# ID: 106b6dc54db24ab1b9c14d71976f842a
# Title: A Concept of Operational Art for 2030: Breaking Through a Modern Defense in Depth
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Our nations operational center of gravity is our ability to project combat power globally. Our adversaries have adopted defensive strategies that seek to restrict or challenge our access to global commons through anti-access and area-denial systems.
Technological advances in detection systems, precision weapons, and weapon speed are coming faster than ever and give the defense immense strategic depth that challenges current operational art for breakthrough operations. This study provides much needed analysis of modern warfare and thinking on operational art required for future breakthrough operations. The joint force does not possess a coherent modern operating concept that enables commanders to visualize operations across time and space against a technologically equivalent force arrayed in a layered defense in depth which is intended to shatter an attack by a superior force. This study analysis the historical and ongoing evolution of the defense in depth to identify three critical elements of future operational art: distributed operations, speed, and all domain integration. It then shows how these elements combine to defeat a future defense in depth. This study is intended to inform the development of a joint operational concept for modern breakthrough operations which would provide the intellectual foundation for modernization and development of supporting service concepts. Only force employment can solve the fundamental problem of modern warfare. Technology can help reduce casualties but cannot alone produce a decisive result.
The fundamental problem of modern warfare is how to conduct decisive military operations against an enemy employing effective lethal firepower. 
1
The question a new joint operating concept must answer is how will the joint force defeat a technologically capable opponent arrayed in a modern defense while avoiding a costly war of attrition? 
2
There is no unifying operational concept to address new battlefield conditions at the operational level. Instead of establishing a common operational concept for offensive joint operations, services are being allowed to pursue independent concepts. The U.S.
Army published "The U.S. Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028" in 2018. The Marine Corps published "The Marine Corps Operating Concept in 2016" and is currently working on a combined Navy and Marine Corps operating concept formerly known as Expeditionary Advanced Bases Operations. Finally, the Air Force published "The Air Force Future Operating Concept in 2015." Not surprisingly, the services are pursuing concepts that promote their own interests and procurement priorities. A common theme, however, is the shared assumption that technological superiority is the means to victory on the future battlefield. Each service is now pursuing a strategy of modernization intended to outpace likely peer competitors. Joint Vision 2020 reflects the ongoing approach: "If our Armed Forces are to be faster, more lethal, and more precise in 2020 than they are today, we must continue to invest in and develop new military capabilities."
Similarly, "Technological innovation [is] a vital component of the transformation of the joint force." 
3
4
5
6
The operational art of the era turned out to be powerless for solving the new problems inherent in the nature of contemporary armed conflict. 
1
The purpose of this chapter is to review how technology in the early twentieth century changed high-intensity conventional warfare and how western militaries responded in order to conduct decisive offensive operations against lethal firepower.
This background will aid in understanding the ongoing evolution of a modern defense.
Section I describes why the defense in depth evolved and the operational art that developed in response. Section II reviews the development of AirLand Battle doctrine which was the U.S. response to Soviet numerical superiority during the Cold War.
Sections III and IV examine two successful breakthrough operations against a modern defense. Finally, Section V provides an overview of current doctrine for breakthrough operations.
The roots of modern operations can be traced back to World War I. Advances in industry, science, and technology made it possible to mass-produce weapons with greater range, accuracy, and lethality. 
2
3
4
5
6
Because the extended front made envelopments impossible, the only way to achieve victory was through a penetration of enemy defenses. Defenders responded by increasing the depth of the defense in order to allow for counterattack forces to meet an attack. The new defense in depth consisted of three successive zones: the outpost zone, the battle zone, and the rearward zone. 7 Throughout the war, attacking forces lacked the striking power to overcome defensive firepower arrayed in depth and designed to wear down an attacking force first, then by counterattack, eliminate any penetration of the defensive line before an attacker could fully penetrate the defense.
8
The solution to the defense in depth started at the tactical level. The key tactical elements were: cover, concealment, dispersion, small-unit independent maneuver, suppression, and combined arms.
9
10
11
12
13
14
AirLand Battle was adopted as the operational approach of US joint forces in the 1980s to address the perceived character of future warfare: greater destruction and increased tempo of operations. AirLand Battle enabled outnumbered US forces to prevail against Soviet forces in Europe. 
15
16
17
The 1991 Gulf War demonstrated a successful modern breakthrough operation following the conceptual framework of AirLand Battle. Following the invasion of Kuwait on August 2, 1990, Iraqi forces setup a defense in depth with 26 infantry divisions deployed in a forward defensive belt with nine Republican Guard mechanized divisions located to their rear. 
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
The main lesson that the US took away from Desert Storm was that technology was decisive. 
34
37
35 Biddle,
Military Power,
[146]
[147]
[148]
[149]
37 Defending Iraqi forces numbered in excess of 350,000 troops and included 17 regular army divisions (three of which were armored and three mechanized), six Republican Guard divisions (three of which were armored and one mechanized), one Special Republican Guard division, special operations and reserve forces, and numerous militia units. The force was equipped with over 2,200 tanks, 2,400 armored personnel carriers (APCs) and 4,000 artillery pieces. and east along the Iranian border. Iraq failed to establish a coordinated defense in depth oriented south along the Tigris-Euphrates Valley, the most likely coalition invasion route. 
38
Command and control heavily depended on orders from a centralized higher headquarters, a system that quickly broke down during the fast-paced maneuver conflict and prevented effective counterattacks or employment of reserve forces. 
39
Battle to great effect at the operational and tactical levels. AirLand Battle was revised 
38
40
41
they observed during OIF. 
42
Secondly, OIF indicated that technology magnified the effect of modern offensive operations against defenders who fail to implement a modern defense. Third, the amount of sensor coverage (e.g., Global Hawk, JSTARS, Predator, and tactical unmanned aerial 40 Gregory Fontenot, E.J. Degen, and David Tohn, On Point: The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2004), 8. 
41
42
vehicles) greatly enhanced targeting throughout the depth of the battlefield. 
43
44
45
The Joint Chiefs of Staff define military doctrine as a set of fundamental principles by which military forces guide their actions in support of national objectives.
The US military continues to operate using concepts and structures developed during the Cold War. While the joint force continues to modernize, joint doctrine for breakthrough operations has remained stagnant. AirLand Battle was the last multi-service warfighting doctrine developed for high-end conventional conflict. Over two decades of counterinsurgency operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, joint and service level doctrine for large scale conventional operations against peer competitors has undergone limited if any revision.
Although services agree that AirLand Battle is unsuited to the modern strategic environment, there is currently no joint force replacement for AirLand Battle. Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, provides twelve principles for joint operations but lacks specifics on a joint warfighting approach to conventional operations. Joint Publication 3-31, Joint Land Operations, dedicates only two pages to offensive operations. The current joint operating concept is called All-Domain Operations. The intent of All-Domain Operations is to combine "space, cyber, deterrent, transportation, electromagnetic spectrum operations, missile defenseall of these global capabilities together … to compete with a global competitor and at all levels of conflict." 
46
Nobody knows how to do that." 
47
48
49
50
49 Todd South, "This 3-Star Army General Explains What Mulit-Domain Operations Mean for You," Army Times, last modified August 11, 2019, https://www.armytimes.com/news/your-army/2019/08/11/this-3-star-army-general-explains-what-multi-domain-operations-mean-for-you/.
50 Department of the Army, The U.S. Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 2018), https://adminpubs.tradoc.army.mil/pamphlets/TP525-3-1.pdf, iii. Dis-integrate means to disrupt the enemy's command and control system, degrading its ability to conduct operations. This action leads to a rapid collapse of the enemy's capabilities or will to fight.
The character of future wars will be determined by their technological means.
Technological advances are coming faster than ever and adversaries are using these advances to strengthen defensive capabilities. The distribution of technology is eroding the advantage the U.S. military has maintained since the end of the Cold War. The decisive military victories in Operation DESERT STORM and Operation IRAQI FREEDOM led several countries to accelerate modernization programs intended to counter U.S. military capabilities asymmetrically. 
1
One of the key requirements of modern warfare is concealment. In order to survive against modern weapons a defender or attacker must remain undetected for as long as possible. The problem of concealment is much harder for the attacker who must expose himself in order to maneuver. The development of detection systems that are increasingly integrated will have significant tactical and operational implications for joint forces. In the past decade two systems have come of age, the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) and Electronic Warfare (EW).
UAVs have revolutionized the battlefield in the post-9/11 period. Today, UAVs saturate the battlefield at tactical and operational ranges, providing persistent surveillance for commanders. UAVs can track and identify targets day or night using various sensors.
While fast moving aircraft struggle to identify targets on the ground in high threat environments, the slower speed and persistent nature of UAVs make it much easier to identify enemy units. Russia has demonstrated the lethality of UAV technology in Ukraine and Syria by flying various types of UAVs at different altitudes to enhance the speed of targeting for indirect fires. 
2
3
Modern military forces are reliant on equipment that uses the electromagnetic spectrum to communicate, transmit data, provide navigation, and to command and control forces. Technological advances in EW have improved the ability of an adversary to locate enemy forces based on their electronic emissions, and disrupt enemy command and control. During an exercise at Ft. Irwin in 2020, the electronic footprint of a battalion sized unit, even though employing modern concealment techniques and under cover of darkness, was easily detected by EW assets at a range of 12 kilometers. 
4
5
6
7
8
5
forces view all emissions as targetable and have been forced to significantly reduce communications. 9
Continued advances in precision weapons, and a growing number of adversaries acquiring precision capabilities, has the potential to shift the pendulum in favor of the defender by denying offensive forces the ability to maneuver. 10 On the modern battlefield, precision strike mean that if a target can be located it can be destroyed from afar. 11 Precision weapons offer a defender the opportunity to establish wide anti-access defenses that dramatically increase the difficulty and cost of offensive maneuver. Where the United States sees precision through a tactical lens, "as a means to improve the effectiveness of existing ways of placing a kinetic effect on target," adversaries are using precision weapons to create changes at the strategic and operational levels of war. 12 For example, China has made significant investment in precision technologies aimed at denying access to its maritime approaches. 
13
Since the Gulf War, precision weapons have been associated with bombs dropped from aircraft or missiles fired from long ranges that can hit a target with pinpoint accuracy. Over the past decade, technological advances have expanded precision capabilities to artillery, mortars, and even small arms weapons. Artillery, historically considered an area fire weapon best suited to suppress an enemy position, is now capable 
9
11
12
13
of firing a single round and destroying a target at maximum range. Having to fire fewer rounds increases the survivability of weapons against counter-fire defenses. As precision weapons potentially expand to small arms, soldiers on the battlefield will be able to hit anything they aim at, at far greater distances than today's solider. Much like the machine gun in World War I, precision weapons are establishing a kill zone for attacking units.
Today that zone is potentially thousands of kilometers in depth. In Ukraine, Russian forces have used precision munitions fired from long range Multiple Launch Rocket Systems to inflict significant losses in Ukrainian mechanized forces, both stationary and moving. 
14
15
Hypersonic weapons are changing the speed of combat and could potentially be decisive at the onset of combat. Their very speed (hypersonic weapons are weapons that travel faster than Mach 5) is changing the character of war by introducing new threats that have regional and strategic implications. There are two types of hypersonic weapons: glide vehicles which are launched from a rocket before gliding to a target, and cruise missiles. Unlike ballistic missiles, hypersonic weapons do not follow a ballistic path and can change their trajectory en route. Their lower trajectory compared to ballistic missiles makes them difficult to detect until they are much closer to the target thereby compressing the timeline for decision-makers to respond. 
16
17
18
19
20
US forces rely on Patriot, Terminal High Altitude Area Defense and Aegis defenses to protect American naval and ground forces against ballistic missile attacks. Hypersonic weapons enable the defender to strike targets due to their ability to penetrate these defenses making the principle of mass risky to the attacker. Finally, due to the speed at which they travel, hypersonics compress the decision space military leaders have to respond to an attack.
The modern defense in depth is a response to the technological advancements that have increased the power of the offense. This chapter will discuss the evolution of defense strategy into the Anti-Access and Area-Denial (A2/AD) system. The purpose of this chapter is to show how peer adversaries are using both traditional weapons and emerging capabilities in all domains to remake the concept of defense in depth and the challenge this poses to offensive military operations. This chapter will demonstrate that the current ongoing evolution of the defense demands a shift in our thinking about operational art and the doctrine, modernization, and tactics needed to win in this environment.
A2/AD is designed to counter US power projection. The defense in depth as we know it is no longer a viable defense strategy. It ended with the decisive US military victory over Iraq in 2003. Realizing the challenge of winning a force-on-force conflict with the US, adversaries are leveraging advanced technologies and weapons to prevent the US from projecting combat power into a theater of operations. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
The third element is predominance of the maritime domain. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
The Gulf War had a profound influence on the leadership of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA). The leaders observed the effect precision munitions, jointness, and advanced command and control systems had on warfare when synchronized with an effective offensive doctrine. The catalyst for the development of an A2/AD system started in 1996 when the US deployed two aircraft carriers to the South China Sea in response to rising tensions between China and Taiwan.
14
15
16
17
Technology has modified the current operational paradigm and is foreshadowing warfare of the future. A2/AD is the form of warfare the US is most likely to encounter in a future conventional conflict, and the form of warfare the US is most unprepared for.
Future adversaries will not fight like Iraq. Iraq's strategy was largely inept, its forces outdated, and air superiority was lightly contested. In the event of war, adversaries will employ multiple layers of stand-off in all domains-land, sea, air, space and cyberspace-with technology on par with US forces, to separate US forces and allies in time, space, and function in order to bring about culmination through heavy casualties. 
21
A2/AD presents joint forces with a new challenge, a layered, multi-domain, system-of-systems that gives adversaries a new dimension of strategic depth not encountered in prior breakthrough operations. 
22
23
The challenge for current operational art is that A2/AD is not the same type of defense in depth that US forces have faced throughout the twentieth century. The aim of A2/AD is to prevent the attacker from massing combat power for the close-fight, thereby giving the defender the numerical advantage by the time the attacker reaches the close battlespace. A2/AD does not rely on counterattack forces to stop a penetration, instead it 21 Scott King, and Dennis Boykin, "Distinctly Different Doctrine: Why Multi-Domain Operations Isn't AirLand Battle 2.0," Association of the United States Army, last modified February 20, 2019, https://www.ausa.org/articles/distinctly-different-doctrine-why-multi-domain-operations-isn%E2%80%99tairland-battle-20.
22 John Callaway, "The Operational Art of Air-Sea Battle," Center for International Maritime Security, last updated July 18, 2014, https://cimsec.org/operational-art-air-sea-battle/11913. 
23
relies on a multi-domain network of sensors and shooters to target offensive and sustainment forces while simultaneously disrupting friendly communications and decision-making architecture. It is a type of warfare that will be fought beyond the visual range of humans. Though there are numerous operational concepts for fighting in an A2/AD environment to include Air-Sea Battle and the Joint Operational Access Concept, the U.S. has not bridged the gap between concept and doctrine in an A2/AD environment, which limits the joint forces ability to translate the concept into tactical actions. In short, A2/AD challenges joint forces traditional understanding of the phases of a conflict, ideas of battlefield framework, access and ability to maneuver within all domains, and operational tempo.
If the US operational center of gravity is our ability to project combat power globally, then development of the operational art necessary to breakthrough a modern defense in depth is crucial. Modern operational art for breakthrough operations must enable the US to project military force into an operational area with sufficient freedom of action to accomplish the required mission. The defense in depth is evolving along two lines: in depth and into new domains. The modern defense in depth provides a defender immense depth in which to affect the attrition and culmination of an attacker. New strategic depth is achieved by integrating the anti-access, area-denial, and rear areas into a seamless defensive strategy. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the proposed operational concept and its elements, and show how they can combine to defeat a future defense in depth. This chapter will build upon the analysis conducted thus far and propose principles for modern breakthrough operations that will provide the intellectual foundation for modernization efforts.
Operational art must account for the nature and character of future warfare. The character of future breakthrough operations will exhibit elements of speed, global reach, networked forces, precision, all conducted and understood within an understanding of all domain operations. The challenge for modern breakthrough forces is that the possibility of a decisive military defeat makes the use of nuclear weapons plausible by the defender.
In modern offensive operations against a nuclear power, there is a point where the attacker is close to reaching its aim of a breakthrough that potentially will result in the defender using nuclear weapons. A2/AD is designed to prevent the attacker from getting to that point. Breakthrough operations have never been conducted against a nuclear armed state. Operational art must account for this risk. During the 2003 invasion of Iraq, US military commanders identified a geographic boundary where Iraqi forces where likely to employ chemical weapons in order to stop the attack. The line roughly coincided with the point in time when the breakthrough had been assured and forces were rapidly transitioning to exploitation. In an A2/AD environment, there will likely be a similar line between the anti-access belt and the area-denial belt where an adversary might choose to employ nuclear weapons. Operations in the anti-access belt allow political leaders to manage risk of escalation because those operations are based on enemy attrition and not decisive maneuver leading to military defeat. Once operations enter the area-denial belt, the ability to manage risk decreases as those operations are based on annihilation. Thus, our operational art for future warfare must be based on a strategy of single-direction attrition conducted through a breakthrough that places the enemy in a no win situation and can lead to negotiations.
The modern A2/AD defense places a significant demand on the defender. For the defender, the battlespace must remain transparent once the battle is joined in order to effectively find and target attacking forces. Similarly, an integrated A2/AD system must be controlled in such a way that the defender can deal with multiple threats. Unlike historical breakthrough operations that relied upon mass at a central point, modern offensive forces will penetrate the defense at multiple points and in all domains. Finally, the command-and-control requirements for a modern defense in depth are significant.
Even with a degraded command and control system, a defense in depth would still rely on the layered belts to conduct an individual defense intended to impose maximum attrition and force culmination of the attacker.
Our analysis of both the history and evolution of the defense in depth reveals a way of accomplishing an operational breakthrough against a modern defense in depth.
Unlike the historical AirLand Battle model, the modern requirement is not to prevent the enemy from reacting in depth. Instead, modern operational art requires that the attacker first degrade the transparency of battlespace in order to create blind spots, then isolate defensive belts by neutralizing A2/AD systems in depth to allow maneuver. This will allow US forces to project military force into the operational area with sufficient freedom of action to seize key terrain and create exploitable gaps in the defense. As forces maneuver into the anti-access and subsequent area-denial belts they must block the flanks of their penetration(s). This will require the neutralization of A2/AD systems that might be repositioned to threaten the penetrating force. Finally, offensive forces must be postured to exploit the breakthrough if required. This concept would be achieved through a series of operations in all domains, first against the anti-access belt, and then against the area-denial belt.
The decisive point in the operational breakthrough will be the penetration of the anti-access defensive belt, which will allow the U.S. to project combat power that directly threatens an adversary's battlespace. The outer anti-access ring extends out to the maximum engagement range an adversary's anti-access system can see and attack targets.
The anti-access belt differs from a traditional defense in that it does not rely on counterattacks to prevent penetration. In the anti-access belt, there is no linear or nonlinear front, only multiple integrated bubbles of sensors and firing systems supported by a robust command and control network designed to enable the rapid destruction of any forces entering this belt. For both the defender and attacker, this belt signifies deep battlespace. The anti-access belt can extend out to a depth of 3,000 miles. Closer to a country's territory is the inner area-denial belt. The area-denial belt signifies the traditional defense in depth with its multiple land based defensive belts, counterattack forces, and the use of combined arms. For both the defender and attacker this belt represents close battlespace. Access to this belt means the attacker can more easily and consistently strike the defender's rear area. The area-denial belt covers a depth of 100 to 300 miles. Penetration of this belt by the attacker leads to exploitation and decisive military defeat of an adversary.
A2/AD threats will present US forces with a very different challenge than they have faced previously. Standoff must be maintained and power projection will be restricted until the anti-access threat is reduced. Long range precision-strike missiles, hypersonic weapons, and air-defense systems provide the defender with deep coverage of an attacker's avenues of approach thereby giving the defender the ability to destroy platforms that can deliver precision strikes long before they come within range of the defender's territory. The chief threat to a modern breakthrough is the ability of an adversary to attack offensive forces at significant range. Required components that allow offensive forces to degrade the transparency of the battlefield and isolate defensive belts are distributed operations, speed, and multi-domain integration.
Breakthrough operations require that forces must be protected from devastating attack, while simultaneously striking effectively at the enemy defensive systems.
Distributed operations reduce the effectiveness of precision munitions, and provides a degree of force protection for the attacker. Distributed operations are the ability to disperse, reposition, and use a variety of bases and operation locations while retaining the ability to maneuver and concentrate combat power. 
1
While traditional breakthrough operations are a race against the arrival of enemy counterattack forces, speed in an A2/AD environment is a race between attrition and will.
The A2/AD strategy is not designed to defeat an adversary, but instead to neutralize a stronger force until time, attrition, or other events break their resolve. 
2
Speed also refers to the speed that weapons travel giving hypersonic weapons a decisive edge over traditional munitions especially against high value targets. Finally, speed will depend on sustainment. Resupply of fuel and ammunition will be critical to maintaining the tempo of offensive operations. In order to sustain a distributed force that seeks to maintain cover and concealment, the current logistical sustainment structure will have to evolve. In a war that seeks heavy attrition of the enemy and not decisive defeat, speed is a critical component of operational art.
Future joint force breakthrough operations against a sophisticated A2/AD threat will require integration of capabilities across all domains-land, air, sea, space, and cybersimultaneously. Adversary A2/AD defenses rely on a series of overlapping capabilities across all domains to ensure maximum attrition of attacking forces. 
3
3 Sameer Joshi, "Demystifying the Anti-Access/Area Denial (A2/AD) Threat," Sameer Joshi, last updated April 10, 2019, https://sameerjoshi73.medium.com/demystifying-the-anti-access-area-denial-a2ad-threat-d0ed26ae8b9e. the first US multi-domain joint doctrine that understood the synergistic effect integration of air and land domains could produce against a defense in depth. Multi-domain operations are combined arms at the operational level presenting adversary's with multiple dilemmas. In breakthrough operations, services will provide effects from their domain that support operational actions by another service in a separate domain. 
4
The previous section presented the elements of operational art required to successfully breakthrough a modern A2/AD defense. We conclude with a picture of how these elements combine to defeat a modern defense in depth. This section assumes a full breakthrough is necessary, but recognizes that as A2/AD capabilities are reduced the risk of nuclear escalation increases. The proposed concept can be applied in cases where military forces attack only the depth required to achieve the operational objective.
At the start of a conflict, US forces can expect to confront hundreds of short-range and long-range missiles, a vast network of radars that can see over the horizon, space based ISR, cyber and EW attacks, and a battlefield flooded with unmanned vehicles. The first challenge will be to ensure US forces forward deployed are ready for surprise attacks in the initial minutes of a conflict. Early warning systems, distributed force laydown, and cover and concealment will mitigate the threat, though these forces will remain highly vulnerable. Leveraging a fires network supported by surface, air, and space based ISR capabilities, US forces will immediately strike targets throughout the depth of an adversary's defenses at maximum range to disrupt the enemy's command and control system and degrade his ability to conduct effective operations. These initial strikes will allow US forces to regain the initiative, provide time and space for US forces to reorganize and reposition for deliberate breakthrough operations, and enhance survivability of military forces forward deployed within the operational area. Along with kinetic attacks, cyber, space and EW capabilities will further degrade transparency of the battlespace and isolate defensive belts thereby allowing small, distributed, and networked first echelon forces to penetrate the anti-access belt at numerous locations to seek out and destroy adversary weapon systems, sensors, and platforms in the air, land and sea domains. 5 Though there will be numerous small expeditionary forces in the first echelon, the first echelon will primarily be platforms controlled by humans or operating autonomously. The operational purpose of the first echelon is to overwhelm the enemy defensive system forcing the defender to expend limited weapons against expendable assets while simultaneously revealing their locations to counterfire. Mass is achieved by massing fires from distributed locations throughout the battlefield vice traditional mass of maneuver forces against a central location. Success in this phase is the creation of multiple blind spots in the enemy A2/A2 system, providing second echelon forces required freedom of maneuver to seize decisive points.
As enemy anti-access systems are suppressed, a second echelon exploitation force comprised of dispersed ground forces, warships and aircraft (fast, light, stealthy, and can travel long distances without resupply) will enter the anti-access belt to seize decisive points that facilitates holding the flanks of the breakthrough attack. From these positions, breakthrough forces will eliminate counter actions by the enemy, strike key targets in the area-denial belt, and establish missile defense capabilities to protect the force. Success in this phase is achieved when gaps are created allowing larger military formations to move toward the area-denial belt without significant enemy resistance.
The final phase of breakthrough operations is similar to traditional AirLand or AirSea Battle doctrine. Third echelon forces composing the main body of US combat power will move forward to the edge of the area-denial belt in order to bring as much of the remaining depth of the defense under attack utilizing aircraft, surface delivered fires, and non-kinetic attacks while deceiving the enemy of the location of the main attack.
The main attack will concentrate against a small portion of the defender's line in order to achieve a rapid penetration, and once a gap has been created, rush additional combined arms elements forward to impose maximum attrition and leave the defender at a complete disadvantage, lending to a cease-fire. missions, development of aircraft with greater range, pursuit of highly mobile naval vessels which can both operate and sustain themselves in a highly distributed, highly networked posture, pursuit of autonomous vehicles that can deliver supplies, relay communications, detect, and strike targets, continued development and incorporation of signature reduction, cover and concealment, and deception into new and existing platforms and basing locations, and procurement of terminal defenses against enemy missiles.
1
The reality of an increasingly observed and sensor saturated battlefield requires a necessary shift in operational art. While modern weapons are a prerequisite for solving operational problems, history reminds us that there are many instances when new technology failed to produce the desired effect. 
2
Effective joint force employment starts with a joint operational concept that broadly describes how the joint force will integrate to achieve success. The purpose of joint operational concepts is to offer "alternative operational methods and related capabilities to maintain military advantage against current and emerging threats." 
3
4
Investing in technology without a meaningful operational level concept to guide this investment is a strategic mistake. Recent US military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan demonstrate that operating on service doctrine without an applicable joint concept can have significant strategic implications even when military operations are conducted in accordance with joint principles.
5
6
7
An operational concept provided the vision for rebuilding the German army following World War I. Much of the German military's success in World War II can be attributed to development of the operational concept of Blitzkrieg, a solution to the stalemate of trench warfare in World War I. The effectiveness of Blitzkrieg demonstrates the power of developing concepts first, then building and equipping a force around that concept. General Heinz Guderian is the German officer credited for developing the revolutionary concept and introducing the world to modern mechanized forces that returned offensive mobility to the battlefield.
Guderian's book, Achtung-Panzer!, explains the thinking behind mechanized breakthrough operations and was the catalyst for German development of panzer forces during the interwar period. Starting in the 1920s, Guderian began an analysis of tactical and technological developments during World War I to draw out lessons for future warfare. 8 He realized that defensive tactics increasingly favored a defense in depth that relied on quick counterattacks to stop enemy penetrations. He also correctly identified that tactical developments that emerged towards the end of World War I required initiative at the lowest level and the need to integrate infantry and artillery in a combined arms manner. After analyzing a number of battles during World War I, all of which resulted in a failure to breakthrough enemy defenses, Guderian came to believe that the solution to the problem was mechanization. Guderian's analysis convinced him that success was only possible through the application of speed. He also realized that a new technology, the tank, offered the armored protection and cross-country mobility required to move and survive on the modern battlefield. By the early 1930s, Guderian's studies led him to conclude that tanks employed in mass and integrated in mechanized formations with infantry, artillery, and engineers, could breakthrough a defense in depth if they were concentrated at the point of main effort and employed in concentrated to develop a concept that would lead to Soviet victory. 
11
12
13
The depth of a modern defense and its use of multiple domains require an updated concept of joint warfighting within a renewed appreciation of operational art.
Recent military history shows that weapons, sensors, and communication advances strongly favor the defender and makes the close fight a pure killing zone.
Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and Army have responded to this emerging challenge with individual serve concepts. What is absent is a truly joint approach and the operational art for penetrating the anti-access belt as well as competing in multiple domains simultaneously. The key tenets of modern operational art that enable offensive operations against an A2/AD defense include distributed operations, detect to kill chain speed, and multi-domain integration. A modern breakthrough requires three operational echelons: an initial attack echelon composed of small or unmanned platforms for penetrating the anti-access belt tactically in order to suppress defenses; a second attack echelon for neutralizing anti-access defenses, and a third breakthrough echelon that can attack the area-denial belt in depth and defeat the enemy will to resist offensive operations. The organization, structure, and equipment of a joint force that can do this will look different than the joint force of today. Only a joint concept that enables doctrine development can mitigate the risk of service centric approaches.
In conclusion, this paper offers a vision of operational art for breakthrough operations against a modern opponent. Further research and analysis is required in order to transform this vision into a joint concept which can guide tactical development and modernization. Concepts are the engine for change. The challenge today is the same challenge that has been faced multiple times over the past century, how to frame the operational problem well enough to produce a useful concept that can eventually be developed into doctrine. 
1
2
20  
20  
/AD strategy to counter US warfighting capabilities. Russia's military has limited power projection capabilities and is significantly weaker than the military of the former Soviet Union which is one reason why Russia has pursued an A2/AD strategy.
/AD strategy to counter US warfighting capabilities. Russia's military has limited power projection capabilities and is significantly weaker than the military of the former Soviet Union which is one reason why Russia has pursued an A2/AD strategy.
Stephen Biddle, Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in Modern Battle (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2006), 28, 30.
2
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Vision 2020 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2000), 1-2, https://www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=446826.
Biddle, Military Power, 24.   
Echevarria, "Operational Concepts and Military Strength."   
Stephen Biddle, Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in Modern Battle (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006), 29.
Biddle, Military Power, 29.   
Timothy Lupfer, "The Dynamics of Doctrine: The Changes in German Tactical Doctrine During the First World War," Leavenworth Papers, no. 4 (July 1981): 1, https://www.armyupress.army.mil/Portals/7/combat-studies-institute/csi-books/leavenworth-papers-4-thedynamics-of-doctrine.pdf.
  7  Lupfer, "The Dynamics of Doctrine," 13.
Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, 33.   
Biddle, Military Power, 35.   
Biddle, Military Power, 31.   
Biddle, Military Power,[35][36] 
Biddle, Military Power,[35][36] 
Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art,
[47]
Biddle, Military Power, 40.   
Roger Facer, Conventional Forces and the NATO Strategy of Flexible Response: Issues and Approaches, R-3209-FF (Santa Monica, CA: RAND,
1985), https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R3209.html, 49.19  Skinner, "Airland Battle Doctrine," 6.20  Skinner, "Airland Battle Doctrine," 11.21  Skinner, "Airland Battle Doctrine," 10. A linear battlefield is characterized by clearly defined continuous lines of contact separating well defined areas under either friendly and enemy control. A nonlinear battlefield is characterized by the absence of clearly defined lines on the battlefield (no flanks or fronts).22  Skinner, "Airland Battle Doctrine," 19.23  Department of the Army, Operations, FM 100-5 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1982), https://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p4013coll9/id/976/, 1-2.
Department of Defense, Conduct of the Persian Gulf War: Final Report to Congress (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1992), https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a249270.pdf,
251-258.   
Joseph Dunford, "The Character of War and Strategic Landscape Have Changed," Joint Force Quarterly 89 (2nd Quarter
2018), 2, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/1056962.pdf.
Robert Angevine, John Warden, Russell Keller, and Clark Frye, Learning  Lessons from the Ukraine Conflict, NS D-10367 (Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses, 2019), https://nsiteam.com/social/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/NS-D-10367-Learning-Lessons-from-Ukraine-Conflict-Final.pdf, 8.
3
Trevithick, "This Is What Ground Forces Look Like."   
Trevithick, "This Is What Ground Forces Look Like."   
Angevine, Learning Lessons from the Ukraine Conflict,
9-10.   
Angevine, "Learning Lessons from the Ukraine Conflict," 9.
Barry Watts, The Evolution of Precision Strike (Washington, DC:  Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessment, 2013), https://csbaonline.org/research/publications/the-evolution-of-precisionstrike#:~:text=In%20The%20Evolution%20of%20the,affect%20vital%20U.S.%20Security%20interests, 5.
Mike Benitez, "A2/AD: Translating for the Warfighter Using Operational Art," Over The Horizon, last modified January 19,
2017, https://othjournal.com/2017/01/19/a2ad-translating-for-the-warfighter-usingoperational-art/.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operational Access Concept (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2012), i, https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/concepts/joac_2012.pdf?ver=2017-12-28-162010-227.
3 Sam Tangredi, Anti-Access Warfare: Countering A2/AD Strategies (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2013), 1-2
.4  Tangredi, Anti-Access Warfare,
13.5  Tangredi, Anti-Access Warfare
, 14.6  Tangredi, Anti-Access
Warfare, 13.7  Tangredi, Anti-
Access Warfare, 13.8  Tangredi,
Anti-Access Warfare, 18.9  Tangredi, Anti-Access Warfare, 13.
Tangredi, 13.   
Tangredi, 20.   
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operational Access Concept, 9-10.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operational Access Concept, 10.
Stephen Kuper, "The Teeth in China's Anti-Access/Area Denial Defenses," Defense Connect News, last modified April 24, 2019, https://www.defenceconnect.com.au/key-enablers/3927-the-teeth-in-china-santi-access-area-denial-defences.
  15  Tangredi, Anti-Access
Warfare, 163-164.
16
17
Tangredi, 217.   
Aziz Erdogan, "Russian A2AD Strategy and Its Implications for NATO," Beyond the Horizon, last modified December 6,
2018, https://behorizon.org/russian-a2ad-strategy-and-its-implications-for-nato/.
Erdogan, "Russian A2AD Strategy and Its Implications for NATO."
Michael Hutchens, William Dries, Jason Perdew, Vincent Bryant, and  Kerry E. Moores, "Joint Concept for Access and Maneuver in the Global Commons: A New Joint Operational Concept," Joint Force Quarterly 84 (1st Quarter
2017), 137.
Robert Brown, "The Indo-Asia Pacific and the Multi-Domain Battle Concept," Military Review 97, no.
5, (September 2017): 17-18, https://www.armyupress.army.mil/Journals/Military-Review/English-Edition-Archives/September-October-2017/The-Indo-Asia-Pacific-and-the-Multi-Domain-Battle-Concept/.
Tangredi, 235.   
Octavian Manea, "The A2/AD Predicament Challenges NATO's Paradigm of Reassurance Through Readiness," Small Wars Journal, last modified June 9,
2016, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/the-a2adpredicament-challenges-nato%E2%80%99s-paradigm-of-%E2%80%9Creassurance-through-readiness%E2%80%9D.2 Georgii Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, trans. Bruce Menning (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2013), 53. 3 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Implementing Joint Force Development and Design, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3030.01 (Washington, DC: The Joint Staff, December 3, 2019), C-2.
Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, 65.   
Huba Wass de Czege, "Lessons from the Past: Making the Army's Doctrine 'Right Enough' Today," Association of the United States Army, last updated September 7, 2006. https://www.ausa.org/publications/lessons-past-making-armys-doctrine-right-enough-today.
Huba Wass de Czege, "Lessons from the Past."
Huba Wass de Czege, "Lessons from the Past."
Heinz Guderian, Achtung-Panzer! The Development of Armoured Forces, Their Tactics and  Operational Potential, trans. Christopher Duffy (London, England: Arms and Armour Press, 1992), 8.
Guderian, Achtung-Panzer!,  
 10  Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, iii.11  Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, viii.
Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, xv.   
Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, xviii-xix.   
Huba Wass de Czege, "Lessons from the Past: Making the Army's Doctrine 'Right Enough' Today," Association of the United States Army, last updated September 7,
https://www.ausa.org/publications/lessons-past-making-armys-doctrine-right-enough-today.2 Albert Palazoo, "Precision and the Consequences for the Modern Battlefield," Small Wars Journal, last updated August 19, 2016, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/precision-and-the-consequences-for-themodern-battlefield#_edn1.
Russian A2/AD systems overview. 22 Aziz Erdogan, "Russian A2AD Strategy and Its Implications for NATO," Beyond the Horizon, last updated December 6, 2018, https://behorizon.org/russian-a2ad-strategy-and-its-implications-for-nato/
Robert Brown, "The Indo-Asia Pacific and the Multi-Domain Battle Concept," Military Review 97, no. 5, (September
2017): 16, https://www.armyupress.army.mil/Journals/Military-Review/English-Edition-Archives/September-October-2017/The-Indo-Asia-Pacific-and-the-Multi-Domain-Battle-Concept/.
I thank the teachers, mentors and peers who have taught me so much throughout my professional career. I am grateful for all those that I have learned from.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation and gratitude to the entire faculty at the Joint Advanced Warfighting School (JAWS). Most notably, I would like to thank 
Professor Dr. David Rodearmel
CAPT James Jacobs
Colonel Kristian Smith
Marine Corps representative, Colonel James Bain
Dr. Keith Dickson
Colonel Chris Rogers
The emphasis of this paper has been on understanding defense in depth with respect to history and emerging technology, and then applying that understanding to think about elements of operational art necessary to conduct modern breakthrough operations.
The challenge has been drawing conclusions from something that has not occurred on a peer level since World War II. Chapter 2 identified three areas of technological advances that have the potential to increase the tempo, lethality, and depth of future warfare and shift the balance of military operations decisively in favor of the defender. Chapter 3 discussed how adversaries, specifically Russia and China, are using new technologies to evolve the concept of defense in depth in a manner that poses a challenge to US national security. Finally, Chapter 4 proposed an operational concept to provide the intellectual foundation for modernization efforts. This chapter will present the significant implications of this concept on modernization.
Adversary shift towards A2/AD strategies will make traditional means of breakthrough operations (tanks, artillery, infantry divisions) less important to the joint force. Joint force modernization for an A2/AD environment should focus on the continued exploitation of space for ISR, communications, and navigation, procurement of precision guided missiles in sufficient quantity to ensure neutralization of anti-access capabilities without requiring an operational pause (this will also produce a deterrent effect by ensuring an opponent has sufficient munitions to withstand an attack and significantly degrade an enemy's A2/AD system in response), incorporating stealth 1. Chinese A2/AD systems overview. 1 
1
Assets needed to Counter A2/ AD Capability 1 1 Sameer Joshi, "Demystifying the Anti-Access/Area Denial (A2/AD) Threat," Sameer Joshi, last updated April 10, 2019, https://sameerjoshi73.medium.com/demystifying-the-anti-access-area-denial-a2ad-threat-d0ed26ae8b9e. 