# ID: 1133b5cb8dc3480e9dc05d97dc0b079a
# Title: Strategic warning time and mobilization planning: implications for Australia's security
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Mobilization allows a nation to minimize the cost of Defense during times of peace, prioritizing expenditure on social services and building economic resilience. However, the ability to conduct timely transformation of national resources into required military capability is dependent upon strategic warning time of developing threats and may be the deciding factor in conflict. The 2016 Defense White Paper identifies that Australia will face greater uncertainty and complexity over coming decades due to the global nature of its strategic interests. However, as no threat of an attack on Australia is expected before 2035 the Australian Army is not required to plan for force expansion or mobilization. This research investigates whether strategic warning time negates the requirement for mobilization planning. The research analyzes three case studies whereby Australia was denied strategic warning time, comparing historical circumstances to current strategic interests and available capabilities. The research concludes that Australia's broad interests preclude accurate assessments of warning time, and mobilization planning is required to reduce the risk of strategic shock.
The absence of a clear threat means that both strategy and the process of determining Defense capabilities is a subjective process based on judgement, not scientific certainty.
-Australian House of Representatives, Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defense and Trade, From Phantom to Force: Towards a More Efficient and Effective Army
Mobilization, the process of rapidly increasing military capability available for operations, has been one of the most critical defense planning functions throughout time.
The ability to conduct timely transformation of national resources into employable military capability has often been the deciding factor in conflict, evidenced by such examples as Helmuth Von Moltke's rapid mobilization of the Prussian military and consequent defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71.
Mobilization allows a nation to minimize the cost of defense during times of peace, prioritizing expenditure on social services and building economic resiliencethemselves important components of national security.0 F 1 However, underpinning this relative prioritization of expenditure are two critical factors: a risk-based assessment of the likelihood and severity of a potential conflict, and an assumption that necessary military capabilities can then be generated within the required time. These factors are often forgotten in the rush to reduce defense expenditure during peace time and, even when not forgotten, assessments are often incorrect. The 'black swan', a term popularized by author Nicholas Taleb describing an unexpected event with severe impact, characterizes many crises involving use of military force through the last century.1 F 2
Much of the problem with mobilization is that it conjures vastly different mental images for different people. Mobilization can encompass a range of actions including the activation of reserve forces, such as occurred for Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, through to the militarization of a nation's manpower and industry as occurred during the Second World War. With such an amorphous scope, and indeed strong negative political connotations when considering the possibility of conscription and massive defense expenditure, it is easy to see why the topic is not at the forefront of public debate. This is particularly the case in countries such as Australia, which are blessed with secure geography and the absence of a clear existential threat. The answer, in 1976 and echoed in White Papers thereafter, was a relatively small but capable regular force (the force in being), which was to serve as the expansion base when more pressing security challenges necessitated mobilization. Australia has been forced to conduct rapid expansion on four occasions throughout its short history, during the First and Second World Wars, the Korean War and Vietnam. More recently, Australia has also relied upon its reserve forces to sustain enduring peacekeeping commitments in the Pacific, and some combat operations further afield.6 F 
7
As a nation with a small population, numbering just 25 million people in 2018, Australia has always struggled to maintain a large standing military. By maintaining a small force in being and mobilizing troops as required in times of conflict, Australia has managed to keep the cost of national defense to a minimum. Such hedging is possible due to two important factors: geography, and alliances. Australia's geographic position presents any adversary such a challenge in force projection, manoeuver and logistics that no nation currently possesses the capability to invade, with the possible exception of the United States. The Government believes that the national intelligence enterprise would provide sufficient strategic warning were any other nation to develop the capability or intent to attack.7 F 8
Other than the bombing of Darwin by Japanese air forces during the Second World War Australia has never come under direct armed attack, and its military endeavors have been expeditionary. The close alliance between Australia and the United Kingdom up until the Second World War, and from thereafter with the United States, has provided further confidence to the Australian government that a large force in being is not required as allies would be available to support the defense of Australia in the unlikely event of such an invasion.
The 2016 Defense White Paper heralds a return of difficult geostrategic circumstances, but also firmly rejects the 'Defense of Australia' isolationist approach which had characterized White Papers during the 1980s and 1990s; the Paper confirms that Australia will continue to contribute to both regional and global contingencies in support of the nation's strategic interests. However, despite Australia's persistent global military deployments over the past two decades and increasing volatility in the Indo-Pacific region, the 2016 White Paper makes no allowance for the need to mobilize and expand the ADF.
To understand why the concept of national mobilization and force expansion have been removed from the consciousness of government and national security planners, it is necessary to look at the impact which the ebb and flow of Defense budgets and force sizes have had on the ADF over time.
While the strategic circumstances of 1976 were so uncertain that the Government thought it prudent to maintain a force in being larger than that of today and to simultaneously plan for the subsequent expansion and mobilization of further resources, by the time of the 1994 White Paper the ADF was at its nadir. The end of the Cold War, the unchallenged dominance of the United States, and a general improvement in South
East Asian peace and prosperity all served to convince the Government that there was virtually no requirement for a standing force. The ADF was reduced to a skeleton organization and major procurement decisions were deferred, a process which had started with the retirement of Australia's last aircraft carrier in the previous decade. The force in being, particularly the Army, came to be viewed purely as an expansion base, with no reasonable prospect for significant military deployment.
In 1999, however, the Australian Government experienced a strategic surprise.
Right on Australia's northern border, and unforeseen by the intelligence enterprise designed to provide strategic warning, the tiny nation of Timor-Leste voted for independence from Indonesia. In the ensuing violence perpetrated by Indonesiansponsored militias Australia was forced to intervene as the lead nation of a multinational stabilization force. The ADF, reduced after decades of budget cuts and with a force design which prioritized low readiness but long term expansion potential, was in a parlous state and barely succeeded in this relatively simple task. The experience of deploying the unprepared ADF on operations left an indelible mark on the memory of those officers leading the deployment, and who later rose to command the organization.8 F 9
The desire to maintain a capable force in being during peacetime became the overwhelming priority of the uniformed force.
The 2000 White Paper, heavily influenced by the strategic shock of the Timor intervention, changed Government's Defense priorities. Unwilling to drastically increase the Defense budget, the Government directed that increased operational readiness would now be prioritized over force expansion and mobilization potential. The regular Army was expanded and experienced a period of significant, sustained capability investment.
This served the Government well, enabling the Army to contribute to subsequent commitments in Afghanistan, Iraq, Timor-Leste and other theaters in support of national strategic objectives.
However, Australia's Defense policy and budget have not followed a linear path. The fear of peacetime force reductions still permeates Defense literature, and despite Australia's experience of having required mobilization in the past, the historical association between mobilization and reductions in the regular Army has likely caused many to view mobilization as a euphemism for budget cuts as opposed to a central component of defense planning. While prioritizing readiness may help to preserve the current force, it ignores the fact that a military of 62,400 is insufficient to defend Australia from armed attack and precludes any sizeable, enduring contribution to regional or global security.
The Australian Government determines the force in being based upon analysis of how much of the federal budget can be spent on defense, against the likelihood of an armed attack on Australia and how significant a contribution the nation may need to make to global security. Any changes in the strategic environment which alter this equation are anticipated to occur with ample strategic warning time, thus allowing for a deliberate increase in the defense budget and methodical growth in the force. This strategy discounts the possibility of a change occurring at a pace which outstrips the nation's ability to mobilize. It also, importantly, ignores the possibility that the government of the day will be either unable or unwilling to act on the strategic warning signs.
The purpose of this paper, therefore, is to seek answers to the following questions. 
This study is based upon unclassified, publically available policy documents from the Australian Government and defense commentators. It is therefore assumed that these documents accurately reflect Government policy and that the Australian Defense Force employs these same policies as the basis of its force structure and contingency planning priorities.
The study also assumes that no significant change in Government policy has occurred since the publication of the 2016 Defense White Paper, despite a change in Government leadership.
Australia continues to benefit from secure geography and a strong alliance with the world's most powerful nation; no other nation has the capability, nor the stated intention, of directly invading Australia. These factors allow the Government to maintain defense expenditure at a relatively low 2% of Gross Domestic Product, and to choose when and where to employ military power in support of its strategic ends.
However, Australia's security environment is growing more complex and uncertain as nation-states and non-state actors grow in power and seek to challenge the established rules-based global order, including within Australia's immediate region.
While recognizing this growing complexity, the Australian Government continues to rely upon the concept of strategic warning time to determine force structure and capability while discounting the need for mobilization planning to enable a rapid increase in available military power. Australia faces the risk that its small standing military may not be sufficient to meet Government requirements in the event of a rapid deterioration in security.
While this research refers to Australian Defense policy and the Australian Defense Force, it is primarily concerned with the Army. The research frames security challenges derived from the principle Government security publications and seeks to understand the implications of strategic warning time for Army force structure and mobilization. While the study will address some of the underpinning Fundamental Inputs to Capability, including materiel and associated Defense industry, it is not the intent of this paper to develop a mobilization plan or costed model for the development of additional capability. Instead, the paper is designed to illuminate the relationship between strategic warning time and capability development and to identify some of the critical aspects of this relationship which might benefit from further analysis as part of a mobilization plan.
CHAPTER 2
The purpose of this literature review is to provide the reader a broad overview of relevant history and elements of defense mobilization as a means to understand the implications of strategic warning time on military capability and force structure decisions. The following texts have been selected to provide an understanding of the complexity of mobilization, the frequency with which nations, including Australia, have been forced to conduct rapid force expansion, and an appreciation for the types of mobilization that might be required.
In as a mechanism by the government to minimize defense expenditure, seeking ever greater financial efficiency and reduction in the force in being. However, he suggests that strategic warning time has been used without a robust mechanism to continually compare both the strategic environment and the requirements of the expanded force, in order to base strategic warning planning upon a rational evaluation of data.
Brabin-Smith suggests that the Government's focus on managing the force in being, rather than delving into detailed mobilization planning, is somewhat justified 
In Military Readiness -concepts, choices and consequences, Richard Betts discusses the complex and interconnected components of military readiness across mobilization, structural readiness and operational readiness. Betts's work is of particular importance as it dispels the misconception that military readiness is a linear process which can be improved simply through the application of time and money.
Betts describes the process of mobilization through the lens of US experience, from the Great War to the Gulf War. Betts argues that America's secure geography has allowed for repeated political decisions to reduce military expenditure during peace to build the economy and improve quality of life, however, the consequence of failing to sustain a large and capable standing army has been a huge increase in casualties at the outset of each conflict.1 3 F 5 Betts provides a historical example of the complex nature of military readiness through analysis of America's mobilization for the Great War. Despite having the benefit of long strategic warning time, the absence of a direct threat to mobilization bases or industry and a massive injection of capital, the deployment was marred by gross inefficiency. Confusion reigned as manpower and equipment were readied at different stages, equipment was not available to train, and deployment and operational plans did not consider the increased quantities of men and materiel available. Betts attributes this failure to a lack of pre-conflict planning, which ensured that concepts and procedures did not exist to govern the increased resources when made available. Betts also provides an analysis of the '10-year rule' which governed British defense planning following the Great War, which held that expenditure on defense would be wasted as no war could occur within a strategic warning time of 10 years. Betts The Inquiry commented that, although the Army's primary purpose was the defense of Australia its historical employment has been primarily geostrategic, conducting expeditionary operations in support of Government policy to enhance its alliances and regional partnerships. Commenting on the utility of Australia's defense contributions the Inquiry noted that, despite the massive expansion of the armed services during the First and Second World Wars, Australia represented a very small overall percentage of allied troops. Importantly, it was also observed that Australia's contribution did not necessarily achieve the geostrategic aims which the Government had intended.2 3 F 15
Conversely, the Inquiry noted that during the Second World War Australia was threatened by invasion from Japan, and the allied effort was focused on the European theater. Australia provided all of the troops available for operations until the United States could further mobilize, eventually providing some 25% of the allied troops in the Pacific. In light of this geographical dilemma, the Inquiry observed that while Australia may choose to contribute to a coalition effort further afield, in a regional conflict Australia may not be able to rely upon rapid international assistance.2 4 F 
16
The Inquiry determined that Australia should base the suitability of its Army on five criteria, which notably included scalability and sustainability. The Inquiry justified this focus on expansion by observing that a thorough study into strategic warning time since 1939 had concluded that an average of 14 months warning preceded conflict.2 5F 17 The Inquiry further observed that despite several decades of concern about the possibility of conflict with Japan, Australia had not moved to address its military capability until within 24 months of the war.2 6 F 18
The Inquiry established that the Army's primary role should be to maintain a credible capability for expanding to counter threats to the nation's security within 24 months. The Inquiry was critical of the Army's interpretation of strategic guidance for mobilization, believing that there had been an almost complete disregard for reserve forces to focus on improving the regular force. The Inquiry was particularly critical of the Army's ability to expand training to accommodate bringing greater numbers of units to operational readiness. Significant hollowness across the force in both manpower and equipment meant that sustainability and force expansion were unachievable. The Inquiry further noted that the Department of Defense did not maintain any plans to rapidly equip and resource understaffed or equipped units, and concluded that this meant these units should not be factored into planning for any defense requirements. The Inquiry stated that so long as the Army was capable of dealing with short notice contingencies, there was no need to maintain a larger force for less likely scenarios, so long as detailed plans existed to generate them promptly.2 7 F 19 The Inquiry stipulated that, given the strategic environment and the Government's expectation of being able to commit a brigade group and battalion group simultaneously to different theaters, the minimum force required by the Army was four brigades at high readiness.2 8F 20
The Inquiry made particular reference to the expansion of Army materiel, recommending that a thorough review be conducted of the Australian defense industry and its ability to support the rapid equipping of under-resourced units. Where industry could not support, the Inquiry suggested there was a need to review policy and plans for stockholding and rapid procurement from multiple offshore suppliers. The Inquiry stated that plans for rapid equipment procurement in conflict were central to defense planning, and needed to be given higher priority by the Department.2 9F 21
The Inquiry made several recommendations for remediating these deficiencies.
While many of the recommendations regarding force structure are no longer relevant due to subsequent expansion and improvements in Army capability, one particular recommendation of the Inquiry remains unresolved, to "develop and maintain plans, processes and institutions to enable the Defense Force to expand to meet significant threats to Australian territory within a warning period of no more than two years". White Paper were still suitable for meeting foreseeable scenarios, however acknowledged that warning time for a conflict may not be sufficient to develop new capabilities and therefore committed to regular strategic reviews and a focus on maintaining a capable force in being.
The Government response contained two particularly important statements which underpinned defense strategy: that the regular Army was no longer to be viewed as an expansion base for major continental-scale operations, and that Australia should be more cognizant of its limited ability to achieve influence through military force.3 1F The review identified that American and Australian approaches to mobilization have been, historically, influenced by their secure geography. For both nations in the past, this has led to decisions to prioritize defense expenditure on naval and air forces to fight holding actions and allow for the mobilization of armies. However, the common experience has been that insufficient planning or resources have been allocated to this mobilization, and as such, they have not been mobilized in time to meet government requirements.
A majority of Australian mobilization literature relates to industrial mobilization or self-reliant defense against existential threats. While Australia did face the prospect of invasion and self-reliant defense during the Second World War, the literature review identified that Australia is unlikely to be able to conduct domestic production of advanced military capabilities in the future due to the lack of a peacetime industry and the time and expense of establishing such facilities to meet a conflict. Despite this, the mobilization debate in Australia continues to address mass mobilization and does not address issues such as surge potential or sustainability.
The review also identified that long term defense planning and mobilization planning are inherently based on judgments about developing threats. Where a nation can accurately identify the likely adversary and gage his level of military development such planning becomes relatively simple; decisions regarding the proportion of national capability translated to defense, and the proportion of defense capability allocated to ready or reserve forces are logically based upon this adversary assessment. However, where an adversary is not identifiable defense planning becomes less about preparedness for a specific threat and more about flexibility in response and potential to rapidly realize capability. This is predicated upon planning and institutional readiness to ensure efficiency.
The literature review also considered the historical basis of Australia's current Defense policy as articulated in the 2016 Defense White Paper. Before the 1999 East Timor Crisis the Government sacrificed Army operational readiness to prioritize naval and air force capability within a heavily resource constrained environment, with the Army designed for mobilization potential. However, the Timor crisis precipitated a change in defense policy from isolationism to active regional engagement, which required greater operational readiness. Consequently, the priority shifted from long term expansion potential towards operational readiness, and without an increase in the budget the change of focus occurred at the expense of expansion potential. This allowed for a gradual transition of the reserve force from one designed to expand the Army, towards one designed to fill hollowness in the regular Army. 
The purpose of this thesis is to determine whether strategic warning time negates the requirement for mobilization planning, to determine whether strategic circumstances may require Australia to mobilize in the future, and to understand how strategic warning time and mobilization impacts the operational, structural and mobilization readiness of the Australian Defense Force. Chapter 1 introduced a broad definition of military mobilization as being the timely generation of military capabilities required to deter or respond to threats. The chapter also provided an overview of Australian defense policy approaches to mobilization; historically a mechanism to reduce defense expenditure, and more recently being abandoned as the Government demands improved operational readiness and effectiveness from the ADF without a corresponding increase in budget.
Chapter 1 highlighted that Australia had been required to mobilize additional military resources for four crises, one of which included the threat of invasion of mainland Australia. Despite this, the Australian Government still deems mobilization readiness to be unnecessary due to secure geography, alliances, and a belief that strategic warning time would permit a gradual development of capabilities required to deter or defeat any developing threat. Chapter 1 concluded with the observation that peacetime decisions regarding force structure and readiness priorities incur long term impacts affecting readiness and sustainability for conflict.
Chapter 2 reviewed existing research on mobilization. The review covered topics of particular relevance to Australia including historical experiences of Australia and the United States in mobilizing for conflict, the application of strategic warning time, and Government perspectives on mobilization as a defense planning priority. Chapter 2 also noted that Australian mobilization research is almost exclusively concerned with full national mobilization and questions of military-industrial self-sufficiency, with little attention paid to reserve mobilization and surge potential which may be precursors to industrial mobilization scenarios.
The literature review concluded that strategic warning time is a necessary component of planning constrained by the realities of defense funding in a democracy, however, is not currently underpinned by any quantifiable criteria governing the lead times required to mobilize capability, and is not useful as a determinant of force structure or capability development decisions.
The thesis will use a qualitative research methodology based on heuristic case studies to answer the primary research question: Does strategic warning time negate the requirement for mobilization planning? The research will be broken into four parts.
The first section will conduct a qualitative review of Australia's national interests as articulated in the 2016 Defense White Paper to understand how the Government views risks, strategic warning time and the ADF as a tool of statecraft. The review will seek to understand the range of military commitments envisaged by Government which determines force structure and capability.
The second section will utilize the specific Strategic Defense Objectives identified in the 2016 Australian Defense White Paper to investigate hypothetical situations which may require mobilization. The section will utilize key aspects of Australian policy including the US alliance, and case studies of Australian intervention in past conflicts to determine where Australia may be required to lead a military commitment, provide a more sizeable contribution, or to conduct a unilateral intervention.
The third section will review the application of strategic warning time in Australia's defense planning. The section will consider how strategic warning time is measured, whether specific metrics are used, and will seek to understand whether warning time can be used to inform the timely development of military capability.
The final section will review Australia's military capability in light of the range of military commitments identified in mobilization scenarios, conducting a qualitative review of the Australian army's structure, capabilities and ADF force projection capabilities to identify where limitations exist which may necessitate mobilization. The While not explicitly defined within the Defense White Paper, the language used to describe the likelihood and relative importance of particular Strategic Defense Interests illuminates the Government's perspective on force structure and appetite to employ force. This is depicted in Table 
below
o The enduring threat of terrorism, including threats emanating from ungoverned parts of Africa, the Middle East and Asia. Australians will continue to be threatened by terrorism at home and abroad.
o The spread of extremism and violence is likely to be worsened by foreign terrorist fighters returning from conflicts to Australia and other countries in our region state fragility, including within our immediate neighborhood, caused by uneven economic growth, crime, social, environmental and governance challenges and climate change.
o The pace of military modernization and the development of more capable regional military forces, including more capable ballistic missile forces.
o The emergence of new complex, non-geographic threats, including cyber threats to the security of information and communications systems.4 2 F 9
The drivers of change reference specific areas of concern, which constitute a framework for Defense planners to understand both Government expectations of defense capabilities and an appetite to employ military means to attain strategic ends.
The White Paper predicts that the United States will remain the world's most powerful military nation over the period to 2035, but acknowledges China's rapid economic growth, military modernization, and expectations of greater regional influence. This is expected to create conditions of constant cooperation and competition, exemplified by China's concurrent participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions, and tensions in the South China Sea. For Australia, economic dependence on China and security dependence on the United States presents a growing dilemma.
Globalization and interconnectedness mean that Australia is now vulnerable to security threats originating well beyond its immediate region. The White Paper references Russia's actions in Ukraine, North Korea's proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and the rise of ideological extremism as issues which have both directly influenced Australia's security and reflect a broader trend of nations challenging the established international system of governance in place since the Second World War. Australia is affected by these issues but lacks the capacity to resolve them unilaterally, which increases the importance of multilateral approaches to security.
A significant expansion in terrorist activity threatens Australia's security and interests around the world. The proliferation of cyber and space capabilities means that Australia is now vulnerable to information collection, disruption of critical infrastructure and degradation of military capabilities by a growing range of state and non-state actors. While Australia seeks increased cooperation and adherence to regulation of space and cyber activity between states, such agreement is unlikely and is undermined by the commercialization and relative ease of developing new systems.
The 2016 White Paper, therefore, details the Government's assessment of those scenarios which may justify the employment of defense capabilities, out to 2035, and directly influences the size and capability of the defense forces required to meet these anticipated missions. Key components of this assessment may be summarized as:
1. Australia's security interests are global, and it may be expected to contribute to coalition campaigns beyond its immediate region. The range of threats to Australia's interests is growing, and therefore military intervention is expected to increase.
2. Increased defense expenditure and increased lethality across Australia's immediate region will increase the costs and risks inherent in operating within this environment.
3. Australia may lead military campaigns in its immediate region and must be viewed as a security partner of choice by neighbor nations.
4. The first task for the ADF is to deny or defeat a direct invasion of Australia's mainland or offshore territories. However, it will not be resourced for this task as no threat is expected before 2035.
This next section presents several force deployment scenarios based upon historical precedent and stated Government interests, to establish a benchmark for the scale and sustainability of Army commitments which may be required.
Scenario One -Defense of Australian Territory Strategic Defense Objective (SDO) One is to deter, deny and defeat attacks on or threats to Australia and its national interests, and northern approaches. The 2016 White
Paper apportions no more than a remote prospect of such an event out to 2035, based upon the lack of identified adversaries or intent, and a lack of requisite military capability. The White Paper does not specifically define national interests or northern approaches. However, the operations undertaken during the Second World War to deny Japan a staging base from which to attack Australia provide some historical context.
Following the conclusion of the First World War Australia, like many other Western nations, withdrew from active consideration of military affairs. The human and financial cost of the war ensured that no political capital was to be gained by discussion of further military conflict, and the Great Depression brought other challenges for both Government and society. Though some important structural reforms were implemented, the inter-war period was largely characterized by decommissioning and reductions in the scale, budget and preparedness of all services.4 3 F 10 Continued adherence to the principle of Imperial Defense and belief that Great Britain would provide for Australia's security was used as a crutch by successive Governments to avoid addressing national defense issues.4 4F 11
As early as 1920 Australian defense officials had identified Japan as the only 'potential and probable adversary' in a future conflict, however, the force structure and materiel recommended by defense officials to effectively defend against a Japanese incursion were never realized. Despite military planners determining that the defeat of a successful invasion could require as many as seven divisions constituting some 180,000 men, the actual force was allowed to decline to below 40,000.4 5F 12 Further, while Australia placed increased reliance upon the security provided by her relationship with Great Britain, both Britain and the United States entered into agreements with Japan which facilitated Japan's development of an enhanced naval capability and reduced the allied forces and Pacific bases which would be available to provide for Australia's security.4 6 F 
13
The Committee on Imperial Defense continued to renew its the 10-year rule until 1932, which had a significant impact upon Government attitudes towards defense and the state of preparedness of the militaries of both nations.4 8F 15 The Australian endorsement of the Singapore strategy continued into the late 1930s despite continual delays and reduction in the scope of Singapore's Defenses, and the acknowledgment in 1937 that any British commitment to Singapore would be secondary to European requirements.4 9F 16
The naval installations at Singapore were eventually opened in 1938, though without a fleet or adequate troops to defend them.5 0 F 17 Japan's increasing industrialization, military advancement, and invasion of Manchuria 1931 were viewed with increasing concern, however, resulted in a disjointed Government response which attempted to counter Japanese commercial interests in the South West Pacific while ignoring the defense implications.5 1F 18 Throughout this period Japan sought to increase trade with Australia beyond the 14% of total exports already received and sought improved access to natural resources in the South West Pacific.
However, in 1936 Australia joined British efforts to frustrate Japan's acquisition of resources by imposing harsh tariffs, and the following year ceased the export of iron ore to Japan, resulting in a complete cessation of trade with Australia.5 2F 19
The Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937 finally spurred an Australian rearmament program primarily aimed at infrastructure development and platform procurement for the Navy and Air Force. However, the budget allocated was still well below that required for effective expansion and rearmament.5 3F 20 Due to the lack of peacetime industries for the manufacture of materiel, particularly aircraft, it was not feasible to rapidly source the expertise required for domestic manufacture, and orders placed with British companies were not satisfied due to prioritization of Britain's re-armament and expansion programs. Australia's faith in British ability and willingness to provide for its defense were badly shaken by the fall of Singapore with the loss of some 15,000 Australian troops and finally brought home that British and American priorities lay in Europe, not the Pacific.
Rapidly mobilized formations from company to brigade were sent to New Guinea, New
Britain, Ambon and Timor to Australia's north, and New Ireland and New Caledonia to the northeast as a means to prevent the Japanese from simply occupying the islands.
However, lacking strength, training, and enablers these forces were expected to be overwhelmed and destroyed in a Japanese assault.5 9F 26
The lack of seriousness with which war planning had been undertaken meant that mobilization, domestic production, rail and road infrastructure, coastal defenses and defensive plans were all inadequate.6 0F 
27
While subsequent analysis indicates that the Japanese lacked the forces required to mount an invasion of Australia, by capturing all of the archipelagos to Australia's north and northeast they successfully sealed sea lines of communication to isolate Australia and prevent Allied passage to either Singapore or the Philippines.6 3F 30 With Australia's hastily mobilized troops hopelessly outnumbered and outgunned, the Japanese rapidly captured air and sea bases at Rabaul in New Guinea, Timor, Java, and Ambon from which they controlled the archipelago and launched over 100 air attacks on the mainland.6 4F 31
Despite strong opposition from the political and military leadership in London several Australian divisions were returned for home defense, as at this point the combined services were incapable of defeating a Japanese invasion should it have occurred.6 5 F 32 Additional Australian troops were deployed to New Guinea to prevent the capture of Port Moresby, which would have provided a launch point for an invasion of Australia, and subsequently fought a grueling campaign to retake the island at the cost of some 20,000 casualties. Subsequently, some 30,000 Australians were required to clear the Japanese from Bougainville.6 6F 
33
As seen in the example of Japanese occupation of the islands to Australia's north, any threat to Australia's sea lines of communication or the acquisition of naval and air bases which could threaten Australia itself would be intolerable, and would likely result in the deployment of large numbers of ground forces to assist sovereign forces or unilaterally defend, secure and retake islands from Java to Fiji.7 5F 42 The Japanese operations demonstrate that an adversary without the ability to invade the mainland could still achieve significant leverage over Australia simply by occupying the northern archipelago and securing lines of communication before Australia was able to generate sufficient forces to respond.
Though no threat is today apparent, the threat of Japan was ignored by successive
Australian governments over at least two decades as economics and the promise of security provided by its allies justified political and economic expediency. As China and other nations in the Indo Pacific experience economic growth, military modernization and vie for greater regional influence, the threat of military capability and political intent to attack Australia may materialize far quicker than current political estimations allow.7 6F 43
Scenario Two -Australian Led Regional Stability Operation Instability in Australia's immediate neighborhood is covered under SDO Two -A Secure Nearer Region, considered of the most immediate importance to Australia's security and worthy of 'effective' military commitment. The Government recognizes that Australia must be prepared to lead such commitments to ensure strategic outcomes favorable to Australia's interests, and to uphold its reputation as the security partner of choice.7 7 F 
44
Australia's intervention in East Timor was deeply unpopular with Indonesians, particularly the military, who saw it as a breach of national sovereignty. The intervention raised the prospect of direct conflict between Australia and Indonesia and was a significant factor in Australia's decision to request 'boots on the ground' from the United In the aftermath of the Second World War, many European nations sought to reestablish the pre-war status quo with their Asian colonies. However, the period of Japanese occupation had allowed for the growth of nationalist movements which now sought independence. Support from the Soviet Union and the newly installed communist government in China led to several communist insurgencies across French, British and Dutch colonies, extending the ideological battleground of the Cold War to Asia.
Although troubled by the spread of communism in Asia and France's war in Indochina, Australia was predominantly concerned about instability in its immediate region. The British were fighting a communist insurgency in Malaya, and the Netherlands had ceded the Dutch East Indies to become the independent nation of Indonesia in 1949.
Through the 1950s increasing authoritarianism in Indonesia along with the growing political influence of both its military and the Communist Party were of grave concern to Australia as it faced the prospect of sharing land and sea borders with an unstable or hostile Indonesia.9 0F 57 Australia recognized that stability in the near region was predicated upon both US and Britain maintaining their presence, thus preventing the development of threats which may impact Australia.
Against this backdrop of regional instability, Australia committed to a policy of Forward Defense and agreed to deploy forces in support of the counterinsurgency campaign in Malaya, and to contribute to a Commonwealth Far East Strategic Reserve.9 1F 58
Although at this stage Britain remained committed to the region, Australia was not oblivious to Britain's post-war financial situation and the risk that she would abandon her remaining Asian colonies.9 2F 59 Australia, therefore, sought the opportunity to build its relationship with the United States and demonstrate its commitment to shared-defense as a means of guaranteeing American support in the region under the new Australia New Zealand United States (ANZUS) Treaty.9 3F 60
The United States was drawn into Vietnam as part of its broader policy of resisting communist expansion, and fear that communist control in Vietnam would soon lead to the loss of other countries throughout Asia.9 4F 61 As American support to France in the First Indochina War transitioned to the subsequent advisory effort, American politicians feared that a unilateral commitment would be portrayed as American imperialism. It was for this reason which America sought the introduction of forces from Australia in 1961.9 5F 
62
As the situation in Vietnam deteriorated America increased its commitment of advisors and began the introduction of combat forces. While eager to see an increased contribution from Australia, Australia's regional security environment was further complicated in 1963 by confrontasi, the Indonesian intervention to prevent the creation of and defended Australia's limited contribution due to the dilemma of balancing between
Vietnam and the threat of Indonesia, he now warned that without a more substantial commitment to the Anglo-American alliance Australia might find itself facing Indonesia on its own.1 06F 73 This pressure led to the addition of a second infantry battalion in 1966, and then a trebling of the commitment in 1967 with the decision to send a brigade task force which included aviation, logistics and special forces.1 07F 74
While the increased commitment was intended to satisfy strategic concerns, at the operational level the creation of the Australian Task Force and battlespace ownership of Phuoc Tuy province allowed the Australians to wage a counter-insurgency campaign in accordance with their doctrine developed during experiences in Malaya and Borneo.1 08 F 75
The Australian approach led to conflict with American General Westmoreland who pushed for a more aggressive campaign as was being waged across the American sectors, with a focus on attrition and the consequent increase in casualties.1 09F 76 However, the Australian operational approach was influenced by the Government's perspective that the commitment was primarily political, that the war was unlikely to be resolved satisfactorily due to the lack of a credible South Vietnamese Government, and as such the priority was to minimize casualties to avoid exacerbating the anti-war sentiment which had emerged.1 10 F 77
By 1970 the Australian Army had grown to 44,000. To sustain the Army at this size, over 60,000 national servicemen were called up for service over the life of the scheme. Some 17,000 national servicemen served in Vietnam, and 500 soldiers died during the war.1 11F 78 The decision to send national servicemen to Vietnam, rather than only professional soldiers, had fundamentally changed the nature of the issue in Australia, given rise to anti-war sentiment, and paced pressure on the Government to limit the scale of its commitment even as the United States applied pressure for a greater contribution.
Australia ultimately failed to achieve the strategic objectives which it had sought, namely continued American involvement in Asia and a guarantee of support under the Force, particularly the army, were to contribute to the significant strategic shock experienced in 1999 when called upon to deploy to East Timor.
While many analysts view Australia's involvement in Vietnam as a strategic error, the circumstances which led to Australia's commitment, namely degradation of regional security and a need to contribute to the ANZUS alliance as a means of assuring reciprocal support, apply equally to this day.
Australia has long recognized that as a small nation with a limited population and industrial base her security is predicated upon the support of powerful allies. Where Australia's commitment in the Second World War was motivated by the need to assure Britain's survival, her overall contribution of troops was not statistically significant. Australia's decision to expand its military forces during the 1960s was driven primarily by concern for the security situation Malaya, New Guinea and the possibility of conflict with Indonesia, not to support a greater commitment to Vietnam. Regardless, the Government found it impossible to expand the military through voluntary enlistment in the short period required and had to resort to conscription, which changed the political nature of its alliance support. In its September 2000 review of the Australian Army the Government acknowledged that the army is an institution which is the subject of great national pride, but in which the majority have no desire to serve; this is an issue which will likely affect the success of rapid voluntary expansion in the future. In addition to the problem of sustainability, the army is not optimized to manage concurrent commitments. During the biennial Exercise Talisman Sabre, the certification of a brigade combat team causes complete disruption to the force generation model, requiring all of the Army's enablers and two of three combat brigades.1 36 F 103 The Army further identifies that a regional contribution greater than that required in East Timor in 1999 would likely require two brigades with all enabling forces which could not be sustained.1 37F 104 Such a commitment would prevent force generation of the third brigade and As a capability, the amphibious three-ship package may support a broad range of missions, from Humanitarian Assistance through to the lodgment of a combat force.
However, from the perspective of force projection, the amphibious capability is designed to lift and sustain an embarked force of some 2,600 personnel, less than the typical establishment for an Australian Army brigade of 3,600. 
Mobilization allows a nation to minimize the cost of defense during times of peace, prioritizing expenditure on social services and building economic resilience.
However, the ability to conduct timely transformation of national resources into required military capability may be the deciding factor in conflict. This process is dependent upon strategic warning time, or the notice which a nation receives of an adversary's hostile intentions, greater than the time required to generate capability.
Australia will face greater uncertainty and complexity over the coming decades due to the regional and global nature of its strategic interests. The Australian Defense
Force will be more active in the region and will require higher levels of preparedness to meet the broad range of emerging threats and contingencies stemming from state competition, lethal non-state actors and state fragility. However, despite this increased uncertainty and complexity, the Government maintains that there is little prospect of an armed attack against Australia before 2035, and consequently there is no need for a mobilization plan or expansion base for the Defense Force.
For most of Australia's history mobilization was the primary means of generating military capability for war. Australian contingents raised for overseas service from the Boer War to Vietnam were supplemented by civilians who could be trained, equipped and deployed at leisure. Following the Vietnam War, a period of isolationism saw this concept taken to the extreme as the regular army was reduced to a mobilization base for home defense. The isolationist defense of Australia policy was thoroughly discredited by the 1999 East Timor Crisis and the realization that Australia must be capable of projecting land forces at short notice. However, without a substantial increase in defense spending high operational readiness and mobilization readiness were considered mutually exclusive, and mobilization was abandoned.
This thesis sought to understand whether strategic warning time negates the requirement for mobilization planning for Australia. To answer this question research was undertaken to understand the components of mobilization planning and strategic o Deter, deny and defeat attacks on or threats to Australia and its national interests, and northern approaches.
o Make effective military contributions to support the security of maritime South East Asia and support the governments of Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste and of Pacific Island Countries to build and strengthen their security.
o Contribute military capabilities to coalition operations that support Australia's interests in a rules-based global order.
In the 2016 Defense White Paper, the Australian Government establishes a relationship between the three SDO, the likely importance and scale of a commitment, and strategic warning time. SDO 1 is the most important and demanding task for Defense. However, the ADF will not be suitably structured or resourced as no threat to
Australia is expected to materialize before 2035. SDO 2 is of the most immediate With her allies committed elsewhere, Australia lost lives and territory and found that without sufficient forces to control the archipelago to her north she was isolated and faced the risk of invasion.
Case study two examined SDO 2 through the East Timor Crisis of 1999, whereby Australia was forced to undertake a regional intervention precipitated by a moral cause.
The Timorese vote for independence and subsequent militia violence avoided strategic warning of developing hostile capability or intent against Australia, and without anticipated warning time the military was unprepared for the extent or duration of the operation. An appeal to the United States for combat troops to deter Indonesian intervention was refused, causing a reappraisal of Australia's general expectation of alliance support. The case study showed that Australia must be prepared for major contingencies within the region with no strategic warning and that she may be the major force contributor.
The final case study examined SDO 3 through the period of the Vietnam War, which saw a general degradation of security across the region and presented Australia with multiple, concurrent security dilemmas. Facing the prospect of hostile neighbors and the possibility that Britain would withdraw from her Asian colonies, Australia sought to deepen her participation in Vietnam as a means to secure reciprocal support from America in the region.
Australia found itself unable to expand the Army through voluntary enlistment, resorting to conscription to grow the forces required for regional interventions and reserves in case of conflict with Indonesia. America's political isolation led to everincreasing pressure for a greater Australian commitment in Vietnam, under threat that America might otherwise withdraw from the region. The case study showed that a significant military contribution may be required outside of the region to maintain alliances and that Australia may face multiple concurrent security dilemmas. Importantly, the experience undermined assumptions about the speed or ease with which the Army can be expanded.
The study determined that the Australian Government has abandoned mobilization planning on the assumption it will receive long strategic warning time of a developing threat, that it will be secure by virtue of its alliance with the United States, and that crises will not occur concurrently or of a scale which exceeds current defense capability. However, the greater uncertainty and complexity across Australia's region and historical precedent demonstrate the inherent risks in such assumptions. As an island nation, Australia's ability to assess strategic warning time is more, rather than less complicated as the regional and global nature of her strategic interests means that developing military capability is less of an indicator of hostile intent. Instead, Australia must rely upon political warning time, a concept which is less tangible or measurable and is subject to rapid change.
To mitigate risk over the next two decades, the Australian Government will invest in modernizing the Army to enhance its survivability and lethality and improve operational readiness to improve responsiveness in a dynamic region. However, the Army suffers from hollowness, lacks sufficient depth in key enablers, and is becoming more reliant upon a reserve force which is lagging in training and equipment. The Army's ability to surge forces, to sustain multiple concurrent commitments or to sustain an enduring commitment are of serious concern. This concern is exacerbated by the lack of mobilization planning which means that neither the conceptual nor structural base for rapid expansion exists.
Against all of this must be balanced the fact that neither a massive increase in budget nor expansion of the Army are justified by current strategic circumstances. To do so without justification would increase the rate of equipment obsolescence and reduce expenditure in vital areas such as regional foreign aid and international engagement.
Instead, the gap in Australian defense preparation is mobilization planning to ensure that the Army and Government are fully conversant with the limitations of the current force, understand the timelines required to generate additional capability, and understand the key decisions which will be required to conduct the timely transformation of national resources into military capability.
This study determined that there is a gap in Australia's defense capability between that required to support the three Strategic Defense Objectives and what is available.
Consequently, the study makes two recommendations for Australian policymakers.
Firstly, mobilization planning should be included as a task in future defense planning guidance as a means to quantify the limitations, costs, timelines, and risks associated with generating greater defense capability.
Secondly, without a means to measure strategic warning time of an attack or threat to Australia, its national interests and northern approaches, the assumption of no threat to 2035 should be removed. The current assessment provides a false and unjustifiable sense of security and ignores the range of other contingencies which may necessitate force expansion.
Literature Review Summary
Literature Review Summary
1 Charles Kirkpatrick,
region many countries are affected by the causes of state fragility -population growth, weak economic growth, climate change, and governance challenges. Instability in Australia's immediate region could have significant implications for security, by giving greater influence to other nations hostile to Australia's interests. Australia must continue to bolster the stability of countries across its immediate region and must lead on the provision of humanitarian and security assistance where required.
Ibid., 4.   
Michael Evans, "The Tyranny of Dissonance -Australia's Strategic Culture and Way ofWar 1901 -2005," (Study Paper No. 306, Land Warfare Studies Centre,   
Australian Department of Defense, Government Response to Phantom to Force:,
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
was not realized until 2014, and the Army's expansion and restructuring to allow for a multi-role combat brigade at high readiness was not realized until after the maturation of Plan Beersheeba in 2017.8 3F 50
In addition to the long term problem of supporting Timor-Leste8 4 F 51 to become a stable and functioning democracy, Australia has been required to commit forces at short notice to the Solomon Islands for peacekeeping and Fiji for non-combatant evacuation following a coup.8 5 F 52 The nation of Papua New Guinea has suffered from significant instability since gaining sovereignty in 1975, and waged a campaign on the island of Bougainville to prevent its independence; a Bougainville referendum for independence is planned for October 2019.8 6F 53 Further potential flashpoints for regional instability include the Indonesian provinces of Papua and West Papua which have called for independence since the refuted 1969 'Act of Free Choice' which ceded autonomy to Indonesia.8 7F 54   While an Australian intervention in Papua New Guinea, West Papua or Bougainville would only follow a significant failure of Australian and international efforts at supporting stability or brokering peace, such an intervention is not without precedent and may be precipitated by large scale violence against civilians which denies the kind of strategic warning time expected of a serious international confrontation.
By geography alone, an intervention in Papua could be exponentially more complex and require more resources, potentially over an extended period as demonstrated by the continued instability in Timor Leste.8 8 F 55 While Australia would presumably only intervene under the legitimacy of a United Nations mandate or sovereign request for assistance, both of which may bring with them international support, Australia would expect to lead the commitment and would be forced to provide a large commitment to ensure the intervention secured its national interests.8 9F 56 Further, the close alliance with the United States would be no guarantee of support for intervention when weighed against the importance of America's relationship with Indonesia. Such an intervention is demonstrably possible, may occur with little to no strategic warning time, and would be considered of immediate importance to Australia's security thus mandating a response. Depending on the diplomatic circumstances and speed at which the situation developed Australia may be required to provide the bulk of initial forces as well as the ongoing provision of resources beyond those held by typical United Nations contributing nations, such as command and control and aviation. As a vital national interest, Australia could not afford for another nation to lead the an independent and unified Malaysia, which drew additional Australian forces to Malaysia and Borneo and increased the need for reserves in case of a direct conflict with Indonesia in New Guinea.9 8F 65 Having been unable to expand through voluntary recruitment, the army was unable to sustain a greater commitment to Vietnam as was desired by the Government.9 
9F 66
67
Separate to the issue of generating or sustaining forces is the problem of force projection, particularly noting Australia's regional and global interests. During the 1999 East Timor Crisis Australia was incapable of projecting her available forces, resorting to chartered transportation and requiring support from the United States in the form of sealift, transport, and logistics.1 38F 105
During the Non-combatant Evacuation Operation (NEO) to extract Australian and Approved Foreign Nationals from Lebanon in 2006, Australia found that commercial platforms were not available due to competition from other nations conducting evacuation of their citizens.1 39F 106 While the distances involved in the NEO made the use of organic resources unfeasible, the lack of available platforms presents a cautionary tale for future force projection or sustainment planning which is reliant upon commercial support.
The 1999 East Timor Crisis forced the Government to consider the scale and readiness of the ADF's force projection capabilities and to embark upon a substantial capability acquisition program to improve organic air and sealift capabilities and logistics. This program has continued through successive Defense White Papers, and currently, the ADF maintains a dedicated amphibious capability consisting of one logistics support ship and two landing helicopter docks, and airlift capability consisting eight C-17 aircraft for global projection and twelve C-130 aircraft for regional projection.1 
40 F 107
The purpose of this study was to question the basic assumption that mobilization is not required in Australian defense planning. Having determined that a range of contingencies may require force expansion, further mobilization study must be undertaken across the fundamental inputs to capability. These areas of study are critical to inform Government and defense planners and to enable future mobilization planning. 
Possible areas of study include identifying the maximum sustainable active and reserve force, understanding the Australian and foreign experiences of rapid expansion through voluntary enlistment and conscription, and reviewing the suitability of regular and reserve force structures for emergent capabilities such as cyber (as opposed to nonuniformed solutions such as defense civilian or contracting). In light of the changing role of the Army Reserve, further research may review the distribution of combat and logistics capabilities across the active and reserve force.
Possible areas of study include analyzing requirements and options for mobilization stations, analyzing domestic infrastructure to support movement and deployment, establishing pre-purchased capacity with civilian aviation and shipping organizations, utilization of industry capacity for rapid construction of ports, rail, and camps, the establishment of offshore pre-positioned supplies or supplies afloat.
The most vital area for further research is in the area of policy. While this paper has demonstrated the rationale for the inclusion of mobilization in defense planning guidance, this carries significant implications for Government policy and the defense budget which require further analysis. In particular, further research may question the suitability of the current defense budget at below 2% of Gross Domestic Product, the Government's emphasis on domestic production of high-end air and naval platforms, and the relative prioritization of the Army, Navy and Air Force budget.