# ID: 126f37d52b40489d91bc94b90f7eb749
# Title: A Common Understanding of Conflict: The Doctrinal Relationship of FM 100-5 (Coordinating Draft) and Joint Doctrine
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden lor this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the lime for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send
Doctrine provides a military organization with a common philosophy, a common language, a common purpose, and unity of effort.
Joint Warfare Of The US Armed Forces, 1995
The U.S. Army is currently revising its capstone doctrinal manual-FM 100-5,
Operations. Scheduled for publication in April 1998, the 14 th edition of this manual is part of a series that began in 1905. The January 1997 release of FM 100-5 (Draft) marks the beginning of a coordination campaign and revision process to broaden the participation of the Army in the development of its new doctrine. Lasting about six months, this process will allow senior officials and the military public to identify issues and comment on the draft.'
While there are numerous contextual differences (and similarities) between the current FM 100-5 and FM 100-5 (Draft), a significant change is the draft's holistic approach in describing the nature of modern conflict. One of the first steps in developing capstone doctrine is to develop or agree upon a model of conflict that describes the strategic environment in which military forces operate. Drawing from experience, present realities, and considerations for the near future, the model serves as a common starting point for the further development of principles and concepts that form the doctrine's core. This monograph evaluates FM 100-5 (Draft) 's proposed model of conflict and principles of operations to determine if they are compatible with Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Doctrine For Joint Operations.
Joint Publication 3-0 describes the security environment as war, armed conflict, and peace. Military operations within these environments fall under three general categories: war, operations other than war involving the use or threat of force, and operations other than war not involving the use or threat of force. After establishing the model of conflict known as the range of military operations, JP 3-0 recognizes the principles of war and the principles of OOTW that provide the foundation of joint doctrine. Approved in 1995, JP 3-0 provides a common perspective from which to plan and execute joint and multinational operations.
Guidance from the TRADOC (Training and Doctrine Command) Commander to the FM 100-5 writing team includes, "Fold... military activities short of general war into the body of Army operational doctrine and not treat them as separate... .OOTW should not appear." 
3
Whether the nation is at war or at peace, a certain level of military, economic, political, and or informational competition exists. Within this realm of conflict (a state of competition or antagonism among nations and or non-state entities) , the Army conducts operations to compel, deter, reassure and support. Army operations consist of one or more of the four categories of operations: offense, defense, stability, and support.
Moreover, FM 100-5 (Draft) revises the current principles of war and OOTW by offering a set of eleven comprehensive principles of operations that apply to all four categories of operations.
A relatively new occurrence in doctrine development is that the services now must consider if their doctrine is consistent with that of the Joint Staff 
6
The Void: The Operational Art And The U.S. Army" writes:
Army doctrine was written secure in the belief that the central problem it was to solve was "'winning the land battle [1976 FM 100-5]". This restricted view insured that little attention was paid to more catholic and multiservice concerns, or to the divergence of perspective on war fighting that divide the services, especially the ground and air forces.... Moreover, the limited scope of the problem tended to support a rather comfortable view that ground combat was the central activity in any conflict and any other players were simply supporting cast. Joint Staff, and the combatant commands all contributed in developing the first iteration of joint doctrine under this new system. By 1995, a second series of capstone and keystone doctrine was complete that is now both comprehensive and authoritative.
Though the CJCS is vested with the authority and responsibility for the development of joint doctrine, individual departments are responsible for their service specific doctrine. Title 10, United States Code, directs the service departments to recruit, organize, train, equip, and provide forces for assignment to combatant commands and administer and support these forces. 
9
While each service is unique in its capabilities, services rarely conduct operations independently. Joint doctrine is key to providing a common framework for all the services. This point requires that the services carefully consider joint doctrine when revising their doctrine. The Army, with its long tradition and institutional knowledge of doctrine, has greatly contributed in the expansion and quality of joint doctrine. Unity of effort among the services and the joint community may be at risk, however, if Army doctrine is significantly different from joint doctrine. This monograph seeks to answer the following question: Is the model of conflict and principles of operations adopted in FM 100-5 (Draft) consistent with JP 3-0?
This monograph examines the nature and purpose of military doctrine and provides a brief history of the role that doctrine plays in the U.S. Army. Next, this monograph reviews the evolution of capstone joint doctrine since 1986 and the model of conflict currently accepted by the joint community. This discussion is followed by an introduction to FM 100-5 (Draft) with a primary focus on the manual's model of conflict, categories of operations and its comprehensive principles of operations. The analysis portion of the monograph is divided into two sections. First, this chapter conducts a comparative analysis of the models of conflict and their associated principles outline in FM 100-5 (Draft) and JP 3-0. Second, the relationship between joint and Army doctrine is analyzed to determine the extent that Army doctrine incorporates joint concepts.
Military historian Michael Howard once stated, "I am tempted indeed to declare dogmatically that whatever doctrine the Armed Forces are working on now, they have got it wrong." 
10
Field Manual 100-5 (Draft) is another step in the revision process to ensure our doctrine remains relevant, achievable, acceptable, and adaptable in the evolving complex security environment. This chapter discusses the nature and purpose of doctrine and provides a brief history of the role that doctrine played in the U.S. Army.
Military doctrine is the fundamental set of beliefs in the application of force that serves at the heart of a military's competence. Considering sound theory and principles, doctrine provides military organization with a common language-a way of thinking as a corporate body about the business of war. Dr. James Schneider, a professor at the U.S. Army's School of Advanced Military Studies writes, "Military doctrine...is the practical application of theoretical knowledge by real-world armies...." 12 Doctrine provides the military with the common base of how to think, study, develop and apply the means and ways to achieve the ends in war.
A common doctrine is important both for military efficiency and organizational learning and helps develop a shared picture of the future we seek to create. A study of organizational learning suggests that one of the keys to great organizations is to build a common understanding of the future-or shared vision. 
13
Mental models represent an individual's internalization of the environment based on deeply ingrained perceptions of situations that evolve from experience, assumptions, and generalizations. These models allow individuals to rapidly access situations often without consciously thinking about them.   Several external and internal influences shape doctrinal development. Figure 
1
The endless debate on the roles and missions of the services, along with the declining defense budget test interservice relationships and has a direct impact on doctrinal development. Doctrinal issues such as air and sea lift, the fire support coordination line, the control of long range missile fires, theater air defense, and close air support are just a few issues the services continue to debate. "Doctrine is a contentious issue because the services often cannot agree on the best way to prepare for the next war." 20 Actually, the services often cannot agree on the best way to conduct war once We focused our energies and got it right-although not without updating the manual at better than once a-year-rate throughout the war." 24 Army doctrine changed considerably between World War II and the publication of the 1976 version of FM 100-5. Doctrine during this period was influenced by a variety of factors to include improved conventional and nuclear weapons, mobility, desires of different military leaders, branch clashes, interservice rivalry, and evolving national security policy. 
5
Following the end of the Korean War, the Army's doctrinal focus shifted to the nuclear battlefield. The idea that the Army could not afford separately organized forces for conventional and nuclear warfare led to the creation of the "pentomic divisions". With the prodding by the Kennedy administration in the early 1960s, the Army examined its limited war and counterinsurgency doctrine. Nevertheless, the Army was doctrinally unprepared as it entered the Vietnam War.'
The U.S. Army emerged from one of the most traumatic periods in its history following the end of the Vietnam War. After analyzing the lessons learned form the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the Army's leadership determined that its doctrine and force capability were inadequate to the requirements determined by world wide U.S. security interests. With the activation of TRADOC under General William E. DePuy, doctrine achieved a new importance in the American Army. Of the four primary functions assigned to this new organization (doctrine, organization, equipping, and training), DePuy saw doctrine as the organization's first priority serving as the engine of change for the remaining three. While the concepts developed in the 1976 FM 100-5 were short lived, the doctrinal development process and the public debates that followed the Considering the changes in the world's security environment, the 1993 version of FM 100-5 included the strategy of force projection and the introduction of OOTVW
Historians Eliot Cohen and John Gooch in Military Misfortunes remind us that military failure stems from the inability to learn, anticipate, and adapt to change. In the last six years, the size of the U.S. Army has decreased from nearly a million man force to a force under five hundred thousand soldiers. While downsizing, the Army participated in one major regional conflict in Southwest Asia and conducted six significant operations other than war in Somalia, Macedonia, Bosnia, Haiti, the Sinai, and northern and southern Iraq. 
32
A brief discussion of complexity theory is useful in understanding the importance of using doctrine as a tool for managing change in large complex systems. According to M. W. Waldrop in Complexity, a complex system is a system with many independent agents that interact with each other allowing the system as a whole to continue to learn and grow. Complexity theory suggests that complex adaptive systems evolve best at the edge of chaos. This does not mean these systems are chaotic and out of control, but that these systems have somehow acquired the ability to bring order and chaos into a special kind of balance. The balance point, referred to as the edge of chaos, is where components of a system never stabilize, and yet never quite dissolve into turbulence.
Complex adaptive systems at the edge of chaos are where new ideas and innovation challenge the status quo that eventually overthrows the old guard. In essence, complex adaptive systems learn from their environment. 
33
One of the significant changes between the first iterations of joint capstone publications (1991-1993) and the second (1995), was the authoritative nature of the second iterations. The cause for this shift was twofold. First, the CJCS was uncomfortable with the level in which the U.S. armed forces understood joint doctrine.
Joint The guidance in this publication is authoritative; as such, this doctrine will be followed except when, in the judgment of the commander, exceptional circumstances dictate otherwise. If conflicts arise between the contents of this publication and the contents of Service publications, this publication will take precedence for the activities of joint forces... , 
44
Both JP 3-0 and JP 3-07, Joint Doctrine For Military Operations Other Than War, points out that political considerations permeate all levels of war during OOTW and that the military may not be the primary player. 
53
• More homogeneous approach resulting in 'comprehensive' doctrine • "Fold...military activities short of general war into the body of Army operational doctrine and not treat them as separate....OOTW should not appear." • Use TRADOC Pam 525-5 to "inform your debates ..strike the delicate balance between long-range conceptual development and the immediate time horizon our doctrine must embrace."
• "Address joint, interagency and combined aspects of warfare."
From CAC CDR:
• Address the "impact and integration of information technologies at different levels throughout the force."
• "Remain consistent with Joint Pub 3.0," but remember services' responsibility to lead as well as reflect joint doctrine. • Support and stability operations to be included • Watch AWEs closely...some will be applicable, some will not Fig. 
5
5
57
58
Armed forces in conflict resolution.
According to the draft, Army forces conduct four basic categories of operations to accomplish assigned missions within joint and or combined operations. The four categories include:
Offensive operations are those that carry the fight to the enemy. They are the decisive form of warfare, the commander's ultimate means of imposing his will on the enemy. Defensive operations are those undertaken to cause an enemy attack to fail. Alone, they achieve no decision. They must ultimately be combined with or followed by offensive actions. Stability operations apply military power to influence the political environment, facilitate diplomacy, and disrupt specified illegal activities. They include both development and coercive actions. Support operations provide essential supplies and services to assist designated groups. They are conducted mainly to relieve suffering and assist civil authorities responding to crises. Support operations are normally characterized by lack of an active opponent. 
59
6
After establishing the nature of modern conflict, the draft discusses the fundamentals that guide and instruct army operations. These fundamentals include the Army's operational concept, the priciples of operations, core functions, categories of operations, operating systems, and concept of complementary and reinforcing effects.'
It is difficult, however, to identify a common set of principles that reasonably apply across the full spectrum of conflict. To support the holistic model of conflict, however, it is necessary to have a set of principles that have universal application. Field Manual 100-5 (Draft) lists eleven principles of operations that instruct and inform the conduct of operations at all levels. The draft instructs that there are no priority among the principles and should be viewed as a whole. Regarding the principles of war, FM 100-5 (Draft) reads, "The experience over the past 75 years has taught that the list was not complete and two principles, morale and exploitation have been added." 
6
The changes offered in the draft FM 100-5 require more than a casual reading by those schooled in current army or joint doctrine to comprehend many of the new concepts introduced in the manual. In addition to the principle of operations, Field
Manual 100-5 (Draft) modifies the tenets of army operations (now called characteristics)
by subordinating the tenet of synchronization as a subset of the new characteristic orchestrations. Additionally, the manual adds to the fundamentals of army operations the concept of core junctions. Core functions (see, shape, strike, shield, and move), are the fundamental actions forces take to apply military power. 
6
8
r OXFJ 1>J11 S1IJ DUD DJ...  
Both FM 100-5 and JP 3-0 serve as the capstone manual for their respective organizations and doctrinal publication systems. The models of conflicts in FM 100-5
(Draft) and JP 3-0 provide the starting point in each manual for the further explanation of principles and concepts that form the core of Army and joint doctrine respectively. The models of conflict in FM 100-5 (Draft) and JP 3-0, however, offer different ways to think about the most complex of human endeavors-war. The thought process to develop these models comes from two fundamentally different schools of thought. In the case of FM 100-5 (Draft), the model of conflict appears to derive from the belief that complex systems, like war, must be looked at from a holistic point of view. This thought process is known as systems thinking. Peter Senge in The Fifth Discipline writes, From a very early age, we are taught to break apart problems, to fragment the world. This apparently makes complex tasks and subjects more manageable, but we pay a hidden, enormous price. We can no longer see the consequences of our actions; we lose our intrinsic sense of connection to a larger whole. When we then try to 'see the big picture' we try to reassemble the fragments in our minds, to list and organize all the pieces... the task is futile... .Thus, after a while we give up trying to see the whole altogether. 
67
Clausewitz in their briefing slides to support the draft's holistic model of conflict. "In war more than in any other subject we must begin by looking at the nature of the whole;
for here more than elsewhere the part and the whole must be thought of together." 
68
The joint model takes the approach that since war is the most complex of human endeavors, it must be broken into separate, but related component parts (War and OOTW). While several scholars of learning organizations might disagree with this approach, doctrine must have practical application. 
69
70
10
10
Additionally, while JP 3-0 categorizes the states of environment, it also recognizes the simultaneous nature of theater operations. Operations other than war may or may not involve the use of force within a theater that could be in a wartime state. This concept is the essence of FM 100-5 (Draft)'s explanation of army operations. 71
OOTW WAR Fig. 
10
A quick read of FM 100-5 (Draft) might lead one to the conclusion that the draft simply replaces the term war with conflict and operations, and the term OOTW with the terms stability and support operations. The draft does refer to the levels of war as the levels of conflict and edits the writings of J.F.C. Fuller and Clausewitz by replacing the word war with operations 1 '' Additionally, the draft's discussion on stability and support operations is very similar to JP 3-0's description of operations other than war. If this was merely the case, changing terms, than one must ask why change? Is it simply because the word OOTW is unpopular with high level officials within the Army? The discussion regarding the models of conflict and the thought process used to develop these models shows that the differences between FM 100-5 and JP 3-0 are more than semantic. The models are fundamentally different in their explanation of the environment in which military forces operate. The principles that guide the conduct of military operations within these models are the most significant.
While the draft addresses in detail the four categories of operations, the principles that guide these operations are focused at the more traditional military view of conflictwar. In the preface of the draft the authors state, "FM 100-5 Operations is first and foremost a warfighting manual." While the Army's primary mission is to fight and win, this warfighting focus of the manual's principles fall short in addressing the other half of the Army's mission-to deter war and support the policies of the nation. Of the twentyfive plus operations in which the Army participated in since 1991, only Operation Desert Storm falls under the "fight and win the nation's wars" category. Surely the Army needs a capstone doctrine with associated principles that addresses the most violent, dangerous, and costly form of conflict which is war. The draft states. "The most violent form of conflict is war. In this most dangerous of enterprises, Army commanders seek to impose their will on adversaries at least cost to their own forces. To fail is to sacrifice the lives of their men and, potentially, the vital interest of the state." 74 However, if the nature of conflict in the late 1980s to mid 1990s continues into the near future, the Army will find itself conducting operations where operations other than war require as much attention as warfighting in doctrinal principles.
The principles of restraint, perseverance, and legitimacy in joint doctrine, emphasize that some environments require a mind shift from the traditional understanding of the application of military force. Offensive, massed effects, and surprise are all worthy principles when massing the elements of combat power in battle.
In peacekeeping and or humanitarian assistance operations, however, the very nature and general goals of these operations call for the restraint of military force.
The services base their doctrine on experiences and expertise in their respective mediums while joint doctrine guides the integration and use of these forces in joint operations. 
73
Whether an Army corps serves as a joint task force headquarters or an Army corps'
provides the bulk of the ground combat power within a joint theater of operations, modern warfare is joint warfare. The services provide trained and equipped forces to joint force commanders that use joint doctrine as their guide in the planning and conduct of military operations. Joint Publication 3-0 states that the doctrine and guidance established in its publication applies to the commanders of combatant commands, subunified commands, joint task forces, and subordinate components of these commands.
"The principles and guidance also may apply when significant forces of one Service are was uncomfortable with the level in which the U.S. armed forces understood joint doctrine. Additionally, in 1994 he questioned whether the services felt obligated to adhere to joint doctrine. This resulted in the CJSC directing that all joint publications contain a qualifier that states that the publication is authoritative; will be followed except in exception circumstances; and where differences between joint and service doctrine arise, joint doctrine will take precedence for the activities of joint forces. This statement does not prohibit the services from developing service specific doctrine. It does, however, suggest that the services need to closely examine joint doctrine to ensure their doctrine is consistent in areas such as the principles that guide the conduct of military operations.
In his guidance to the authors of FM 100-5 (Draft), the Combined Arms Center Commander directs, " 'Remain consistent with Joint Pub 3.0,' but remember services' responsibility to lead as well as reflect joint doctrine." 77 Complexity theory teaches us that the competition and interaction among independent agents within larger systems is necessary for the organization to continually evolve and adapt. If joint doctrine is no longer applicable (while many would suggest otherwise), than it is the responsiblity of the Army to work with the other services and joint staff to improve it. What is questionable, however, is the publication of a capstone service doctrine with many of its core concepts fundamentally different from joint doctrine, with the intent and or hope that joint doctrine will follow. Imagine the armor or infantry school changing the principles of war in one of their assigned brigade or battalion field manuals. Affecting change in joint doctrine by this process may have been the best way to jump start the joint doctrinal development process ten or even four years ago. However, joint doctrine, its development process, and its doctrinal organizations have progressed a long way since the passage of the Defense Reorganization Act of 1986.
Both the Army and the Joint Staff have similar views on the role and purpose of doctrine. The U.S. Army views its capstone doctrine as the statement of how it intends to conduct war and operations other than war as pan of the joint team. Providing the intellectual focus that touches all aspects of the Army, the doctrine established in FM 100-5 facilitates communications, promotes a shared vision, and "serves as the basis for curriculum in the Army school system." 
78
...the fundamental principles that guide the employment of forces. Doctrine is authoritative. It provides the distilled insights and wisdom gained from our collective experiences with warfare... Joint doctrine offers a common perspective from which to plan and operate, and fundamentally shapes the way we think about and train for 79 war.
The Army and Joint Staff see doctrine as a means of developing common mental models within their organization to improve the planning for and execution of military operations. Service doctrine and joint doctrine both serve as the basis for curriculum in the U.S. military schools systems. There could very well be a generation of Army officers taught two separate doctrines of war-one for Army operations and one for joint operations. The problem is that Army forces rarely operate independently suggesting that Army doctrine should at least mirror joint doctrine in its understanding of the nature of conflict ad its principles of operations.
The proposed second iterations of post-Cold War Army capstone doctrine offers a different way of viewing the security environment. In the formulation of its model of conflict and guiding principles of operations, FM 100-5 (Draft) considers lessons from the past, present day realities, and looks to the future. The draft draws upon the best of military theorist, joint doctrine, and introduces original concepts. The authors of FM 100-5 (Draft), however, chose not to distinguish between the categories of conflict, and fold operations other than war and war into a comprehensive body of Army operational doctrine. This approach creates a dichotomy with JP 3-0.
While this monograph reflects a bias favoring the explanation of the security environment and principles of war and OOTW listed in the current FM 100-5 and JP 3-0, this was not the purpose of the monograph. The purpose of this monograph is not to determine whether FM 100-5 (Draft) or JP 3-0 offer a better explanation of the nature of modern conflict or which set of principles is more applicable in today's complex security environment. By focusing at the core of each organization's capstone manual, the purpose of this paper is to determine whether the comprehensive doctrine adopted in FM 100-5 (Draft) and its model of conflict are consistent with joint doctrine.
Several conclusions emerge from the analysis. First, the holistic approach taken by FM 100-5 (Draft) that does not categorize types of conflict is fundamentally different from joint doctrine. Joint doctrine makes a conscious effort to delineate between largescale combat operations (war) and operations other than war that may or may not involve combat. Second, while many of the principles of operations in FM 100-5 (Draft)
incorporate the principles of war and OOTW, the list and its narrative does not incorporate the principles of restraint, legitimacy, and perseverance recognized by joint doctrine. In addition, the principles of operations morale and exploitation do not appear in joint principles. Since both JP 3-0 and FM 100-5 (Draft) recognize that their principles are the bedrock of military doctrine, these differences present a conflict between the two doctrines. The third conclusion is that the draft should be modified to reflect joint doctrine. While FM 100-5 is an Army manual, the Army rarely conducts operations independently. Additionally, the focus of FM 100-5 is at the operational level of war, making it inherently joint in nature.
Since FM 100-5 (Draft) is built around the framework of its holistic model of conflict and principles of operations, modification to either of these concepts would cause a major rewrite of the manual. Unless the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff makes an issue of the differences between JP 3-0 and FM 100-5 (Draft), significant modification to the manual's bedrock is unlikely. Two recommendations may help to better connect the Army's new doctrine with JP 3-0. First, a brief discussion (possibly in the preface or in the part one of the FM 100-5), acknowledging the joint perspective that separates the environment of conflict into war and OOTW. From here, FM 100-5 may then lead into what JP 3-0 describes as the simultaneous nature of theater operations.
This sets the stage to introduce the concept that within this simultaneous environment of joint and combined operations, army operations consist of a combination of offense, defense, stability, and or support operations. Second, FM 100-5 should capture the intent of legitimacy in the discussion of stability imperatives, and the intent of restraint, perseverance, and legitimacy in the discussion of support imperatives.
At the operational level, doctrine is neither pure theory nor dogmatic. Doctrine lies along the continuum between theory and application. Both Army and joint capstone doctrine emphasize that doctrine is not an end to itself. Doctrine at the operational level provides broad concepts and principles requiring leader's judgment in application. "The desired outcome is to establish a pattern of thought-a common cultural bias-resulting in optimal performance across a broad range of possibilities." 80
The U.S. military must continue to learn, adapt, and evolve as it enters into the twenty-first century. If it remains set in its tactics, doctrine, and organization, the U.S. armed forces will surely meet the same fate as other militaries failing to evolve. The Army's latest revision of its capstone doctrine presents some interesting challenges in developing a shared vision both internal and external to the Army. While the Army must continue to revise its doctrine, the Army must also consider the possible negative effects that a revised doctrine not consistent with joint doctrine will have on its own members and the joint community. The importance of the U.S. armed forces as a whole to share a common model of conflict and principles that guide military operations is imperative for success.
that all forces operate under a single commander with the requisite authority to direct all forces employed in pursuit of a common purpose. Unity of effort, however, requires coordination and cooperation among all forces toward a commonly recognized objective, although they are not necessarily part of the same command structure. In multinational and interagency operations, unity of command may not be possible , but the requirement for unit of effort becomes paramonut. Unit of effort-coordination through cooperation and common interests-is an essential complement to unity of command. g. Security: The purpose of security is to never permit the enemy to acquire unexpected advantage. Security enhances freedom of action by reducing friendly vulnerability to hostile acts, influence, or surprise. Security results from the measures taken by commanders to protect their forces. Staff planning and an understanding of enemy strategy, tactics, and doctrine will enhance security. Risk is inherent in military operations. Applications of this principle includes prudent risk management, not undue caution. Protecting the force increases friendly combat power and preserves freedom of action.
h. Surprise: The purpose of surprise is to strike the enemy at a time or place or in a manner for which it is unprepared. Surprise can help the commander shift the balance of combat power and thus achieve success well out of proportion to the effort expended. Factors contributing to surprise include speed in decisionmaking, information sharing, and force movement; effective intelligence; deception; application of unexpected combat power; OPSEC; and variation in tactics and methods of operations.
i. Simplicity: The purpose of simplicity is to prepare clear, uncomplicated plans and consise orders to ensure thorough understanding. Simplicity contributes to successful operations . Simple plans and clear concise orders minimize misunderstanding and confusion. When other factors are equal, the simplest plan is preferable. Simplicity in plan allows better understanding and execution planning at all echelons. Simplicty and clarity of expression grealty facilitate mission execution in the stress, fatigue, and other complexities of modern combat are especially critical to success in combined operations.
2. Principles of OOTW. The principles of war, though principally associated with large-scale combat operations, generally apply to military operations other than war, though sometimes in different ways. However, the political considerations and the nature of many military operations other than war require an underpinning of additional principles listed below. a. Objective. Direct every military operation toward a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable objective. This principle of war applies also to operations other than war. A clearly defined and attainable objective-with a precise understanding of what constitute success-is critical when the United States is involved in operations other than war. Military commanders should also understand what specific conditions could result in mission termination, as well as those that yield failure. JFCs must also understand the strategic aims, set appropriate objectives, and ensure that these aims and objectives contribute to unity of effort with other agencies.
The principle of unity of command in war also applies to operations other than war; but, in operations other than war, this principle may be more difficult to attain. In these operations, other government agencies may often have the lead. Commanders may answer to a civilian chief, such as an ambassador, or may themselves employ the resources of a civilian agency. Command arrangements may often be only loosely defined and many times will not involve command authority as understood within the military. This arrangement may cause commanders to seek an atmosphere of cooperation to achieve objectives by unity of effort. Military commanders need to consider how their actions contribute to initiatives that are also diplomatic, economic, and informational in nature. Because operations other than war will often be conducted at the small unit level, it is important that all levels understand the militarycivilian relationship to avoid unnecessary and counter-productive friction.
c. Security: Never permit hostile factions to acquire an unexpected advantage. In joint operations other than war, security deals principally with force protection against virtually any person, element, or group hostile to our interests. These could include a terrorist, a group opposed to the operation, and even looters after a natural disaster. JFCs also should be ready constantly to counter activity that could bring significant harm to units or jeopardize mission accomplishment. Inherent in this responsibility is the need to be capable of rapid transition from a peaceful to a combat posture should the need arise. The inherent right of self-defense from the unit to the individual level applies to all operations.
d. Restraint: Apply appropriate military capability prudently. The actions of military personnel and units are framed by the disciplined application of force, including specific ROE. In operations other than war, these ROE will often be more restrictive, detailed, and sensitive to political concerns than in war. Moreover, these rules may change frequently during operations. Restraints on weaponry, tactics, and levels of violence characterize the environment. The use of excessive force could adversely affect efforts to gain or maintain legitimacy and impede the attainment of both short-and longterm goals. This concept does not preclude the application of overwhelming force, when appropriate, to display US resolve and commitment. The reasons restraint often needs to be understood by the individual service member because a single act could cause critical political consequences.
e. Perseverance: Prepare for the measured, protracted application of military capability in support of strategic aims. Some operations other than war may be short, others protracted. Peacetime operations may require years to achieve the desired effects. Underlying causes of confrontation and conflict rarely have a clear beginning or a decisive resolution. It is important to assess crisis response options against their contribution to long-term strategic objective. This assessment does not preclude decisive military action but does require careful, informed analysis to choose the right time and place for such action. Commanders balance their desire to attain objectives quickly with a sensitivity for the long-term strategic aims and the restraints placed on operations. Therefore, the patient, resolute, and persistent pursuit of the national goals and objectives, for as long as necessary to achieve them, is often the requirement for success.
f. Legitimacy: Sustain the willing acceptance by the people of the right of the government to govern or of a group or agency to make and carry out decisions. This principle focuses on internationally sanctioned standards, as well as the perception that authority of a government to govern is genuine, effective, and uses proper agencies for reasonable purposes. Joint force operations need to sustain the legitimacy of the operation and of the host government. During operations where a government does not exist, extreme caution should be used when dealing with individuals and organizations to avoid inadvertently legitimizing team. PYSOOP can enhance both domestic and international perceptions of the legitimacy of an operations.
Below is the principles of operations and the four sets of imperatives for army operations extracted from FM 100-5 (Draft). 
82
b. Offensive: Seize, train, and exploit the initiative. Offensive action is key to achieving decisive results. It is the essence of successful operations. Offensive actions are those taken to dictate the nature, scope, and tempo of an operation. They force the enemy to react rather than act. Offensive operations are the means by which we impose our will. Offensive operations are essential to maintaining the freedom of action necessary for success. They are required to exploit vulnerabilities and react to rapidly changing situations and unexpected developments. An offensive spirit must be inherent in all actions. Even the defense must be an active, not a passive one. c. Maneuver: Place the enemy in a position of disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power. Manuever is shifting combat power-forces and effects-to gain advantage. It is the dynamic element of warfare that concentrates and disperses combat power in a manner that places and keeps the enemy at a disadvantage, thus achieving results that would otherwise be more costly. Effective maneuver keeps the enemy off balance by making him confront new problems and new dangers faster than he can deal with them. It is the principal means by which we gain and preserve freedom of action, reduce vulnerability, and exploit success. Maneuver is more that just fire and movement. It is the dynamic, flexible application of all elements of combat power. It requires flexible thought, plans, and operations, and the considered application of the principles of massed effects, surprise, and economy of force.
d. Massed Effects: Mass the effect of combat power in a decisive manner in time and space. Forces at all levels mass the effects of combat power to overwhelm opponents and gain control of the situation. We mass military power to achieve both destructive and constructive effects. We mass in time by applying the effects of combat power simultaneously. This achieves an overwhelming moral and systems effectoverload. We mass in space by concentrating combat power effects against a select combination of physical points. Massing does not mandate concentration against one or two points. Commanders mass against the right combination of points. The aim is to strike a combination of critical elements whose loss shatters the coherence of enemy operations. These elements may be deployed in a small area and vulnerable to concentrated attacks which mass in time and space. Others may be spread throughout the battle space and vulnerable only to simultaneous, distributed operations which mass in time.
e. Economy of Force: Employ all combat power available in the most effective way possible; allocate minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts. Economy of force ensure no effort is wasted... .Economy of force is a reciprocal of the principle of massed effects. It requires that minimum resources be employed in areas away from the main effort, whether that effort is directed against a single point or a combination of distributed points. Economy of force requires accepting prudent risk in selected areas to achieve superiority-overwhelming effects-where decision is sought. Economy of force missions often require the forces employed to conduct operations with the bare mimimum of essential resources.
f. Simplicity: Prepare uncomplicated concepts and plans and direct, concise order to ensure thorough understanding. At all levels, concepts, plans, and orders should be as simple and direct as possible. Other factors being equal, the simplest concepts and plans are normally the best. Clear, consise orders minimize confusion and misunderstanding.
g. Surprise: Achieve effects disproportionate to the effort by taking unexpected action. Surprise results from taking action for which an opponent is unprepared. It is not essential that the enemy be taken completely unaware, only that he become aware too late to react effectively. Factors contributing to surprise include speed, employment of unexpected systems, deception operations, variation of tactics and methods of operation, and operation security. Information dominance is key to surprise. Surprise applies to the full range of operations. For example, in operations against a hostile force, surprise can greatly magnify the effect of combat actions and systems. In other situations, forces may preempt violence by demonstrating an unexpected capacity for combined arms combat. They may thwart attempt at terrorism and thievery by unexpectedly changing routine when delivering supplies and services.
h. Unity of Effort: Achieve common purpose and direction through unit of command, coordination, and cooperation. Employing military force in a manner that develops their full combat power requires unity of effort. Unity of effort directs and coordinates the action of all forces-military and civilian-toward a common goal or objective. Whenever possible, unity of effort should be achieved through unit of command-vesting a single commander with the requisite authorities to direct and coordinate all forces employed in pursuit of a common goal. When this is not practical, forces achieve unity of effort though coordination and cooperation.
i. Exploitation: Take advantage of and make lasting temporary effects of battlefield success. At every level, commanders must plan to secure the results of successful operations. Indeed, no operation is successful until and unless it has been properly exploited. Leaders must develop plans and allocate sufficient resources to ensure that opportunities created by initial gains are rapidly and decisively exploited. j. Security: Never permit an enemy to acquire the unexpected advantage. Security is essential to protection and preserving combat power. Security results from the measures taken by a command to protect itself from surprise, observations, detection, interference, espionage, sabotage, or annoyance. Security may also be obtained by deception operations designed to confuse and dissipate enemy attempts to interfere with the force and the operation. The principle of security does not suggest over-cautiousness or avoiding calculated risks which is an inherent part of conclict.
k. Morale: Build, maintain, and restore fighting spirit. Warfare is ultimately a human endeavor that relies primarily on the fighting spirit-morale-of the soldiers and units engaged. Leaders at every level must understand that a force's fighting spirit requires constant attention. It must be deliberately built, actively maintained, and constantly restored. Soldiers and units do not have an inexhaustible supply of morale. It is continually sapped by the dangers and hardships of campaigning. Fighting spirit is maintained by providing competent, confident, disciplined leadership; proper tools to accomplish assigned missions; and adequate food and rest. It is restored by opportunities to recover from perilous, demanding missions. Leaders must take all necessary steps to appraise the fighting spirit of their units and take necessary steps to keep it at the highest possible level.
2. The imperatives of Army operations. To accomplish assigned missions, Army forces conduct four basic categories of operations: Offense, Defense, Stability, and Support. They conduct these operations to compel, deter, reassure, and support. Below is the imperatives for the four basic categories of Army operations.
a. Offensive operations are governed by six general imperatives. Apply these imperatives in combining core functions, operating systems, and offensive forms to plan and execute attacks.
from common mental models. Senge describes systems thinking as knowing about the forces and interrelationships that shape the behavior of systems that help people determine how to change systems more effectively.
14 Teddy C. Cranford, "Mental Models And Operations Other Than War," (MMAS, School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army 
Command and General Staff College, 1995), 8-9. 15
16
17
33
French philosohes Pierre Bourcet and Comte de Guibert envisioned in the 1770's and 80's, a new organizational structure for the French Army and a concept of campaign that would fundamentally change the conduct of war. Both Bourcet and Guibert saw semi-independent operational units formed from the newly created division, moving on separate axis against the enemy but remained in mutual supporting difference from each other. (Robert M. Epstein, Napoleon's Last Victory: 1809 And The Emergence Of  Modern War, 7.) The French Revolution provided the social and political change in the environment for the fruition of these "operational concepts" developed by Bourcet and Guibert. Often beyond the edge of chaos and in turbulence during the Rein of Terror, the French Army by 1805 was able to establish a balance point in chaos and produced a national army organized in combined arms corps that significantly changed the conduct of war. The organizational, command and control, and logistical changes in the French Army are examples of a complex system learning, growing, and adapting to the changing environment at the edge of chaos. The armies of Austria, Prussia, and Russia, remaining stable in their organization and tactics were overcome by change and soundly defeated by Napoleon at Ulm and Austerlizt between October and November of 1805. (David G Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon, 381-439.; R. R. Palmer, "Frederick the Great, Guibert, Bülow: From Dynastic to National War," 91-112).
If the Army chose to implement the concepts of Force XXI before the Army was ready monetarily, intellectually, and or technologically, the Army would move beyond the edge of chaos and into turbulence. 1. to reorganize the Department of Defense and strengthen civilian authority in the department; 2. to improve the military advice provided to the President, the National Security Council, and the Secretary of Defense; 3. to ensure that the authority of the commanders of the unified and specified combatant commands is fully commensurate with the responsibility of those commanders for the accomplishment of missions assigned to their commands;
of FM 100-5 are examples of the U.S. Army getting it right before the "moment arrives." Operations Just Cause, Desert Storm, and the numerous successful operations other than
R The White House, A National Strategy Of Engagement And Enlargement, (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office (GPO), 1996), iii.
State that the principles of operations are a combination of the principles of war and the principles of OOTW, a closer examination reveals that the principles of OOTW (restraint, perseverance, and legitimacy) were deleted.  Field Manual 100-5 (Draft) recognizes that the principles are not a checklist. The principles of operations do not apply equally to every situation or operation, or do not always apply in the same way to every situation. In comparing the draft's principles of operations to the principles of war and OOTW listed in current army and joint doctrine, we can note both similarities and differences. The principles of operations slightly change two principles of war. The principle of mass now is massed effects and the principle of unity of command is the principle of unity of effort combined from the APPENDIX 1: PRINCIPLES OF WAR AND OOTW Below are the principles of war and principles of OOTW extracted from JP 3-0.
1. Principles of War. The principles of war guide warfighting at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels. They are the enduring bedrock of US military doctrine.
a. Objective: The purpose of the objective is to direct every military operation toward a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable objective. The objective of combat operations is the destruction of the enemy armed forces' capabilities and the will to fight. The objective of an operation other than war might be more difficult to define; nonetheless, it too must be clear from the beginning. Objectives must directly, quickly, and economically contribute to the purpose of the operations. Each operation must contribute to strategic objectives. Avoid actions that do not contribute directly to achieving the objective.
b. Offensive: The purpose of an offensive action is to seize, retain, and exploit the initiative. Offensive action is the most effective and decisive way to attain a clearly defined objective. Offensive operations are the means by which a military force seizes and holds the initiative while maintaining freedom of action and achieving decisive results. The importance of offensive action is fundamentally true across all levels of war. Commanders adopt the defensive only as a temporarary expedient and must seek every opportunity to seize or reseize the initiative. An offensive spirit must therefore be inherent in the conduct of all defensive operations. c. Mass: The purpose of mass is to concentrate the effects of combat power at the place and time to achieve decisive results. To achieve mass is to synchronize appropriate joint forces capabilities where they will have decisive effect in short periods of time. Mass must often be sustained to have the desired effect. Massing effects, rather than concentrating force, can enable even numerically inferior forces to achieve decisive results and minimize human losses and waste of resources.
d. Economy of Force: The purpose of the economy of force is to allocate minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts. Economy of force is the judicious employment and distribution of forces. It is the measured allocation of available combat power to such tasks as limited attacks, defense, delays, deception, or even retrograde operations in order to achieve mass elsewhere at the decisive point and time.
e. Maneuver: The purpose of maneuver is to place the enemy in a position of disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power. Maneuver is the movement of forces in relation to the enemy to secure or retain positional advantage, usually in order to deliver-or threaten delivery of-the direct and indirect fires of the maneuvering force. Effective maneuver keeps the enemy off balance and thus also protects the friendly force.... f Unity of Command: The purpose of unity of command is to ensure unity of effort under one responsible commander for every objective. Unity of command means 4. to increase attention to the formulation of strategy and to contingency planning; 5. to provide for more efficient use of defense resources; 6. to improve joint officer management policies; and otherwise to enhance the effectiveness of military operations and improve the management and administration of the Department of Defense.
39 Joint Doctrine Capstone And Keystone Primer, 2, 83.
40 Goedkoop, 31. Though other publications were available to the field in "test form," the 1991 version of JP 1 was the first fully approved manual that dealt with joint warfare from an authoritative position. This manual served as the basis in which a series of joint publications would evolve. 41 Morris J. Boyd, "Doctrine and Force XXI: Leading the Army into the 21 st Century," [TRADOC home page] available at http://204.7.227.753:443/force21/sv/svessay/&doc/fxxihtml., Internet, accessed 1 March 1997.
42 JP 3-0, GL-15. Capstone doctrine includes JP 1, JP 0-2, and JP 3-0. The publications below the capstone doctrine are considered keystone publications. Additional specific doctrine and tactics, techniques and procedures derive from the joint keystone. Joint Publication 3-0 is both a capstone and keystone manual. It serves as the keystone manual for joint operations in which other subordinate manuals such as JP 3-07, Military Operations Other Than War derive. In addition, JP 3-0 serves as a capstone manual for joint operations providing the common thread for the other joint keystone manuals. 46 JP 1, iv. In the inside cover of JP 3-0, General Shalikashvili writes that JP 3-0 forms the very core of joint warfighting and establishes the framework for our forces' ability to fight. "The fundamental concepts and principle contained in JP 3-0 provide a common perspective from which to plan and execute joint and multinational operations." 47 JP 3-0, Chart located on page 1-2.
48 Department of Defense, JP 3-07, Military Operations Other Than War,  (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1994), Inside front cover. 