# ID: 12c13062ba0646728448414639e39384
# Title: A State of Permanent Evolution: From 1970s Training and Doctrine Command to 2018 Army Futures Command
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Great-power competition characterizes the current geopolitical environment according to the 2017 National Security Strategy. Russia again has become the US Army's pacing threat and China stands as its long-term threat. The overmatch gap the US Army once enjoyed has diminished as its adversaries continue to rapidly modernize. Budget considerations, rapid advancements in technology, and persistent combat operations increase the complexity of the environment and challenges the US Army's efforts as it looks to the future. Organizational evolution must occur to transition the US Army from an industrial to information age model that is prepared to dominate and win in future conflicts. Senior Army leaders recognized this need and began bold reforms to start this transition, epitomized by the creation of Army Futures Command in 2018. In 1973, the Army found itself in a similar period of organizational evolution embodied in the creation of Training and Doctrine Command. This paper seeks to establish the connections between reforms in 1973 and how they inform the current transformation of the US Army. Through that connection, this paper highlights the necessary ingredients for effective organizational change such as senior leadership involvement and identification of potential threats from adversaries. Analysis emphasizes the need for organizational evolution and Army Futures Command is the vehicle to transition the Army for the future.
In 1983, General Donn Starry addressed the US Army War College and stated, "change is a constant for today's armed forces." 
1
2
4
5
2
3 Michael J. Arena, Adaptive Space: How GM and Other Companies are Positively Disrupting  Themselves and Transforming Into Agile Organizations (New York: McGraw Hill, 2018), 8.  interests. 
6
7
Confronted by these challenges, the need for change and reform to dominate in the future was recognized by senior Army leaders. In the fall of 2018, senior Army leaders announced the creation of a four-level command called Army Futures Command (AFC). The new command is meant to unify modernization efforts spread across multiple entities. Its aim is to provide concept, capabilities, and organizational structures for future soldiers to dominate on a future battlefield. 
8
9
Significant challenges confront AFC and its charter to modernize and change the US Army within this complex strategic and operational environment. Russian and Chinese actions combined with continued conflict in the Middle East are the most prominent challenges. These challenges blended with budgetary constraints, complicated acquisitions process, modernization efforts, and shift in US Army concepts and doctrine further add to the complexities. Organizational change given these circumstances is a nebulous path that AFC is required to navigate in order to successfully prepare the US Army for the future. Such a large organizational change for the US Army requires a review of the relevant organizational change literature that answers the question of AFC being an effective vehicle for persistent and future readiness. External and internal pressures influence AFC as it changes a large organization for future warfare, the past provides a lens to view deliberate organizational change that successfully prepared the US Army for the future.
Fortunately, examining events in the US Army's past provides a way to navigate this period of change, specifically the establishment of TRADOC in 1973. Senior Army leaders consistently refer to the reforms in 1973 and its link with current organizational changes. 
10
Esper expressed his view of the future for the US Army stating, "change is hard for any organization, especially one as big as the Army but we must make the transition to the future. We must stay ahead of our adversaries and we must do all we can to deter conflict and keep the peace."
12
13
14
Organizational change for the US Army is no easy task. Detailed and focused analysis of its past provides applicable lessons for AFC. This is accomplished through the examination of the creation and early years of TRADOC and the impacts of the Yom Kippur War on US Army's shift in doctrine, combat developments, and training via TRADOC. TRADOC's past as a case study furnishes a relevant lens to view this current period of change for the US Army. Key aspects on the success of TRADOC and its ability to change a large organization provide a means to apply relevant lessons to AFC and its leadership for necessary change for the US Army. Even more necessary is an assessment of the motivations and mechanisms that propelled change and reform forward, in this case a credible present and future threat.
This case study provides a relevant perspective that helps overcome resistance to change that impedes the Army's ability to rapidly evolve.
The method this paper uses to examine change and reform is what Alexander George called "structured, focused comparison." 
15
16
Five tasks are considered key when conducting a structure, focused comparison case study. First, the researcher must identify the problem and research objectives. For the purpose of this paper, the problem is identifying the effective ways to enact change and reform within the US Army with an objective of demonstrating that AFC is the vehicle to facilitate that necessary change. 17 Next, the researcher builds a strategy and specifies variables. 
18
Next is the case selection, for this paper that is the creation and early years of TRADOC in 1973.
This case provides relevance to the present as TRADOC was the last major reorganization to occur in the Army until AFC's creation in 2018. Subsequently, the researcher then seeks to describe the variance in the variables. 
19
20
21
22
Professor Thomas Gary observed that case study analysis' main goal is to understand the why and how something might have happened. Observation of a specific case allows a researcher to "drill down" as deep as possible for evidence ultimately creating a three-dimensional perspective of the topic. 
23
19
Bennett and George,
[83]
[84]
21 Andrew Bennett and Jeffrey Checkel, eds., Process Tracing: From  effective and deliberate. 
24
25
Structured, focused comparison combined with process tracing enables this paper to effectively analyze the organizational changes brought about by TRADOC in its formative years. Analysis of the case study attempts to draw out the lessons available from TRADOC's creation and early years, then applies to them a single comprehensive analytical framework. These lessons are brought forward to the present and compared with the creation of AFC and the challenges it faces to lead necessary change and reform to prepare the US Army for future threats. John Gaddis saw the future as a zone where "contingences and continuities coexisted independently, the past a place where their relationship is inseparably fixed, and the present as the singularity that brings them together."
26
27
Much has been written about the early years of TRADOC and its impact on changing the US Army to meet current and future threats. Sources range from the leaders who created and led TRADOC, for instance the personal papers of General William DePuy and General Donn Starry, as well as a multitude of secondary sources about TRADOC and military reform. Literature on AFC, however, is sparse, limited to a handful of online and journal publications. This paper seeks to add to the body of 
24 Gary,
9. 25 Ibid.,
15.
28
Hatch best described why one should study organization theory, "the more one knows about organizations they participate in helps understand the environment one operates in while enhancing the relationships within the organization." 29 Expanded knowledge and enhanced relationships encourages members in an organization and that enables meaningful change. Those reforms facilitate an organization to meet challenges in a rapidly changing environment while being prepared for a future environment. The early years of TRADOC and creation of AFC in 2018 both represent periods of change for the US Army.
Comprehension of the organization and theories that influence its processes provides clarity on effective means for lasting change to meet future tasks. Hatch provides a filter to view organization theory through three perspectives: modern, symbolic, and postmodern. 
30
From the symbolic perspective, interpretations are considered facts of what a symbolic researcher studies and how they study it. Explanations and interpretative processes are details of the symbol-filled environment that creates and permeates any organization. This perspective often requires a researcher to empathize with the organization given the situation and environment, this creates a framework and greater understanding of that organization's reality. 
31
32
1
30 Hatch,
10. 31 Ibid.,
11. 32
33
The symbolic perspective of organization theory views the environment as a "social construction arising 
33 Hatch,
12. 34 Ibid.,
[14]
[15]
35
36
When it comes to organization-environment relationships, the neo-institutional theory provides a lens to view transformation of an organization as it reacts to a changing environment. Neo-institutional theory claims that organizations not only require materials, labor, equipment, and information but also depends upon the acceptance of the societies within its environment. 
37
38
Legitimacy, both in the institution and the challenges it faces, ensures its continued survival during the reform and in future operations. This is an important consideration for an organization as it contemplates change and reform to adapt to a new or future environment.
A key consideration to organizational change is the environment an organization creates and operates. This paper analyzes the motivations that led to change in the US Army in response to the environment, both with TRADOC in the 1970s and with AFC in 2018. Karl Weick provides a theory that maintains when decision-makers respond to their perceptions, they enact the environment they imagine 
35 Hatch,
88. 36
37
38
39
40
An essential factor to meaningful change is how an organization is structured as it interacts within its environment. Typically, an organization's structure encompasses a physical (spatial/temporal relationship) and a social (patterns of interaction with members) aspect. 
41
A bureaucracy seeks to arrange/structure people into jobs, jobs into departments, and departments into organizations. Though bureaucracies do not lend well to fast-pace environmental changes, they provide consistency, reliable decision making, typically merit-based, and impersonal application of rules. 
42
39
40
41
Hatch,
106. 42
43
44
45
2
43 Hatch,
110. 44
45 Larry E. Greiner, "Evolution and Revolution as Organizations Grow," Harvard Business Review (May-June 1998): 56, accessed January 13, 2020, https://hbr.org/1998/05/evolution-and-revolution-as-organizations-grow. crisis of autonomy. This leads to the delegation phase where increased growth and autonomy require more coordination and integration. A crisis occurs when too much autonomy and decentralization occur, the crisis of control, as to not return to the direction phase, bureaucracies emerge and propel an organization to the next phase. 
46
The coordination phase solves the crisis of control by adding mechanisms to bound the organization and systems, creating rules and procedures. this can eventually lead to a red-tape crisis where a bureaucracy has grown so large as to slow down and prevent the organization from working efficiently. The collaboration phase is the final segment that pulls an organization out of the crisis of redtape by redistributing teamwork, responsibilities, and reducing over-differentiated tasks into more 
46
manageable sets, assigning shared responsibilities. 47 An organization's leadership is critical at the collaboration phase. If it fails to allow for necessary change, an organization undergoes a crisis of renewal; an organization becomes lethargic and unable to adapt to a changing environment. This crisis leads to a decline of an organization and eventual irrelevancy. 
48
49
50
47
48
49
50
atmosphere of risk aversion. This creates significant resistance to change that postpones its effects and magnifies a refraction layer, a challenge organizational leadership must overcome in order to create meaningful change.
Secretary of the Army Ryan McCarthy advocated a change in the perception of risk aversion, challenging Army leaders to fail and fail early to learn vital lessons that leads to success in the future. 
51
52
53
54
55
3
64
65
66
71
72
Notwithstanding the resistance, many senior leaders embraced the mindset of change and were able to quickly enact it, DePuy noted that the decision to reorganize CONARC occurred in one week. 
73
70 Nielsen, 26. 
71
72 Donn A. Starry, correspondence to Richard Swain, June 7, 1995, Combined Arms Research Library,  Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 6.  cumbersome processes, and a hyper-bureaucracy. 
74
75
81
82
83
85
84
85
On October 6, 1973 combined Egyptian and Syrian forces, supplied with modern Soviet equipment, conducted surprise offensives into the Sinai Peninsula and Golan Heights that took the Israelis and world by surprise. The conflict, commonly referred to as the Yom Kippur War, demonstrated the over-confidence and lack of preparedness of the Israeli Defense Force (IDF) which suffered heavy casualties from the start. Although Israel's misfortunes reversed by the end of the two-week conflict with Israeli forces in full control of its territory and the destruction of the Egyptian and Syrian field armies, the implications of the war reverberated through much of the Western world and the US Army. The intensity and speed of this modern battle had been unseen with examples of sophisticated, layered air defense capabilities, precision munitions, and massive tank battles not seen since World War II. More lethal and sophisticated munitions resulted in larger than anticipated casualties on both sides of the conflict. During a presentation to TRADOC leadership DePuy highlighted a staggering statistic, within eighteen days of conflict the combined Egyptian and Syrian force lost more personnel and equipment than what the entire US Army had stationed in Europe. 
86
87
The Yom Kippur War provided the catalyst DePuy and other senior Army leaders needed to advance their vision to reform and modernize the Army. The war also showed senior leaders how far behind the US Army was on modernization efforts compared to the Soviet Union. Persistent combat operations in Vietnam and inconsistent priorities allowed the US Army to miss a generation of modernization while the Soviets had advanced one or two generations ahead. 
88
87
88
89
90
91
92 From 1968
92 From -1973
93
94
89
90
91 Philip Karber, "Dr. Philip Karber on the Russian Way of War," Modern War Institute, US Military Academy, April 9, 2018, video of lecture, 5:54, accessed January 14, 2020, https://mwi.usma.edu/video-dr-phillipkarber-ukraine-russian-way-war/. 
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
95
96 Nielsen, 39. 
97 Esper,
Atlantic Council's Commanders Series,
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
98
103 Treisman,
52.
Soon after Crimea's annexation, Russia supported a series of information campaigns and proseparatist protests in the Donbass region of Eastern Ukraine. Those actions quickly escalated to a separatist movement and Russian volunteer terrorism, political assassinations, and population coercion. 
104
105
106
118
119
120
121
5
122
117
118
130
Elimination of a risk-aversion attitude within the organization is essential to promote change. 
131
132
128
129
130
131
132 Todd South, "Four Takeaways from the 4-Star General at Army Futures Command," Army Times, May 7, 2019, accessed February 10, 2020, https://www.armytimes.com/news/your-army/2019/05/07/four-takeawaysfrom-the-4-star-general-at-army-futures-command/.
Comparison of the current Army reform efforts and those in the 1970s appear natural and convenient but it is not out of intellectual laziness. The magnitude of changes and complexity of the strategic environment irrefutably connect both the past case of TRADOC and emergent case of AFC.
First, the largest Army reorganizations over the past forty-year period occurred between both cases.
Secondly, the impacts of observable and anticipated threats, ironically by Russia, in the Yom Kippur War and events in Ukraine are key components of organizational change for the Army. Starry noted "the 1973 Arab-Israeli War provided a fortuitous field trail of useful concepts. The lessons drawn from this conflict, as well as other analytical study, led to the Army's conclusion about the requisite strategy, operational concepts, tactics, organizations, equipment, and training."
133
134
135
AFC is the vehicle to prepare the Army and bring it from an industrial age to an information age Army. Murray highlighted the magnitude of current reforms, "The Army took some really bold steps two years ago when they came up with the concept of the Futures Command. It is about doing things differently. It is about moving the Army into the information age because we will not be successful if we just continued to do the same thing we have always done in the past." 
136
137
138
16  
16  
23 Thomas Gary,
Mark Esper, interviewed by Vago Muradian, Atlantic Council's Commanders Series, May 17, 2019.  Video, 8:00, accessed November 11, 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-9gA_jdWHiU.    
Jim Garamone, "Army Secretary Notes Another Inflection Point for Service," DOD News, May 1, 2018, accessed February 29, 2020, https://www.defense.gov/Explore/News/Article/Article/1508637/army-secretary-notesanother-inflection-point-for-service/.
Donald. J. Trump, "National Security Strategy of the United States of America," The White House 17 December 2017, 2, accessed November 11, 2019, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
 7 Esper, Atlantic Council's Commanders Series, 5:28.
8 Todd South, "Four Takeaways from the 4-Star General at Army Futures Command," Army Times, May 7, 2019, accessed November 11, 2019, https://www.armytimes.com/news/your-army/2019/05/07/four-takeawaysfrom-the-4-star-general-at-army-futures-
command/. 9 Sydney J. Freedberg, "Permanent Evolution: SecArmy Esper on Futures Command," Land Warfare, Threats, Breaking Defense, May 7, 2018, accessed February 20, 2020. https://breakingdefense.com/2018/05/permanent-evolution-secarmy-esper-on-futures-command-exclusive/.
Mark Esper, "Army Futures Command," filmed on July 13, 2018  in Washington, DC, C-SPAN, 1:30, accessed February 15, 2020, https://www.c-span.org/video/?448404-1/army-secretary-announces-austin-locationarmy-futures-command.
11 John Lewis Gaddis, The Landscape of History: How Historians Map the Past (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 11.
Esper, Atlantic Council's Commanders Series, 17:22.    
Sydney J. Freedberg, "Army Outlines Futures Command; Org Chart in Flux," Breaking Defense, March 26, 2018, accessed November 12, 2019, https://breakingdefense.com/2018/03/army-outlines-futures-command-orgchart-in-flux/.
  14  Freedberg, "Permanent Evolution: SecArmy Esper on Futures Command."
John Lewis Gaddis, The Landscape of History: How Historians Map the Past (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 31.
Ibid., 31.   
Suzanne C. Nielsen, "US Training and Doctrine Command, 1973-1982: A Case Study in Successful Peacetime Military Reform" (master's thesis, US Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2003), 7.
Mary Jo Hatch, Organization Theory: Modern, Symbolic, and Postmodern Perspectives, 4 th ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 3.
Robert H. Scales, "Forecasting the Future of Warfare," War on the Rocks, April 9, 2018, accessed December 10, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2018/04/forecasting-the-future-of-warfare/.
Ibid.   
DePuy, oral history interview, 178.   
Ibid., 10.    
Esper, "Army Futures Command," 00:51.   
Starry, "To Change an Army," 24.
Mark Esper interviewed by Vago Muradian, Defense and Aerospace Report, March 28, 2018, 2:46, accessed February 13, 2020, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GJBODOeUUaI.
Esper, "Army Futures Command," 12:05.   
Particular consideration to 
Dr. Dan Cox
Colonel Shane Murphy
Army Futures Command
Abbreviations AFC TRADOC study inherent to its recent creation, several vital elements to organizational change in the Army leads to prudent speculation on the future impact of AFC. Particularly, the identified threat motivated both organizations in a similar pattern towards rapid organization change. Though the sequence differs between both cases, the impact served the same purpose through the focus, justification, and resources to enact deliberate change. Organizational change theories by Greiner and Bleistein provided a filter to view both these case studies and relevant models to identify and enact change. DePuy saw TRADOC's creation and influence as a turning point in the Army's evolution in the 1970s, a fact acknowledged by current senior Army leaders. 
123
124