# ID: 1312a26cad61498f9d096e38679a760c
# Title: Necessity and Change: Contributing Factors and the Development of Soviet Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The Red Army performed countless significant and critical roles in the service of the Soviet Union. This institution effectively unified the nation and assisted in imparting the drastic social and political changes in the maturation of itself and the state. These actions served as a way of homogenizing the Soviet Union through military service. During the interwar period, the Red Army harnessed lessons learned and technological change and built upon a rich history of theory while concurrently affected by social, cultural, and political changes. These factors all impacted the creation of the Red Army and the concurrent development of Soviet operational art in the 1920s and 1930s.
World War II witnessed the initial two years of setbacks for the Red Army. Despite these setbacks, the supreme command maintained the goal of resuming large scale, successive operations. When these occurred, beginning with Operation URANUS in late 1942, the work of military theorists in the interwar years began to yield the success that the Soviets and allies desperately needed to defeat Germany. When studying the operations conducted on the East Front, it is easy to be impressed with the large scale of battles at Stalingrad and Kursk among others. What strikes me as particularly fascinating is how the Red Army was able to repeatedly absorb significant losses and set the conditions to gain and maintain the initiative that led them back across the western portion of the USSR and into Berlin in 1945.
As much as the individual contributions of theorists such as Svechin, Tukachevskii, Triandifilov, and Neznamov shaped the development of Soviet operational art, the belying changes to the social, cultural, and political institutions provided a supporting structure for conceptualization and development to occur. The same structure also collapsed in the late 1930s and resulted in the unfortunate murders of many theorists. Their legacy, passed on to peers and subordinates was revived and used to great success in late 1942 and through the end of World War II.
As much as the revolutions and resulting social, cultural, and political changes were decades in foment, the development of operational art traces its lineage backward to the Crimean War. It built momentum from lessons learned and the assimilation of new technologies as the Russians and later Soviet military thinkers formalized a methodology to plan and execute large scale operations to safeguard their nation.
This paper seeks to answer the following question: Looked at from social, military, cultural, and political perspectives: What were the primary drivers that transformed the Soviet military's capability to conduct large-scale, coordinated mechanized operations in the two decades before World War II?
Today the development of operational art by the Soviet theorists is widely acknowledged and studied. The imperial Russian Empire and the later Soviet Union enjoyed a robust heritage in military operational thought and planning throughout history. Throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, significant changes occurred and evolved within this school of thought.
Past conflicts fueled determination to affect changes within the military structure and how it fought. Social and cultural changes resulted from the conflicts of this timeframe as well. The revolutions intertwined with the conclusion of the Russo-Japanese War, and involvement in World War I significantly altered the cultural and social aspects and institutions of the nation.
The aftermath of the Russian Civil War demonstrated a need to assert and maintain authority across the expansive Soviet Union and to protect its territory from outside influence. These critical events, across the political, social, and military spectrums, directly contributed to the development of Soviet operational art in the 1920s and 1930s.
The technological advances in the twentieth century and the role of science in Czarist, Soviet Russia, and Soviet Union also contributed to the operational art development as new methods, reasoning, and organization affected military planning and employment. 1 A unique situation of broad, complex social and cultural changes, lessons learned resulting from past conflicts, technological advances, and the response and application by a With the ongoing technology and social modernization, there was now a need to effectively coordinate and control these forces across vast distances to maintain the security of the Soviet Union against internal and external threats. The combination of political changes and ideological differences between Soviet Russia and Western Europe shed light on the rising capabilities and intentions of potential adversaries that further contributed to operational development.
socially transformed and modernized military under constrained time availability is a useful topic of study with elements applicable to members of the profession of arms now and in the future. This paper will explore the supporting social, cultural, political, and military conditions and institutions that led to and supported the rapid development of operational planning and execution that ultimately safeguarded the Soviet Union from its creation through the interwar years and into World War II. This Master of Military Studies Paper will set forth the argument that the development of Soviet operational art during the interwar years is derivative of multiple factors in the late Russian Empire and early Soviet history. Decades of past war performance in the Russo-Japanese War, World War I, and the Russian Civil War, combined with significant alterations to the political, social, and cultural structures of the nation and the growing technological advances in the early twentieth century contributed to development of a formalized methodology to visualize, plan, and execute large scale operations in a method that supported the Russian/Soviet state and way of war.
The 1905 and 1917 revolutions, both decades in the making from social and political changes, coincided with Russia's wars of the early 20 th century. The Russo-Japanese War Determined to gain an understanding of modern warfare and possibly to solidify their positions within the new political regime, these men constructed the intellectual framework to protect the Soviet Union in future wars. Concepts such as shock, large scale turning attacks, destruction, attrition, simultaneity, and interchangeability ultimately formed the concepts for large-scale fronts fighting across broad distances in a series of linked operations. Among this debate are the lessons learned from previous wars, emergent technologies, all set against the backdrop of rapid modernization and political, social, and cultural changes. The revolution in military affairs regarding military thought set the course for the Red Army throughout the twentieth century.
The complex history of Russia and the Soviet Union in the 20 th century can be attributed to an endless list of contributing factors. These factors include significant changes to social, cultural, and military institutions' structure and climate resulting from revolutions, technology, and past military performance. This paper will explore these factors as primary drivers that transformed the Soviet military's concepts of how to conduct large-scale, coordinated operations in the two decades before World War II.
Depending on the author, the term 'operational art' can encompass the broad linkages between strategy and tactics or focus on specific types of large scale operations and their conduct. This paper will use the 1986 FM 100-5 and current JP-5 definitions of operational art to provide definitions and an orientation for 'what' it is for members of the profession of arms today. 
2
3
The takeaways from these two definitions are that future definitions will likely evolve with emergent technologies, command and control platforms, and scale.
Operational art is the employment of military forces to attain strategic goals in a theater of war or theater of operations. Operational art thus involves fundamental decisions about when and where to fight and whether to accept or decline battle. Its essence is the identification of the enemy's operational center of gravity-his source of strength or balance-and the concentration of superior combat power against that point to achieve a decisive success. Operational art requires broad vision, the ability to anticipate, a careful understanding of the relationship of means to ends, and effective joint and combined cooperation. Reduced to its essentials, operational art requires the commander to answer three questions: 1) What military condition must be produced in the theater of war or operations to achieve the strategic goal? 2) What sequence of actions is most likely to produce that condition? 3) How should the resources of the force be applied to accomplish that sequence of actions? JP-5 defines operational art as follows:
The creative thinking used to design strategies, campaigns, and major operations and to organize and employ military force, allows commanders to better understand the challenges facing them and to conceptualize an approach for achieving their strategic objectives. The thought process helps commanders and their staffs to lessen the ambiguity and uncertainty of a complex operational environment, understand the military problem facing them, and visualize how best to effectively employ military capabilities to accomplish their mission. This is the essence of operational art. 
4
The timeline for the end of the Czarist regime and establishment of the Soviet Regime saw significant social changes before, during, and after revolutions. Continued modernization, industrialization, and war efforts enabled one another and resulted in social and cultural changes that developed into the Russian revolutions in the early 20 th century. These alterations began with the emancipation of the serfs in 1861, continued through social and political strife, and ultimately resulted in the end of Czarist rule in 1917. The new system under Lenin and then Stalin took years to evolve and endured further internecine disputes but ultimately prevailed and solidified power. The new regime rallied ideological support via education, military, science, and economic means. In turn, the regime used these venues to support and rationalize decisions made by the Soviet government.
Both Imperial Russia and the early Soviet Union suffered from a weak sense of national identity. 5 Pre-1930s 'Russian' typically referred to an opposition to other ethnic groups or nations and most often used for xenophobic purposes to galvanize the population against a threat. 6 Whether it was due to grand borders, class system, limited communication means, and others in the potentially unlimited list of causal factors, both the Czarist and Soviet Regimes encountered difficulties in mobilizing and uniting the entire nation. Both the Russian and Soviet citizens essentially lacked a common heritage and tales of glorious history. 
7
The typical Russian and Soviet thought in local or provincial terms and identified himself not by 'Russian', but by province or ethnic group. 
8
9
10
According to cultural psychologists, and as a generalization, Russians elevated the value of understanding a problem in importance over the action. 12 With the rapid modernization and social changes, this line of reasoning remained; and perhaps with new freedoms, increased. The importance of analysis and understanding problems was an important aspect of Marxist theory; this in turn was present in the social fabric and in the military institutions. This generalized outlook provided the intellectual framework and impacted the development of operational planning and execution for both Imperial and the Soviet Union.
The communist regime sought to solidify and maintain power while modernizing the nation. Some scholars argue that Lenin and Trotsky created a fortress state due to fears of external and internal enemies. 
13
14
15
16
18
19
20
The Soviets used ideology to establish technical solutions to existing issues and to assert order and clarity to the plan forward. With the developing and encompassing ideology and elevation of technology and bimodal use of science, it is easy to understand how this methodology transferred into the realm of military theory. 
21
22
23
24
The military established new schools for staff officers and provided the supporting structure for an analytical and creative environment. In keeping with the ideological spirit, it combined science as a method of providing technical solutions to existing problems and the framework for the evolving military science to support ideology. into the concepts that comprise Soviet operational art. The resulting military development of doctrine and plans tied back into the technological weakness at the rise of the Red Army. To prevail, it utilized an extensive planning process that relied on a thorough understanding of the problem to plan for mass and shock across a broad front to overwhelm adversaries.
The Bolsheviks established the Red Army to deal with the coming Civil War and various foreign interventions. 
25
26
27
28
The Red Army maintained the history of conscription and focused on only the politically reliable classes of the poor and peasant populations. 
29
30
By capitalizing on past local identities, the Red Army created national units within its ranks and the militia ranks. The development of both the Red Army and militias answered the question of how to maintain security and readiness; however, this setup increased risk to the new regime and limited the effectiveness and modernization of the military as a whole. 
31
32
33
34
35
36 Despite this shortfall, there was significant opposition to incorporating former Czarist officers into the Red Army in its creation and after the Civil War. Tukachevskii, then a junior officer, claimed that the Red Army essentially received the least capable talent from the Czar's army that failed to possess the basic military skills and political understanding of a dynamic civil war. 
37
Trotsky and Lenin employed brutal methods of coercion to employ the officers, many of whom detested the new regime and blamed it for the conclusion of World War I. Both World War I and the Russian Civil War increased many officers' modern warfare experiences that later enhanced the Red Army's establishment and growth. 
38
39
40
Bolsheviks. 
41
42
Though the initial years necessitated the use of soldiers with minimal training, the leadership of the Soviet Union realized the power of trained soldiers in comparison to armed workers. 
43
The necessity to maintain a professional cadre to train and plan resulted from the Civil War. The system setup by men such as Trotsky and Frunze laid the basic groundwork from which to provide the military power to execute future operations.
The Russo-Japanese War in 1904-1905 had a significant impact on Russian popular consciousness. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
The challenge to reconcile understanding of modern warfare arose again in less than a decade after the conclusion of this conflict. World War I began as the Russian Army began to reconstitute and modernize itself. 
51
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
With little manpower in reserve, breakthroughs often resulted in huge territory gains till the offensive halted. 
62
Once halted, the defender then attacked. The distances traversed in battle and factor of geography played a role in how military theorists conceptualized future operations for the Red Army. This conflict was complicated by foreign influence in terms of supplies and ethnic groups of various regions fighting with and against the Bolsheviks. 63 The Civil War resulted in the establishment of Soviet Russia; however, it provided a legacy of large-scale death and destruction that resulted from years of war, famine, and disease. Both sides fought this conflict through vicious and brutal methods that included murder, torture, and mass reprisals. 
64
65
Following World War I and the Civil War, the Soviets realized that the employment of mass armies required the mobilization of the entire country. This effort to provide materiel and effectively plan operations across a sweeping frontier went far beyond the scope of just inserting individual pieces of new technology. This construct changed the way the Soviets viewed and prepared for war and they realized that strategy needed to change as a result of the end of decisive battles. 
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
As another of the many trade-offs, the focus on military capacity led to shortages and inefficiencies in building in support of the civilian populace.
The age of the single, decisive battle was over and modern warfare required the view of subsequent and complimentary operations to achieve operational and strategic success. With this line of thinking, the tactical level is minimized compared to Western military theory. These concepts tied into the communal concept and that to succeed required hardship and inevitable casualties. Conceptually theorizing how to link the series of objectives into operations to support the end state supported the general Soviet outlook. This combined with the scientific approach, made large scale operations possible.
Russian and later Soviet critics of the Russo-Japanese War identified the significant impact of technology with regards to the scale of the battle as well as the conduct of war. 
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
With this line of thought, it is clear that the Soviet military theorists understood the need to fight as a combined arms force, but importantly not just at the tactical level. 
86
87
88
Tukhachevskii argued that the next operation should not begin until the enemy is destroyed, and that a pause could mitigate the advantage and give the enemy time to consolidate. 
89
90
94
The cultural, social, and military environment supported the intellectual exploration of visualizing how future wars would be fought. As these efforts generated momentum, political and social changes shaped the military infrastructure in terms of both manpower and equipment and established the basis for how Soviet planners would conduct successive, large-scale operations across a broad front. Operational art development continued during the interwar years and witnessed a resurrection and required refinement throughout execution during World War II. 
95
96
From a historical examination of Russian and Soviet history and its militaries, there are several themes that remain constant, despite the political construct. Its military always possessed the advantage of extensive land mass. This had a direct correlation in how military theorists developed operational thought. Additionally, the military always had the advantage of nearly unlimited manpower available. A different outlook, somewhere between Western and Eastern, also affected the development of military thinking. Among the constants there are the negative factors of a weak economy and poor infrastructure, lack of national identity, difficulty homogenizing the entire populace, and technical shortfalls.
Militaries are organizations that are directly affected by their societies and political institutions from which they draw manpower, receive tasking, and serve. The creation of the Red Army and its development of operational art during the interwar years continued the rich tradition of military thought. These growing concepts that resulted from lessons learned and technological improvements were directly affected by political, social, and cultural changes.
Science and technology in support of modernization and as an ideological justification played a concurrent and significant role in developing military theory and doctrine of how to operationally assimilate and employ these enablers.
By no means, complete or perfect, the development of Soviet Operational Art in the 1920s and 1930s unquestionably laid the framework for successive, large scale operations in World War II and continued development into the Cold War decades. Without this, the tide
The Russian Empire and then Soviet Union was an expansive state comprised of 17,098,242 square kilometers, not including the eventual fifteen republics 97 ; almost twice the size of the United States. 
98
Facts and statistics cannot adequately capture the expansive distance and variety of cultures that comprised this country. This area possessed limited infrastructure in terms of rail, road, and communications networks when compared with Western Europe or the United States during this time frame. Located between Europe and Asia, Russia and then the Soviet Union was a unique culture, not entirely western and not entirely eastern. This land and people were affected by migrations and conflict from east to west, and west to east. Each of these conflicts throughout its history continued to affect and change the development of Russia's culture and individual ethnic groups. With the wide-ranging terrain, this land mass was a historical buffer for Western Europe and often times not a significant contributor to European affairs due to distance affecting transportation and communication. This separation led to differing viewpoints of how Russia viewed itself, other nations, and conducted diplomacy and military operations. 99 Despite this composition, the Soviet Union still encompassed a broad variety of cultures, ethnic groups, languages, and religions. This variety impacted how both Russia and the Soviet Union developed as nations. The Soviet regime typically was a Russian government that worked with the history it inherited and despite a predominantly Russian government, used the varying cultural heritages to its advantage. 
100
The effort to modernize, in the footprints of Europe, began under Peter the Great in the late17 th and early 18 th century. is present in Russian society, culture, and politics throughout the 19 th and 20 th centuries and struggled to determine which way to develop. Among the constants in Russian and Soviet history is a unique blend of European and Asian influences that affected identity and development.
102 This modernization focused along social, political, and military institutions. Despite these efforts, many still saw Russia as lagging behind the rest of Europe and continued to do so into the 20 th century. A history of significant class and wealth divides affected the development and westernization of Russia and carried over till the revolutions in the early twentieth century. Over 22 million Russians were classified as serfs, private property of landlords, who depended primarily upon agriculture to subsist and generate wealth for the land owners and aristocracy. 
103
The period of the Great Reforms in the middle of the 19 th century abolished serfdom in 1861, and essentially dismantled the social, economic, and later political structure of Russia. This significant departure from the past took decades to evolve and continued to manifest itself into further changes during the 20 th century.
104 Despite efforts to improve and modernize social institutions, education and living conditions changed only marginally with the new regime. 
105
Limited industrialization occurred prior to this time period. As the market developed with emancipation of the serfs, it occurred in the few large cities. The abolition of serfdom led to increased urbanization to support industrialization. Despite significant increases in production, capacity lagged far behind the major Western powers. 
106
108
1 This general focus of new technology in this paper refers to airplanes, trains, tanks, and trucks. The development and incorporation of these technologies radically altered how militaries planned, executed, and supported operations. Dates of reference: Russian Empire: ~1600-1917. Soviet Russia 1917-1922. Soviet Union 1922-1990.  
10
13
14
15 Hoffman, David L. Stalinist Values: The Cultural Norms of Soviet Modernity, 1917
-1941
. (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003)
16
18
19 Fischer. 48. 20
turned by the Red Army in the fall of 1942 and into 1943 and beyond might have delayed or not occurred. The creation of the Soviet Union and resulting modernization efforts of society and the military supported the creation of new ways to view warfare and frame the problem of command and control of massive forces over expansive distances. This view, not entirely Western and not entirely Eastern produced a third way to view warfare that became the Russian and Soviet way of war. The result was a new concept that ultimately enabled the Soviet Union to adequately control massed forces, fires, and maneuver them in linked operations to defeat the Germans in World War II.