# ID: 133cebbebe2241ee9bd71e338e416584
# Title: The future of US coercive airpower
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2002.0
# Fulltext:
The Russian Wildcard.
The biggest wildcard affecting the U.S. posture in both Europe and Asia involves the uncertain evolution of reform and democracy within Russia and of relations between Russia and the West.
Many Russians believe that the United States has taken advantage of Russian weakness.
Relations could deteriorate over disagreements on a number of issues, including further NATO expansion; the deployment of a U.S. national missile defense systems; Russian arms sales to various states, particularly Iran, Iraq, and China; and access to energy resources in the Caspian basin.
Russian cooperation in the initial stages of the war on terrorism has not fundamentally altered this equation.
Given that Russia is the only country on earth that has the capacity to completely devastate the United States, these uncertainties will make managing the relationship with Russia one of the highest priorities of the next 25 years.
Of course, developments within Russia remain dramatically unclear, even relative to the uncertainties discussed thus far.
Russia will also figure prominently in Asia.
The emerging Russian-Chinese partnership is more a reflection of Russian weakness than of a genuine convergence of interests.
Nonetheless, while Russia remains weak, it will continue to seek close relations with China, both to counter U.S. influence and to get much-needed funds from sales of military equipment.
If Russia recovers somewhat, such considerations will diminish and more structural issues will assert themselves in Russian-Chinese relations.
In particular, the growing Chinese migration to and influence in the sparsely populated Russian Far East will likely cause strains in the relationship.