# ID: 133cebbebe2241ee9bd71e338e416584
# Title: The future of US coercive airpower
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2002.0
# Fulltext:
Change is clearly the idiom of our age.
The end of the Cold War, the emergence of new information technologies, and the ongoing integration of global markets have all engendered radical change in a relatively short time.
The coincidental start of the new millennium even seems to have neatly delineated the new age on our calendars.
Nonetheless, often unnoticed in this whirl of dynamism are the many less stirring but no less critical pockets of stability.
For any military organization, and especially one like the Air Force that is culturally prone to look to high-technology innovative solutions, forgetting the past is at least as dangerous as failing to adjust to the future.
A great deal was learned during the Cold War about how to create military power and how to apply it to political problems in the modern age.
The end of that struggle has not automatically invalidated the lessons.
Two issues from this volume highlight the continued salience of Cold War experience to current dilemmas.
The first is the issue of nuclear weapons.
These weapons were the foundation of U.S. strategy during the Cold War and, according to some, the technological innovation that spared us the horrors of a third world war.
Yet as Glenn Buchan documents (Chapter Seven), current U.S. nuclear policy is an unfortunate combination of stasis and neglect.
Nuclear weapons are often seen as an irrelevant and even immoral anachronism in the post-Cold War world.
Official U.S. policy toward nuclear weapons encourages this view by encompassing apparenüy contradictory undertakings: eliminating the U.S. nuclear arsenal in keeping with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty yet, at the same time, espousing continued adherence to a policy of strategic deterrence against Russia and maintaining U.S. nuclear forces on alert.
Prudence requires maintaining the U.S. nuclear arsenal in a world in which nuclear knowledge cannot be unlearned, yet public relations require downplaying the existence and utility of nuclear weapons in the national military strategy.
The result is a policy that, as Buchan demonstrates, is slowly being crushed under the weight of its own contradictions, as weapons deteriorate and nuclear knowledge is lost.