# ID: 135afa402e134957a063bd4ecc3a4ba0
# Title: Strategic Forum. Number 276. February 2012. Post-Asad Syria: Opportunity or Quagmire?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
rule of Syrian President Bashar al-Asad is partly based on the impact his rule has had in Syria. Asad's fall might not bring improvement for the Syrian people. But the argument that Asad, odious as he may be, provides stability now looks less and less convincing. ◆ ◆ Whether Asad stays or falls, the current Syrian unrest could have profound implications on the Middle East in at least four ways: the impact on Iran, Asad's closest strategic partner; the perception of the power of the United States and its allies; the stability of neighboring states; and the impact on Israel. ◆ ◆ The more Asad falls on hard times, the more Tehran has to scramble to prevent damage to its image with the "Arab street" and to its close ally, Lebanese Hizballah. ◆ ◆ Asad's overthrow is by no means assured, and U.S. instruments to advance that objective are limited. The U.S. Government decision to call for his overthrow
T he government of President Bashar al-Asad in Syria faces strong pressure from its neighbors and the Western powers. In the background is the fall in 2011 of longstanding governments in Tunisia and Egypt to popular protests and, of course, the overthrow of Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi in a civil war backed by North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military action. It is not clear if Asad will fall or if he will hold on to power. It is fair to say that because his hold on power is sufficiently in doubt, it is well worth examining what would be the strategic consequences if he fell and what would be the strategic implications if he is able to muddle through Syria's current difficulties. Moreover, given the many sudden and unpredicted Middle East developments in 2011, such an examination should note which low-probability developments might have major impacts on the region and on U.S. interests.
It is not clear how disordered the process of Asad's overthrow might be or what would be the character of a post-Asad government.
To start with the transition, there is the risk of a violent civil war. Asad seems determined to rally Syria's Alawite minority to support him by exploiting the real risk that if he is overthrown, the more than 40 years of Alawite dominance over the state will end. 
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
Later, if not sooner, the same popular demands for freedom and political say might well resurface. Suppressing the current protest wave might bring only temporary stability, with instability returning at some point. A similar www.ndu.edu/inss SF No. 276 3 argument can be made about any coup that would keep the old system of Alawite rule in place; perhaps it would temporarily restore order, but its long-term prospects look poor. In short, it is not clear how to minimize bloodshed and sectarian tensions in Syria, nor is there any guarantee that a post-Asad government would better serve the Syrian people.
The August 18, 2011, decision by the major Western powers to call on Asad to leave office was explained as necessary because he had become a force for instability, as well as because of identification with the goals of protestors. 
9
The United States has been inspired by the Syrian peoples' pursuit of a peaceful transition to democracy. They have braved ferocious brutality at the hands of their government. They have spoken with their peaceful marches, their silent shaming of the Syrian regime, and their courageous persistence in the face of brutality-day after day, week after week. . . . We have consistently said that President Assad must lead a democratic transition or get out of the way. He has not led.
For the sake of the Syrian people, the time has come for President Assad to step aside. 
10
Washington interpreted the protests as showing "the strong desire of the Syrian people . . . for a Syria that is democratic, just, and inclusive," in Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's words. 
11
12
An important variable will be the extent to which a future Syrian government, under Asad or not, would concentrate on the country's domestic problems, rather than its foreign policy. It seems likely that a post-Asad government would concentrate its attention at home. If Asad reasserts control, then perhaps he will also seek to focus on the home front, but perhaps he will lash out at those he sees as having exacerbated his problems, namely, the United States and its regional allies, including Turkey and friendly Arab League states. Asad also may see tensions with Israel as a way to rally popular support. Most likely, even if Asad wishes to be active on some foreign policy front, his ability to be so would be more limited than before the recent troubles. For one thing, Syria's finances are in much worse shape.  
25
26
27
In short, Asad's Syria has sponsored terrorism, interfered in the affairs of its neighbors, pursued weapons of mass destruction, and flouted its international treaty obligations.
Those are not the actions of a government that promotes regional stability. A more accurate reading is that Asad did much to undermine the stability of the Middle East.
Iran has been described as a "strategically lonely" country with few close friends on the international scene. 
28
39
Iran's regional influence would also be hurt if Asad's troubles-whether or not he stays in power-hurt the Hizballah movement in Lebanon, which has been Iran's closest international partner. Hizballah's military might is an important Iranian instrument of deterrence against an Israeli attack. That may be difficult to sustain if Asad falls.
As the ICG puts it, "The effect [of Asad's fall] on Hizbollah arguably would be most visible and immediate. Iran might well continue to supply the resistance movement with arms by air or by sea, but the flow inevitably would be curtailed, making it more difficult for Hizbollah to sus-tain its current military posture, deter an Israeli attack or restock in the event of an actual armed confrontation." 
40
41
Iran with an even closer partnership with Turkey, in what would presumably sideline Iran from the Syrian theater.
The ICG nicely summarized the impact of Asad's fall on Iran as "possibly auguring a profound shift in the regional strategic balance of power-far more significant than a policy of sanctions or pressure against Tehran could possibly bring about." 42
A strong argument can be made that U.S. prestige and influence around the world suffer if the United States issues a call for Asad's overthrow and yet he stays in power.
The United States has a compelling interest in ensuring that any time the President of the United States says something must happen, then it does happen. Indeed, a serious argument for the U.S. military commitment in Libya was that President Obama had said publicly that Qaddafi must go. Talk is not cheap; staking out a position without being willing to act undermines the credibility of every U.S. call for Asad's overthrow, and the EU has moved with uncharacteristic speed to place biting sanctions, culminating in a ban on imports of oil from Syria. 
43
44
45
46
Were Asad to muddle through, Washington would face some difficult quandaries. So long as Asad is in power, it will be hard to walk back the sanctions imposed on Syria, yet it will be difficult to sustain economic and political isolation of the Asad regime if that government looks like it will be in power for the foreseeable future. If that isolation lessens, then the United States and its allies will look like they lost a confrontation with Asad, which would reduce their perceived clout.
Asad's overthrow is by no means assured, and U.S.
instruments to advance that objective are limited. The U.S.
Government decision to call for his overthrow presumably rested on a judgment that the prospects for success were good and the payoff, if successful, would be high. 
It is difficult to see how Asad the defensive by charges that they have surrendered their rights when compromising with Israel. 
49
50
52
Surprisingly, there is little if anything in the extensive public record, extending over months of comments to the media and testimony to Congress, to suggest that considerations about the regional impact of Asad's fu- Again, the ICG captured the most likely impact Asad's overthrow would have on the regional strategic balance: "For Israel and the U.S. in particular,
◆ ◆ Syria engaged in clandestine nuclear activities, which led the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) board of governors to notify the United Nations (UN) Security Council about Syrian noncompliance with its international treaty obligations. 13 The IAEA concluded, "the Agency assesses that it is very likely that the building destroyed at the Dair alzour site was a nuclear reactor which should have been declared to the Agency." 14 The only other countries reported by the IAEA board to the UN Security Council are North Korea and Iran. ◆ ◆ Adopted to end the 2006 Israel-Hizballah war, United Nations Security Council Resolution (UN-SCR) 1701 mandates that governments prevent the sale or transfer of weapons, ammunition, equipment, and training to "entities or individuals" in Lebanon. 15 Within a month of its adoption, Turkish authorities intercepted a Syrian aircraft carrying weapons from Iran to Hizballah. UN follow-up teams report that arms regularly cross the Syria-Lebanon border, presumably en route to Hizballah. ◆ ◆ The March 2007 UNSCR 1747, one of several imposing sanctions on Iran over its nuclear program, mandates that "all States shall prohibit the procurement of such items [arms or related materiel] from Iran by their nationals, or using their flag vessels or aircraft." 16 Syria regularly violates this mandate by facilitating the shipment of Iranian arms to Hizballah. ◆ ◆ Despite repeated promises to American secretaries of state-most explicitly to Colin Powell-Syria continues to allow Hamas to maintain unimpeded its international headquarters in Damascus. 18 All major industrial countries categorize Hamas as a terrorist group. The Middle East peace process "Quartet"-the United States, the European Union (EU), Russia, and the UN-warned against assistance to Hamas until it meets a set of conditions, including renouncing violence. 19 The irony is that rather than Syria moving away from the terrorist group Hamas, it is Hamas that is reducing its reliance on Syria because of Hamas's concern about Syria's negative image among its target audience. 20 ◆ ◆ Since 2003, Syria has facilitated the flow of Services Committee, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz held up the passports of foreign fighters encountered by U.S. forces in Iraq to show that they had gone through Syria. 22 In September www.ndu.edu/inss SF No. 276 5 presence, that arrangement was a transparent violation of Lebanese sovereignty. In its September 2004 UNSCR 1559, the Security Council "call[ed] upon all remaining foreign forces to withdraw from Lebanon." Syrian forces did not leave until forced to do so by the combination of a million Lebanese protesting and a concerted international campaign led by France and the United States, with strong Saudi support. Both Bashar al-Asad and his father, former president Hafez al-Asad, have had a false reputation for being forces for stability and de facto peace with Israel. The reality was quite different. They did not take on Israel in the domain where Israel is strongest and Syria is weak-namely, conventional war. That was not out of any conviction that international disputes should be settled peacefully, but instead out of necessity. After the 1978 Camp David Accords, Hafez al-Asad learned a painful lesson from his unsuccessful effort to reach strategic parity (his term) with 23 In other words, it was Israeli effort, with support by the United States, to maintain a strategic deterrent that kept either Hafez al-Asad or Bashar al-Asad from pursuing the use of force. Israel has deterred Syria by sustaining a massive military effort for a small country.
36
It would be a great challenge for Iran to sustain the support of the "Arab street," which it has highly prized, if Tehran is seen as backing a brutal dictator, rather than
30
It would be a great challenge for Iran to sustain the support of the "Arab street," which it has highly prized, if Tehran is seen as backing a brutal dictator, rather than
Furthermore, the problem of spreading chaos and sectarian strife may be greater if Asad continues to rule.
Furthermore, the problem of spreading chaos and sectarian strife may be greater if Asad continues to rule.
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
the stakes are huge. The regime's collapse would significantly hurt its allies, whether Iran, Hizbollah or Hamas, possibly auguring a profound shift in the regional strategic balance of power-far more significant than a policy of sanctions or pressure against Tehran could possibly bring about. . . . The ripple effects across the region would be vast." 
54
1 The sectarian nature of Asad's rule and of his response to protests, as well as the risks that creates of Sunni backlash, is laid out in detail in International Crisis Group (ICG) The key passage in the joint statement from British Prime Minister David Cameron, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel was, "Our three countries believe that President Assad, who is resorting to brutal military force against his own people and who is responsible for the situation, has lost all legitimacy and can no longer claim to lead the country. We call on him to face the reality of the complete rejection of his regime by the Syrian people and to step aside in the best interests of Syria and the unity of its people," available at <http://ukeu.fco.gov. uk/en/news/?view=PressS&id=645689682>. 
10
11 Hillary R. Although the report was not released, the speakers in the Security Council discussion of it described its conclusions in detail; available at <www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/Iran%20S%20PV%206090. pdf>. An indication of the amount of explosives involved is that when the poorly stored explosives blew up in July 2011, the blast killed the Cypriot defense minister and navy commander and destroyed the country's largest electric power station, causing such extensive economic repercussions that Cyprus has had to consider asking the EU for a financial bail-out. 
18