# ID: 135afa402e134957a063bd4ecc3a4ba0
# Title: Strategic Forum. Number 276. February 2012. Post-Asad Syria: Opportunity or Quagmire?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
◆ ◆ Syria engaged in clandestine nuclear activities, which led the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) board of governors to notify the United Nations (UN) Security Council about Syrian noncompliance with its international treaty obligations.
13 The IAEA concluded, "the Agency assesses that it is very likely that the building destroyed at the Dair alzour site was a nuclear reactor which should have been declared to the Agency."
14 The only other countries reported by the IAEA board to the UN Security Council are North Korea and Iran.
◆ ◆ Adopted to end the 2006 Israel-Hizballah war, United Nations Security Council Resolution (UN-SCR) 1701 mandates that governments prevent the sale or transfer of weapons, ammunition, equipment, and training to "entities or individuals" in Lebanon.
15 Within a month of its adoption, Turkish authorities intercepted a Syrian aircraft carrying weapons from Iran to Hizballah.
UN follow-up teams report that arms regularly cross the Syria-Lebanon border, presumably en route to Hizballah.
◆ ◆ The March 2007 UNSCR 1747, one of several imposing sanctions on Iran over its nuclear program, mandates that "all States shall prohibit the procurement of such items [arms or related materiel] from Iran by their nationals, or using their flag vessels or aircraft."
16 Syria regularly violates this mandate by facilitating the shipment of Iranian arms to Hizballah.
◆ ◆ Despite repeated promises to American secretaries of state-most explicitly to Colin Powell-Syria continues to allow Hamas to maintain unimpeded its international headquarters in Damascus.
18 All major industrial countries categorize Hamas as a terrorist group.
The Middle East peace process "Quartet"-the United States, the European Union (EU), Russia, and the UN-warned against assistance to Hamas until it meets a set of conditions, including renouncing violence.
19 The irony is that rather than Syria moving away from the terrorist group Hamas, it is Hamas that is reducing its reliance on Syria because of Hamas's concern about Syria's negative image among its target audience.
20 ◆ ◆ Since 2003, Syria has facilitated the flow of Services Committee, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz held up the passports of foreign fighters encountered by U.S. forces in Iraq to show that they had gone through Syria.
22 In September www.ndu.edu/inss SF No.
276 5 presence, that arrangement was a transparent violation of Lebanese sovereignty.
In its September 2004 UNSCR 1559, the Security Council "call[ed] upon all remaining foreign forces to withdraw from Lebanon."
Syrian forces did not leave until forced to do so by the combination of a million Lebanese protesting and a concerted international campaign led by France and the United States, with strong Saudi support.
Both Bashar al-Asad and his father, former president Hafez al-Asad, have had a false reputation for being forces for stability and de facto peace with Israel.
The reality was quite different.
They did not take on Israel in the domain where Israel is strongest and Syria is weak-namely, conventional war.
That was not out of any conviction that international disputes should be settled peacefully, but instead out of necessity.
After the 1978 Camp David Accords, Hafez al-Asad learned a painful lesson from his unsuccessful effort to reach strategic parity (his term) with 23 In other words, it was Israeli effort, with support by the United States, to maintain a strategic deterrent that kept either Hafez al-Asad or Bashar al-Asad from pursuing the use of force.
Israel has deterred Syria by sustaining a massive military effort for a small country.