# ID: 140d290cc08a4d16a6695a55b21ee086
# Title: Russian Military Strategy Development from 1991 to 2019
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The concepts, principles, and direction of Russian military strategy development outlined above form the foundation for contemporary Russian strategy.
Gerasimov provides insight into current Russian military strategy development in his 2019 address to the Academy of Military Science.
He elaborates that military strategy development progressed through several stages of evolution from a strategy of annihilation, attrition, global war, nuclear deterrence, to indirect operations.
Gerasimov mentions that even though nonmilitary methods precede the use of military force, the military continues to remain relevant as demonstrations of military might support the effectiveness of nonmilitary methods.
Also, military force is necessary when the nonmilitary methods are unable to achieve the specified goals.
Gerasimov states that Russia's armed forces must be prepared to conduct new-type wars and armed conflicts via classical and asymmetric methods.
He notes that Russia has been preparing for several years and is ready to counteract US strategies.
He specifies that the foundation of the Russian response is a strategy of active defense which draws upon the defensive nature of Russian military doctrine to preemptively neutralize threats to state security.
Gerasimov shares that Russia's experience in Syria resulted in the identification of a new practical field.
The field involved the execution of tasks to defend and promote national interests outside of Russia's borders while using a strategy of limited actions.
The strategy of limited actions entails the use of a self-sufficient grouping of forces selected from a branch of the armed forces that has a high degree of mobility and can make the greatest contribution to achieving the objective.
Gerasimov clarifies that the strategy requires the attainment and maintenance of information superiority, command and control readiness, logistics systems readiness, and the covert deployment of the force grouping.
The counter strategies outlined by Gerasimov reflect Russian observations and deductions of US and allied policies and strategies.
Russia perceives the actions of the US and its allies as representative of an aggressive foreign policy to depose nations that are not in-line with their interests.
Russian leaders and theorists consider US and allied unilateral actions to undermine state sovereignty and change the legally elected authority structure within a state as a violation of international law.
Additionally, Russia believes that the US development of aggressive military strike capabilities, such as global strike and multi-domain battle, support US and allied foreign policy and implementation of colour revolutions and soft power.
Consequently, Russia perceives that the principal US method of achieving policy goals involves the use of a population's protest potential coupled with the employment of precision weapons strikes against key objectives.4 4F