# ID: 140d290cc08a4d16a6695a55b21ee086
# Title: Russian Military Strategy Development from 1991 to 2019
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph will focus on the evolution of Russian military strategy from 1991 to 2019 through studying Russian actions and experiences in the current Ukraine conflict and intervention in Syria.
The analysis begins with a review of the evolution of the Russian understanding of war, military strategy, military doctrine, associated terminology, and relevant definitions from the Soviet period to the present.
The examination includes a review of Russian capabilities, military reforms, foreign security policy, and lessons learned.
More specifically, the monograph concentrates on how Russia prioritizes the purpose and application of their military strategy, what conflicts and world events affected Russian military strategy development, and the current capabilities that Russia is focusing on now.
The investigation will introduce Russia's current military strategy and its emphasis on a general strategy of active defense, limited action, and a shift towards the development of military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operation and their employment.
Once the requisite concept, terminology, and definition analysis is complete, the current Ukraine conflict and intervention in Syria serve as case studies to underscore the presence, implementation, rationale, and purpose of each specified element of current Russian military strategy.
The analysis will discern cogent insights and lessons regarding the development of Russian strategy and infer lessons for US military policy and strategy.
In addition, the examination will offer observations and implications regarding the lessons and future of Russian military strategy development.
The study and information could inform future US and allied military policy, strategy, force structure, and capabilities development in the European theater.