# ID: 140d290cc08a4d16a6695a55b21ee086
# Title: Russian Military Strategy Development from 1991 to 2019
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union saw a realignment of the relationship between Russia and the United States. The animosity of the Cold War gave way to a tenuous period of disarmament, cooperation, and transparency. However, security and social conflicts of interest from 1991 to 2019 widened the rift between Russia and the US and its allies, resulting in significant shifts in Russian security partnerships and policy. Russia's current military strategy represents a notable change from the nuclear weapons and conventional combined arms focus that typified the Cold War and consists of a general strategy of active defense, limited action, and an adaptation towards the development of military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operations and their employment. This monograph will focus on the Russian military strategy development from 1991 to 2019 through a review of the Russian understanding of war and military strategy from the Soviet period to the present and applying it to the Russian military campaigns in Ukraine and Syria. Additionally, the Russian understanding of war and military strategy provides some insights regarding the potential future direction of Russian military strategy development and implications for current and future US military policy and strategy.
The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union saw a realignment of the relationship between Russia and the United States. The animosity of the Cold War gave way to a tenuous period of disarmament, cooperation, and transparency.0 F 1 In an effort to establish good relations with the US and its allies, Russia reluctantly met the stipulations of the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty by re-allotting nearly half of the Soviet Union's tanks, artillery, armored combat vehicles, combat aircraft, and helicopters to the former Soviet republics and consolidating the Soviet nuclear arsenal with the Russian military. The breakup of the Soviet armed forces resulted in the redistribution of four million Soviet military personnel and the creation of national militaries in the fifteen independent states that superseded the Soviet Union. The haste and disorganization of the reformation left the initial post-Cold War Russian military with a deteriorating force posture, limited infrastructure, unaffordable defense industry, and contracting defense budget. Thus, Russia struggled to develop and implement a national strategic concept that aligned with its international position and defined its interests, threats, and requirements. The subsequent Russian national security doctrines from 1992 to 2000 proved to be inconsequential in terms of influence on policy and failed to generate any significant military reforms. Rather, Russian political and military elites remained focused on maintaining Russia's status as a great power.1 F 2 Russia's position as an internal sovereign state and a great power form the core of its national identity and security focus. Consequently, Russia's efforts to define the statuses of great power and sovereign statehood ultimately conflicted with the actions and interests of the US and its allies.2 F 3 Russia's security emphasis on great power status and state sovereignty serves to justify employing force internally, within its perceived sphere of influence, and in support of sovereign allied/partner governments.3 F 4 Accordingly, Russian misgivings and objections to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) enlargement rounds during 1999 and 2004 generated a nascent shift in Russian foreign security policy. The improved US-Russian dialog that occurred towards the end of the Cold War included discussions regarding US efforts to develop pan-European security institutions that would not divide Europe and fulfil core Russian security interests. Therefore, Russia did not conceive nor expect NATO expansion eastward. Rather, Russia supported the development of pan-European multilateral security arrangements and organizations that respected its status as a great power and provided a public front for Russian influence.4 F 5 However, US efforts after 1991 included integrating institutions aligned with the US and its allies into the newly formed democracies of the former Warsaw Pact nations and Soviet Republics.5 F 
6
4
5
6 Alexander Vershbow, "Present at the Transformation: An Insider's Reflection on NATO Enlargement, NATO-Russia Relations, and Where We Go from Here," in Open Door: NATO and Euro-Atlantic Security After the Cold War, ed. Daniel S. Hamilton and Kristina Spohr (Washington, DC: Foreign Policy Institute/Henry A. Kissinger Center for Global Affairs, Johns Hopkins University SAIS, 2019), 429. members or Soviet Republics. Consequently, Russia currently believes the ongoing encroachment of NATO military forces on its borders is the primary threat to its security and erodes its influence in Eastern Europe. Russia's post-Cold War efforts and view of NATO underscores its desire to establish cooperation as an equal partner and to protect its sphere of influence.6 F 7
The US and NATO involvement in the former Yugoslavia from 1995 to 1999 further influenced Russian security perceptions and policy. Russia characterized the actions as repudiating its role as a regional and great power by repudiating its status as a protector of affiliated ethnicities and violating sovereignty within its sphere of influence. Specifically, NATO's military actions against Serbia denied Russia's perceived historical role as the protector of the Southern Slavs.7 F 8 Russia also noted NATO's ability to act without the consent of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC), allowing the alliance to employ military force wherever it deemed necessary.8 F 9 Consequently, Russia shortly followed suit, initiating the First and Second   Chechen Wars in 1994 and 1999. The conflict highlighted the Russian deductions from the NATO actions in the former Yugoslavia. The Russians inferred the preeminence of noncontact/remove warfare via massive and decisive force to solve problems and achieve goals in the Balkans. Russia discounted the value of negotiations and instead used them to mask military operations. The legality of actions, observation of laws, and humanitarian suffering became of secondary importance to the reduction of Russian casualties. Russia dismissed foreign public opinions and NATO government positions if state concerns were at issue; a focused and centralized media campaign became a critical component for success.9 F 
10
7
8
10
11
In addition, Russia interpreted the 2008 NATO membership intention statements for Georgia and Ukraine as attempts by the US and NATO to further erode its influence within the former Soviet republics and threaten its national security. The actions galvanized Russian views regarding its security partnership with the US and NATO, leading to the Russian 2008 conflict in Georgia, executed under the guise of protecting human rights. Russia sought to reassert its great power status, influence, and authority within its sphere of influence. The conflict emphasized Russia's declaration that it could emulate the US policy of unilateralism and intervention, in the affairs of sovereign states, for the purpose of human rights. The 2011-2013 Arab Spring and Russian antiregime protests intensified Russian concerns regarding internal state sovereignty. As a result, Russia initiated the 2014 conflict in Ukraine, annexing Crimea and invading Eastern Ukraine under the pretense of quelling the extremism of the Euromaidan uprising and protecting human rights. Russia further underscored its security emphasis with its subsequent 2015 intervention in Syria where it portrayed itself as a status quo power that sought to protect the sovereignty of states.1 1F 
12
13
The Russian military's performance during the Chechen and Georgian Wars revealed deficiencies; however, Russian leaders remained preoccupied with the notion that the resolution of current regional crises precluded the initiation of significant military reforms. Thus, following the conclusion of the Georgian War, the improved Russian economy and increased defense expenditures initiated Russia's 2008 'New Look' military reforms.1 3F 
14
15
16
This monograph will focus on the evolution of Russian military strategy from 1991 to 2019 through studying Russian actions and experiences in the current Ukraine conflict and intervention in Syria. The analysis begins with a review of the evolution of the Russian understanding of war, military strategy, military doctrine, associated terminology, and relevant definitions from the Soviet period to the present. The examination includes a review of Russian capabilities, military reforms, foreign security policy, and lessons learned. More specifically, the monograph concentrates on how Russia prioritizes the purpose and application of their military strategy, what conflicts and world events affected Russian military strategy development, and the current capabilities that Russia is focusing on now. The investigation will introduce Russia's current military strategy and its emphasis on a general strategy of active defense, limited action, and a shift towards the development of military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operation and their employment. Once the requisite concept, terminology, and definition analysis is complete, the current Ukraine conflict and intervention in Syria serve as case studies to underscore the presence, implementation, rationale, and purpose of each specified element of current Russian military strategy. The analysis will discern cogent insights and lessons regarding the development of Russian strategy and infer lessons for US military policy and strategy. In addition, the examination will offer observations and implications regarding the lessons and future of Russian military strategy development. The study and information could inform future US and allied military policy, strategy, force structure, and capabilities development in the European theater.
To comprehend Russian military strategy development, it is important to review the Russian evolution and understanding of the concept of war and associated tenets and terms. The foundation of current Russian military science and thinking stems from Soviet era thought and theories. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union's (CPSU) seventy-four years of governance provided a lengthy and stable period for the development for military thought. The CPSU's ideology formed the core of and deeply influenced the development of Soviet, and subsequently Russian, military concepts. A key tenet that shaped the foundation of Soviet military science is the concept of holism, the belief that a single synthetic system exists to connect everything. Thus, Soviet military science examined all issues and components with the function of the system as the consideration. This contrasts with the US analytical-logical tradition that focuses on individual processes and components before organizing the aggregate. Soviet military science also emphasized a strict reliance on the Marxist philosophy of dialectical materialism to guide action and development. In Soviet military thinking the philosophy resulted in an acutely scientific method that centered on the belief that new means of struggle always created corresponding counter-means that caused changes in military operations. Lastly, Soviet military science placed a considerable emphasis on historical analysis and the belief that strategy involves a contemplation of military history.1 6F
17
The Soviet view of the causes of war developed from Marxist principles regarding the inevitable conflict between political systems and class divisions; war was considered a tool of the exploitative ruling class to further its economic interests. Vladimir Lenin further developed Karl Marx's view of war and understood its utility as a necessary means to transform society; accordingly, war became instrumental and inevitable. The Marxist-Leninist concept of the inevitability of war reached a transition point with the Soviet development of nuclear weapons.
Recognizing the destructive consequences of a nuclear conflict, Nikita Khrushchev introduced the concept of peaceful coexistence in 1959, which asserted that states with conflicting philosophical, social, economic, and political ideologies would compete using their respective strengths in lieu of war. The Marxist-Leninist view that wars stemmed from economic causes also influenced the Soviet view of the nature of war.1 7F 
18
With the introduction of Khrushchev's concept of peaceful coexistence, some Soviet theorists began to consider politics, economy, ideology, psychology, and other nonmilitary means to influence an enemy. Nevertheless, the Soviet definition of war remained unchanged and armed struggle remained the main and decisive means in war.1 8F 
19
Technology serves as a primary driver for the sweeping changes in the capabilities, doctrine, and organization that fundamentally transform the form of fighting associated with a new generation of warfare. Russian military general and theorist Vladimir Slipchenko defined the previous and current generations of warfare, which continues to serve as a definitive work for Russian military theorists. According to Slipchenko, the first generation occurred from 500 BC-900 AD and involved hand-to-hand fighting and primitive arms. The second generation spanned from 900-1700 and featured firearms. The third generation covered 1700-1800 and included increased firepower, trench warfare, and maritime battles. The fourth generation, between 1800 and 1945, encompassed the advent of automatic weapons, tanks, and air combat. The fifth generation introduced nuclear weapons while the sixth generation started in the 1990s and involved precision weapons and information and electronic warfare. Thus, the Soviet and current Russian understanding of the character of war centers on its dependence on the economy and technology.1 9F 
20
However, the documents acknowledged the growing prevalence of indirect, nontraditional, and other forms and means of violence associated with the character of modern warfare. Thus, the 2010s became an era of notable change for Russian military thought.
The anti-establishment colour revolutions and Arab Spring deeply influenced Russian theorists and spurred debate regarding adjustments in the understanding of war. Theorists noted the blending of the boundary between war and peace and subsequently military and nonmilitary means during international confrontations. Accordingly, the 2010 Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation continued the link between armed conflict and war but also outlined nonmilitary threats that undermined sovereignty and interfered with the internal affairs of Russia and its allies. The 2014 Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation and 2015 Russian National Security Strategy increased the focus on the nonmilitary aspects of military conflict; specifically, the use of the information sphere to affect a population's protest potential.2 2F 
23
The Russian Chief of the General Staff, Valery Gerasimov, provides additional insight regarding the current Russian understanding of war during his 2017 address to the Academy of Military Science. He notes that there are several characteristics associated with contemporary military conflicts. Gerasimov states that NATO operations in the former Yugoslavia initiated the era of noncontact/remote warfare. He elaborates that the US and NATO imposed geographic and economic restrictions on the execution of military operations. As a result, weapons cost became an important consideration during the development of methods for executing military operations.
Subsequent military conflicts continue the trend with the increasing employment of robotic complexes and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to accomplish a variety of military actions.
Gerasimov notes that US and allied actions confirm that information superiority has become an indispensable prerequisite for the execution of combat operations. He outlines that attaining information superiority involves the simultaneous use of mass information and social networks with psychological and information-technical effects. Gerasimov states that the conflict in Syria represents the use of hybrid methods of operation which involve the simultaneous use of traditional and nontraditional operations of both a military and nonmilitary nature. He clarifies that foreign actors transformed Syrian internal protests into assaults by organized armed opposition via advisors and information effects. The foreign actors then spurred the inclusion of foreign directed and supplied terrorist organizations to oppose the Syrian government. Gerasimov adds that the US and NATO do not classify hybrid operations as acts of aggression and are actively executing hybrid operations in the international domain. He declares his belief regarding the blurring of the boundary between war and peace when an actor is able to threaten or violate a state's national security and sovereignty without overt military actions. Additionally, he mentions that the reasons and approaches for the use of military force are broadening to include the promotion of a state's economic interests while under the guise of protecting democracy or instilling democratic values.2 3F 
24
25
26
27
During wartime, military doctrine assumes a somewhat less prominent role as armed combat is subject to the military-political and military-strategic considerations, generalizations, and conclusions associated with the specific situation. Therefore, strategy governs war and armed combat, not doctrine. Lastly, the Handbook contrasts the offensive character of Soviet military doctrine with the aggressive and predatory tendencies associated with the military doctrine of US and its allies. The Handbook stresses that that Soviet Union did not intend to initiate attacks; rather, the doctrine refers to the character of the war waged in the defense of the Soviet Union and its allies.  
30
31
The military encyclopedia clarifies that a nation's policy and economy determine the military strategy's tasks. Policy sets war objectives, preparations, means and methods, and the 29 Timothy L. Thomas, Russia Military Strategy: Impacting 21st Century Reform and Geopolitics (Fort Leavenworth: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2015), 42-43. 
30
31
34
32
33
Accordingly, Russian doctrine discarded the Leonid Brezhnev era policy of no first use of nuclear weapons against nuclear states and non-use against nonnuclear states; the shift likely stemmed from the loss of Russia's conventional forces superiority following the end of the Cold War.3 4F 
35
The Russian 1997 National Security Concept continued the trend of international security optimism with the belief that the strengthening of international law virtually removed the danger of direct aggression against Russia. However, the document's focus on the resolution of internal issues associated with terrorism, ethnonational struggles, and the economy revealed growing Russian concerns regarding international cooperation. The concept observed increasing international competition for access to resources and markets. Thus, the document noted a trend regarding the growing threat of foreign intelligence service penetration of Russian governmental, financial, economic, scientific, and media entities. The penetration could weaken Russia economically, destabilize Russia through the targeting of interethnic and religious issues, and undermine Russia's policy goals and direction.3 5F 
36
37
35
36
38
However, the documents noted Russian disapproval of the emergence of an increasingly unipolar world order and the propagation of the concepts of humanitarian intervention and limited sovereignty that permitted nations to act externally from the United Nations (UN) Charter and UNSC. Russia perceived attempts from the US and its allies to create an international relations structure where unilateral actions would resolve key issues by circumventing the fundamental rules of international law. Consequently, the documents emphasized that the flaws of international mechanisms that allowed the unilateral use of force were a threat to international security and underscored the general decline in confidence regarding international security cooperation.3 8F 
39
Specifically, the documents noted that the threats to Russian military security included the efforts of leading nations to achieve a preponderant military position via high-precision, information, and other high-technology means of conducting armed warfare. Also, the concepts viewed NATO expansion efforts involving Ukraine and Georgia as a violation of the principle of equal security.
Accordingly, the documents stressed the employment of all military means, to include nuclear weapons, against an armed aggressor. Therefore, Russia updated its military doctrine to elaborate on the operational forms and methods associated with modern wars. The doctrine directed a shift of military force development priorities from the local and internal war scenarios of the 1993 Military Doctrine to conventional forces capable of global reach. Additionally, the doctrine introduced the notion that modern war could involve a systematic method to target the full sphere of human activity via indirect and nontraditional forms. Specifically, Russian theorists identified information warfare as a threat.3 9F 
40
Specifically, the documents included the accusation that the US and European Union (EU) were responsible for the armed conflict in Ukraine via their support of the anti-constitutional colour revolution elements that divided the Ukrainian society and precipitated the conflict. Accordingly, the term colour revolution entered Russia's strategic lexicon. The concepts identified that the main threats to Russia's state and public security were foreign organizations, intergovernmental organizations, radical public associations, financial and economic structures, groups using nationalist and extremist ideology, and individuals that target Russia's unity and territorial integrity. The documents elaborated that the threats could destabilize Russia's domestic political and social situation via colour revolutions and the dismantling of traditional religious and moral values. Consequently, the emergence of new methods to undermine state sovereignty spurred the introduction of the Russian belief that global competition occurs at the civilizational level.4 0F 
41
The Russian doctrinal focus on nonmilitary methods, particularly colour revolutions, led to further clarification regarding the information aspects of military conflict. Concerning information warfare, the doctrines outlined the implementation of information warfare prior to the initiation of military action to achieve political aims or shape global opinions in a manner that would permit a nation to use military force. The documents underscored the ability of information warfare to solely achieve political aims while acting across the spheres of peace and conflict. The focus on the informational sphere and the incitement of domestic unrest continued with the identification of internal and external military dangers. Internal military dangers included information influencing to erode the historical, spiritual, and patriotic traditions of Russia's population. External military dangers focused on the use of information and communication methods to affect Russia's internal affairs, sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity, and the overthrow of friendly regimes on Russia's borders.4 2F 
43
42
The concepts, principles, and direction of Russian military strategy development outlined above form the foundation for contemporary Russian strategy. Gerasimov provides insight into current Russian military strategy development in his 2019 address to the Academy of Military Science. He elaborates that military strategy development progressed through several stages of evolution from a strategy of annihilation, attrition, global war, nuclear deterrence, to indirect operations. Gerasimov mentions that even though nonmilitary methods precede the use of military force, the military continues to remain relevant as demonstrations of military might support the effectiveness of nonmilitary methods. Also, military force is necessary when the nonmilitary methods are unable to achieve the specified goals. Gerasimov states that Russia's armed forces must be prepared to conduct new-type wars and armed conflicts via classical and asymmetric methods. He notes that Russia has been preparing for several years and is ready to counteract US strategies. He specifies that the foundation of the Russian response is a strategy of active defense which draws upon the defensive nature of Russian military doctrine to preemptively neutralize threats to state security. Gerasimov shares that Russia's experience in Syria resulted in the identification of a new practical field. The field involved the execution of tasks to defend and promote national interests outside of Russia's borders while using a strategy of limited actions. The strategy of limited actions entails the use of a self-sufficient grouping of forces selected from a branch of the armed forces that has a high degree of mobility and can make the greatest contribution to achieving the objective. Gerasimov clarifies that the strategy requires the attainment and maintenance of information superiority, command and control readiness, logistics systems readiness, and the covert deployment of the force grouping. The counter strategies outlined by Gerasimov reflect Russian observations and deductions of US and allied policies and strategies. Russia perceives the actions of the US and its allies as representative of an aggressive foreign policy to depose nations that are not in-line with their interests. Russian leaders and theorists consider US and allied unilateral actions to undermine state sovereignty and change the legally elected authority structure within a state as a violation of international law. Additionally, Russia believes that the US development of aggressive military strike capabilities, such as global strike and multi-domain battle, support US and allied foreign policy and implementation of colour revolutions and soft power. Consequently, Russia perceives that the principal US method of achieving policy goals involves the use of a population's protest potential coupled with the employment of precision weapons strikes against key objectives.4 4F 
45
46
Militarily, Russia continues to consider the increasing US and NATO presence on its borders as the primary threat to its security. Additionally, Russia believes that the US is creating strategic instability by withdrawing from key Cold War arms limitation and reduction treaties and through the pursuit of military multi-domain operations. Non-militarily, Russia's focus in the information sphere outlines its belief that the US and its allies seek to execute diversionary and sabotage actions to affect and destabilize the domestic security of Russia and its allies.4 6F
47
The Russian campaign in Ukraine provides insight into its current strategy of active defense, limited action, and shift towards the employment of military and nonmilitary forms and Russian military operations in Eastern Ukraine initiated immediately after the collapse of the Yanukovych government. The decision by the interim Ukrainian government to repeal the official status of the Russian language on February 23 coupled with Russian operations in Crimea spurred leftist and right-wing organizations in Eastern Ukraine to initiate public protests. On March 1, protesters seized the regional administration buildings in Kharkiv and Donetsk.
Protestors took control of the regional administration building and demanded an annexation referendum in Luhansk on March 9. By March 10, local Ukrainian police regained control of the captured administration buildings and arrested separatist leaders and supporters. The arrest of the local political figurehead separatist leaders allowed individuals with links to Russian security services, military experience, and Russian associations and businesses to assume control of the protest movement and shift the focus away from politics to insurgency. From April 6 to 23, armed separatist groups seized administrative and state security buildings in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. Ukrainian military operations to contain the separatists initially faltered as the separatists received short-range air defense systems from Russia and as Ukraine diverted a majority of its forces to react to the 40,000 Russian forces amassed on Ukraine's border with Russia.4 9F 
50
The subsequent Russian military offensive in January 2015 resulted in the defeat of Ukrainian military forces at Debaltseve and resulted with the Ukrainian government's acceptance of the Minsk II ceasefire with terms that heavily favored Russia. As a result of the Minsk Protocol, Russian military operations continue to focus on training and equipping separatist forces to become a capable conventional force.5 0F 
51
The campaign portrayed the Fall 2013 popular protests in Kyiv as a negative byproduct of closer ties to the EU. Upon the collapse of the Yanukovych government in February 2014, the campaign focused on discrediting the interim Ukrainian government as illegitimate, the dangers posed by events in Ukraine to Russia, the threats to Russians in Crimea, and supporting the narrative for Crimea to return to the safety of Russia. The campaign also leveraged an alleged anti-protest campaign from the Russian-speaking population of Crimea to portray the Kyiv protests as the products of foreign intervention and denounce the protestors and subsequent interim government as fascist extremists. Externally, Russia President Vladimir Putin stated on March 4 that Russia had no intention of invading Ukraine or annexing Crimea and that Russian forces were not on Crimean soil. However, Putin noted that Russian intervention could occur if the situation deteriorated in Ukraine. Additionally, he stated the hypothetical return of Crimea to Russia would not violate any norms nor create new precedents.5 1F 
52
53
52
54
55
56
57
During the operation to annex Crimea, Russia organized the grouping of forces around the VDV. The VDV's mobility allowed Russian forces to offset the numerical and firepower advantages of the Ukrainian military forces. At the start of the operation in late February, Russian military forces in Crimea consisted of one incomplete naval infantry brigade and several hundred specialforces operators arrayed against 15,000 Ukrainian military forces. Nevertheless, Russian forces leveraged their mobility and completed the annexation within one month.5 7F 
58
59
The Russian operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine exemplify the emphasis in Russian military strategy to employ military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operation.
Both operations followed contemporary Russian military strategy and employed extensive nonmilitary information campaigns preceding, during, and following the campaign in Ukraine.
The information campaign centered on ensuring domestic approval for the military and political 
58
60
The Russian military operations in Ukraine exemplify elements of Russia's contemporary military strategy and understanding of war. Russian leaders perceived US and allied indirect and hybrid operations as responsible for the political turmoil in Ukraine. The situation aligned with Russian observations of previous US and allied actions abroad to blur the distinction between war and peace to achieve information superiority, spur internal protests, and undermine the concept of state sovereignty. Also, the situation further confirmed Russian beliefs regarding NATO's efforts to expand eastward and the threat posed to its national security. Thus, Russia believed that the collapse of the Yanukovych government represented the termination of its diplomatic efforts to resolve the political turmoil in Ukraine. Consequently, Russia chose to execute military operations that reflected its strategy of responding to emerging threats with mirror and asymmetric measures. In Ukraine, the measures involved nonmilitary operations in the information sphere to build domestic support and target the Ukrainian population's protest potential. The nonmilitary operations received support from precision military deployments and strikes against key objectives across Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. The operations emphasized Russia's adherence to the theoretical and practical aspects of current strategy through the planning and integration of military operations to support nonmilitary methods for the attainment of diplomatic, political, and military goals.
The Russian military campaign and operations in Syria differ from the operations executing during the Ukraine Campaign. The campaign further highlights certain elements of its current strategy of active defense, limited action, and shift towards the employment of military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operation. The events preceding the Russian campaign began with public protests in Syria that stemmed from the regional unrest associated with the An assessment of the Russian campaign confirms the presence of a strategy of active defense. Russia's emphasis on preemptively neutralizing threats to state security is apparent with the Russian view of Syria as a region that could threaten its strategic interests in the Middle East.
It also views Islamic insurgents as a threat to the Assad regime and a potential domestic threat.6 4F 
65
64
65
Russian military operations in Syria exemplify the use of a strategy of limited action to defend and promote national interests outside of Russia's borders. The military operations in Syria adhered to the strategy's focus on the use of a self-sufficient grouping of forces selected from a branch of the armed forces that has a high degree of mobility and can make the greatest contribution to achieving the objective. In Syria, Russia developed their grouping of forces around the VKS. The VKS served as the armed forces branch with the highest degree of mobility and ability to provide the greatest contribution to Russia's campaign to simultaneously establish and secure Russian military bases in Syria, reestablish and retrain the Syrian military, and force concessions from the Syrian opposition forces. The operations also exemplified the strategy's requirement of attaining and maintaining information superiority, command and control readiness, logistics systems readiness, and the covert deployment of the force grouping.
Additionally, the campaign served as a testing ground for Russia's modernization efforts to reestablishing military capability with over 200 diverse new weapons tested in Syria.6 6F 
67
66
67
68
69
69
70
71
72
Russia noted that the actions decreased the division between war and peace by employing information superiority and precision military strikes to support the dynamic use of a population's protest potential and further promulgate US and allied efforts to erode the notion of state sovereignty. The Russian assessment regarding the imminent military collapse of the Assad regime forced it to conclude its longstanding diplomatic efforts and execute military operations to protect its future regional influence, military access, and national security. The operations exhibited characteristics of Russia's current strategy to protect interests outside of its geographic periphery by implementing mirror and asymmetric measures. Russian actions in Syria centered on military methods supported by nonmilitary methods in the information sphere. The operations followed the theoretical and practical elements of strategy through the planning, support, and employment of integrated measures to attain diplomatic, political, and military goals.
The review of Russian military strategy development from 1991 to 2019 reveals the existence of a general strategy of active defense, limited action, and an adaptation towards the development of military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operations and their employment. The evolution of Russian military strategy emphasizes the processes and rationale associated with Russia's strategic direction. Russia's initial military strategy development following the end of the Cold War focused on its geographic periphery and internal threats. In addition, international security cooperation and international law became the primary means to overcome ideological friction and negate any threats of direct aggression against Russia.
However, Russia's strategic direction shifted during the 21st century with its scrutiny of NATO's eastward expansion, adversary military technological developments, and the traditional and nontraditional operations of both a military and nonmilitary nature executed by the US and its allies. Russia noted the rise of unilateralism executed outside of international law, specifically actions by foreign actors to use a population's protest potential and other nonmilitary methods to destabilize the internal stability of a state and undermine the concept of sovereign statehood. Additionally, Russia observed that contemporary conflicts involve spheres of confrontation that favor the inclusive use of political, economic, information, and other nonmilitary measures with military force. Therefore, Russia developed a military strategy that emphasized the concepts of active defense, limited action, and the development of military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operations and their employment. The execution of the concepts centered on the principles of strategic deterrence, the preemptive neutralization of threats to state security, and the advancement of national interests outside of its borders. The Russian military campaigns in Ukraine and Syria highlighted the implementation of the principles and concepts that define Russia's current military strategy.
The Russian understanding of the concept of war and direction of contemporary military strategy provides some insight regarding the possible direction of future Russian military strategy development and implications for US military policy and strategy. The underpinnings of Russia's strategic direction are its focus on maintaining its status as a great power and one of the centers of a multipolar world order. Accordingly, it will continue to actively counter any perceived threats or adversary efforts to undermine its sphere of influence, interests, security, stability, and its internal sovereignty or the sovereignty of its allies. Also, Russia will continue to interpret actions that circumvent or limit the ability of international organizations to enforce international law as a threat. The tenets and direction of Russian military science will continue its perception that competition occurs within a global system and at the civilizational level. Consequently, Russian actions and responses to perceived threats will match its observations and deductions gleaned from the military and nonmilitary operations executed by the US and its allies. The basis of the Russian response will stem from its actions to mirror US and allied actions, counter perceived threats, and the continued development of new military and nonmilitary forms and methods of operations and associated technologies. Notably, Russia intends to maintain a capability to the
Alexei G. Arbatov, "The Transformation of Russian Military Doctrine: Lessons Learned from Kosovo and Chechnya" (Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany: George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies,
2000), v. 2 Steven E. Miller, "Moscow's Military Power: Russia's Search for Security in an Age of Transition," in The Russian Military, ed. Steven E. Miller and Dmitri Trenin (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004), 4-17. 3 Anne L. Clunan, "Russia's Pursuit of Great-Power Status and Security," in Routledge Handbook of Russian Security, ed. Roger E. Kanet (New York: Routledge, 2019), 4-5.
Clunan, "Russia's Pursuit of Great-Power Status and Security," 9-10.
Clunan,[9][10][11] 
Hanna Smith, "Military Might as a Basis for Russian Great Power Identity," in Routledge Handbook of Russian Security, ed. Roger E. Kanet (New York: Routledge, 2019), 46-48.
Susanne Oxenstierna, "Russia's Economy and Military Expenditures," in Routledge Handbook of Russian Security, ed. Roger E. Kanet (New York: Routledge, 2019), 97.
Arbatov, "The Transformation of Russian Military Doctrine," 15.    
Clunan," 11.   
Oscar Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War: Blurring the Lines Between War and Peace (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2019), 23-25.
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[22][23][24][25][26][27][28] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[28][29] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,
  22  Johnson, The Russian Understanding ofWar,[43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52][53] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War, 
Valery Gerasimov, "Contemporary Warfare and Current Issues for the Defense of the Country," trans. Harold Orenstein, Military Review 97, no. 6 (November-December 2017): 22-27.
Gerasimov, "Contemporary Warfare and Current Issues for the Defense of the Country," 22-27.
Timothy Thomas, "Russia's Forms and Methods of Military Operations: The Implementers of Concepts," Military Review 98, no. 3 (May-June 2018): 30-36.
S.N.Kozlov, ed., The Officer's Handbook: A Soviet View, trans. DGIS Multilingual Section, Translation Bureau, Secretary of State Department, Ottawa, Canada (Moscow: Ministry of Defense Publishing Company, 1971),57-58.    
Kozlov, The Officer's Handbook: A Soviet View, 65.   
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War, 52-53.
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[63][64][65][66][67] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[63][64][65][66][67] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[85][86][87][88][89][90] 
Johnson, The Russian Understanding of War,[85][86][87][88][89][90] 
Gerasimov, "The Development of Military Strategy under Contemporary Conditions."
Gerasimov, "The Development of Military Strategy under Contemporary Conditions."
Michael Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2017), 1.
Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine,[6][7][8][9][10][11][12] 
Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine,[41][42][43][44][45] 
Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine,[50][51][52][53]
[54]
Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine,[11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25][26][27][28][29] 
Cooper, "Moscow's Game of Poker," 14-41.
Cooper, "Moscow's Game of Poker," 63.
I would like to thank 
Dr. Amanda Nagel
COL Gregory Hirschey
Mr. Russell "Rusty" Rafferty
Mr. John Dubuisson
Ike Skelton Combined Arms Research Library
Dr. Lester Grau
Mr. Charles Bartles
SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 8. PERFORMING ORG REPORT NUMBER 9
MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Advanced Military Studies Program 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
target decision-making centers and cruise missile launchers that facilitate strikes on Russian territory. Russia also seeks to validate a unified system to integrate intelligence, forms of destruction, and command and control to enable the holistic destruction of an enemy.
Nevertheless, the core focus of Russian strategy development remains strategic deterrence and the information sphere of conflict.