# ID: 140d290cc08a4d16a6695a55b21ee086
# Title: Russian Military Strategy Development from 1991 to 2019
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The Russian military operations in Ukraine exemplify elements of Russia's contemporary military strategy and understanding of war.
Russian leaders perceived US and allied indirect and hybrid operations as responsible for the political turmoil in Ukraine.
The situation aligned with Russian observations of previous US and allied actions abroad to blur the distinction between war and peace to achieve information superiority, spur internal protests, and undermine the concept of state sovereignty.
Also, the situation further confirmed Russian beliefs regarding NATO's efforts to expand eastward and the threat posed to its national security.
Thus, Russia believed that the collapse of the Yanukovych government represented the termination of its diplomatic efforts to resolve the political turmoil in Ukraine.
Consequently, Russia chose to execute military operations that reflected its strategy of responding to emerging threats with mirror and asymmetric measures.
In Ukraine, the measures involved nonmilitary operations in the information sphere to build domestic support and target the Ukrainian population's protest potential.
The nonmilitary operations received support from precision military deployments and strikes against key objectives across Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
The operations emphasized Russia's adherence to the theoretical and practical aspects of current strategy through the planning and integration of military operations to support nonmilitary methods for the attainment of diplomatic, political, and military goals.