# ID: 144f793fa99643498eafd07d5435243b
# Title: Measuring the effectiveness of the Afghan surge
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
On December 1, 2009, President Barack Obama declared that the United States would deploy additional combat power to Afghanistan to reverse the momentum gained by the Taliban and associated insurgent networks. Despite nearly eight years of war at that point, deliberate campaign assessment had only begun in 2008. Assessments exist to help commanders better understand the nature of the current campaign and how it changes over time. With an immature assessment process at the beginning of the surge, ISAF was forced to rapidly adapt and improve. Several changes to the assessment process during the surge included the creation of the ISAF Joint Command Information Dominance Center and Afghan Assessment Group. These organizations slowly increased transparency, credibility, and relevance at the strategic level. Despite improvements at the strategic level, however, advances were not as significant at the tactical level. Ultimately the improved centralized assessment process used by ISAF at the close of the surge was more effective at helping the COMISAF better understand the operating environment. Though the system still depended on quantitative data and failed to push assessments down to tactical units, it provided GEN Allen a more robust picture than GEN McChrystal received two years prior.
15.
The United States military had been operating in Afghanistan for approximately seven years at that point. Initially, operations in Afghanistan were viewed more favorably than operations in Iraq by the American population due to direct ties between the Taliban and al-Qaeda. But as the war continued, negative sentiment slowly increased. In 2004, 25 percent of Americans polled believed that the war in Afghanistan was a mistake; in 2008, that number rose to 30 percent, and in 2010, it increased to 40 percent. 
3
4
An analysis of the surge in Afghanistan is extremely relevant to today's military and its preparedness for future contingencies. The nation continues to wage a counterinsurgency in Afghanistan with questionable improvement in security, stability, and host nation capacity. Also, potential adversaries around the world have been emboldened with the thought that they can defeat or attrit the United States through 3 Frank Newport, "More Americans Now View Afghanistan War as a Mistake," Gallup, 19 February 2014, accessed 7 March 2018, http://news.gallup.com/poll/ 167471/americans-view-afghanistan-war-mistake.aspx. unconventional means. It is a realistic assessment that the United States will fight small wars and unconventional conflict again in the future.
The current situation in Afghanistan is a product of years of strategy changes, political turnover, coalition uncertainty, and enemy actions. Military and political leaders seek to increase force presence to consolidate gains and increase Afghan capability.
Insurgencies have manifested many times in history and Afghanistan will not be the last place U.S. policy is put to the test. Multi-domain battle and the threat of a near-peer force is shaping current military thinking and preparation. Balance and flexibility in military capability are important to meet the current need and prepare for an unknown future. As a force, the United States must not allow the hard-fought lessons from Afghanistan to be forgotten while preparing for the multi-domain near-peer battle. The nation cannot be shortsighted enough to fail at our current mission. The study of current and past counterinsurgency campaigns is valuable to the United States military and its preparation for future conflict. At a minimum, the Afghan experience is woven into the historical fabric of the nation and serves to provide insight for future political and military leadership.
Research Question: How did senior military leaders assess progress in Afghanistan during the troop surge of 2010-2011 and how did the assessment process improve over time?
Secondary Research Questions 1. What were the conditions of the counterinsurgency in Afghanistan prior to President Obama's decision to deploy 50,000 (21,000 agreed to initially with 30,000 surge forces) additional forces to the country? 2. Prior to the increase in troop presence did the United States employ centralized measures of effectiveness to gauge efforts and successes? 3. Were measures of performance nested at the tactical level to clearly demonstrate success or failure of measures of effectiveness? 4. What success was achieved through the new strategy, and was it built upon or squandered with future policy changes?
The first assumption is that an increase in military forces did initially produce positive results in various categories on the battlefield in Afghanistan, however gains were not effectively reported, analyzed, and tracked. The use of clear measures of effectiveness in tracking progress is very important. The population-centric counterinsurgency approach depends highly on protecting civilian centers, establishing legitimate government control, and defeating isolated insurgent forces. To execute the population-centric approach, commanders need to adjust troop levels to be able to protect the population, train host-nation forces, and defeat the insurgent. The other counterinsurgency (COIN) approach focuses primarily on destruction of the enemy force, with little emphasis on governance and impact to the population. These approaches to COIN are similar in that they both produce large amounts of data and metrics, but they vary greatly in respect to integration of the population to target the support base of an insurgency. This research is not intended to favor one COIN approach over the other but will look at the assessment processes used to measure effectiveness of operations.
At the operational and tactical level forces face a daily dilemma; to execute combat operations and court the civilian populace. This is important to evaluate for practical and future waging of counterinsurgencies. If the force increase was successful and senior leaders did not effectively plan, implement and evaluate methods of effectiveness, military operations would begin to show limited results and potentially do more harm than good with the population. It is possible that success was not consolidated or communicated, forcing future commanders to revise campaign plans and assessment processes.
The second assumption in this study is that the United States will not stop fighting counterinsurgencies. The new Field Manual (FM) 3-0 Operations states that "while the U.S. Army must be manned, equipped, and trained to operate across the range of military operations, large-scale ground combat against a peer threat represents the most significant readiness requirement." 5 This statement reflects the focus and organizational energy that is currently being applied into training, force modernization, and doctrine. This thesis does not argue the necessity for continual preparation for near-peer conflict. On the contrary, it acknowledges potential for future counterinsurgency operations that can benefit from lessons learned in Afghanistan. The military must prepare for multi-domain battle against near-peer threats and be able to quickly transition to stability and counterinsurgency operations. Threats around the world have seen the level of success achieved by extremist networks in Afghanistan. Insurgencies are a great equalizer against a vastly superior power and will therefore be used by weaker opponents for the foreseeable future.
Department of Defense doctrine defines a measure of effectiveness as "a criterion used to assess changes in system behavior, capability, or operational environment that is tied to measuring the attainment of an end state, achievement of an objective, or creation of an effect." 
6
Department of Defense doctrine defines a measure of performance as "a criterion used to assess friendly actions that is tied to measuring task accomplishment." 7 A measure of performance links directly back to a measure of effectiveness. Effective measures of performance are established with criteria that describe the level of success or failure of stated actions. The level of success or failure of a measure of performance 
6
7
correlates directly to a measure of effectiveness. Commanders use measures of performance to gauge if measures of effectiveness are working or not.
The ISAF is NATO's military coalition operating in Afghanistan. Over time the number of countries that participate, and the level to which they contribute has risen and fallen based on strategy and the level of popular support. ISAF leadership has changed many times, not always in a positive and productive way. Two enduring priorities of ISAF are to separate insurgent forces from population centers and increase Afghan military capacity. Over time, international contributions of troops to ISAF have ebbed and flowed, and priorities and strategy have changed frequently. This thesis will evaluate the assessment processes used by ISAF to make decisions during the troop surge.
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan was put in place as the legitimate legislative body in place of the Taliban. Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan operates from Kabul and has a large task of demonstrating influence and capacity to a largely rural population while minimizing corruption. Government 
The primary limitation for this project is the role of Special Operations Forces in Afghanistan, specifically the 75th Ranger Regiment. First, it is highly likely that most information supporting research of the Ranger Regiment's actions remain classified. The classification of this thesis is UNCLASSIFIED so only research with the same level will be used. These criteria will be made clear in all correspondence with individuals for research. In the event any information is perceived to be SECRET or higher, I will not include it in the research and contact the installation security manager.
The scope of this thesis begins with the election of President Barack Obama on 5 November 2008. Afghanistan strategy gained a lot of attention during his campaign and once the election outcome was clear, his review of policy and strategy most likely intensified. The end period for this research is slightly less clear. At this point, 2012 is used as a benchmark. The initial published date to begin withdrawing surge forces was July, 2011. In June, 2011 President Obama announced a plan to withdraw the aggregate number of surge forces by the end of 2012. 10
The goal of this research and thesis is to analyze a major shift in America's counterinsurgency strategy and its level of effectiveness. For nearly six years, combat 10 Ted Barrett, Alan Silverleib, and Barbara Starr, " After multiple reviews of strategic options and debate with civilian and military advisors, President Obama adjusted efforts back to Afghanistan, but with strings attached. One condition applied to the surge in military forces and other national resources was a specified expiration date. In his speech to the Corps of Cadets at the United States Military Academy, President Obama noted that American military presence would begin to withdraw from Afghanistan in July 2011. 
12
13
-President Barack Obama, National Security Strategy (2010)   This statement by President Barack Obama from the 2010 National Security Strategy outlined his vision for America's comprehensive mission in Afghanistan. The remarks note that military action against insurgent forces are not ends in themselves, but rather a means to provide freedom of maneuver for Afghan government and military forces. The document goes on to illustrate the importance of diplomatic and political means in a comprehensive strategy, but unfortunately gives military leaders a clear end date for their requested force increase. The National Security Strategy of 2010 rightly placed emphasis on Afghan responsibility and capability but was shortsighted in its projected timetable.
In this literature review, we will discuss three areas from the overall body of knowledge to frame and analyze the primary research question: recent Afghan history, counterinsurgency thought and doctrine, and military campaign analysis. Each of these topics is necessary to provide context to the situation in Afghanistan leading up to the surge, deployment of the additional forces, and most importantly, the assessment of effectiveness of tactical action and its integration to operational and strategic vision.
To understand the challenges and opportunities inherent to a military strategy in Afghanistan it is important to review history. An in-depth history of Afghanistan, with ancient culture and numerous tribal and ethnic intricacies cannot be adequately discussed in this document, but several salient points can be derived from the last four decades.
External influences are prevalent and powerful, tribal structures are the primary power base among the diverse population, and geography complicates an already difficult situation.
Afghanistan has a rich and complicated history that has been influenced heavily by outside actors. Several external influences include military greats; Alexander the Great, Genghis Kan, and Tamerlane to massive industrialized empires such as Great Britain, Russia, and the United States. 
14
In 1893, the British empire established a rough border between Afghanistan and British India known as the Durand Line. 
15
22
23
24
25
21
22
23
24
25
With the withdrawal of Soviet forces in 1989, Afghanistan descended into a dark period of civil war. The human toll of the fighting against the Soviet Union was vast. It is estimated that 1,000,000 Afghan civilians were killed with an additional 8,000,000 displaced civilians. 
26
27
28
29
26
27 Felbab-Brown, 121. 
28 Irwin,
23. 29
Afghanistan and its people have experienced constant violence and upheaval for the majority of its modern history. Generations of Afghans have lived in an environment that fosters radicalization due to a lack of structure, law, and peace. Lack of education and unemployment propel the population toward instability. However, despite bloody ethnic tensions throughout Afghanistan, the presence of external actors historically served to unite the tribes against a common threat.
Further complicating the path to stability and peace in Afghanistan are tribal affiliations and structures. The tribe is the dominant source of power and legitimacy in this ethnically diverse country. The south and east are dominated by Pashtun tribes as they account for 40 percent of Afghanistan's population. 
30
31
31
32
Durrani, and Ghilzai sub-tribes. Afghan President Karzai is Popalzai while his cabinet is dominated by Durrani, and the Taliban recruit heavily from the Ghilzai. 
33
34
Afghanistan's history is extremely lengthy and complex. The literature review seeks to determine aspects of Afghan history that shaped the environment leading up to 2009. There is no challenge in finding sources of Afghan history as there is a wealth of knowledge already published. The information is unbiased and well written as a whole.
However, one challenge to discussing history is determining what is important enough to write about and what can be left for the reader to study at a later time. Recent Afghan history is important to better understand the challenges of establishing law and order, a legitimate government, and competent military force capable of defending that centralized government.
History and culture helped shape President Obama's understanding of the Afghan problem and compilation of a strategy to solve it. The issue at hand in my research is not if he, General McChrystal, or any other leaders implemented the correct strategy but how did they conceptualize a problem, align resources, and measure success. A challenge for observers and individuals is that history is interpreted differently by various actors and vastly different conclusions are drawn. Humans apply their past experiences and biases in drawing those conclusions and Afghanistan is no different.
In combatting insurgencies, "the expected result-final defeat of the insurgentsis not an addition but a multiplication of these various operations [military, political, police and judiciary]; they all are essential and if one is nil, the product will be zero." 
35
The creation of the Marine Corps' Small Wars Manual was an influential step in counterinsurgency doctrine. Its authors note in 1940 that "there is a sad lack of authoritative texts on the methods employed in small wars." 36 Small wars are defined loosely as an operation "which does not involve a major effort in regular warfare against a first-rate power." 37 Nations and militaries have fought counterinsurgencies to varying levels of success; no one experience is the same and applying a checklist will not guarantee victory. Authors of the Small Wars Manual go further to inform current (as of 1940) and future military leaders that "although small wars present a special problem requiring particular tactical and technical measures, the immutable principles of war remain the basis of these operations and require the greatest ingenuity in their 36 US Department of the Navy (DON), Fleet Marine Force Reference Publication (FMFRP) 12-15, Small Wars Manual (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1940), 8. 
37 Ibid.,
1. application." 38
The study of counterinsurgencies gained a large following among the military profession and academia since the invasion of Iraq in 2003, and the body of knowledge increased. In this portion of the literature review, I will discuss how the body of knowledge has changed since 2001, the fundamentals of American counterinsurgency and stability doctrine, and application to the surge in Afghanistan.
Counterinsurgencies are not new concepts for the United States military. The first instance of this type of warfare was the Philippine Insurrection that ensued after the Spanish American War. Ultimately the United States was drawn into war with Spain, one that appeared to start an era of colonial acquisition. It is noted that "at no time . . . did the principal actors at the time . . . consider the long-term implications of the decision that they were making in order to deal with the immediate military circumstances." 
39
38 DON,
8. 39
40
early on the challenges of counterinsurgency. One American general, Jacob H. Smith, exacerbated insurgent support by issuing orders such as "the more you kill and the more you burn the better you will please me . . . I want all persons killed who are capable of bearing arms." 
41
The Vietnam War made a tremendous impact on the United States in general and the military specifically. Literature on the Vietnam War is extensive in its scope and very passionate. There is much debate that surrounds the American military experience in Vietnam and impact that it made on the future professional force. Many of today's senior military and political leaders grew up in the tumultuous times during and immediately after the war. Those experiences helped shape the world view of many future professional officers that led large formations in the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Analysis of the Vietnam War by Colonel Harry G. Summers Jr. In it, Summers argues that the ultimate reason for failure in Vietnam was not linked to tactical or operational shortcomings, but due to "commit[ting] the Army without first committing the American people." 42 He went on to conclude that "such a commitment would require battlefield competence and clear-cut objectives to be sustained, but without the commitment of the 
41 Bert,
68. 42
43
On Strategy's comprehensive analysis made such an impact on the post-Vietnam force that General Edward Meyer, the Chief of Staff, provided copies "to all army active and retired three-and four-star generals" and Newt Gingrich sent copies to "all members of the House and Senate." 44 It appears that this book was well-received by many different groups, from Vietnam veterans, to politicians, and academics. After a glowing review from the New York Times, On Strategy became a course text across many undergraduate programs in the United States. 
45
46
43 Summers,
13. 44
45
46
Unfortunately, Vietnam was not the last time the United States would experience the challenges of countering an insurgency. After the invasion of Iraq was complete, the situation deteriorated into a growing insurgency that had to be dealt with. 
48
54
Kilcullen is a former Australian army officer, a contemporary thinker on counterinsurgency who worked within the American political and military establishment and continues to advise, write, and research the topic. His perspective would prove important to GEN David Petraeus' strategy in Iraq during that surge. LTC Kilcullen first rose to notoriety in 2004 when he spoke at the "Irregular Warfare Conference" in Quantico, Virginia. His thesis was that irregular wars "should be called regular wars; the 
52 White,
154. 53
54
56
55 White,
88. 56 Ibid.,
86. 57 Ibid.,
35. 58
61
62
63
59
60
61
62
63
American counterinsurgency doctrine and its transformation over time contribute to understanding the contemporary operating environment of this work. Doctrine must be thorough, updated, and understood across the military as it "promotes mutual understanding and enhances effectiveness during operations." 
65
Counterinsurgency theory and the officers that advanced it were not embraced by everyone in the military. There are several outspoken critics of the doctrine and those who advertise it as a simple formula for success. One opponent in particular, COL (Ret.) 
64
65
Gian Gentile wrote Wrong Turn: America's Deadly Embrace of Counterinsurgency from his personal perspective as a former squadron commander in Iraq. Gentile's argument is that while counterinsurgency is a valid effort on the range of military operations, the military establishment must avoid oversimplifying historical vignettes and current operations. He discusses the risk involved with deducing a general formula from Malaya, Algeria, Vietnam, or elsewhere and applying that to Afghanistan, Iraq, or future operations. COL (Ret.) Gentile urges that "the example of Malaya is often cited by those who believe that there is a template to follow for "winning" in Iraq. Such reductionist templates are seductive because they offer easy-to-understand solutions for complex problems."
66
In his book, Gentile comes across as bitter and strongly against the current of popular belief in counterinsurgency strategy. I agree that military leaders must beware of applying "reductionist templates," but those historical case studies are important starting points for formulating strategy. Senior leaders must apply critical thinking when reviewing history and use conclusions responsibly in shaping operational approaches to current problems.
The third and final portion to the literature review is campaign analysis and counterinsurgency metrics. Military campaign analysis is critical to any operation in order to gauge progress measured against a predetermined end state. The process of analyzing success or failure at the tactical and operational level allows senior leaders to modify strategy. Senior military leaders receive input from the political domain as well as intelligence from lower echelon commands that both feed that process. The assessment of counterinsurgency operations is inherently challenging because it often incorporates input along lines of effort that military units do not traditionally train.
In 2012, RAND published Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency, authored by Ben Connable. The purpose of the book was to assist staffs, commanders, and policy makers in their effort to improve assessments in counterinsurgency operations. 
67
68
69
70
71
67
Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency is a definitive work on campaign analysis and counterinsurgency assessments. In the book, Connable "argues that the already daunting challenges faced by military staffs assessing conventional war are exacerbated many times over in COIN." 
73
75
72
73
74
75
applying EBA to counterinsurgencies. He concludes that "complexity, chaos, and the absence of clear and comprehensive data" limit the effectiveness of EBA in COIN. 
76
Stephen Downes-Martin is a professor at the Naval War College with extensive experience observing and assisting assessment staffs and commanders from the tactical level to ISAF and ISAF Joint Command headquarters. 
77
76
77
"it is extraordinary how well" military leaders and staffs have done creating assessment processes under combat conditions, but that it is imperative "to identify and fix the flaws . . . without apportioning blame or criticism." 
78
79
80
81
The Surges in Iraq and Afghanistan" by Frank G. Hoffman and G. Alexander Crowther.
"Strategic Assessment and Adaptation" offers a very comprehensive look at the history of the assessment process in the American military, focusing primarily on parallels with the 
84
85
Vietnam War. The authors determine that the American process in Vietnam "was oversimplified in one sense by body counts and kill ratios but was also confused by an overabundance of sources and myriad metrics." 86 This document highlights challenges common to COIN assessment, including external and internal actors (regular and/or irregular forces), the civilian population, and governance capability.
Hoffman and Crowther determine that President Obama made a deliberate decision to create a "hybrid" course of action for adapting the Afghan surge option, blending the need to affect the Taliban and al 'Qaida, protect the population, and increase governance. Surge forces would number 30,000, with an option for 3,000 additional troops, there would be a timetable of July 2011 for a conditions-based withdrawal, and most importantly, the mission was no longer the "defeat of the insurgency" but a "disruption of the Taliban and its effectiveness." 
87
Counterinsurgency theory is also well represented in academia with a wide range of opinions and beliefs. Campaign analysis and assessments is the area with the least robust body of knowledge. Although there is less written about analysis and assessments, the sources which I discuss are very timely, well-researched, and comprehensive. Writings 
The ultimate purpose of American forces in Afghanistan has not changed since the war began. American operations are ultimately intended to disrupt terrorist organizations aimed at inflicting harm on the homeland and its people. With this truth in mind, American and international partner forces have shifted their approach over time due to factors such as national strategic goals, resources, leader turn-over, and enemy situation. Troop numbers ebbed and flowed and their focus shifted between protecting the Afghan population and targeting insurgent and terrorist networks. This chapter will detail the qualitative case study methodology as well as the oral history process. It will provide clarity on the process for selecting individuals, types of questions asked, and how the researcher plans to arrive at conclusions. The researcher will utilize a qualitative case study method for this research topic. As noted by respected author Robert E. Stake, "the case is an integrated system. The parts do not have to be working well, the purposes may be irrational, but it is a system."
88
Within the larger scope of qualitative case studies, this particular research fits into the realm of intrinsic case study. In an intrinsic case study, the researcher has curiosity about a specific issue. My experiences in Afghanistan with the United States Army helped shape my adult life, and for that reason I want to learn more. This is opposed to an instrumental case study where a researcher studies a case specifically to learn about a different system. 
89
The primary role internal to the research of this work is constructivist. This role "does not require the researcher to avoid delivering generalizations. But a constructivist view encourages providing readers with good raw material for their own generalizing." 
91
The researcher will strengthen the findings of a qualitative case study analysis with oral history. Interviews with knowledgeable civilian and military leaders will 
89
The more statistics you assemble the greater your appetite becomes for even more statistics. Somehow-somehow you feel that, in the end, you can solve the whole damn problem if you just had enough statistics.
-General Creighton W. Abrams, quoted in Ben Connable, Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency GEN Abrams' quote highlights a challenge in attempting to report progress in Vietnam that carried over to current trends in Afghanistan and Iraq; senior leaders make decisions informed by "inaccurate, decontextualized, and aggregated numbers or thousands of pages of lengthy narrative." 92 Assessment in counterinsurgency is inherently difficult and made even more challenging given that conditions in a theater of operations change over time. The goal of this research is to explore the state of assessment in Afghanistan during the surge period from January 2010 to July 2011. The primary research question asks how did senior military leaders assess progress in Afghanistan during the troop surge of 2010-2011 and how did the assessment process improve over time?
This research is important to the professional force for two reasons. First, our military continues to fight violent extremists in Afghanistan while simultaneously working to build a more capable, self-sufficient Afghan security force. Despite seventeen years of war, the United States military only began a process of deliberate and wideranging assessment in 2008. 
93
92
93
The goal of this research is to assist educating the professional force and anyone interested in the assessment processes during this specific snapshot of the American military experience, inform future leaders, and minimize the repetition of any failures. It is not intended to make recommendations for current assessment in Afghanistan or any other contemporary campaign, nor will it advance recommendations for future policy, strategy, or doctrine. Nor is it the aim of this project to hold individuals or agencies accountable for real or perceived shortcomings in the war effort. On the contrary, the hope is that readers better appreciate the complexity and difficulty of waging effective counterinsurgency in Afghanistan and the astounding responsibility of those selected to managed it.
In the process of examining this topic, the research question changed slightly from "Did military and political leaders establish clear measures of effectiveness with a coherent, centralized system to collect, track and analyze data during the troop surge of 2010-2011?" to "How did senior military leaders assess progress in Afghanistan during the troop surge of 2010-2011 and how did the assessment process improve over time?"
The content and goal of the project was unchanged, nor was it negatively impacted by refining the research question. The original question was framed in a way that required a simplistic "yes or no" response and ultimately appeared convoluted and lengthy. The research, oral history interviews, and conclusions were not affected.
There are several secondary research questions that will be answered in the process of researching the primary. To understand the assessment process in 2010 and 2011 we first have to know the state of the insurgency and associated assessment process leading up to that point. The secondary questions that will help answer the research question are:
1. What were the conditions of the counterinsurgency in Afghanistan prior to President Obama's decision to deploy 50,000 (21,000 agreed to initially with 30,000 surge forces) additional forces to the country? 2. Prior to the increase in troop presence did the United States employ centralized measures of effectiveness to gauge efforts and successes? 3. Were measures of performance nested to clearly demonstrate success or failure of measures of effectiveness? 4. What success was achieved through the new strategy, and was it built upon or squandered with future policy changes?
This chapter is organized into three sections. The first, "Assessment and Counterinsurgency According to Doctrine," establishes a baseline understanding of several key U.S. doctrinal references. These references are the starting point used by staff officers and commanders as campaigns are built, but can be augmented by outside expertise, commander's judgement, and innovation. The second section is "Afghanistan Assessment Prior to the Surge." This increases awareness of the ISAF assessment process as it existed leading up to arrival of the first surge brigades in early 2010. The early process changed often and consisted of almost purely quantitative data. 
94
96
The assessment process contains three subordinate events: monitoring, evaluating, and recommending or directing action. 
98
99
As the staff builds common understanding using staff reports, reconnaissance assets, and other means, it begins to conduct relevant analysis. The act of analyzing relevant data using pre-determined criteria is called evaluation. In evaluation, it is important to "judge progress toward desired conditions" and create linkages to "why the current degree of progress exists." 
100
103
104
101 HQDA, ADRP 1-02, 1-61.
102 Ibid.
103 HQDA, FM 5-0, 6-3. 
104 Ibid.,
105
The challenge of establishing an effective assessment process generally increases in counterinsurgency operations because of many internal and external factors. The staff and commander attempt to monitor and analyze a host of metrics including intricate tribal or ethnic relationships, support or opinion of the population, partnered security force capability, governance and economic conditions, backing of coalition partners, rule of law, education, essential services, enemy activity, freedom of maneuver, safe havens, and external support. Because of these factors, doctrine recommends incorporating qualitative and quantitative data into assessment process but offers little specifics to planners other than integrating subjective assessments. 
106
106
integration into the common operational picture. 
107
108
109
108
109
110
A critical issue with assessments in counterinsurgency arises from the political nature of the campaign, and decentralized nature of the execution. Because doctrine identifies that "at its core, a counterinsurgency environment is a political problem," higher headquarters (ISAF in this case study) must have an incredibly accurate picture of the nation-wide effort. 111 However, due to the complexity inherent to counterinsurgency, doctrine also stresses the importance of mission command as it "is ideally suited to the mosaic nature of COIN operations." 112 Mission command is important to successful COIN operations in order to "push as many capabilities as possible down" to lower echelons and allow a force to "adapt and react at least as quickly as the insurgents." 
113
110 HQDA, FM 3-24, (2014), 12-2. 111
112 HQDA, FM 3-24, (2006)
113
Qaeda and prevent their return to Afghanistan." 119 It was submitted at a time when final debates regarding troop surge numbers were occurring amongst senior political and military leaders as detailed in earlier chapters. It also informed Secretary Gates and other senior leaders on the state of the ISAF effort and provided recommendations for improvement.
GEN McChrystal made his position known that Afghanistan must be 'properly resourced' but expressed the view that "resources are not the crux. To succeed, ISAF requires a new approach-with a significant magnitude of change-in addition to a proper level of resourcing. ISAF must restore confidence in the near-term through reassured commitment, intellectual energy, and visible progress." 120 GEN McChrystal's summary offered a foreboding message. It warned that "[T]he stakes in Afghanistan are high . . . [T]he situation in Afghanistan is serious . . . [S]uccess is achievable, but it will not be attained simply by trying harder or 'doubling down' on the previous strategy." 
121
122
The challenge of fixing the assessment process remained a high priority. GEN 
119
120
121
122
McChrystal recognized that to employ newly authorized resources appropriately and adjust course effectively, ISAF must develop effective assessment architectures . . . to measure the effects of the strategy, assess progress toward key objectives, and make necessary adjustments. ISAF must identify and refine appropriate indicators to assess progress, clarifying the difference between operational measures of effectiveness critical to practitioners on the ground and strategic measures more appropriate to national capitals. Because the mission depends on GIRoA [Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan], ISAF must also develop clear metrics to assess progress in governance. 
123
124
of ANSF to include the police. 
125
126
123
124
125
126
Center (IJCIDC) was created in early 2009 specifically to assist the IJC commander and headquarters. The IJCIDC served as the for IJC and focused almost entirely on quantitative data collection. 
127
128
130
131
128
129 Connable,
155. 130
131
132
133
After reviewing the quality of the assessments, GEN McChrystal determined that the ISAF plan lacked objectives, decisive points, decisive conditions, and indicators and relied almost entirely on quantitative data. 
134
It remained to be seen if the surge would benefit from a reformed campaign plan but preparing to transition districts and provinces to Afghan control required a new model.
Current procedures were overly dependent on quantitative data, lacking the credibility that GEN McChrystal sought. In late 2009, in an attempt to create a more complete assessment, ISAF initiated the DAM. The DAM would not last through 2010. 
135
1
136
132
133 Van Popple interview. 
134
135
137
138
Using figure 2, Zharay District Assessment Model, the reader need only look at the bulletized comments under each line of effort to realize that causal relationships are absent, greatly reducing the utility to a strategic commander. 
138
139
139 Connable,
156.
3
140
141
142
143
140
141
142
143
144 Connable,
204.
145
The assessment process in Afghanistan prior to the surge was not comprehensive enough to inform senior military commanders. The process was immature, overly reliant on quantitative data, and excessively top-down in nature. As mentioned, several important changes were instituted prior to the arrival of 33,000 additional U.S. troops that would lay the groundwork for improved assessment. The developments included the creation of the IJC and AAG, and focused commander's guidance to improve transparency and credibility.
The ISAF assessment process in place during the surge in Afghanistan was not mature or comprehensive enough to adequately depict conditions on the ground or inform the commander. Identifying shortcomings in the overall process led to gradual improvements over time, however "as of September 2010, it was unclear to a group of 150 experts, including many NATO and ISAF officials, exactly how many or even what types of assessment existed." 
146
Information should be available to subordinate echelons at the tactical level and other interested parties, such as the domestic population, media, and political leaders.
Transparency is required up and down the chain of command to prevent far reaching consequences. Unfortunately, reporting elements across Afghanistan felt inclined to produce multiple products to depict what some referred to as a "parade of progress" in their area of operations. 
149
To improve transparency to the outside world, GEN Petraeus opened ISAF and the AAG to reporters during his tenure as COMISAF. Toward the end of his assignment with the AAG, COL Van Popple hosted international reporters daily who "believed ISAF was cooking the books." 150 As the media was allowed to see the inner workings of the AAG and experience the complexities of the mission, they became increasingly more supportive, and less openly hostile. Despite the best efforts of leaders and staffs at all levels, there was "an institutional drive to produce 'good-news stories.'" 151 Quite often, there may not be good news stories to report, and higher headquarters must accept that. In general, negative trends represent a turn from achieving a desired end state. When negative trends occur, it is important for a staff to use intellectual rigor and unbiased analysis to determine potential causes of the trend for the commander.
GEN McChrystal lost a battle to lessen the classification of ISAF briefings to improve transparency with ANSF partners, media, and others. 152 Subordinate commands at the tactical level would be forced to increase partnering operations while providing minimal intelligence and assessment feedback to ANSF leaders. There was, however, a requirement for some information to remain classified during the surge to protect targeting tactics, techniques, and procedures, intelligence capabilities, and specifics of the campaign plan. Jones, a former senior advisor to President Obama for Afghanistan and Pakistan and to the Commander, Combined Forces Special Operations Component Command-Afghanistan, highlighted the importance of transparency in assessments for use by senior political leaders. From his perspective as an advisor to political and military leadership he noted the importance to balance what information is published "but [he]   can understand why information is classified" in the cases of protecting American forces and specialized capabilities. 
153
154
152
153
154
155
157
158
159
155
Woodward, Obama's Wars (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010), 175. 156 Ibid., 178. 157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
160 Connable,
129. 161 Ibid.,
150. 162 Ibid.,
14. 163 Ibid.,
204. 164
subordinate units lose faith in the process, receive little back in return, and "consumers have no reason to trust the reporter." 
165
4
Campaign objectives were identified, each with a distinct line of operation. Intermediate objectives were nested within each distinct line of operation and served as indicators of positive or negative change over time. 
166
The standards used for measuring progress were "behind," "on track temporary," "on track enduring," and "goal achieved." The paradigm also utilized highly subjective colorcoded metrics, known as thermographs, that served little purpose other than a quick visual aid. 
167
168
165
166 Schroden et al.,
7. 167
168
The causal relationship targets factors that help or hinder reaching a desired outcome, and if progress is not adequate, to adjust resources or operations accordingly.
One example that highlights the challenge of determining causal relationship is the decline in improvised explosive devices (IEDs) on a given route. Once it is determined through patrols, SIGACT reporting, human intelligence and other means that the number of IEDs declined over a period, there are many possibilities for why the decline occurred. The change could have happened due to time of year (colder weather naturally causes decline), movement of an IED cell to a safer district, lack of IED components, loss of key IED manufacturer, etc. The assessment process during this period focused primarily on the raw data depicting a drop in IED activity. A "green" color would be assigned to the indicator on the chart, with little emphasis on the cause.
Overreliance on simplified color-codes highlighted the need for narrative reports along command channels to pinpoint why a system changed. Based on Jones' observation and frustration, it appears that the assessment paradigm remained ineffective for senior decision-makers and tactical-level leaders. COL Van Poppel echoed that assessment, noting that in late 2010, the AAG should have been focused on the effects on systems, not purely the numbers of events or indicators. 169 169 Van Poppel interview. When GEN Allen assumed command of the ISAF in July 2011, he was the third leader to serve in that capacity during the surge in Afghanistan. Within two months of taking command, he initiated the second major overhaul of assessments during the surge period. He ordered the AAG to review the current process, and develop a new, more effective one. 
170
172
173
COL Gallahue also highlighted that at the battalion-level, staffs and commanders were able to achieve relatively good situational understanding of the area of operations through hundreds of platoon and company patrols, ANSF partnering activities and battlefield circulation. 
174
175
171 Schroden et al.,
6. 172
173 COL Kimo Gallahue, interview with author, 5 April 2018. commanders from clearly understanding and visualizing their areas of operation. 
176
177
178
179
180
176
177 Downes-Martin, 118. 
178
179 Van Poppel interview. 
180
COIN as recommended in FMs 3-24 and 5-0, but the effort was disjointed and disunified across the theater. Frequent changes in leadership were a challenge to staffs, but nonetheless, over time the assessment paradigm improved in clarity, increasing human discourse and judgement, and the ability to make timely decisions. 
181
182
183
182 Schroden et al., 7.   183 Adam Shilling, A Quick Reference Guide to the New Paradigm of Operation Assessment (Fort Belvoir, VA: Center for Army Analysis, May 2016), 4. findings. 
184
185
187
185
186 Downes-Martin, 103. 
187
189
190
191
Kabul. 192
Regarding the overwhelming level of requirements from higher headquarters, Downes-Martin discussed the self-inflicted wound of overwhelming the system with too 188 MG Brian Mennes, telephone interview with author, 5 April 2018.
189 Van Poppel interview. 
190
191
192
193
194
195
196 193 Shilling,
1. 194
195
196
197
1
198
6
6
199
Two other components made this paradigm a better product. The empty fields to the left of the slide depicted the overall assessment of the domains in the area of operations. To the right, the empty field allowed commanders to write a more detailed narrative that supported the assessed standard level. Unlike McChrystal and Petraeus' models, this paradigm more effectively depicts relationships among data sets. The radar graph method allows for successive reports to be overlaid, depicting any changes in trends. 
200
201
The resulting assessment paradigm for RC's to consolidate and submit to ISAF can be seen in figure 
7
Figure occurred when GEN Kelly replaced GEN Petraeus. Under GEN Kelly, the AAG worked to create a system that would continually provide holistic and comprehensive assessments to senior commanders. According to Dr. Jonathan Schroden, the assessment paradigm that was established under GEN Kelly "should serve as a seminal example of how to assess progress and inform decision-making in a counterinsurgency." 
206
207
Platoons and companies continued to monitor and collect vast amounts of data to feed analysts at the operational and strategic-levels with little in return. Based on interviews, personal experience, and research, staffs and maneuver units at the tactical-level rarely received feedback from completed assessments. Upon reflecting on the AAG's performance, COL Van Popple identified that "there should be a responsibility of the analyst at the highest level to provide reports back down to the user level," however the "folks at the RC's were criminally overtasked." 
208
209
Opportunities for future study in the field of assessments are many based on the changing nature of assessment paradigms in the complex COIN environment. Generally, COIN must include some level of nation building and stability operations, a challenge when balanced with effects against the insurgent. Former U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Ronald Neumann astutely noted that "nation building is a dirty word. If you want to control an enemy, you need an army. To have an army, you need a government.
To have a government, you must have an economy." 210 Each of those elements requires deliberate assessment, tied to the campaign plan and strategic end states.
There is a gap in assessments in doctrine that has been closing slowly, as is evidenced by the 2006 and 2014 versions of FM 3-24. The 2006 edition included a three page section on assessments, whereas the 2014 publication increased to eight pages. 
209
210
Although a simple page count does not mean the content regarding assessment is suitable, it does highlight increased attention and focus. Military planners and doctrine writers continue to integrate civilian academics in the fields of operations analysis, mathematics, modeling, scientists, and knowledge managers. 
211
Another area that requires further study is the role and effectiveness of Special Operations Forces during this period. Special Operations Forces contributed greatly to the surge in Afghanistan providing extensive pressure on the enemy through precision raids and other means. The impact on the enemy cannot be understated and integration with conventional surge forces supported aggressive targeting of insurgent networks.
However, due to classification restrictions still surrounding much of the Special Operations Forces community's role, it was not possible to integrate their important contribution to the mission. Perhaps future researchers would be able to produce a classified or redacted unclassified document that aptly tells the story of the Special Operations community in Afghanistan from 2010 to 2012.
Commissioned and non-commissioned leaders must also balance education, training, and experience to increase the transparency, credibility, and relevance of assessment processes in the future. Leaders are vital to the operations assessment process and carry significant influence. 
212
Although the focus of this research concludes that the processes used by the AAG and ISAF headquarters improved, it is worth noting that those improvements had little effect on requirements placed on tactical elements. From personal experience, platoons were tasked to conduct combat patrols along Afghanistan's most highly mined route daily to gather data such as the number of billboards along the roadside, cords of fire wood delivered to mosques, and number of wells (almost always empty) in nearby villages.
Many of these patrols often resulted in direct fire contact with the enemy or significant IED blasts. The data that was collected on these patrols was packaged at the company and battalion level, sent to higher headquarters, and rarely followed by any top-down assessment or feedback. 
214
215
216
214
215 Rajiv Chandrasekaran, Little America: The War Within the War for Afghanistan (New York: Random House, 2012), 327.
216 Javid Ahmid, "Dress Like Allies, Kill Like Enemies: An Analysis of 'Insider Attacks' in Afghanistan" (Report, Modern War Institute at West Point, West Point, NY, April 2017), 8.
Congress in December 2012 was full of nuanced conclusions about the effectiveness of the surge. The Department of Defense's overall assessment of the surge stated that: Many security metrics have improved during the last two years. The comparison in violence between 2012 to date and 2010 (the first year with surgelevel forces present for the same nine month period) is stark: EIAs (enemy initiated attacks) have declined by 12 percent, IED explosions have declined by nine percent, ISAF-caused civilian casualties have declined by 28 percent (insurgent-caused civilian casualties increased by 11 percent), Direct Fire (DF) attacks have declined by nine percent, and indirect fire attacks are down by 24 percent. The ANSF has grown by 88,464 personnel and has dramatically increased its capabilities. The areas of the country influenced by the insurgents and the ability of the insurgency to attack the population have been significantly diminished. Although challenges remain and progress in Afghanistan has been uneven in many areas, the security gains resulting from the surge are clear." 
221
222
As Nagl noted, "one of the advantages fleas enjoy in their attacks on much larger creatures is their autonomy."
223
18  
18  
71  
71  
Source: Jonathan Schroden, Rebecca Thomasson, Randy Foster, Mark Lukens, and Richard Bell, "A New Paradigm for Assessment in Counterinsurgency," Military Operations Research 18, no. 3 (2013): 11.
5. ISAF Campaign Assessment Template Source: Jonathan Schroden, Rebecca Thomasson, Randy Foster, Mark Lukens, and Richard Bell, "A New Paradigm for Assessment in Counterinsurgency," Military Operations Research 18, no. 3 (2013): 12.
5. ISAF Campaign Assessment Template Source: Jonathan Schroden, Rebecca Thomasson, Randy Foster, Mark Lukens, and Richard Bell, "A New Paradigm for Assessment in Counterinsurgency," Military Operations Research 18, no. 3 (2013): 12.
James Gannon, Obama's War: Avoiding a Quagmire in Afghanistan (Washington, DC: Potomac Books,
2011), 144.2 Ibid., 143.
Ben Connable, Embracing the Fog of War: Assessment and Metrics in Counterinsurgency (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2012), 153.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, October 2017), ix.
Seth G. Jones, Counterinsurgency in Afghanistan (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2008), 38.
Vanda Felbab-Brown, Aspiration and Ambivalence: Strategies and Realities of Counterinsurgency and State Building in Afghanistan (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2013), 40.
Ambassador Ronald Neumann, telephone interview with author, 14 February 2018.
Kevin Marsh, "Obama's Surge: A Bureaucratic Politics Analysis of the Decision to Order a Troop Surge in Afghanistan," Foreign Policy Analysis 10, no. 3 (July 2014): 282.
Ibid., 283.   
Lewis G. Irwin, Disjointed Ways, Disunified Means: Learning From America's Struggle to Build an Afghan Nation (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2012), 8.
Editors of Encyclopedia Britannica, "Durand Line," Encyclopedia Britannica, accessed 11 November 2017, https://www.britannica.com/event/Durand-Line.
 191.   
Romano, Calfano, and Phelps, 401.    
 196.   
Gian Gentile, Wrong Turn: America's Deadly Embrace of Counterinsurgency (New York: The New Press, 2013), 23.
Robert E. Stake, The Art of Case Study Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1995), 2.
Ibid., 200.   
Dr. Seth G. Jones, interview with author, 5 April 2018.   
LTG James Terry, Operational Leadership Experiences Project, Interviewed 12 June 2013 by Anthony Carlson, Combat Studies Institute, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 5-6, accessed 3 April 2018, http://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/singleitem/collection/ p4013coll13/id/3150/rec/1.
Connable, 156.  [The 150 experts mentioned either worked alongside Dr. Connable in assessment workshops or were interviewed by him during operations in Afghanistan in2010.]   
Schroden et al., 8.    
Von Popple interview.
 108.   
Schroden et al., 5.   
MAJ Jason Adler, telephone interview with author, 2 May 2018.
Schroden et al., 10.   
Schroden et al., 10.    
Ibid., 12.    
Ibid., 11.    
Ibid., 13.   
McChrystal,[2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13] 
Schroden, 40.    
HQDA,[3][4] 
Van Popple interview.   
Bexfield and Staniec, slide 24.    
 121.   
McChrystal, 
US Department of Defense (DOD), Report on Progress Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan, December 2012, 2, accessed 28 April 2018, https://www.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/November_1230_Report_FINAL.pd f.
Ibid., 13.    
John A. Nagl, Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and Vietnam (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2002), 25.
NAME(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
dynamic, and challenging to articulate. In the case of Afghanistan in 2011, assessments of the campaign were ineffective due to flaws in data analysis and unreasonable reporting requirements. GEN McChrystal noted that to effectively implement the new "properly resourced" strategy, ISAF must provide as much operational freedom to tactical-level leaders as possible. He articulated that, due to the challenges in achieving shared understanding in COIN, "ISAF must strike the right balance between control and initiative, but err on the side of initiative." 
147
McChrystal's focus on assessments was transparency and credibility. By achieving those two aspects, the coalition could start to shore up confidence levels among the Afghan population, coalition partners, American political leaders, and the American people.
The standard for transparent assessments is that a product clearly articulates the process and figures presented, and ideally, can be released for public consumption with no limitations. 
148
147
148
What is the study about? You are invited to participate in a research study being conducted for a Masters of Military Art and Science at the United States Army Command and General Staff College. This is a case study regarding a significant period in the recent American military experience. The study is interested in your perspective about the role surge forces played in carrying out revised strategy in Afghanistan in 2010-2011. This research looks to link operational-level ways and means with strategic-level ends. There is no deception in this study.
What this study will NOT do. This study will not make policy, strategy, doctrine, or tactical recommendations for future conflicts. Details from initial interviews and any follow-on research will not be used to degrade or erode credibility of past political or military leaders. Your experiences and thoughts will be used in an effort to put a personal perspective to military doctrine as it applies to the situation in Afghanistan during the proscribed time period.
What will be asked of me? You will be asked open ended questions concerning your role in Afghan strategy or operations leading up to, during, or immediately following the surge. It is estimated that the interview will take approximately 30 to 60 minutes.
Who is involved? MAJ Christopher Wallgren is the researcher and author of this study. The academic committee that may be present during interviews or involved in synthesis of the content are: Mr. Ronald Staver (Committee Chair), Mr. David Loch (Advisor/Reader), and Dr. Scott Stephenson (Ph.D., Advisor/Reader). Contact information for all members is listed below.
This study is UNCLASSIFIED. All questions and discussion must be UNCLASSIFIED in nature. If either party feels that the questions or responses drift toward a CLASSIFIED designation, either party can stop or redirect the conversation.
There are no known risks to participating in this study. You may elect to stop the interview at any time. You may also choose not to answer a specific question for any reason, and you may choose to end participation in the study at any time after the interview was conducted.
There are no incentives for participation. It is possible that the research may be published, used by CGSC, or read by some across the United States Army, especially those with personal experience in Afghanistan.
The data collected in this study may be attributed to you. The only personal information that may be used (unless you decline) is your name and duty position as it applied to the time period covered. There is an option below to select anonymity.
Can I stop participating in the study? Yes. You may end your participation at any point during or after the interview without penalty.
If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, any complaints about your participation in the research study, or any problems that occurred in the study, please contact the researchers identified in the consent form. You may also contact the Command and General Staff College Human Protections Advisor, Ms. Bobbie Murray, at (913) 684-7311 at any point.
The researcher is always available to answer questions regarding this study and its final product. If questions, issues, or recommendations arise at any point prior to, or after the interview please do not hesitate to communicate those to MAJ Christopher Wallgren. Please direct your questions or comments to: christopher.j.wallgren.mil@mail.mil, ( 
978