# ID: 1468ec62b5b8495386f4a110da8eae98
# Title: Naval War College Review, Winter 1999
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1999.0
# Fulltext:
14.
The (rough) details of some aspects of the various bids in October 1997 were: Britain/ Sweden-JAS39 Gripen jet fighter/trainer (twelve two-seater and thirty-six single-seater), four F-3000 corvettes (with Lynx helicopters), Challenger-2 main battle tanks (MBTs), and four Upholder submarines; France-four La Fayette or Surcouf corvettes, two secondhand Daphne submarines (to supplement the SAN's current three in service) or four joint Spanish Skorpene submarines, Cougar maritime patrol helicopters, Eurocopter EC135 light utility helicopters, LeClerc MBTs, and Mirage 2000 or Mirage Fl jets; Germany-four Meko 200 corvettes and four 206/9/212 submarines and four 509A corvettes, plus twenty CASA military aircraft; Canada-^sixty light utility Bell 425.helicopters, and Halifax or Vigilant-chss frigates/patrol vessels; Italy-MB339CD jet trainers, four corvettes, and Agusta helicopters; and Russia-150 T80U MBTs, K-28/K-27 helicopters, four Kilo-class submarines, Gepard frigates, and 150 MiG-29 fighters.
The following entries made the respective short lists: Corvettes were shortlisted from Germany (Meko 200SA), France (La Fayette), Spain (Project 590B), and Britain (F3000) (Italy's offer was rejected as unsuitable for South African waters).
Fighters from Germany (AT2000 RSA), France (Mirage), and Sweden/Britain (Gripen) were shortlisted, though neither Britain's Hawk nor the Russian MiG-29 made the cut. (
Russia's countertrade offer apparently did not meet the minimum requirements, and there were also concerns about long-term logistics reliability.)
Canada's Bell, Italy's Agusta, and the French-German Eurocopter were still in the race to provide the light helicopter replacement for the Air Force's Alouettes.
The French LeClerc and the British Challenger tanks were shortlisted.
Italy (MB339FD), Russia/Italy (Yak-AEN 130), and the Czech Republic (Aero Vodchody L159B) were all asked to submit offers for the LIFT.
See Business Day Johannesburg, South Africa), 7 January 1998, and http://www.sacs.org.3a/cgi-bin/vdkw_cgi/x9f2d59f3-275/search/5078180/ 42.
U.S. companies were not invited to tender because of the criminal settlement going on at that time between Denel and the US.
government.
In February 1997, Armscor was convicted in the United States of violating U.S. arms export controls during the apartheid era.
In return for Armscor agreeing to subject itself to the jurisdiction of U.S. courts and paying substantial fines, a settlement was engineered.