# ID: 1576dd46562c4333899a134b40d46ff8
# Title: Improving Strategic Competence: Lessons from 13 Years of War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this report is to contribute to the ongoing efforts to distill lessons from the U.S. experience in 13 years of war (2001-2014), apply the lessons to the future operating environment, and identify critical requirements for land forces to operate successfully in conjunction with joint, interagency, and multinational partners to address hybrid and irregular threats. This study seeks to address a particular gap in the current debate on the future of national security strategy and the role of landpower caused by an inadequate examination of the national level of strategy made by the interagency level of government. The gap exists because there has been no systematic effort to collect and analyze insights from those who have been actively engaged in making policy and strategy from 2001 to 2014. A RAND Arroyo Center workshop provided a mechanism for eliciting insights from policymakers and academic experts involved in the formation of national-level strategy and its implementation over the past 13 years. This study analyzes and develops those insights in the context of the overall debate on future national security strategy. The purpose of this document is to assist military and civilian leaders in assessing capabilities needed in the U.S.
The United States and many of its closest allies have been engaged in a long period of continuous military operations with mixed success in confronting a range of complex and dynamic threats. The U.S. military recognizes that a great deal of intellectual work remains to be done to learn from these experiences. This study seeks to contribute to the ongoing debate about the lessons from the past 13 years of war and the requirements for addressing future conflicts. It addresses a particular gap in the current debate on the future of national security strategy and the role of landpower caused by an inadequate examination of this recent experience in the national-level of strategy made by the interagency level of government. The gap exists because wartime pressures have not afforded time for reflection by many of those who have been actively engaged in making policy and strategy for the past 13 years and because there has been no systematic effort to collect and analyze such insights. The lessons collected and analyzed here represent an initial contribution to the ongoing collective endeavor to learn from these recent conflicts.
The U.S. military leadership has conducted its own examinations and recognized the need for continued study of the recent past. At the direction of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in June 2012 the Joint and Coalition Operational Analysis (JCOA) division of the Joint Staff J-7 produced an initial study examining recent wartime experience. That study, Decade of War, Vol. 1: Enduring Lessons from the Past Decade of Operations, identified 11 broad themes, based on 46 previous JCOA studies analyzing U.S. operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, To place the past 13 years of war in historical context, Chapter Two examines the U.S. experience in warfare from World War II to the present and identifies broad trends and inflection points in how U.S. forces have fought. Two themes emerge from this survey. First, land warfare has evolved away from conventional combat against state actors and their standing forces to an increasing incidence of irregular warfare fought by joint forces against nonstate actors. This has led to an increasing reliance on SOF, which have grown and participated in a wider range of military operations than at any time in their history. Second, while the Army often learns tactical and operational lessons from the wars it fights, it often struggles to incorporate these wars' broader strategic lessons that require it to think outside of the box and beyond its immediate past experiences. Thus, the Army and the joint force as a whole have adopted new technologies that have improved the mobility, survivability, and situational awareness of forces; the ability to operate at night; and the lethality and precision of weaponry. Yet the joint force and the U.S. government as a whole have displayed an ongoing ambivalence about and lack of proficiency in the noncombat and unconventional aspects of war and conflict against nonstate actors, despite their increasing frequency. Much of the past 13 years were devoted to recovering, refining, and partially institutionalizing those capabilities. The challenge now is to preserve and refine needed capabilities and develop innovative new ways of operating based on recent experience.
Chapter Three formulates seven lessons from the past 13 years of war based on research, interviews, the workshop, and the Delphi exercise. Many of these topics predate the past 13 years and have been the subject of extensive debate, scholarship, and attempted policy remedies. The seven lessons identified in this study were determined to be relevant to both the recent past and the future. They are as follows:
Lesson 1. A deficit in the understanding of strategy Lesson 2. Deficits in the process for formulating strategy Lesson 3. A failure to incorporate the essential political element of war into strategy
xii Improving Strategic Competence: Lessons from 13 Years of War Lesson 4. The inability of technology to substitute for the sociocultural and historical knowledge needed to inform understanding of the conflict, formulation of strategy, and timely assessment Lesson 5. A failure to plan, prepare, and conduct stability operations and the transition to civilian control, as well as belated development of counterinsurgency capabilities Lesson 6. Insufficient emphasis on shaping, influence, and noncombat approaches to addressing conflict Lesson 7. Inadequate civilian capacity and inadequate mechanisms for coordinated implementation among joint, interagency, and multinational partners.
The lessons are described in greater detail below, with additional argument and supporting evidence provided in Chapter Three.
Lesson 1: The making of national security strategy has suffered from a lack of understanding and application of strategic art. The U.S. government has experienced a persistent deficit in understanding and applying strategic art. The blurry line between policy and strategy requires both civilians and the military to engage in a dynamic, iterative dialogue to make successful strategy, but that often failed to occur. The decision to go to war in Iraq, the decisions to send a surge of troops to Iraq and then Afghanistan to bolster faltering war efforts, and the approach taken toward countering terrorism in the past two administrations all illustrate strategy deficits. In the first case, the civilian policymakers did not seek and factor in the needed information to examine their assumptions and prepare for likely consequences. In the second case, the civilian policymakers found the military's recommendations inadequate and relied on outside advice in making the decision to surge in Iraq. In the case of the Afghan surge, that decision was reached after multiple reviews stretching over two years, but it did not resolve the divergence in approach favored by the military (full-spectrum counterinsurgency) and senior civilians in the White House who advocated a narrower counterterrorism agenda aimed at al Qaeda. The fourth major decision, ratified and pursued by both administrations, was to adopt a global counterterrorism strategy that relied primarily on strikes against terrorists who were actively plotting to strike the United States. During the past 13 years, the strategies typically failed to envision a war-ending approach and did not achieve declared objectives in a definitive or lasting manner. The ends, ways, and means did not align, whether because the policy objectives were too ambitious, the ways of achieving them ineffective, or the means applied inadequate.
Lesson 2: An integrated civilian-military process is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition of effective national security strategy. The current process does not routinely produce effective strategy, in part because the U.S. military is taught to expect a linear approach in which the policymakers provide the objectives and the military develops the options for achieving them. The military typically provides a range of operations but prefers one that meets the objectives fully with the least risk. That model falls short in two respects. Civilian policymakers require an active dialogue with the military and other sources of information to inform the diagnosis of the situation, as well as to develop realistic policy objectives. That iterative process must continue through the development of options, since the president weighs a wide variety of factors in considering the optimal course of action. Formulating strategy is further inhibited because there is no established integrated civilian-military process that would rigorously identify assumptions, risks, possible outcomes, and second-order effects through soliciting diverse inputs, red-teaming, and table-top exercises. The lack of such a process inhibited timely adaptation of strategy in response to the evolution of understanding and events.
Lesson 3: Because military operations take place in the political environment of the state in which the intervention takes place, military campaigns must be based on a political strategy. Lesson Three examines the failure to think in terms of the political aspects of a conflict and the desired outcomes that are fundamentally political in nature. This deficit results in part from a tendency to focus on tactical issues, troop levels, and timelines, rather than the strategic factors that will determine a successful outcome. The U.S. military has also been reluctant to grapple with the political aspect of war, in the belief that it is either not part of war or entirely up to the civilians to address. Yet an intervention is unlikely to produce lasting results without a strategy that addresses the political factors driving the conflict and provides for enduring postwar xiv Improving Strategic Competence: Lessons from 13 Years of War stability. Implementing that strategy is likely to involve a combination of military and political means by the United States and local partners acting in concert-such as elections, negotiations, and power-sharing. This fundamental issue has been obscured by the focus on governing capacity, which is a separate, long-term, institutional issue that is often secondary to resolving conflict.
Lesson 4: Because of the inherently human and uncertain nature of war, technology cannot substitute for sociocultural, political, and historical knowledge and understanding. Lesson Four finds a deficit of both sociocultural and historical knowledge that is critically needed for understanding a conflict, formation of strategy, and the assessment of its implementation. In part, this is due to a continuing overreliance on technology and a belief that wars can be fought and won by reliance on it alone. Without such knowledge and understanding, necessarily developed over time, the required adaptations in the strategy cannot be made. While the need for assessment has been acknowledged, the approach to assessments may rely too heavily on systems analysis and on creating a process that charts the execution of a strategy (important but not sufficient) rather than its effect on the conflict.
Lesson 5: Interventions should not be conducted without a plan to conduct stability operations, capacity-building, transition, and, if necessary, counterinsurgency. Lesson Five finds that there was repeated failure to plan, prepare, and generate adequate capability and capacity for stabilization and reconstruction operations, capacity-building, and transitions to civilian authority (known respectively as Phase IV and Phase V operations in military doctrine) and conduct those operations in a sufficient and timely manner following interventions (Phase III major combat operations). Doing so in conjunction with a political strategy might have lessened or obviated the need for large-scale counterinsurgency operations. Counterinsurgency capabilities were developed but somewhat belatedly. Transitions to civilian authority were also hobbled by a failure to plan and implement the needed measures with the needed authorities in a timely fashion.
Lesson 6: Shaping, influence, and unconventional operations may be cost-effective ways of addressing conflict that obviate the need for larger, costlier interventions. Lesson Six finds that there is a chronic lack of emphasis on shaping, influence, and unconventional approaches that might in some cases avoid the need for Phase III major combat operations. The lack of emphasis can be traced to (1) a reluctance to engage in a proactive manner while a conflict is still relatively small or unthreatening, (2) an insufficient understanding of the full range of possible activities, and (3) an underdeveloped model for planning and conducting these operations as a campaign that achieves results without major combat. SOF have demonstrated the ability to achieve effects through a sustained campaign approach, in conjunction with other joint, interagency, and multinational partners, as an alternative to major combat operations. Yet the paradigm is not fully established, as "Phase 0" shaping, influence, capacity-building, and unconventional activities are often seen as a prelude to and preparation for major combat operations rather than a potential alternative to them.
Lesson 7: The joint force requires nonmilitary and multinational partners, as well as structures for coordinated implementation among agencies, allies, and international organizations. Lesson Seven finds that despite the issuance of directives to establish the necessary capability, there is a chronic lack of civilian capacity, as well as obstacles to civilians operating in hostile environments. Despite some successes in coordinated implementation among joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational partners, the mechanisms for achieving the desired synergy are still inadequate, including in circumstances where a civilian-led effort is most appropriate.
Chapter Four examines characterizations of the future operating environment to determine whether and how the lessons of the recent past may retain their relevance. It concludes with recommendations for development of a theory of success and further adaptation and preservation of capabilities.
The National Intelligence Council's (NIC's) Global Trends 2030: Alternative Futures report finds that irregular and hybrid warfare will remain prominent features of the future threat environment. It states that "most intrastate conflict will be characterized by irregular warfare-terrorism, subversion, sabotage, insurgency, and criminal activities" and that intrastate conflict will also be increasingly irregular, noting that " [d]istinctions between regular and irregular forms of war-xvi Improving Strategic Competence: Lessons from 13 Years of War fare may fade as some state-based militaries adopt irregular tactics." 
2
U.S. national security strategy has begun to grapple with this passage from the recent past to a future that will be resource-constrained yet still rife with many challenges to U.S. interests around the world. Defense strategic guidance has posited a rebalancing and rationalization of the joint force based on a force-sizing construct of fighting and winning one major war while denying victory in a second conflict; this represents a significant departure from the previous construct, which held that the United States needed to be able to fight and win two major wars, even if not concurrently (i.e., "win-hold-win"). The current defense strategic guidance states that the U.S. military will not size the force to conduct large-scale counterinsurgency and stability operations but that it will maintain the expertise and the ability to regenerate the needed capacity. 
3
The rise of irregular threats and constraints on resources pose an acute dilemma for U.S. strategy, increasing the imperative to remedy the deficiencies of the past 13 years. More than ever, the United States requires new approaches that can achieve satisfactory outcomes to multiple, simultaneous conflicts at acceptable cost. It must become more 
3
Chapter Four also examines potential remedies that would apply the lessons identified in Chapter Three to future conflict. To address the strategy deficit and to provide a basis for determining the capabilities needed to address the irregular and hybrid threats of the future, Chapter Four advances the argument that a "theory of success" would provide a compass for strategy, address the full dimensions of war, and provide the basis for developing a wider array of effective approaches to resolve or contain threats. This chapter refers to theoretical and historical antecedents to posit a more robust conception of political warfare and political strategy as integral to U.S. national security policy and strategy. This view connects war and statecraft on the same spectrum and depicts the exercise of power as a marriage of force and diplomacy that wields the various elements of national power in a more seamless manner. The study concludes with seven recommendations for further adaptation and the retention or refinement of numerous capabilities:
• First, it recommends enhancing strategic competence by educating civilian policymakers and revising the version of policy and strategy taught to the U.S. military. It recommends adoption of an integrated civilian-military process that provides the needed expertise and information to diagnose the situation and formulate reasonable objectives, as well as subsequent strategy. Two options based on the Eisenhower National Security Council process are suggested. • Second, the U.S. military may profitably explore deeper organizational transformations to increase its adaptability. Specifically, the military should examine ways to build effective, tailored organizations that are smaller than brigades and equipped with all the needed enablers to respond to a range of contingencies. This may entail significant institutional reform.
• Third, SOF and conventional forces should expand their ability to operate together seamlessly in an environment of irregular and hybrid threats. The recent robust use of SOF suggests the possibility of a new model, or models, for achieving operational or even strategic effect through a campaign approach. This represents a potentially potent new form of landpower that, if applied with strategic patience, can address threats without resort to large-scale military interventions. SOF-led campaigns can provide low-visibility, high-return security solutions in numerous circumstances. SOF have begun to develop the operational level art, planning, and command capabilities to realize this potential, but several additional steps are needed. In particular, new operationallevel command structures can facilitate both SOF-centric and SOF-conventional operations. Habitual SOF-conventional teaming will maintain and deepen the interdependence and familiarity gained in the past decade. Reopening the advisory school at Fort Bragg can be a powerful mechanism for developing common procedures and understanding for operating in small, distributed, blended formations, as well as a ready cadre of trained advisers able to meet the expected demand of a national security strategy that places increased emphasis on partnered operations and building partner capacity. • Fourth, innovative and multifunctional personnel can make a smaller force more effective, but the incentives must be systemic to reward personnel for creativity, risk-taking, and acquisition of multiple specialties. The principle of mission command can be deepened to permit further decentralization and delegation of initiative. • Fifth, joint and service capabilities that create and maintain regional familiarity or expertise, advisory capability, and other special skills for irregular warfare and stability operations should be preserved and refined at the level needed to execute current military plans. These personnel can serve as a training cadre for rapid expansion in the event of a large-scale stability operation or counterinsurgency. The same skills are fungible in Phase 0 shap-ing and influence operations, so the cadre will likely be in high demand. • Sixth, civilian expertise is essential in a broadened conception of war that places due emphasis on the political dimension. The most valuable contribution that civilians can make is often their expertise and insights, rather than hands-on execution at a tactical level. Because civilian capacity is likely to remain limited, the emphasis should be on ensuring that the relevant civilian experts are collocated at the key commands and sufficiently robust country teams and, when necessary, at the tactical level in formations that provide force protection and enable them to perform their duties. • Seventh, multinational partners have proven their value in numerous ways over the past decade, but the U.S. government can improve its preparation of U.S. personnel to serve in coalitions and to effectively employ non-U.S. expertise by identifying in a systematic manner both its own gaps and the potential external resources to meet them.
This study identifies critical lessons from the past 13 years of war and recommends that a deliberate effort be undertaken to remedy the deficits in the "American way of war"; to preserve and improve the ability to tackle the strategic, political, and human dimensions of war; and to explore innovative new combinations of SOF and conventional forces to anticipate and meet the security challenges of the future more successfully. While the sponsor of this project is the U.S. Army, and specifically the U.S. Army Special Operations Command, the sponsor agreed that the scope should include the entire joint, interagency, intergov-ernmental, and multinational (JIIM) experience, since both Army and all special operations forces (SOF) operate within that wider context. The study sought to identify the most important overarching issues at the levels of policy and strategy and then determine how they affected implementation on the ground. Those lessons are set in the context of the evolving U.S. experience in warfare and are applied to a future operating environment in which irregular and hybrid warfare are expected to play a major if not predominant role. The report then draws implications from this analysis for the joint force, in particular land forces and SOF, operating within a JIIM environment for these types of conflicts.
Chapter Two surveys the U.S. experience in warfare from World War II to the present to identify key trends and inflection points. Warfare became increasingly joint, and technology increased precision in weaponry, improved situational awareness, and enhanced the force's ability to operate at night. SOF became increasingly capable and experienced substantial growth, with historically high rates of operational tempo during the past 13 years. Precision weaponry and refined techniques enabled forces to minimize collateral damage, but at the same time sensitivity to even these lower rates of civilian casualties increased. Armor retained its relevance in lethal environments, and survivability of men and material increased through an array of doctrinal, tactical, and technological improvements. The U.S. military faced ongoing challenges in conducting noncombat missions, such as stabilization, reconstruction, and capacity-building missions-difficulties that became increasingly apparent after 2001. From this, two broad themes emerged. First, land warfare has evolved away from conventional combat against state actors and their standing forces to an increasing incidence of irregular warfare fought by joint forces against nonstate actors. Second, while the joint force has on the whole adapted quickly at the tactical and operational levels, it has often struggled to incorporate the wars' broader strategic lessons.
Chapter Three identifies seven lessons from the policymaking level of government to the operational level of the battlefield, derived from the experiences of 2001-2014. As the chairman's Decade of War study noted, "operations during the first half of the decade were often marked by numerous missteps and challenges as the U.S. government and military applied a strategy and force suited for a different threat and environment."
2
Chapter Four assesses future conflict trends and argues that further adaptation is required to institutionalize the lessons of the past 13 years and prepare for a future that will include frequent irregular and hybrid warfare, according to the National Intelligence Council's Global Trends 2030 projection. The United States faces stark choices about where to invest increasingly scarce defense dollars; retaining an overmatch in conventional military capability is not only necessary to defend against peer competitors and existential threats, but it also forces state and nonstate adversaries to choose a blend of irregular or asymmetric measures to gain advantage. However, the changing character of war necessitates a deeper examination of the basic U.S. approach to war and national security. The Decade of War study posited that "the Cold War model that had guided foreign policy for the previous 50 years no longer fit the emerging global environment." If that is true, then a revised theory of success adapted to the current circumstances may provide a compass for strategy. This chapter makes the case for such a theory of success and outlines seven areas for improved JIIM capabilities based on that theory and the lessons derived in Chapter Three.
The approach employed in this study consisted primarily of document-based research and semistructured interviews with experts and officials involved in the decisionmaking and implementation of policies and strategies over the past 13 years. In addition, a workshop of policymakers and academic experts in national security, civil-military relations, and strategy was convened to discuss the policy, strategy, and implementation lessons of the past 13 years.
The RAND Arroyo Center workshop of scholars and policymakers was convened on June 19, 2014, to advance the understanding of how the U.S. government may use all instruments of national power more effectively. Selected academic readings were provided to the participants in advance of the event, and participants were asked to come prepared to articulate three policy-or strategic-level lessons from the past 13 years of war based on their research and experience. This preparation was intended to identify a slate of potential lessons and needed reforms of policy, practice, and/or organization for discussion. The workshop was conducted as a structured discussion to elicit the logical reasoning and experiences of these experts and to debate and prioritize critical issues bearing on the formation and implementation of policy and strategy. The workshop was divided into three discussion modules, each with brief opening remarks by a selected expert followed by threeminute rounds for participant comments.
First, participants discussed the policy process, exploring questions such as the following: Was the process for developing U.S. policy options and defining desired end states effective? Did the policy process include the necessary input and iterative dialogue with the military and intelligence community to inform the development and assessment of options? Were historical examples developed and used correctly?
Second, participants discussed strategy formulation. They debated whether policy goals were effectively matched with available resources to develop a coherent and achievable strategic plan; whether the United States possessed adequate understanding of the environment and the type of conflict it was engaged in; when the United States was slow to adapt its initial strategy, why that was the case; how assessment and strategic adaptation might be made more agile; and whether there is a need to mandate an integrated political-military planning process.
Third, participants discussed implementation. They discussed what changes may be required to improve the U.S. government's conduct of transitions and conflict termination (i.e., Phase IV and V operations); whether the U.S. government has developed the necessary capability to conduct stabilization, reconstruction, and advisory missions; the desired/needed role of civilians in these types of complex contingency operations; and whether the U.S. government has a coherent model for building partner capacity.
The study team then conducted a two-round Delphi poll to identify areas of agreement among the participants. The Delphi technique was originally developed by the RAND Corporation in the 1950s to forecast long-range future trends, events, and outcomes for the military. Employing this technique, this project team developed seven lessons based on the workshop discussion and research. The team then conducted a written poll in which the participants rated the lessons according to their perceived importance and the perceived need for reform or improvement on a five-point scale. The poll was conducted in two rounds. In the second round, the refined list of lessons was rated by a large majority of the participants as important or very important.
Finally, as part of the research on needed capabilities for Chapter Four, the research team identified gaps and shortfalls based on the seven lessons derived in Chapter Three. The team then analyzed the military's adaptations made to date in doctrine, organization, and personnel, as well as civilian interagency and multinational adaptation. To complete its gap analysis, the team examined the work of the Joint Staff irregular warfare executive steering committee to determine whether the relevant practices and capabilities recommended in the 2013 Joint Force Assessment for Irregular Warfare are being institutionalized. A number of that assessment's recommendations are still pending implementation and may be canceled because of budget constraints.
The U.S. Experience in Land Warfare, 1939-2014 On February 25, 2011, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates traveled to the United States Military Academy at West Point for his last speech to the cadets as secretary. In his speech, he reflected that the Army, "more than any other part of America's military, is an institution transformed by war," and that with the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan ending, the Army now faced a new but equally daunting task-ensuring that Iraq and Afghanistan's lessons are not simply "'observed' but truly 'learned'incorporated into the service's DNA and institutional memory." Learning, Gates continued, does not come easily. The defense establishment often succumbs to what he termed "next-war-itis"-thinking about the future without a proper understanding of the past and appreciation of the demands of present. Tellingly, Gates laced his remarks with historical references drawn not only from the immediate past, but from the last half-century. At the same time, Gates argued, the Armyand, more broadly, the military as a whole-often learns selectively, focusing on what it wants to learn and not on what it needs to learn. "There has been an overwhelming tendency of our defense bureaucracy to focus on preparing for future high-end conflicts-priorities often based, ironically, on what transpired in the last century-as opposed to the messy fights in Iraq and Afghanistan." 
1
• First, how do the wars of the past 13 years fit into the broader evolution of land warfare? • Second, and more subtly, what lessons did the U.S. military (and, specifically, the Army) learn-and, almost as importantly, not learn-from its wars over the past three-quarters of a century?
This chapter makes two central claims. First, while the Iraq and Afghanistan wars are often portrayed as unique and unprecedented, they actually fit into a broader evolution of land warfare away from conventional combat against state actors to the increasing incidence of irregular warfare fought by joint forces against nonstate actors. 2 Second, as the second half of the twentieth century vividly demonstrates, the Army tends to be adept at learning tactical and operational lessons but less so at learning the strategic lessons. 
3
World War II's influence on the U.S. military, including the Army, cannot be understated. As Hew Strachan argued, "The theoretical force of the Second World War has been with us ever since . . . partly because the conclusion to the war-the dropping of the atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki-carried its own warnings. As a result total war became the foundation stone for strategic theory in 2 Irregular warfare (IW) is defined as "[a] violent struggle among states and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s). IW favors indirect and asymmetric approaches, though it may employ the full range of military and other capabilities in order to erode an adversary's power, influence, and will." Joint Publication 1, Doctrine of the Armed Forces of the United States, JP I-6, 2013.  the second half of the twentieth century." 
4
World War II featured a series of operational breakthroughs in land warfare. In the 1920s and 1930s, the world's better armies drew on World War I's apparent lessons and the ongoing changes in weapons technology to think through how to fight the next war. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
As the war progressed, militaries also learned how to better integrate these massive forces. Joint operations-combining land, sea, and naval power-became very important, much more so than was the case in World War I. 
11
12
As innovative as war was on the tactical and operational levels, the World War II experience also produced a series of intellectual blinders when it came to thinking about the future of warfare. To begin, the war ingrained a conventional bias in the United States military. From the American military's perspective, World War II was overwhelmingly a conventional conflict. Only those few Americans who avoided capture in the 1941-1942 Philippine campaign and joined Filipino guerilla groups to harass the Japanese occupiers and the relatively few Americans in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) gained meaningful experience in guerilla war. Of the roughly eight million serving with the United States Army by the end of the war, fewer than 24,000 served with the OSS. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Ultimately, the period from World War II to the Korean War highlights the ability of the Army to learn a variety of tactical and operational lessons. Over the course of both conflicts, it assimilated new technologies and new tactics to fight conventional wars better. It proved less adept at thinking outside of the box and imagining alternatives to the World War II model of land warfare. Unfortunately for the Army, the World War II model of warfare was quickly becoming outmoded.
While much of the attention remained focused on deterring the Soviets from invading Europe, the United States also faced a new threat in the post-Second World War era-the rise of Communist insurgencies. As the Kennedy administration entered office in 1961, many parts of the Third World were convulsed by the increasingly messy process of decolonization and the "wars of national liberation." 
20
19 Max Hastings, The Korean War, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987, pp. 333-335. 20
On the tactical and operational levels, the Army in Vietnam showed some signs of innovation and embraced new technologies relatively quickly. Ground combat in South Vietnam included the first widespread use of helicopters in warfare. Initially developed during World War II and refined in the 1950s, helicopters were used for troop transport, medical evacuation, and fire support (gunship) in Vietnam. Showing great promise in the middle years of the war, by the end of the conflict (1971-1972 for U.S. forces) the helicopter was increasingly vulnerable because of the introduction of shoulder-fired surfaceto-air missiles and better quality anti-aircraft guns. Approximately 5,000 helicopters were lost during the Vietnam War, roughly half due to enemy action. 
21
22
23
Where the Army struggled to adapt, however, was more on the conceptual level. During the war, the United States faced a twofold threat-a conventional threat from the North Vietnamese Army and an insurgency in the form of the Viet Cong. Although the Army had faced nonstate actors in the post-World War II landscape before (such as with the Hukbalahap Rebellion in the Philippines), none matched the Viet Cong's size and sophistication. 
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
The Soviet Union's sudden collapse between 1989 and 1991 upended the strategic assumptions that had been in place for almost half a century. The United States and its Western allies no longer needed to worry about the Red Army's tanks pouring through the Fulda Gap. Europe seemed-at least for the moment-safe and secure. As a result, during the 1990s, all the NATO militaries were significantly reduced. For land forces in particular, the collapse of the Soviet Union meant a search for a new paradigm of warfare: What sort of threats would the United States face now that the Soviets were gone, and what would the land component's role be in this new unipolar world? The answers to both questions were far from clear; indeed, the Army experimented with three different models for the future of warfare during the 1990s.
Initially, the future of land warfare seemed to be very much in keeping with the past: The first Persian Gulf War (Desert Storm) saw a major ground operation based largely on World War II operational concepts. Following its seizure of Kuwait in August 1990 in an armored assault, Saddam Hussein's army dug into southern Iraq and Kuwait and passively watched the buildup of a massive U.S.-led coalition force in Saudi Arabia. From August 1990 to February 1991, over 530,000 U.S. military personnel (of whom nearly 300,000 were Army) deployed to the region to prepare for a counteroffensive to retake Kuwait. Addition-ally, there were several hundred thousand coalition soldiers, sailors, and airmen. 
35
36
37
38 35
Schuber et al., The Whirlwind War, Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History, 1995, p. 157 36
37
38
39
After Desert Storm, the United States participated in a number of small military operations that did not involve large-scale conventional combat. First called "peacekeeping" missions but later renamed "peace-building," "postconflict reconstruction and stabilization," or "stability operations," the American ground forces deployed to Somalia (1992-1994), Haiti (1994-1995), Bosnia (1995-present), and Kosovo  (1999-present). Of these campaigns, the Army, however reluctantly, gained the most experience with stability operations in the Balkans. Eventually, the Balkans provided an alternative use for land forces in the post-Cold War era.
The Army first deployed to Bosnia-Herzegovina in Operation Joint Endeavor following the 1995 Dayton Accords as part of a NATOled, 36-nation, 60,000-strong international force (IFOR). About 18,000 personnel, primarily from the 1st Armored Division, formed the core of Multinational Division (North), and another 10,000 U.S. personnel served as part of various NATO and U.S. headquarters and support elements. 40 IFOR's primary goals were to establish a sustainable cessation of hostilities, ensure force protection, and estab-lish enduring security and arms control measures. 
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
Throughout the mid-to late 1990s and for some time after the September 11, 2001, attacks, the NCW concept was gaining acceptability, particularly among airpower advocates. Indeed, the Kosovo air war seemed to confirm the idea that wars could be won with minimal ground forces. 
52
Over the 1990s, then, the Army found itself in a period of strategic flux. Without the Red Army, it became increasingly unlikely that the future of land warfare would consist of massive armies locked in large-scale, conventional combat. Indeed, as Desert Storm vividly demonstrated, any foe choosing to engage the United States military in conventional combat was risking disaster. That said, if conventional combat was not the future of land warfare, it was not clear what would take its place. The Army struggled to learn from its role in stability operations in the Balkans and elsewhere, all while it was trying to find its place in the yet-untested concepts of NCW. For the Army, it was just the first steps in learning to think "big." 
51
52
The initial military response to the September 11, 2001, attacks seemed to conform to the NCW's assertions about the future of warfare. The United States deployed only a few hundred CIA and military SOF personnel to Afghanistan in late 2001 and early 2002, supported by Air Force bombers and Navy fighters, to partner with large numbers of Afghan fighters. The "network" seemed to work well: The few U.S. personnel on the ground passed targeting information to aircraft to strike Taliban forces, while Afghan troops, primarily members of the Northern Alliance, comprised most of the ground force. By early 2002, the Taliban regime had been toppled. The victory, however, was not perfect. The absence of U.S. ground forces probably permitted Osama bin Laden and the senior al Qaeda leadership to escape across the border into Pakistan. 
53
The March-April 2003 march to Baghdad was accomplished by an air-ground force that was a fraction of the size of the 1991 Desert Storm operation. 
54
53
54
even easier to defeat. But while the operation was conducted with relative ease, there were some warning signs that the promises of NCW RMA might not be realized. The lower-level tactical ground units (division and below) had poor situational awareness on the advance to Baghdad. Indeed, the tactical intelligence system largely collapsed, leaving the advancing ground forces with little better than World War II levels of awareness of the enemy. The effectiveness of U.S. and British heavy armor compensated for the very poor quality of tactical situational awareness. 
55
NCW's failure in Iraq and Afghanistan spurred a twofold response in the Army. On the technical level, as in Vietnam, the Army turned to technology to provide the answer to the challenges of irregular warfare.
Beginning in 2003, the Army Chief of Staff set up the Army IED Task Force, later the Joint IED Defeat Organization. 
56
Perhaps the more challenging transformation for the Army, however, was on the strategic level-shifting ground forces away from NCW to a counterinsurgency (COIN) paradigm. Similar to the Vietnam experience, the U.S. forces initially deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan had focused on large-scale maneuver warfare or else on the peacekeeping missions of the Balkans, and so were ill-prepared to fight a COIN. Indeed, the Army found itself relearning many of the lessons from Vietnam in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
57
58
57
Nagl, 2002. 58
59
60
61
59
60
62
63
64
The expansion in demand for SOF prompted a variety of tactical innovations, especially in terms of intelligence sharing and targeting, allowing these forces to find, fix, and finish terrorist targets at ever more rapid rates. 
65
This historical overview of the evolution of the American approach to land warfare over the last 75 years reveals three broader trends important for framing a discussion of the lessons learned from the most recent conflicts.
• First, while it is almost hackneyed to say, land warfare is growing increasingly complex. Land warfare today relies on technologically sophisticated systems to collect, share, and process information and carry out precision strikes, capabilities that would have been unimaginable in the World War II period. As importantly, the conduct of land warfare is increasingly structurally complex as well. More and more frequently, the Army operates in conjunction with its sister services, other government agencies, and international and multinational partners. Successfully conducting future land campaigns will require navigating both the technological and structural complexities of this environment. • Second, the Iraq and Afghanistan wars are part of a larger shift under way in land warfare away from conventional wars fought against state actors to unconventional conflicts fought against nonstate actors. World War II and the Korean War were almost exclusively conventional conflicts, at least from the perspective of the U.S. Army, and the U.S. Army did play a major role in the occupation and reconstruction of postwar Europe and Japan. However, the Vietnam War showed that much more emphasis had to be placed on irregular warfare. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, the conventional phase was very short-a matter of a few weeks. The counterinsurgency period, however, lasted years. While Iraqi insurgents, the Afghan Taliban, and al Qaeda have far less military capability than a well-armed nation state, they present a different set of challenges to the U.S. military.
66
Again and again, to its credit, the Army embraced new technologies relatively quickly over the course of the years to address tactical and operational challenges and opportunities-like the helicopter, precision weapons, and more advanced intelligence and surveillance equipment. At the same time, the Army (and most of the joint force) has found it more difficult to make bigger-picture, strategic changes, particularly those that require capabilities other than those needed for conventional warfare.
Together, these three trends-the increasing JIIM nature of land warfare, the trend toward unconventional warfare, and the challenges the Army confronts at learning these big lessons about conflict-help give the remainder of this work its focus. Instead of focusing on the tactical or technological lessons learned from the last dozen years of war, the work focuses on the areas where the Army should seek to improve its institutional learning-on the strategic and policy levels of war. In essence, then, this work seeks to address Secretary Gates' twofold challenge of avoiding both "next-war-itis," as well the Army's tendency to focus strictly on high-end conflicts. In sum, it seeks to help the Army learn big.
The preceding chapter described the evolution of warfare as conducted by the joint force and particularly the land forces. This survey of the joint force experience would be incomplete and would be an insufficient basis for drawing lessons without the addition of two dimensions: the policy and strategy formulation and adaptation process and the interagency experience. The joint force does not operate without guidance from civilian policymakers, and without interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational partners. There has been no governmentwide effort to synthesize lessons from the past 13 years at the policy level or with interagency input. The joint staff's Decade of War study relied on 46 studies conducted by the JCOA and a working group convened by the J7, but, as it acknowledged, that did not include the strategic, policy level, or interagency perspective.
This chapter builds on that work and represents an initial effort to begin to fill that gap. Between 2001 and 2014, the United States deployed upward of 250,000 troops to overthrow two governments, undertake protracted counterinsurgencies, conduct counterterrorism operations worldwide, and establish a global network of partner forces for counterterrorism operations. Examination of these years, one of the longest periods of conflict in U.S. history, should yield useful insights for future conflicts. A full analysis of lessons from the recent conflicts must await comprehensive case studies that describe the full narrative of events, explain their outcomes, and project their relevance for future conflict.
This chapter draws heavily on a workshop of scholars and policymakers convened by RAND to begin the work of assessing the recent period of war, and thereby advance the understanding of how the U.S. government may use all instruments of national power more effectively. There have been few comparable efforts by experienced policymakers and academic experts in recent years, making this workshop uniquely valuable for its insights. In order to identify critical lessons from the past 13 years and potential reforms of policy, practices, and/or organizations to address them, the workshop was designed in three modules of structured conversations on policy, strategy, and implementation.
The workshop participants identified a wide range of problems with, and solutions to, the United States's defense and national security policymaking process. For purposes of clarity, we have grouped their insights into seven lessons. These lessons incorporate the comments and insights of the workshop participants, augmented by relevant external research, RAND analysis, and the findings of the other chapters in this report. These lessons do not, however, necessarily reflect the views of any workshop participant, whose comments were given off the record in a not-for-attribution context. Many of these issues predate 2001 and have been the subject of considerable debate and scholarship. In some cases the debate has been somewhat settled, and in other cases opposing camps continue to press their case. In some cases agreement was reached on the need for a remedy, but the remedy was inadequate or was not implemented consistently or successfully. In yet other cases, the centrality of the issue has not been widely acknowledged. This study identifies the contrasting positions on each issue, examines them in light of the recent record, and makes a case for their continued relevance and need for remedial action.
A major point of discussion among workshop participants was the degree to which the U.S. government struggled with crafting policy and strategy in the past 13 years.
1
Regarding the civil-military relationship, one position is that making strategy should be a linear process, with civilian policymakers setting objectives and the U.S. military leadership crafting the strategy to achieve them. Another camp holds that in practice the line between policy and strategy is actually very blurry, and that civilians and the military need to engage in an iterative and dynamic dialogue to inform policy decisions and subsequent strategy. A third view holds that the approach to strategy will vary greatly according to presidential preference. Given that the U.S. presidential system grants substantial authority for making foreign policy to the chief executive, within the bounds of the Constitution and U.S. law, national security decisions and the manner of making them will be determined in some measure by the sitting U.S. President. The President is ultimately the decisionmaker, the nominator of his team, and the architect of his process for making decisions. Yet the experience of the past 13 years suggests that effective civilian and military interaction is critical to the framing of realistic policy objectives and effective strategy for their achievement. The development of policy objectives, policy options, and strategy requires (1) an accurate characterization of the conflict and the adversary; (2) an understanding of the possible ways of addressing the problem, with the attendant risks and assumptions; and (3) an estimate of means and time required to execute those possible ways. The military is an essential provider of those inputs, as are the intelligence community and others, to assist in the framing of objectives and the assessment of options. The dynamic dialogue requires a degree of trust and interaction in an iterative process. 
2
Numerous scholars have argued that the demands of the contemporary security environment require a broader understanding of strat-egy 
3
4
5
6
The second major issue is the locus of strategy-making, with several participants and a burgeoning literature noting that the White House and senior civilian policymakers have eschewed the making of strategy while becoming embroiled in operational and tactical details. Gates documents the high degree of focus in the White House on such tactical details as dates and troop levels, which often consumed the attention of the most senior officials rather than the critical war-ending issues of political outcomes, negotiations, and elections, where civilian insights are critical. Numerous workshop participants with exposure to the interagency and White House deliberations concurred with this characterization.
The third reason for the strategy failings may not be trivial flaws of process or friction in the bureaucracy but a narrow view of strategy and a narrow view of war. The fundamental problem could be, as Colin Gray has argued, rooted in what he calls "the American way of war" (referencing and seeking to update, no doubt, Russell Weigley's superb history of American military strategy and policy
7
8
9
10
11
9
10 Gray, 2006
, pp. 30-48. 11 Strachan, 2013, pp. 251, 266-267.
• The decision to go to war in Iraq was notable among the major policy decisions of the past 13 years for relying on very little process or structure, as major figures in the Bush administration persuaded the president to invade Iraq without any extended deliberation. 
12
13
forces into Iraq in 2007 to turn around what had become a fullblown sectarian civil war between Shia and Sunni Iraqis, with a virulent strain of al Qaeda finding sanctuary and recruits within a disaffected Sunni population. The two notable features of this decision were that it took over three years of spiraling violence for policymakers to come to grips with the situation and act, and that ultimately its decision was made by going outside the formal civilmilitary process for advice and relying on advice contrary to that given by the senior military leadership at the Pentagon and U.S. Central Command. Regarding the first point, LTG H.R. McMaster, a participant in both wars and a scholar whose doctoral dissertation examined the civil-military frictions and role of the joint chiefs in the Vietnam war, located the root of this slow adaptation of strategy in the still-potent U.S. vision of relying on technology to wins its wars through the network-centric "revolution in military affairs." In his view, "the disconnect between the true nature of these conflicts and pre-war visions of future war helps explain the lack of planning for the aftermath of both invasions as well as why it took so long to adapt to the shifting character of the conflicts after initial military operations quickly removed the Taliban and Ba'athist regimes from power." 
14
15
16
What was the upshot of the reviews? As Gates recounts in his memoirs, he and his under secretary of defense for policy, Michele Flournoy, considered the 2009 review led by Bruce Riedel to have described "what but not how," thus not meeting the principal requirement of a strategy. The lengthy reviews and the eventual decision to send 30,000 more troops to Afghanistan for two years obscured the fact that consensus was never reached on the approach to the war: General McChrystal ascribed to a fully resourced counterinsurgency effort and the Obama White House sought a less ambitious effort focused on keeping al Qaeda from expanding its sanctuary in South Asia.
• The fourth major decision, or policy, enacted in the past 13 years was the counterterrorism policy adopted to fight the al Qaeda terrorist organization that attacked the United States on September  11, 2001, and affiliates that have sprung up in the ensuing years.
The congressional authorization for the use of military force has been interpreted as permitting the U.S. forces to strike at any al Qaeda affiliate deemed to represent a dire or imminent threat to U.S. persons or the homeland. It has led to a continuous campaign of raids and drone strikes in several countries around the globe beyond the war theaters of Iraq and Afghanistan. Some scholars have defended the efficacy of this approach as preventing attacks on the homeland and U.S. citizens and avoiding the expense or pitfalls of extended or large-scale operations. 
17
18
Counterterrorism has been defined in vastly different ways over the past 13 years. Military doctrine defines it as "actions taken directly against terrorist networks and indirectly to influence and render global and regional environments inhospitable to terrorist networks." 
19
Vol. 92, No. 4, 2013, p. 32. 18
in application it has often focused on the direct, enemy-centric part of that definition, which constitutes reliance on an even narrower set of tactics than counterinsurgency methods. McMaster and others have criticized the U.S. reliance on a minimalist-footprint counterterrorism approach. In his view, "This approach elevated one important capability in counterinsurgency to the level of strategy. It did not adequately address fundamental causes of violence, critical sources of enemy strength, the enemy strategy, likely enemy reactions, or the effect of the actions on the population." 
20
Interestingly, the "counterterrorism only" approach, as it has been dubbed, was embraced more by civilians than the U.S. military, including SOF that would be one of the primary entities prosecuting such an approach. In order to dissuade senior White House officials, Gates commissioned a paper from McChrystal, who had led the counterterrorism special operations task force, to explain in some technical detail why this "CT only" approach would not work in Afghanistan. He wrote that "without close-in access, fix and find methods become nearly impossible. Predator strikes are effective where they complement, not replace, the capabilities of the state security apparatus, but they are not scalable in the absence of underlying infrastructure, intelligence, and physical presence." 
21
What have been the results? While the counterterrorism approach as applied decapitated much of the original al Qaeda leadership, the leadership subsequently regenerated and the movement metastasized. As the director of national intelligence testified in 2014 in presenting the annual worldwide threat assessment, "The threat of complex, large-scale attacks from core al-Qa'ida against the U.S. Homeland is significantly degraded. . . . However, diffusion has led to the emergence of new power centers and an increase in threats by networks of likeminded extremists with allegiances to multiple groups." 
22
As noted above, some scholarship views the presidential decisionmaking process as overwhelmingly a function of presidential personality-which implies that there is little point to reforming the process. 
23
24
25
The Interagency Policy Committee (IPC), Deputies and Principals meetings process was intended to create the forum for interagency deliberation and vetting of policy options for eventual presidential decisions. Participants observed that even senior officials have become consumed by details and crisis management, an observation also made repeatedly by Gates, who served eight administrations. 
26
27
28
29
First, the process must be interactive and dynamic, not linear. Second, the process must integrate civilians and the military. Finally, an adequate process must revisit assumptions, estimate reactions and unintended effects, and enforce a review and revision cycle. Participants noted that hearing a diversity of views was vital, including a more articulated expression of the intelligence analysis that included divergent views and acknowledgment of gaps. Visiting the country in conflict, meeting with the locals, and surveying the battlefield provide senior leaders an invaluable window into the firsthand realities that will help them craft, assess, and adjust their thinking and subsequent strategy.
The making of good strategy and policy is impeded by the gulf between the civilian and military view of how the process should work. The difference in views regarding strategy as discussed in the previous lesson is mirrored in a disjunction between the military approach to the process and the needs of civilians charged with making policy decisions. Military doctrine teaches that national security policy objectives are formulated and then translated into the National Security Strategy, the National Military Strategy, the Quadrennial Defense Review, and regional campaign plans, and thence down to specific operational and tactical plans. But determining objectives requires input from the military that will inform the President's decision. As one workshop participant described it, "The President will say, 'Here is the problem. I want some thoughts. Please give me some options.' The military wants to know what the end state is. The President needs to weigh other objectives, resources needed, the politics of his decision, etc. The military feels that they aren't getting sufficient guidance, and the President feels he isn't getting clear options."
As Janine Davidson has observed, based on three years as the deputy assistant secretary of defense for plans, the military's planning process is at odds with the needs of the civilians and the requirements of good policy: "Military planners want detailed guidance regarding end states and objectives that civilians often cannot provide up front. . . . Civilian presidents and defense secretaries might be surprised to learn that it is considered their responsibility to determine ends and means without being first offered a menu of feasible options."
30
Moreover, there is a deep source of the tension that process alone may not be able to resolve. The military leader is legally obligated to provide his best professional advice (i.e., accurate to the best of his knowledge) and an executable plan, but that imperative can be wielded in a way that restricts the presidential prerogative to set policy. 
31
32
The second issue identified is the need for an integrated process. Once the presidential decision has been reached, the civilian role in strategy does not end, but there is no mechanism for integration below the level of the cabinet. Each department is empowered to carry out its own portfolio, and there is no forcing function built into the government for either planning or execution in concert. This is not a new issue; the need for an integrated civil-military process to craft the strategy and the plans that flow from it (as well as to work together in implementation as will be addressed in Lesson 7) has been widely recognized. Solutions have been attempted at various times. One such mechanism was promulgated in Presidential Decision Directive 56, implemented in the Clinton administration after the failures of Somalia in the early 1990s.
33
The third issue identified is a process that is sufficiently sophisticated to take account of the many variables involved in making strategy. The U.S. Army has adopted the tenets of design to improve upon the linear military decision making process. A much-simplified version of systemic operational design as originated by the Israeli military, this approach dictates an initial assessment to accurately diagnose, or "frame" the problem, and an iterative process of establishing an approach and then adjusting the approach based on the results achieved and the changing environment. One example of this approach was performed by a multinational expert group led by McMaster and U.S. diplomat David Pearce to assess the cause of the failing war in Iraq and suggest a new approach. In 2007, General David Petraeus assembled a Joint Strategic Assessment Team (JSAT) to evaluate the war in Iraq and recommend a way forward. Chaired by H.R. McMaster (then a U.S. Army colonel), the JSAT was an interagency, civil-military, multinational review team of some two dozen personnel that included representatives of the U.S. State Department, think tanks, and allied governments.
The JSAT sought to understand and diagnose the current state of the war in Iraq and then recommend an appropriate strategy. The team found that the war in Iraq had become a sectarian civil war and that among other things political reconciliation would be required to provide a stable government. If the Iraqi government members were not able to see this as in their interests because they favored their particular sect or a winner take all approach, the approach condoned efforts to marginalize sectarian leaders and neutralize their influence. The JSAT recommended a CORDS-like structure with a single leader to achieve a tight integration of this political-military strategy, which was not adopted. But closer coordination was achieved between civilians and the military in Iraq, starting with Petraeus and Ambassador Crocker. However, the approach was not adopted or implemented at the White House level as the overall strategy, and it was not continued by the succeeding administration. 
34
35
Some efforts have been made to institute combined planning practices, even though no directive has made it obligatory. The Senior Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan (SRAP) staged several "rehearsal of concept" drills with a wide array of participants, to determine the best modes for executing the civilian-military strategy. Workshop participants noted that the Obama administration conducted tabletop exercises at the senior level on Iran and other issues, in a partial application of this approach, to assess potential reactions and effects to policy options.
Over the past two years another collaborative assessment, gaming and planning effort was undertaken by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and two combatant commands. In late 2012 U.S. Special Operations Command (SOCOM) and USAID started to collaborate on a Joint Sahel Project to develop a common understanding of conflict drivers in the Sahel region of Africa. Concerned with the rise of terrorist groups sympathetic to al Qaeda in the region-including al Shabaab in Somalia, Boko Haram in Nigeria, al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb in Algeria, and Ansar Dine in Mali-SOCOM and USAID understood that a solely military response would be as inadequate as a solely development response. A broader response would be required to foster stability in the region and long-term U.S. interests.
This project was undertaken against the backdrop of previous civil-military frictions on this topic, culminating in the coup in Mali and eventual intervention with the French in the lead. The experience laid bare the lack of a shared understanding within the U.S. government of the region, the threat and U.S. interests, as well as what the focus of U.S. efforts should be. That bedrock disjunction meant that there was no integrated plan, no consistent resourcing, and no metrics or attempts to judge the success or failure of the activities being undertaken.
To remedy these profound lapses, over the course of 18 months, the SOCOM-USAID collaboration widened to include partners from across the U.S. government. USAID taught its Interagency Conflict Assessment Framework to U.S. Africa Command (AFRICOM) and SOCOM, enabling them to complete an initial Sahel Desk Study. AFRICOM hosted the first of two war games, adapting its approach to fully integrate social, political, economic, and cultural variables into the war game framework. In May 2014 USAID hosted a first-of-itskind Development Game. The extended collaboration, initiated from the staff level without senior policymaker guidance, resulted in the inputs for a new interagency, civil-military plan for U.S. engagement in North Africa. 
36
Military campaigns take place in the social, cultural, and political contexts of the states in which they are fought, and any successful operation will be cognizant of those contexts and have a plan for how to operate within, exploit, influence, and achieve victory in them. 
37
At one level, the centrality of politics to war is widely recognized. The political nature of war has been articulated by Clausewitz, Sun Tzu, and others and is part of the long tradition of diplomacy, particularly the school of realpolitik diplomacy. 
38
39
The cause of this deficit, as noted in Lesson 1, appears to rest in the limited conception of strategy that both policymakers and strategists have embraced. Both the civilian and military U.S. leaderships tended to focus on combat operations and counterterrorism, drawing their objectives narrowly around defeating enemy forces and preventing al Qaeda-affiliated terrorists to lay claim to certain territory. U.S. forces did indeed successfully target and eliminate many insurgents and terrorists. But these kinetic operations in themselves were insufficient to enable the host governments to control its territory and borders, particularly when the actions of those governments were fueling the generation of terrorists, insurgents, and sympathizers.
Achieving the overall goal of the wars required a political strategy integrated with the military strategy. As H.R. McMaster argued:
Because an insurgency is fundamentally a political problem, the foundation for detailed counterinsurgency planning must be a political strategy that drives all other initiatives, actions, and programs. The general objective of the political strategy is to remove or reduce significantly the political basis for violence. The strategy must be consistent with the nature of the conflict, and is likely to address fears, grievances, and interests that motivate organizations within communities to provide active or tacit support for insurgents. Ultimately, the political strategy must endeavor to convince leaders of reconcilable armed groups that they can best protect and advance their interests through political participation, rather than violence. McMaster has also formulated this thesis with regard not only to counterinsurgency but to war more generally: "If the indigenous government and its security forces act to exacerbate rather than ameliorate the causes of violence, the political strategy must address how best to demonstrate that an alternative approach is necessary to avert defeat and achieve an outcome consistent with the indigenous government's interests. If institutions or functions of the supported state are captured by malign or corrupt organizations that pursue agendas inconsistent with the political strategy, it may become necessary to employ a range of cooperative, persuasive, and coercive means to change that behavior and restore a cooperative relationship." 
41
Efforts were made to pursue these political objectives at various times in the wars, and the critical necessity of achieving success in this regard was recognized by Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad (in both Afghanistan and Iraq), the Petraeus/Crocker duo, and the coalition command in Kandahar in 2010-2011 and in regional overtures by SRAP, but the absence of a clear consensus at the senior U.S. levels that this was central to the strategy undermined the continuity necessary for such efforts to succeed. 
42
A political strategy will always have to account for the differing interests of the parties to a conflict. The mere fact that U.S. interests do not align with the host nation or antagonists' interests does not make political solutions impossible; indeed that is the business of diplomacy rightly understood, backed up not only by military force in a wartime context. Effective suasion very often requires conditionality, or the application of concrete sticks and carrots. Petraeus and Crocker practiced conditionality informally, but as Biddle notes, "in Afghanistan, by contrast, the West has been systematically unwilling to use conditionality as leverage for reform." 
43
42 Robinson (2008)
43
44
45
46
Another impediment to understanding the centrality of the political dimension has been the counterinsurgency focus on building governing capacity. The U.S. Army Counterinsurgency Field Manual of 2006 stated that "[t]he primary objective of any COIN operation is to foster development of effective governance by a legitimate government." 
47
48
50
47
48 Biddle, 2014, pp. 80, 81, 83-84. 49
52
53
High expectations for technology in the 1990s may have lessened the emphasis on developing understanding based on human, cultural, and social intelligence that commanders found so lacking on Afghanistan and Iraq. 
54
When faced with the need to address this deficit, the military expended a great deal of effort in creating the knowledge needed for understanding the conflict. It did so in three ways: by developing it within the force, seeking to create or leverage interagency centers of knowledge, and tapping expertise outside the government to inform plans, execution, and assessment. 
55
56
Just as important as the need to develop an understanding of the human, political, and sociocultural aspects of a conflict is the ability to place knowledge in historical context and use history as a guide to understanding. This is another truism without which policymak- ers, strategists, and those charged with implementing strategy are lost. Without a collective and comprehensive understanding of what happened previously, there is little chance of developing an appropriate approach to new challenges. The tendency to rely on anecdote or personal experience in framing policy arguments was noted by a number of participants, and the only remedy is development of a historical mindset and a study of history that is full and contextual. 
57
Complexity does not always produce clarity, however, and very often-especially in war zones and developing countries-the desired data are unreliable or unobtainable. As a consumer and provider of such assessments, McMaster notes both the importance and the difficulty with assessments: "It is difficult to overstate the importance of constant reassessment. The nature of a conflict will continue to evolve because of continuous interaction with enemies and other destabilizing factors. Progress will never be linear, and there will have to be constant refinements and readjustments to even the best plans." But, he adds, "Commanders and senior civilian officials should be aware that overreliance on systems analysis can create an illusion of control and progress. Metrics often tell commanders and civilian officials how they are executing their plan (e.g., money spent, numbers of indigenous forces trained and equipped, districts or provinces transferred to indigenous control), but fail to highlight logical disconnects. . . . An overreliance on metrics can lead to a tendency to develop short-term solutions for long-term problems and a focus on simplistic charts rather than on deliberate examinations of questions and issues critical to the war effort." 58 Metrics tend to characterize how programs and operations are doing (measures of performance), but not whether they are the right ones (measures of effectiveness). In other words, a comprehensive suite of metrics may tell a commander whether his strategy is being well executed, but not whether it is a successful one.
U.S. policymakers deliberately eschewed preparing for post-combat stabilization in both Iraq and Afghanistan, and the U.S. military did not deploy sufficient numbers of prepared forces to conduct stability operations as the need for them became evident, until a wrenching and prolonged review process late in both campaigns. 
59
For some, the failure to heed past experience in this regard almost defies comprehension, given voluminous evidence and scholarship suggesting that the need to consolidate the peace is a co-equal imperative 
58
59
60
61
62
60
Experience also suggests that building partner capacity to get local security forces in the lead as quickly as possible should be a higher priority. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, building indigenous security forces took second place to combat operations in terms of the urgency and resources devoted to the task, with particularly severe deficits in building adequate police, logistic and other enablers, and headquarters staff and institutions. 
63
64
65
Transition to civil authority, or Phase V operations, is equally important. If Phase IV was rocky in Iraq, and capacity-building deficient in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya, Phase V in Iraq did not go smoothly either (that phase is now approaching in Afghanistan). As RAND research has noted, "The planning for the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq and transition to civilian lead suffered from a "gap between established goals and the time and resources necessary to achieve them," leaving civilian and military personnel facing the "challenge of seeking to achieve overly optimistic strategic and policy goals with insufficient resources." 
66
67
In addition to revising military doctrine, the U.S. government took some steps to institutionalize the needed approach. In December 2005, the Bush administration issued National Security Presidential Directive 44 (NSPD-44), "Management of Interagency Efforts Concerning Reconstruction and Stabilization." NSPD-44 designated the Secretary of State as the lead agent for coordinating interagency planning efforts. By doing so it implied that reconstruction and stabilization operations were primarily a task for civilian agencies: It tasked the Secretary to "coordinate" with the Secretary of Defense "to ensure harmonization with any planned or ongoing U.S. military operations," which merely stated, but did not resolve, the problem of civil-military coordination in complex operations.
The current policy does not appear to provide adequate assurance that JIIM partners will achieve the necessary integration of effort or resourcing for their requirements. Despite the issuing of directives (there are also DoD directives relating to Stability Operations and Irregular Warfare) and doctrine (including novel experiments in interagency doctrine for both stability and reconstruction operations and counterinsurgency), there is no guarantee that even the progress in approach made over the past 13 years will be lasting. In Dobbins' view, "much still needs to be done if the current level of expertise is not to degrade again after the immediate crises recede. Forestalling such a regression will require the establishment, by legislation, of an enduring division of labor between the White House, the Department of State, DoD, and USAID. There must be an allocation of responsibilities that cannot be lightly altered by each passing administration, for no agency will invest in activities it may not long need to carry out." 
68
70
In the event, U.S. actions, inaction, and other circumstances led to growing insurgencies in both Iraq and Afghanistan. The U.S. government faced a choice between abandoning the enterprise or mounting a large-scale counterinsurgency effort. It embarked on the latter path and devoted troops, effort, and resources to quelling the combination of insurgency, terrorism, and sectarian war between 2003 and 2011 when it departed Iraq and 2014 as it transitions or departs Afghanistan. 71 69 Todd R. Greentree, "Lessons from Limited Wars: A War Examined, Afghanistan," Parameters, Vol. 43, No. 3, 2013, p. 93.   70 
Kelly, Bensahel, and Oliker, 2011. 71
72
73
Other alternatives are preferable, including the option of supporting indigenous counterinsurgency efforts, called foreign internal defense (FID) in U.S. doctrine, which is discussed in the next lesson. In that case the United States provides assistance, which could possibly include combat advisers, but the weight of the effort is borne by the country afflicted by the insurgency. This was not an option by the time the war in Iraq was a full-blown sectarian conflict, since the Iraqi government was a major antagonist in a fight against some of its own and counterterrorism mission by U.S. and some NATO forces after 2014. constituents. The function the coalition troops played was as much one of peace enforcement as counterinsurgency.
The counterinsurgency tactics employed during the surge did decrease levels of violence, but the fact that they were not carried out in the larger context of a concerted, sustained implementation of a political strategy makes it difficult to settle the argument as to the tactics' effectiveness. Many caricatured arguments have been formulated suggesting that the U.S. actions had no effect and that other actors' actions were entirely responsible for the demonstrated decline in violence achieved in both "surges." 
74
75
76
25, No. 1, 2014, pp. 161-179. 75
Quarterly, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2014, pp. 75-76, 78. 76
Proactive, preventive engagement is considered by some to be an obvious and even prudent middle-ground alternative between inaction and full-scale intervention. For others, it represents a dubious proposition that most often leads down a slippery slope to extended commitments and unsatisfactory results. The defense strategic guidance and the Quadrennial Defense Review embrace the notion that building partner capacity and using partners can be cost-efficient ways of securing U.S. interests, although the actual resources devoted to this middle path are quite modest. The argument is that if U.S. government invested more in such efforts, it might sufficiently mitigate the threat or conflict to avoid the need for Phase III interventions. Workshop participants noted that the Phase 0 suite of prevention, shaping, and influence operations has received far less attention and emphasis, particularly compared to Phases III, IV, and V. As one participant noted, "Everything I hear from the military suggests that we don't have a theory of victory in Phase 0. We have to do a lot better job at conceiving and implementing Phase 0 and I [the latter is deterrence operations]. We don't have a clear idea of what needs to be done or how we will do it." In part this is due to an inadequate conceptualization of how SOF can be employed both separately and in conjunction with other forces to achieve strategic effects. They have historically been used as a tactical force, but as their role has grown so has the need for operational art and operational level command to accommodate and exploit their unique advantages. The use of SOF has grown dramatically in the past 13 years in all phases of military operations, but their use has not yet been translated into a new way of war.
Critics of this approach have pointed out significant challenges to effective preventive engagement. They argue that the United States is at Phase 0 or I in almost all countries in the world; it cannot invest more everywhere. Policymakers need to set priorities as to where to engage based partly on which countries are most at risk, but the intelligence community does not have a good track record of projecting where or when conflict will next erupt, much less specific conflicts that might threaten U.S. interests. 
77
78
79
77
78
25, No. 2, 2000, pp. 5-50. 79
80
To become a more viable default option, shaping, influence, and unconventional operations must demonstrate efficacy and improve the identification and management of such risks. There is thus a need for further development of a model that will help policymakers apply the Phase 0 toolkit to achieve national security objectives. Some research has been done on the conditions under which assistance to partners is likely to produce the desired results, but more work is needed to identify the necessary and sufficient conditions and apply them to the current gamut of threats to determine where they are most likely to bear fruit. 
81
In conflict environments that are hostile, denied, or politically sensitive, SOF are likely to carry out a preponderance of these activities to shape, influence, and support partners (which may be government forces or informal groups, such as tribes or militias) because they are selected, trained, and equipped to operate in very small formations in a low-visibility or clandestine manner. For example, FID and unconventional warfare (UW) are two operations that can be carried out entirely in Phase 0. 82 FID is the provision of military and civilian assistance to a government under threat, in accordance with that government's own "internal defense and development" plan. The U.S. operation in the Philippines is an example of an effective foreign internal defense mission. After the September 11, 2001, attacks, the U.S. deployed a small contingent of SOF to the Philippines for Operation Enduring Freedom-Philippines (OEF-P) to help train and advise Philippine forces combating the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) and Jemmah Islamiyya (JI), two terrorist groups with links to al Qaeda. The groups had not attacked the United States and were comparatively smaller and posed less of a threat to the Philippines than al Qaeda posed to Afghanistan or Pakistan, yet the United States nonetheless devoted some resources to combating them and training partner security forces. The U.S intervention was smaller by orders of magnitude than the deployments to Iraq or Afghanistan, never totaling more than about 600 troops. And it was successful: The two groups, small to begin with, were even more constrained and limited, and Philippine forces were more capable of managing the threat from them, after a decade of sustained but relatively small U.S. investment. The intervention benefited from its proactive nature: The United States did not wait until the Philippine government was near collapse or ASG on the brink of overrunning the 82 FID is defined as "participation by civilian and military agencies of a government in any of the action programs taken by another government or other designated organization to free and protect its society from subversion, lawlessness, insurgency, terrorism, and other threats to its security" (JP 3-22). Unconventional warfare is another method of assisting a friendly force, in this case to coerce or remove a government or occupying power. The doctrinal definition is "activities to enable a resistance or insurgency to coerce, disrupt or overthrow a government or occupying power through and with an underground, auxiliary, and guerrilla force in a denied area" (JP 1-02).
government. Because the situation was not dire, it was also relatively less costly to deal with.
Other influence operations and security cooperation activities can be part of a noncombat approach to achieving national security objectives. Civil affairs units are the most-deployed units in the joint force, and active-duty civil affairs are a core part of almost all special operations efforts. Similarly, military information support operations (formerly known as psychological operations) are employed in virtually all special operations endeavors, as well as in support of embassy and public diplomacy efforts. They represent a powerful if underdeveloped capability for achieving nonlethal effects. "Phase 0" operations are rarely conducted by SOF alone. Conventional forces and interagency and multinational partners are frequently involved, such as in the effort to stabilize and support a new government in Somalia under the United Nations-sanctioned African Union peace enforcement mission AMISOM. Security force assistance and partner capacity building are often discussed as activities with no end state, but in fact they should be construed as operations that achieve effects through strengthening and supporting another country. Influence operations and shaping operations can also include counter threat finance, cyber operations, and many other nonlethal activities. All of these should be considered tools that can be assembled in innovative ways and applied with sufficient foresight and duration to achieve lasting effect without resort to major combat operations. 
83
Phase 0 is also unhelpful in conveying the spectrum of options available under this approach. The foreign internal defense mission often involves combat, but the combat is undertaken primarily by the host nation forces, with advisory support from special operations and conventional forces that operate under a variety of rules of engagement in keeping with the U.S. and host nation agreement. The unconventional warfare mission is another support mission that provides support to indigenous forces that are fighting an occupation or seeking to overthrow a regime; this was used to topple the Taliban and might be used to coerce or disrupt the Syrian regime or recent Russian incursions in Europe. FID and UW may involve combat advisers, but the main effort is carried by the indigenous force.
The United States has opportunities to invest in shaping and influence operations around the world, including in Yemen and North Africa. Compared to the trillion dollar expenditures in Iraq and Afghanistan, preventive engagement costs less money, requires fewer troops, and incurs less risk than larger, conventional operations. The Philippines, of course, was a comparatively small threat and not too problematic an ally. While working with partners often is highly problematic, tedious, and time-consuming, it may be the best option considering the downsides of all the rest.
A strategy that seeks to avoid major combat operations and long, costly entanglements such as Iraq and Afghanistan would place increasing emphasis on what the joint force and its interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational partners can do in Phase 0 to address threats to U.S. interests. Applying such an approach would require in many cases a forward leaning proactive stance on the part of policymakers, as well as strategic patience for some of these initiatives to bear fruit. Yet in the long term the benefits of these investments could last for years, and the costs could be significantly less than the endeavors of the past 13 years. The administration, in its proposed counterterrorism partner-ship fund, appears to have in mind such an approach as a major feature of its evolving counterterrorism strategy, although the programmatic details and model (including criteria for supporting states, scope of assistance, and metrics and conditions for execution and assessment) have not been provided in the initial documents accompanying the funding request. 84
The joint force has recognized in doctrine and in practice that it needs interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational partners, but adequate funding and practices to prepare those partners is lacking. In addition, no practice currently mandates coordinated implementation under a unified command structure, leaving unity of effort to be achieved by voluntary means alone. Because of the lack of relevant expertise within its own ranks, the U.S. military realized that in many operations, particularly Phases 0, IV, and V, it could not accomplish the mission alone. It required civilian expertise from a host of agencies, and it benefited from the expertise and political support of multinational coalitions. The need for integration between civilians and the military is not limited to the making of policy and strategy; it is also a necessary part of policy implementation. Yet the United States cannot impose unity of command by military fiat across services, agencies, and coalitions, creating the challenge of integrating and coordinating efforts.  Interagency, Multinational, and Coalition Partners, Santa Monica, Calif.:  RAND Corporation, MG-707-OSD, 2008; Szayna et al., 2009.  To take the issue of integrating structures first, the U.S. government's record in the latter years of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan suggests that neither the Iraq nor the Afghanistan interagency structure succeeded in establishing an enduring framework for integrated civilian-military policy management. For example, the SRAP and the White House were in frequent conflict over both Afghanistan and Pakistan policy implementation, primarily because the White House preferred a minimalist solution while SRAP was seeking to promote stability through institution-building. And in Kabul, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) command and the U.S. embassy were at odds, particularly during the tenures of Gen. McChrystal and Amb. Karl Eikenberry. A U.S. civilian-military integrated implementation plan was finally forged between the two entities, but it critically left out the rest of the ISAF coalition.
Among the many experiments in civil-military interagency partnerships, the Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) were the best known and most widely employed in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Early in the war in Afghanistan the U.S. military developed the concept of PRTs, which were small civilian-military units led by military officers. They were in some cases manned by civilian reconstruction experts from the Departments of State, Agriculture, or Justice and the U.S. Agency for International Development, as well as NATO ally civilians. Their role was to foster governance and development in key areas. PRTs were later employed in Iraq under a different model; they were civilianled and reported to the embassy rather than the regional military commands. The integrated civilian-military concept drew inspiration from the CORDS program in Vietnam with a crucial difference in their respective command structures. 86 CORDS established a civilian chain of command operating under the overall military command. 
86
87
88
Army, 1982, Chapter 5. 87
88
89
90
91
The record of multinational coalition performance is far more positive, although the speed of coalition decisionmaking is, at least in the case of NATO coalitions, destined to remain the speed of the slowest national decisionmaking. NATO and NATO countries are not the only, but are by far the most important, coalition partners of the United States over the past 13 years, along with Australia, which has participated in both Iraq and Afghanistan in relatively substantial numbers. As with many other partners who joined both coalitions, the experience provided the opportunity to learn coalition operations, contribute to a common security objective, and earn potential compensating support for its own needs and interests.
The U.S. government has benefited diplomatically from the international support that coalitions provide. The U.S. military is tasked with fighting and winning the nation's wars, and while acting alone is at times required, the United States prefers to operate with other nations and entities in coalitions of the willing. Virtually all U.S. military operations have been part of a multinational coalition since 1989, many in partnership with NATO, including operations in Bosnia, Serbia and Kosovo, Afghanistan, Libya, Pakistan, the Red Sea region, and Turkey. 
92
NATO member militaries vary in size, structure, and capability, ranging from highly sophisticated militaries that are fully integrated into U.S. planning and operations to those that cannot function without tremendous U.S. assistance-most partners lack the ability to deploy and conduct sustained operations outside of their territory without considerable U.S. support. Command and control (C2) of NATO operations has remained difficult, with multiple command structures across the operational domain hindering operations. To mitigate issues of interoperability within the NATO structure, early and continuous planning to incorporate coalition support requirements is recommended. 
93
Coalitions continue to experience difficulties in sharing intelligence due to countries' differing policies on sharing of classified information, as well as technical hurdles for sharing information. The sharing of timely and accurate intelligence has increased with the use of the Battlefield Information Collection and Exploitation Systems (BICES), but BICES has not yet been widely adopted. Communication systems 
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
[A]ll the services regarded the counterinsurgency wars in Iraq and Afghanistan as unwelcome military aberrations, the kind of conflict we would never fight again-just the way they felt after Vietnam. The services all wanted to get back to training and equipping our forces for the kinds of conflict in the future they had always planned for: for the Army, conventional force-on-force conflicts against nation-states with large ground formations; for the Marine Corps, a light, mobile force operating from ships and focused on amphibious operations; for the Navy, conventional maritime operations on the high seas centered on aircraft carriers; for the Air Force, high-tech air-to-air combat and strategic bombing against major nation-states.
I agreed with the need to be prepared for those kinds of conflicts. But I was convinced that they were far less likely to occur than messy, smaller, unconventional military endeavors. . . . The war in Afghanistan, from its beginning in 2001, was not a conventional conflict, and the second war against Iraq began with a fast-moving conventional offensive that soon deteriorated into a stability, reconstruction, and counterinsurgency campaign-the dreaded "nation-building" that the Bush administration took office swearing to avoid. . . . Developing this broad range of capabilities meant taking some time and resources away from preparations for the high-end future missions the military services preferred. 1 -Former Defense Secretary Gates This concluding chapter builds on the previous chapters' analysis to assess how the recent experience may be applicable to future conflict and what that might imply for the U.S. government, military, and potential partners. The first section reviews future trend assessments and finds that those assessments suggest that the lessons of the past 13 years retain their relevance going forward. The next section argues that this "new normal" of a continuing high incidence of irregular and hybrid warfare, whether conducted by states or nonstate actors, indicates the need for a theory of success that can serve as a compass for strategy in these conditions, where victory may be elusive but security solutions remain imperative. The third section recommends exploration of seven deeper institutional reforms that may better prepare the nation to confront threats successfully.
The notion that a more fundamental adaptation of the U.S. national security system is needed for this era is not new. The Joint Staff's Decade of War study posited that "the Cold War model that had guided foreign policy for the previous 50 years no longer fit the emerging global environment." 2 This argument holds that the U.S. approach to national security and the basic orientation of its military are rooted in an era characterized by state-on-state conflict among standing forces of nation-states. The historical survey of Chapter Two suggested that even before the Cold War, irregular forms of warfare were bedeviling the United States, which periodically experimented with new approaches to counter them. If true, this broad trend would suggest that the need for adaptation by the U.S. government and its military continues even as it draws down in Afghanistan. New conflicts, a Eurasian crisis, and a metastasized terrorism problem all loom, promising little respite from threats that may demand some type of response.
The lessons derived from the workshop and other research suggest that the policy process is not optimized to produce clear ends, efficacious ways, or adequate means and is inhibited by inadequate civilmilitary interaction at the levels of policy, strategy, and implementa-tion. 
3
4
A number of projections discussed in this section foresee an ongoing incidence of irregular and hybrid war. The risks of conventional and nuclear war nonetheless remain, and the rise of peer competitors may bring them to the fore in the more distant future. A new RAND study assesses that China's current level of integration into the global system means it is less likely to behave in an unconstrained manner and pose an existential threat as the USSR did in the Cold War. "China is not the Soviet Union, which created a separate and distinct sphere from the West, dominated it politically, and controlled it economically," the report states, and its conclusion "rejects the perspective that China 
3
5
The first overall trend is a decline in the number of conflicts, as noted by the National Intelligence Council's Global Trends 2030: Alternative Futures report and documented in several academic studies. 
6
7
8
9
Another projection is that the diffusion of technology will produce more hybrid warfare, as less capable adversaries (state and nonstate) gain access to and the ability to use a variety of more potent weapons. Hybrid warfare has been defined as conflict with "an adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs a fused mix of conventional weapons, irregular tactics, terrorism and criminal behavior in the battle space to obtain political objectives." 10 Thus actors will be able to wreak more damage with more powerful weaponry, compared to the relative low lethality of U.S. adversaries in the past decade. The Global Trends report says: "the spread of precision weaponry-such as standoff missiles-may make some conflicts more like traditional forms of warfare." The National Defense Panel Review of the 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review also identified "wider access to lethal and disruptive technologies" as a major trend and stated that "[d]iffusion of these technologies will enable regional states to put U.S. interests, allies and forces at risk, and will enable small groups and individuals to perpetrate large-scale violence and disruption." 
11
12
4
Diffusion of weapons of increasing lethality is just one trend that will empower adversaries of the future. For example, nonlethal technologies including unarmed aerial vehicles are readily available commercially, with micro unmanned aerial vehicles (micro UAVs) and swarming tactics expected to increase in the near future. Cyber tools and tactics also enable influence operations of increasing impact, with the added advantages of low barriers to entry and ability to operate anonymously. In the recent example of Russia's actions in the Ukraine and elsewhere, it employed trolls, bots, and hacktivists. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
In summary, the continued high rate of irregular warfare among the conflicts that occur and those conflicts that the U.S. is involved in, plus the diffusion of lethal technologies to create higher incidence of hybrid warfare, create a continued demand signal for the United States to address both irregular and hybrid threats. (See Table 
4
The Need for a Theory of Success This section posits that this "new normal" conflict environment of multiple, simultaneous challenges that differ substantially from those of the Cold War or World War II era requires a new way of operating that can achieve national security objectives at bearable cost. Successfully aligning ends, ways, and means, in turn, requires a theory of success suited to the current environment. This section outlines the argument for and characteristics of such a theory.
The need to retain and refine capabilities for irregular, hybrid, and conventional war as well as a nuclear deterrent runs up against the constrained resources of the present and future years. The U.S. joint force is undergoing significant downsizing due to the automatic budget-cutting legislation. This fact inevitably bears on the topic of this paper, which is the distillation and application of the policy and strategic lessons of the past 13 years to the future threats and challenges that the U.S. government and its forces may be called upon to address. Means affect the options available to the policymaker, and strategy must reflect that. Making strategy requires making choices. As the Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) review panel and other commentators have noted, however, strategy should not be entirely budget driven; the former critiqued the single-war assumption on which the QDR's force-sizing construct is based. The QDR review panel does not argue for returning to the previous two-war construct but for taking into account a world of multiple threats that the U.S. military must be  prepared to address. The report states: "Our concern is that the threats of armed conflict for which the United States must prepare are more varied than they were 20 years ago. In short, the logic behind the twowar standard is as powerful as ever, but we believe that logic should be expressed in a construct that recognizes that the U.S. military must have the capability and capacity to deter or stop aggression in multiple theaters-not just one-even when engaged in a large-scale war." 
26
The larger issue is whether the U.S. military as a whole accepts the thesis that the character of warfare is indeed changing, which would imply the need to change the way the U.S. military understands and approaches war. The changing character of warfare may be the metalesson of the past 13 years (or longer). If the character of warfare is changing, it poses a challenge to the joint force, and perhaps most profoundly the Army, as the nation's largest service with the widest range of capabilities, to continue to assess not only the threats of the future but also how it approaches them. This changing character of warfare could moreover be compounding a long-standing vulnerability in how the United States approaches war. Efforts to examine, clarify, and perhaps modify the approach to war would provide a sound basis for deciding what capabilities need to be preserved, refined, or created. War games and ongoing concept development are all grappling with elements of this issue, and a follow-on study to the Decade of War, Vol. 1, has been initiated.
The discussion at the RAND workshop and the ensuing analysis suggest that there is merit in examining and clarifying what would constitute a viable theory of victory that (1) fully accounts for the changed character of warfare, (2) reaffirms the ultimate political objectives of war, and ( 
3
The statistical trends outlined above identify irregular warfare as a major feature of the changing character of war, in addition to research carried out under a program by that name at Oxford University. 
27
28
This definition of political warfare was used by George Kennan:
Political warfare is the logical application of Clausewitz's doctrine in times of peace. In the broadest definition, political warfare is the employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives, to further its influence and authority and weaken those of its adversaries. 
30
28 Nadia Schadlow, "War and the Art of Governance," Parameters, 
Vol. 33, No. 3, 2003. 29
Abizaid, 2014, p. 19. 30
This theory of victory may be more appropriately termed a theory of success, given the military connotations of the word victory and the fact that success may be defined in more modest terms. The idea that there can be degrees of victory, or success, is not new. Colin Gray developed the idea of multiple sliding scales representing degrees of decisiveness and achievement. 
31
32
33
This theory of success explicitly includes a preference for aiming to win in Phase 0 whenever possible. This has obvious appeal in that it avoids the cost of war and yet achieves security objectives. In one sense it is simply an obvious statement of rational preference. But incorporating this preference into intent in a formal theory of victory can have a transformative effect on the "American way of war." The U.S. military must remain prepared to fight and win major conventional war, retain a viable nuclear deterrent, but under this theory of victory a greater weight of effort and focus of attention moves to "prevent and shape" in the Army's Prevent-Shape-Win construct as a more efficient means of obtaining desired outcomes. In other words, it seeks to win by preventing and shaping, and makes the necessary investment and adaptation to accomplish that if at all possible. And as a second consequence, when those efforts fail and a major Phase III operation must ensue, it will be explicitly grounded in a political strategy that envisions the war-ending conditions that must prevail through some combination of military and non-military ways and means. In other words, "winning" must include some concept of consolidation to achieve lasting results.
A theory of success may be difficult to define without reference to a specific threat or problem it seeks to address, but its elements could be described broadly as follows. A theory of success would aim in the first instance at prevention of all-out conflict through proactive means, and mitigation of conflict when all-out victory is infeasible or elusive. That is to say, such a theory must account for the continuum of politics and war and be profoundly realistic in setting objectives. This is not an argument for minimalist objectives that aim at purely expedient or temporary fixes; there must be an insistence on sustainable outcomes to warrant the expenditure of effort. General characteristics of "ways" or approaches that are able to achieve such effects are (1) persistent presence as a substitute for overwhelming force to win the contest of wills, (2) strategic patience to pursue a course that may only achieve effects over time, and (3) elements of inventiveness or surprise that use understanding of the political environment to perform a kind of jujitsu to gain advantage in lieu of overwhelming force. (In other words, the characteristics are in many respects the opposite of those Colin Gray used to describe the traditional American "way of war" cited in the previous chapter.) Ways or approaches with those attributes may achieve satisfactory ends with relatively modest investments, at least compared to the costs of major wars and investments in the armaments of strategic deterrence.
The rise of irregular threats and constraints on resources pose an acute dilemma for U.S. strategy, increasing the imperative to remedy the deficiencies of the past 13 years. More than ever, the United States requires new approaches that can achieve satisfactory outcomes to multiple, simultaneous conflicts at acceptable cost. It must become more agile in adapting its strategy as circumstances warrant, and it must improve its ability to work effectively with all manner of partners. The growing role of SOF represents a potential advantage of strategic import, but operational concepts and constructs must be further refined to supply a seamless array of options for the application of JIIM power.
Aspects of a new way of operating have already been under development, exemplified by an unprecedented use of SOF in conjunction with conventional forces as well as partially successful experiments in JIIM teaming to access a wider range of capabilities. Special operations and conventional forces combined in new ways to provide a suite of capabilities that neither possessed alone, and the combinations enabled operations at larger scale and in more conflicts than SOF could provide alone. The Army's new operating concept recognizes the need to continue to adapt and innovate to execute combined arms operations in a complex future operating environment. The concept for the first time recognizes special operations as a core competency and thus opens the way for greater experimentation in combined conventional-SOF operations and development and institutionalization of capabilities. 
34
Some of the recommendations below apply broadly to the national security strategy and the full spectrum of war, and others are more focused on habitual deficits, which is to say the capabilities for prosecuting irregular war and executing proactive and preventive approaches that obviate the need to conduct costly land wars. Whatever the capabilities, they will only be effective if harnessed to a viable strategy that is guided by a theory of victory, or perhaps more appropriately, a theory of success. This argument provides the basis for seven proposals for reform or retention of capabilities.
The seven areas addressed below were selected based on their criticality to addressing the changing character of warfare. The challenges identified in Chapter Three were mapped to the joint framework for capabilities: doctrine, organization, training, material, leader development and education, personnel, and facilities, as well as civilian interagency and intergovernmental and multinational capabilities.
In identifying both lessons and possible remedies through the workshop, poll, interviews, and research, a "short list" approach was taken to aid in prioritizing areas deemed essential to (1) successful execution of national security strategy in a basic way or (2) the prosecution of irregular and hybrid war. This limiting approach was applied because the current challenge is how to improve the ability of a smaller joint force and government to master irregular and hybrid warfare while retaining the conventional and nuclear capabilities. This is not just a U.S. military imperative; the U.S. government and its allies and partners need to grapple with the changing character of warfare and creatively apply resources in the most effective ways.
Technology is often viewed as the most likely way to produce greater efficiency and effectiveness, but substantial investment is often required to realize those gains. As Chapter Two noted in its survey of the evolution of warfare, airpower, and lethal technology reduced the need for massive armies and logistical tails to support vast quantities of "dumb" ordnance. Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and precision weapons greatly increased SOF "man-hunting" capability. Changes in organization and personnel, as well as operational innovation, may be equally useful in overcoming the strictures of budgetary constraints and closing the gaps revealed in past performance. The last big organizational change in the Army was Brigade Combat Team (BCT) modularity. 
35
35
In terms of education, it is important to remedy the deficit of strategic education on the civilian side, and on the military side to develop a more realistic and less rigid concept of how policy is made as part of the military education and planning. The National War College has introduced courses that could be a basis for providing enhanced strategic education to both civilian policymakers and staff and the senior military planners and strategists. Practices that the U.S. military has developed over the past 13 years can be employed at the policy level for developing an integrated political-military national strategy, as well as for contingencies in particular countries or regions. For example, the problem-framing and iterative elements of design can also be introduced into the policy planning process as a matter of course, to enforce rigor in identifying and revisiting assumptions, risks, and costs. Other measures could include routine use of a deliberate process for testing the range of policy options through interagency gaming and tabletop exercises.
Transformations in organization and personnel may be especially critical to remedy the deficits revealed by past experience and prepare to meet the challenges of the future. Many innovations of the past decade can help point the way forward. Flat, adaptive, networked modes of operating have become a new organizational model for nonstate actors, businesses, and other entities, driven in part by technology that permits rapid acquisition and diffusion of information. The joint force may find it advantageous to examine options for radical change in its organization and personnel systems. Task organizing and mission command are two concepts that can drive further organizational adaptation.
Task organizing is a model for adapting structures to specific purposes, and exploration of deeper modes of task organization might yield greater flexibility and adaptability. All services have formed task forces, and joint task forces are the norm in deployed formations. The formation of task forces just prior to deployment contains certain limitations in that units are not routinely trained or prepared to work with those specific partners in the required manner. A model that incorporates task organization as a fundamental principle and implements it at lower echelons might foster more inherent traits of adaptability and flexibility.
Historically, the Army has changed its organizational structure based on the threat environment, from a divisional/corps structure built to counter the Soviet Union to Combined Arms Battalions (such as the 173rd Battalion (BN) Task Force (TF), built for operations in the Balkans). Modularity has been critical to Army successes, depicted through the number of TF-sized elements functioning at levels smaller than the BCT throughout operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The doctrine for the BCTs-FM 3-90.6 Brigade Combat Team-states that the BCTs are still the "Army's combat power building blocks for maneuver, and the smallest combined arms units that can be committed independently." 
40
Guidance from Army senior leaders and multiple strategic guidance documents address the need to organize the force appropriately, stating that Army forces must be tailorable and scalable to specific missions and they must be prepared to respond rapidly to any global contingency mission. 
41
42
The 2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division was the first unit designated as the RAF and began actively supporting AFRICOM in March 2013. 
43
44
The United States Marine Corps (USMC) Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF)-the principal organization upon which this force is built-is a highly scalable organizational model composed of command, ground, aviation, and logistics elements that vary in size and capability according to their assigned or likely missions and are specifically equipped for deployment by sea or air. 
45
Historically the Marine niche has been expeditionary amphibious operations, but the Marines deployed frequently in large numbers throughout the Iraq and Afghan wars. There is a move now back to smaller-scale expeditionary roles. The Special Purpose Marine Air-Ground Task Force for Crisis Response (SP-MAGTF-CR) based at Moron Air Base in Spain was established in response to the 2012 attack on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, and the recent turmoil that has arisen in Mali, Algeria, and other North African countries. 
46
47
48
The joint force might explore additional approaches to task organization. As the largest force, the Army faces the widest array of demands. Although the Army must retain the ability to conduct and prevail in major combat operations, it faces a competing demand that it perform equally well in other missions that are likely to constitute its most frequent form of employment. Despite the introduction of the RAF, the Army is still fundamentally based on the BCT, and it has adapted the BCT to form Advise and Assist Brigades (as it did in the latter years in Afghanistan) and battalion or company size advisory teams (less successfully, judging from the Iraq experience of military transition teams and other ad hoc advisory teams). An alternative model might be a multifunctional brigade (still qualified in decisive action) that readily produces a multifunctional battalion or company. Whether applied at the brigade or battalion level, this model would also eschew the BCT and enabler distinction in favor of a mission-based task organizing principle that would present a package that includes the "enablers" and even places them in the lead when the mission dictates a multifunctional unit with civil affairs, engineering or influence operators (MISO) as its main effort. Another option would be to form some advice and assist brigades (or smaller units) and assign them to geographic regions with high and sustained demand.
In the near term, the following recommendations could be used by the Army to create smaller, mission-ready units organized to accomplish a specific mission for a Combatant Commander instead of uti-lizing the BCT model for deployments: (1) Limit the number of units that need to be trained and equipped to deploy under the BCT level.
(2) Start the training earlier and ensure NTC or Joint Readiness Training Center rotations for the battalion-level joint task force prior to a deployment. Ensure that all enablers are present and the task force is assembled before the training rotation begins. (3) Obtain dedicated air assets for mobility and close air support for echelons below the BCT level. ( 
4
The recent robust use of special operations suggests the possibility of a new model, or models, for achieving operational or even strategic effect through a campaign approach. This represents a potentially potent new form of landpower that, if applied with strategic patience, can address threats without resort to large-scale military interventions. SOF-led campaigns can provide low-visibility, high-return security solutions in numerous circumstances. SOF have begun to develop the operational level art, planning, and command capabilities to realize this potential, but several additional steps are needed.
As noted above, the significant increase in reliance on SOF over the past 13 years has been recognized in the new Army operating concept as constituting a core competence for the service. A concomitant recognition in a joint concept would pave the way for development of the doctrinal, organizational, and other capability implications of this trend. The promise it holds is for a strategic approach that, in many future areas of operation, achieves lasting effect with fewer troops and other resources, though applied in some cases in a sustained and geographically distributed manner. To achieve its intended effect, such "persistent presence" must be appropriately conceived, organized, and led.
In the operating concept, the Army envisions three types of operations: SOF-centric, SOF-conventional-force blends, and more traditional operations led and conducted by a preponderance of conven-tional forces. 
49
To conduct these types of operations, SOF have relied heavily on ad hoc commands substantially filled by individual augmentees through a joint manning document.
SOF experience in the past 13 years suggests the need for more standing joint deployable command capability for SOF. 
50
50
51
52
53
54
SOF have demonstrated the ability to conduct sustained operations in multiple theaters over the past 13 years, but their size limits them to deploying no more than some 10,000 operators at any one time worldwide. The historic growth of SOF is now leveling off as budget cuts take their toll. Their limited size and the continued high demand signal warrant greater effort to create more flexible combinations of special operations and conventional forces to permit largerscale operations and, perhaps most often, greater numbers of sustained, distributed operations. This would suggest that the next step in the evolution of the SOF-conventional force relationship could be a hybrid SOF-conventional command. The U.S. Army Special Operations Command's vision document, ARSOF [Army Special Operations  Forces] 2022, proposed exploring this option, and its Silent Quest wargame concluded that "SOF and its partners must establish hybrid structures that include elements of SOF, CF and JIIM partners, and institutionalize these structures as part of its steady state organizational framework."
55
Regular and habitual teaming with conventional forces and joint SOF, perhaps through RAF, will increase and sustain such familiarity at the unit and individual level. Without such continued collaboration the past 13 years' experience of deconfliction, fusion cells, combined operations and other interdependent operations will soon become a distant memory. Numerous structures and practices can foster continued and increased SOF-conventional force interdependence across the range of military operations. One option for deepening and sustaining SOF-CF interdependence would be to revive the Military Adviser Training Academy (MATA) created during the Vietnam War and based at the Special Warfare Center and School at Fort Bragg, North Carolina. The Special Warfare Center and School has the required training capability and personnel to develop and operate such a course. A school at that major Army base, which is located a short distance from major Marine Corps installations, could provide a location for retention of advisory knowledge, education courses and training facilities for a joint, interagency and ministerial full-spectrum advisory and stability operations complex. Corps, division and brigade conventional units are based there, as well as a multitude of special operations units including civil affairs and psychological operations units.
As mentioned above, SOF have developed new doctrine and revised existing doctrine to take account of the lessons learned and practices developed over the past 13 years. 
56
57
Personnel requirements for the future are that individuals be innovative and multifunctional. It is not sufficient that doctrine enunciate that decentralization in the form of mission command or that education and training inculcate the value and method of taking general guidance and devising the most effective means of accomplishing the commanders' intent. The personnel system itself must reward innovation.
Two steps have been taken to increase incentives and means to encourage innovation at the individual level. The new Army officer evaluation report (OER) includes "creativity" as a character trait to be discussed. This is a valuable first step but much more could be done to mitigate the inherent conformist tendencies of a hierarchical organization in which superiors control the career path of subordinates. An interesting development is the Army's adoption of a 360-degree general officer online evaluation form, in which any general officers are allowed to anonymously rate their peers. This rating tool is used strictly for developmental purposes for the officer to learn and adapt, rather than an assessment used for promotion evaluation.
Increasing multifunctional personnel may be another way to develop expertise within a shrinking force. While a shrinking force may not be able to accommodate large numbers of personnel trained in only one specialty, several models exist for multifunctional personnel with more than one specialty. The Foreign Area Officer specialty is one, and the Marine Corps Foreign Security Force Adviser is another. These trained advisory personnel could also serve as training cadre in a revived MATA advisory academy to produce larger numbers of advisers when needed. Finally, the joint force could adopt the Special Forces habit of routinely cross-training soldiers on teams in each other's specialties.
Plans for surging expertise in needed regions can also help produce needed capability rapidly. To overcome the deficit of expertise and create a sustained pool of available manpower for advisory work in Afghanistan and Pakistan, the AfPak Hands program was created by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Members from all four military services could sign up for two deployed tours to the region. Prior to deploying they received language and cultural training in a degree-based education program, and in between deployments they were assigned to relevant positions in the United States addressing the Afghanistan-Pakistan policy and program objectives. This program could be studied as a potential model for a future surge advisory capac-ity. For such a program to attract the best talent, participants' careers must not be derailed by making the commitment. Ideally, such service should be incentivized through the promotion or preferred assignment systems.
While defense guidance does state that expertise and capabilities will be maintained for conducting small-scale counterinsurgency and stability operations, the precise level required should be derived from the current military plans in order to drive the appropriate resourcing, force structure, training, education, and equipping decisions. 
58
Many organizations and training programs aimed at creating the necessary skills for conducting stability operations and building partner capacity, as well as preparing personnel to work in deploying interagency coordination cells and teams have been disbanded as the U.S. war in Iraq ended and the force deployed to Afghanistan declined. 60 58 Interview, Joint Staff J-7, July 2014. These special skills cannot be created overnight, and simply maintaining a library of lessons learned and programs of instruction will not produce optimal results. For maximum effectiveness and readiness, it can be argued that actual capability must be retained at some scale across the services. A joint entity such as the Joint Center for International Security Force Assistance (JCISFA) may be the most efficient method of articulating the demand for and tracking the capability and lessons of stability and advisory missions, but some service-specific capability is needed, for example to train foreign maritime, naval, and air forces on platforms and techniques other than those used by U.S. forces. In a July 2014 report, the Government Accountability Office examined the process for tracking needed advisory specialties and recommended further improvements. Table 
4
The shortage of civilian interagency capability and capacity was addressed in the previous chapter, as was the impediments to their movement at the tactical level in hostile environments, which in turn restricted their ability to complete their mission. The first of these constraints may not have a solution in the current budget environment, and after the killing of a U.S. ambassador in Benghazi the domestic political environment in the United States has made the State Department even more security conscious and risk averse.
Some studies recommend the creation of adequate civilian capability and capacity, which would require congressional support and funding for the State Department to revive the interagency CRC, adequately fund its parent organization, the Bureau of Conflict and Stabilization Operations, support the Civilian Stabilization Initiative, and consider creating a school to train civilians in reconstruction and stabiis doubling its civil affairs capacity by two battalions, but the Army is disestablishing one of the two civil affairs brigade commands (the 85th Brigade headquarters). Source: RAND interviews with joint staff, USMC, and USAID officials. lization missions. 
61
Dobbins, 2010;
and Bensahel, Oliker, and Peterson, 2009. 62
Policy and planning documents frequently assume that in the future the U.S. military will operate as part of a multinational coalition, as it did in Afghanistan with the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and in Iraq with the Multinational Force-Iraq (MNF-I), a U.N.-sanctioned "coalition of the willing." If it is correct to assume that most U.S. deployments of significant scale and/or duration will occur as part of a coalition (Libya is the most recent example that suggests Iraq and Afghanistan are not outliers), an effort to improve both coalition warfare and how the United States participates in coalitions could create more effective coalitions and thereby lessen the burden on U.S. forces. The coalitions of the past 13 years have been primarily based on U.S. personnel and structures, but coalitions of the future might rely more heavily on others, especially in those countries or regions where U.S. partners have a strong interest. 63 U.S. capabilities and resources will continue to make it a major contributor to many coalitions, especially as its NATO partners continue to struggle to meet the agreed level of defense spending (two percent of gross domestic product).
The United States can improve and emphasize its own coalition education, training, and operational practices. International attendance at U.S. professional military institutions remains significant, but funding for the State Department's International Military Education and Training (IMET) program has been reduced. U.S. professional military education curricula could increase its emphasis on coalition operations. The NATO Center for Lessons Learned has produced several studies to capture lessons from recent coalition experiences, which would be useful guides to needed changes as well as required reading for U.S. professional military education. 
64
Cleveland and LTC Stuart Farris, "Toward Strategic Landpower," Army Magazine, July 2013, pp. 20-23. 64
65 Principal author's personal observation at multiple predeployment training for one-, two-, and three-star commands deploying to Afghanistan in 2009-2011; some attended NATO training held for coalition members in Europe. On multinational training, see also Spirtas et al., 2008.  More international immersive experiences would also benefit U.S. personnel, relatively few of whom attend foreign military schools such as the NATO Defense College (NDC) in Rome. In such an environment, U.S. personnel are immersed in an international community of actual and potential coalition partners where U.S. personnel are in the minority. At the five-month senior course at NDC in 2014, for example, only seven of the 78 participating officers and civilian officials were from the U.S. The others came from 28 countries, including 12 from non-NATO countries around the world. NDC is a senior service college, and the U.S. Army and Marine Corps provide military education level 1 ("senior service college") credit to those attending. U.S. senior service colleges have included substantial numbers of international attendees in the past 13 years, many of which are funded through the State Department's IMET program, but the majority and the environment is a U.S.-dominated one.
As for operational assignments, few U.S. military personnel experience deployment in a coalition or multinational organization that is not structured around a U.S. military command and staffed with a majority of U.S. personnel. An exception is those U.S. personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions such as those in the Sinai, Cyprus, or the Balkans. Such assignments could be encouraged as critical educational, training and broadening experiences. The most powerful incentive would be to include such experience as a criterion or credit toward promotion or command assignments.
Another way in which the United States could improve the multinational aspect of operations is to identify and deliberately plan to use specific expertise or skills that non-U.S. forces possess. The expertise of coalition partners such as Britain through its long conflict with Northern Ireland was usefully leveraged in reconciliation efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq, primarily through the person of the three-star general who led the reintegration cell in both MNF-I and ISAF. The national police or carabineri of Italy were useful in training Afghan police forces. Australia's Federal Police has a standing police advisory corps that has deployed to support stability and peacekeeping operations in over a half-dozen countries. 
66
Finally, the internal transformations that the UK and Australian forces are pursuing can provide valuable lessons for the U.S. force despite the latter's much greater size and reach. The UK and Australian armies are both emphasizing task organization at lower echelons and cross-functional personnel. The Australian Army is currently reorganizing to build "a force first around a mission" rather than focusing battle groupings around battalions. 
67
68
69
70 66
67
68
This study suggests that recognizing the likely continuities between the recent past and the possible future will provide a hedge against unwise abandonment of hard-won innovations in practice and thought. While budget decisions necessarily force reductions in capacity, many of the capabilities developed over the past 13 years merit retention at smaller scale. Some of those capabilities warrant further investment of time or resources to ensure they are refined to perform better in the future. And some ongoing gaps, if not addressed, represent a risk to future mission success. Some of those gaps may be remedied by improving interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational coordination, which can yield important efficiencies. The United States may find that other partners are better suited not only to perform certain needed roles but to conceptualize and lead them.
The tendency at the present moment, as the large commitments in Iraq and Afghanistan have ended, may be to completely eliminate capabilities that were developed and dismiss as irrelevant lessons that were only partially formulated and disseminated. This rush to turn the page on the past 13 years may impose a heavy price, outweighing the presumed savings gained, when the next U.S. intervention occurs. As Feaver noted, "The United States has a cyclical tendency to follow too much expansion with too much retrenchment, and vice versa. Policymakers often overcompensate, at least in their rhetoric, for the actions of their predecessors. Successful policy must avoid this temptation, as it judiciously mixes opportunities for cost-saving cuts with continued commitments to extended security for the nation and its diverse interests." 
71
RR-816-A 
9 7 8 0 8 3 3 0 8 7 7 5
62
64
National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds, NIC 2012-001,  December 2012, pp. 59-60.   
JCOA, 2012, p. 1.   
Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates, "Speech to the United States Military Academy (West Point, NY)," February
25, 2011.   
Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 274.
For the study of military innovation during the interwar years, see
Posen, 1984;
Tim Ripley, The Wehrmacht: The German Army in World War II, 1939-1945, Routledge,  2014, pp. 16-18: Richard M. Ogorkiewicz, Armored Forces, A History of Armored Forces and  Their Vehicles, New York: Arco Publishing, 1970, pp. 20-23,  
72-85.   
Jonathan House, Combined Arms  Warfare in the Twentieth Century, Lawrence, Kan.: University ofKansas, 2001, pp. 64-104.   
The National Archives states that there are 23,973 personnel files from the OSS between 1941 and 1945. Although small in size, the OSS led to the subsequent development of the Special Forces, its unconventional warfare doctrine, and the Army's psychological warfare department. National Archives, "Organization of the Office of Strategic Services (Record Group 226)," undated.
U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, "Occupation and Reconstruction ofJapan, 1945-52," undated.   
The post-World War II occupations were different in both scope and scale from the Allied occupation of the Rhineland at the end of the First World War. The occupation of the Rhineland was a military measure designed to create a buffer between France and Germany; it did not aim at the political reconstruction and democratization of Germany.
Andrew F. Krepinevich, The Army and Vietnam, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1986.    
Jonathan House, Combined Arms Warfare in the Twentieth Century, Lawrence, Kan.: University ofKansas, 2001, pp. 196-205. Special operations and CIA operations were also conducted in the Korean War.
Simon Dunstan, Vietnam Choppers, Helicopters in Battle 1950-1975, London: Osprey  Publishing, 2003, pp. 200-201.    
Dunstan, 2003, pp. 94-106.    
Thomas Mahnken, Technology and the American Way of War Since 1945, New York: Columbia University Press, 2010.
The Hukbalahap Rebellion was from 1949 to 1951 and ranged in size from 11,000 to 15,000 actors: Benedict J. Kervkliet, The Huk Rebellion: A Study of Peasant Revolt in the Philippines, University of California Press, 1977, p. 210. By comparison, the numbers for the People's Army of Vietnam range from 240,000 in 1960 to 643,000 in 1975; see Correlates of War data set: Max Boot, The Savage Wars of Peace: Small Wars and the Rise of American Power,New York: Basic Books, 2002, pp. 281-335.    
For the debate over the Army's lack of strategy in Vietnam, see Andrew F. Krepinevich, The Army and Vietnam, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986; Harry Summers, On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War, Novato, Calif.: Presido Press, 1995.
Krepinevich, 1986, pp. 3-26.   
Vietnam Studies: U.S.Army Special Forces, 1961-1971, Center for Military History Publication 90-23, Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, 1989; Robert M. Cassidy, "Back to the Street Without Joy: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Vietnam and Other Small Wars," Parameters, Summer 2004, p. 76.
28 CORDS and future CIA director William Colby even goes far as to label the period 1971-1972 as "victory won" and suggest that thanks to CORDS the 1972 offensive included "no substantial guerrilla action." William Colby and James McCargar, Lost Victory: A Firsthand Account of America's Sixteen-Year Involvement in Vietnam, Chicago, Ill.: Contemporary Books,
1989, pp. 291, 363.29  
Krepinevich, 1986
Conrad Crane, Avoiding Vietnam, the U.S. Army's Response to Defeat in Southeast Asia, U.S. Army War College, 2002, p. 2.
R. Cody Phillips, Operation Just Cause: The Incursion into Panama, Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History, 2006, pp. 42-43.    
Bob Seals, "The 'Green Beret Affair': A Brief Introduction," Military History Online, 2007.   
Crane, 2002, pp. 15-18.    
Larry Wentz, Lessons from Bosnia: The IFOR Experience, Washington, D.C.: DoD CCRP/ NDU, 1997, pp. 3-4.   
John Gordon and Bruce Pirnie, "Everybody Wanted Tanks, Heavy Forces in Operation Iraqi Freedom," Joint Force Quarterly,Issue 39, 2005, pp. 84-90. Two bright spots in initial stages of Operation Iraqi Freedom were the very effective, timely air support that the ground forces received, as well as the much better situational awareness of the location of friendly forces due to the just-fielded Blue Force Tracker system that provided near-real-time updates of the whereabouts of friendly (Blue) units.
William H. McRaven, "Testimony to the U.S. Senate on the Department of Defense Authorization of Appropriations for Fiscal Years 2015 and the Future Years Defense Program," U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee, March 11, 2014.
63 Charles H. Briscoe et al., Weapon of Choice: ARSOF in Afghanistan, Fort Leavenworth, Kan.: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2003; Linda Robinson, One Hundred Victories: Special Ops and the Future of American Warfare, New York: PublicAffairs,
2013.
64
Press, 2007.   65  Stanley A. McChrystal, My Share of the Task: A Memoir, New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2013.
Thomas S.Szayna, Angela O'Mahony, Jennifer Kavanagh, Stephen Watts, Bryan A.  Frederick, Tova C. Norlen, and Phoenix Voorhies, Conflict Trends and Conflict Drivers: An  Empirical Assessment of Historical Conflict Patterns and Future Conflict Projections, unpublished RAND Corporation research, 2013, p. 30.   
The military defines strategy as "a prudent idea or set of ideas for employing the instruments of national power in a synchronized and integrated fashion to achieve theater, national, and/or multinational objectives" (U.S. Department of Defense, Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint Publication 1-02
, 2014, p. 244). Essential to the concept of strategy is the process of identifying priorities, articulating assumptions, making decisions, eliminating options, bringing goals in line with available resources, and choosing what not to do as much as what to do.
Two recent examinations of difficulties in the formulation of U.S. strategy are Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., and Barry D. Watts, Regaining Strategic Competence, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2009, and Francis G. Hoffman, "Enhancing America's Strategic Competency," in Alan Cromartie, ed., Liberal Wars, London: Routledge, forthcoming. See also Project on National Security Reform, Forging a New Shield, 2008; Clark A. Murdock et al., Beyond Goldwater-Nichols: Defense Reform for a New Strategic Era, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies, Phase 1 Report, 2004, and Phase II Report, 2006; Steve Metz, Strategic Landpower Task Force Research Report, Strategic Studies Institute,
October 3, 2013;
See, for example, Colin S. Gray, The Strategy Bridge, New York: Oxford University Press, 2010, and Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
  4  Eliot A.Cohen, Supreme Command: Soldiers, Statesmen, and Leadership in Wartime, New  York: Free Press, 2002. See alsoPeter Feaver and Richard H. Kohn, eds., Soldiers and Civilians: The Civil-Military Gap and American National Security, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,   
2001.5Strachan, 2013,
p. 76.6  Robert M. Gates, Duty: Memoirs of a Secretary at War. New York: Alfred A.Knopf, 2014,  pp. 301, 338-339, 352, 365-369, 381-383.   
Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1977.
Colin S. Gray, "Irregular Enemies and the Essence of Strategy: Can the American Way of War Adapt?" Carlisle, Pa.: Strategic Studies Institute, 2006.
Bob Woodward, Plan of Attack, New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004. Also, regarding the decision to go to war in Afghanistan, in contrast with many observers who believe that the exigency of responding to the 9/11 attack excused the lack of a strategy, Strachan writes: "[Defense secretary] Rumsfeld's response was to bypass the problem of strategy, not confront it. In 2001-02, he, and with him the President and the vice-president, marginalized the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. . . . The Americans were saved from the consequences of their own temerity because of the sudden and wholly unexpected collapse of Kabul, thanks to the military contribution of the Northern Alliance"(Strachan, 2013, p. 68).
Nora Bensahel, Olga Oliker, Keith  Crane, Rick Brennan, Jr, Heather S. Gregg, Thomas Sullivan, and Andrew Rathmell, After Saddam: Prewar Planning and the Occupation of Iraq, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-642-A, 2008, p. 233.
H.R. McMaster, "On War: Lessons to Be Learned," Survival, Vol.50, No. 1, 2008, p. 25.   
Peter Feaver, "The Right to Be Right: Civil-Military Relations and the Iraq Surge Decision," International Security,Vol. 35, No. 4, Spring 2011. See also
Woodward, 2004.
Bob Woodward, Obama's Wars, New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011, pp. 43, 246.   
H.R. McMaster, "Decentralization vs Centralization," in Thomas Donnelly and Frederick W. Kagan, Lessons for a Long War: How America Can Win on New Battlefields, Washington, D.C.: AEI, 2010, pp. 64-92
.
21
An Integrated Civilian-Military Process Is a Necessary, But Not Sufficient, Condition of Effective National Security Policy and StrategyThe need for an effective, integrated process for making policy and strategy has been widely recognized, and various directives have sought to establish procedures, but current practices appear less rather than more functional. Moreover, a lack of trust and skepticism about efficacious ways to achieve objectives at reasonable cost have complicated the civil-military dialogue. One workshop participant noted that in his experience of administrations since the Vietnam War, three factors affected the conduct of national security strategy: the President's own leadership, the experience of his team, and the interaction of the principal members, which in turn affected whether the established process worked and produced sound policy and strategy. The George H. W. Bush national security cabinet included significant experience in previous Republican administrations, relative harmony among the principals, and a National Security Adviser who played the role of arbiter in a process that was considered inclusive and orderly.
22
Bensahel et al., 2008, p. 238.   
Gates, 2014, pp. 352, 371.    
This observation was also documented in an earlier study, Clark A. Murdock et al., Beyond Goldwater-Nichols: Defense Reform for a New Strategic Era, Phase 1 Report, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 2004, pp. 61-62.
28 "Panetta: 'My Mission Has Always Been to Keep the Country Safe,'" National Public Radio,February 3,  
2013.29  Center for the Study of the Presidency & Congress, Project on National Security Reform, "Forging a New Shield," November 2008.
Janine Davidson, "The Contemporary Presidency: Civil-Military Friction and Presidential Decision Making: Explaining the Broken Dialogue," Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol.43, No. 1, 2013, p. 141.  
  31  Peter Feaver, "Crisis as Shirking: An Agency Theory Explanation of the Souring of AmericanCivil-Military Relations," Armed Forces & Society, Vol. 24, No. 3, 1998, p. 415.   
Davidson, 2013, p. 143.    
The Clinton administration issued Presidential Decision Directive 56 (PPD), "Managing Complex Contingency Operations," in May 1997.
Francis G. Hoffman, "Enhancing America's Strategic Competency," in Alan Cromartie, ed., Liberal Wars, London: Routledge, forthcoming.
USAID-USSOCOM, Joint Sahel Project: Development Game After Action Report (AAR), May 27, 2014.
Rupert Smith,  The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World, New York: RandomHouse, 2008.   
Otto Von Bismarck, Bismarck: The Man and the Statesman, Volume 1, New York: Cosimo, Inc., 2005; Hans J. Morgenthau and Kenneth W. Thompson, Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, New York: Knopf, 1978.
H.R. McMaster, "Decentralization vs Centralization," in Thomas Donnelly and Frederick W. Kagan, Lessons for a Long War: How America Can Win on New Battlefields, Washington, D.C.: AEI, 2010, p. 84.
Eliot A. Cohen, "The Historical Mind and Military Strategy," Orbis, Vol. 49, No. 4,  Fall 2005, pp. 575-588.   
Conrad Crane, "Phase IV Operations: Where Wars Are Really Won," Military Review, May-June 2005, p. 11.
Dobbins, 2010, p. 71 (emphasis added).
Nora Bensahel, in Spirtas et al., 2008; and Senior Civilian Representative Report,  pp. 13-14.    
The Australian Army, Land Warfare Doctrine 1: The Fundamentals of Land Power 2014, Australian Army Headquarters, 2014; UK Ministry of Defence, Future Land Operating Concept: Joint Concept Note 2/12, The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre, 2012.
  96  Brigadier Mick Ryan, "After Afghanistan: A Small Army and the Strategic Employment of Land Power," Security Challenges, forthcoming.
The information in this paragraph is from a RAND visit to NSHQ in May 2014 to receive briefings and observe training and education courses at Mons and Chievres, Belgium, facilities.
Lincoln P. Bloomfield, Jr., "Brave New World War," Campaigning: Journal of the Department of OperationalArt and Campaigning, Joint Advanced Warfighting School,  Summer 2006, p. 15.   
Gates,  
2011, pp. 118-119.   
Strachan, 2013, p. 241.   
Terrence K. Kelly, James Dobbins, David A. Shlapak, David C. Gompert, Eric Heginbotham, Peter Chalk, and Lloyd Thrall, The U.S.Army in Asia, 2030-2040, Santa Monica,  Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-474-A, 2014, pp. iii, 40.  
6 Once such study, whose findings are described below, is Thomas S.Szayna, Angela  O'Mahony, Jennifer Kavanagh, Stephen Watts, Bryan A. Frederick, Tova C. Norlen, and  Phoenix Voorhies, Conflict Trends and Conflict Drivers An Empirical Assessment of Historical  Conflict Patterns and Future Conflict Projections, unpublished RAND Corporation research,  2013
.7 National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds, NIC 2012-001,  December 2012, pp. 59-60.   
Janis Berzins, "Russia's New Generation Warfare in Ukraine: Implications for Latvian Defense Policy," National Defence Academy of Latvia Policy Paper Number 02, April 2014.
Szayna, O'Mahony, et al., 2013, p. 169.    
Francis G. Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars. Arlington, Va.: Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 2007.
William J. Perry and John P. Abizaid, Ensuring a Strong U.S. Defense for the Future, Washington D.C.: United States Institute of Peace, 2014, pp. 14-15.   
"Trolls" are organized groups of people who leave messages or comments on websites for the direct purpose of shaping international opinion. Max Seddon, "Documents Show How Russia's Troll Army Hit America," BuzzFeed World, June 2, 2014.
See Strachan (2013) for a description of the program and collected works, including two previous volumes.
Colin S. Gray, Defining and Achieving Decisive Victory, Carlisle, Pa.: U.S. Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, 2002.
J. Boone Bartholomees, "Theory of Victory," Parameters, Summer 2008, p. 28.
LTG Charles T. Cleveland, USASOC commanding general, shared this insight with the study team and used it in developing the idea of long-duration special operations "campaigns."
RAND was provided with a draft version of the concept, published as U.S. Department of the Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The U.S. Army Operating Concept: Win in a Complex World, Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, October 7, 2014.
U.S. Department of theArmy, Army Posture Statement 2014, 2014, p. 9.    
This information comes from RAND interviews conducted with U.S. military personnel at the U.S.Army Combined Arms Command, Fort Leavenworth, Kan., August 2013.   
Amos, 2014.
SOCOM Lessons Learned Operational and Strategic Studies Branch, "Special Operations Joint Task Force-Afghanistan (SOJTF-A): From Concept to Execution . . . The First Year," 2013. RAND has also conducted two classified assessments of the SOJTF-A.
52
."
53
U.S. Army Special Operations Command, "ARSOF 2022," 2013, and "USASOC Silent Quest Facilitated War Game 14-1 Executive Summary and Final Report," 2014.
In addition to the revised version of Joint Publication 3-05, Special Operations, in July 2014, Army Doctrinal Pamphlet 3-05 was published in August 2012.
USASOC, Assessing Revolutionary and Insurgent Strategies, Casebook on Insurgency and Revolutionary Warfare: 23 Summary Accounts; Casebook on Insurgency and Revolutionary Warfare,Volume II 1962-2009; Human Factors Considerations of Underground in Insurgencies, 2d Edition,  2013; and Undergrounds in Insurgent, Revolutionary and Resistance Warfare, 2d Edition, 2013.   
government, and in land and This research was sponsored by 
U.S. Army Special Operations Command
RAND Arroyo Center's Strategy, Doctrine, and Resources Program. RAND Arroyo Center
RAND Corporation
United States Army
Unique Identification Code (PUIC)
HQD146692
BCT Brigade Combat Team CIA Central Intelligence Agency COIN counterinsurgency CORDS Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support CT counterterrorism DoD U.S. Department of Defense FID foreign internal defense Historian
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The lessons from the past 13 years of war formulated here as well as other studies and analyses suggest that steps are needed to enhance U.S. strategic competence. 
36
37
38
39
The goal of reforming the NSC is to provide a locus for strategic policy development-studying problems, crafting options, and