# ID: 1612f73a941743ea9649761a39cedf7a
# Title: At the Limit of Complexity: British Military Operations in North Persia and the Caucasus 1918
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
In a largely forgotten chapter of the First World War, Britain sent a small task force to the Caucasus and Northern Persia in 1918. Named Dunsterforce after its commander, Major General Dunsterville, this group attempted to organize indigenous forces to defeat an Ottoman Empire offensive to seize the southern Caucasus. A comprehensive campaign study of Dunsterforce and an analysis of its successes and failures provide insights into the complexities of modern armed conflict. An understanding of the strategic environment in which Dunsterforce operated, the interests of the various actors in the region, and the lines of operation that Dunsterville chose to accomplish his objectives may enable current and future practitioners of the art of war to face the difficulties inherent in such operations. Dunsterforce's successes were due to the coordinated and skillful use of all elements of British military and national power, no matter how inadequate the actual military power was. Yet there are limits to what skill alone can achieve and those limits were revealed during the operation. The scant troops available, conflicting guidance from higher headquarters, lackluster will of indigenous forces, and immense complexity of the operating environment ensured that Dunsterforce did not achieve all the lofty goals envisioned by the British political leaders.
August 27, the Turks have made a successful attack on our very weak right -our losses being three officers and 70 men of the N. Staffords killed, and 11 officers and 35 men wounded. The attack was a very determined one and had Baku troops been there I'm afraid Baku would have been taken . . . As it is, the risk of the town being taken is so great that I dare not keep this Diary by me anymore.
-Major General L. C. Dunsterville, Personal Diaries Prologue On the evening of 14 September 1918 the sun set on the embattled port of Baku.
A fierce struggle raged between British troops and the Army of Islam for control of the southern ridges that dominated the city. The elegant metropolis built by oil wealth on the Caspian Sea was about to fall to the Ottomans. 
1
2
How and why did a British task force find itself deep in the Caucasus, far from support, amongst conflicting revolutionary and ethnic factions, fighting the Ottoman Army in the final months of World War I? While the British retreated from Baku, the tide had irrevocably turned in the greater conflict. Over a month earlier, on 8 August, 1918, the British Army offensive near Amiens on the Western Front had resulted in what Germany's de facto military ruler, Erich Ludendorff, called "the black day of the German 
Army." 6
The collapse of the Tsarist Russian Empire left a dangerous gap to the north of British Forces in the Middle East. 
7
8
2
Area of Operations 1917-1918   Source: Created by Sven Hoogerheide, concept by author.
Furthermore, the disruptions caused by the First World War and the Russian revolution of the previous year unleashed a cauldron of conflicting groups in the Caucasus seeking an advantage from the confused situation. 
9
A campaign study of Dunsterforce and an analysis of its successes and failures provide insights into the complexities of modern armed conflict. An understanding of the strategic environment in which Dunsterforce operated, the interests of the various actors in the region, and the lines of operation that Dunsterville chose to accomplish his objectives may assist current and future practitioners of the art of war to face the difficulties inherent in such operations.
In addition, if "what's past is prologue," 10 then there are few better regions in the world to study military operations. In the Caucasus, the Eurasian landmass meets the Middle East. Flanked by the Black and Caspian Seas, ringed by beautiful mountains, and cursed with abundant natural resources it has long been coveted by great powers. 
11
9
10 William Shakespeare, The Tempest, Act 2, Scene I.
11 Dominic Lieven, The End of Tsarist Russia (New York: Viking, 2015), 202.
pipelines through the independent states of the Caucasus will decide how much Russia is able to dominate its former satellites. 
12
13
The modern descendants of the regional players in this study will be familiar to followers of current events: Turkey, Iran, Russia, Iraq, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Kurdistan. 
14
The United States is not the first to be seduced by the siren song of having proxies fight our wars for us. Nor will we be the last. In 1918, the British Army was committed to the decisive struggle on the Western Front and exhausted from years of bloodletting.
12 Zbigniew Brzezinski, The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy and its Geostrategic Imperatives (New York: Perseus, 1997), 124, 129. 
13
14
15
There were no troops left to defeat the Ottoman offensive in the Caucasus. As such, British policy makers envisioned deploying a small group of elite soldiers to organize the resistance of ethnic groups in the Caucasus to contain the Ottomans.
Yet the daring and resourcefulness of Dunsterforce could not completely overcome the tyranny of the principles of war. The task force lacked the mass necessary to defeat the enemy alone and Dunsterville was unable to establish unity of command over the disparate groups he needed to mobilize. Riven by conflicting ethnic loyalties, and opposing political agendas, these local forces highlight the complex human terrain in which Dunsterforce was required to operate.
The requirement for the U.S. military to operate in complex environments against, and with, multiple actors with diverse interests will continue. 
16
forces but there remains much more to learn. Looking through the cracked mirror that is the study of history can provide some of those insights.
Later, I became a Foreign Service Officer for the Department of State and an Army Reserve Foreign Area Officer. I hope to help synchronize US strategic, operational, and tactical objectives and better leverage all elements of national power to defend our interests. This study attempts to holistically analyze all levels of war and provide the context in which British policy makers made their decisions.
As students at the US Army Command and General Staff College, we are taught to balance the ends, ways, and means necessary to achieve our strategic objectives. 17 That is not the story you are about to read. For the British in the Caucasus, the ends were ambitious, the means were inadequate, and the ways were unclear. It closely resembles the wars that the US has recently fought, and will be asked to fight in the future. If this study can provide some insight to my colleagues then it will have served its purpose.
Today, the political and military leaders of the United States believe that we face a geo-strategic environment more complex than ever before. Yet the world has always been complex. 
18
17
18
Complexity is defined as having a large number of interacting elements, and the interaction of those elements can cause "disproportionally major consequences." 
19
20
21
A historian has described Dunsterforce's campaign as the "strangest of many twists on the road to victory." 
22
23
19
20
21
22
Palmer, Victory 1918
(New York: Atlantic, 1998), 195. 23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
31
32
33
34
35
36
35
Ultimately, Dunsterforce was able to achieve its military objective to delay the capture of Baku's oil fields by the Central Powers and stabilize the security situation in Northwest Persia. Conversely, the British failed to achieve its larger political objectives to strengthen the ethnic groups in Caucasia in order to deny the strategic region to both the Ottomans and Bolsheviks. Its successes were due to the coordinated and skillful use of all elements of British military and national power, no matter how inadequate such actual military power was. Yet there are limits to what skill alone can achieve and those limits were revealed during the operation. The scant troops available, conflicting guidance from higher headquarters, lackluster will of indigenous forces, and immense complexity of the operating environment ensured that Dunsterforce did not achieve all the lofty goals envisioned by the British political leaders in London and Delhi. The men of Dunsterforce operated at the limit of complexity and beyond.
CHAPTER 2 THE GEOPOLITICAL SITUATION 1917-1918   Our Consuls in Turkey and India, our agents, etc., must rouse the whole Moslem world into wild rebellion . . . if we are going to shed our blood, then England must at least lose India. 
1
The Global Strategic Environment
In January 1918, none of the belligerents could confidently predict the outcome of the ongoing titanic struggle known to us now as the First World War. The conflict had begun over three years before, and the size and scope of the war dwarfed the expectations of both sides. Amidst this uncertainty, few military and political leaders believed the war would end within the year. 2 Yet all sides realized 1917 ushered in profound political and military changes that altered the calculus of the conflict. As a result, the belligerents braced for a climactic year in the struggle, none sure of the outcome. impatiently awaited the arrival of American forces to reinforce their badly depleted armies and alter the balance of power on the Western Front. 
3
4
5
6
7
3
4
5 Alan Moorehead, The Russian Revolution (New York: Harper and Row, 1958), 233. 
6
When the war began, the Ottoman Empire controlled much of the Middle East. Its capital was the ancient city of Constantinople, also referred to as Istanbul. Although it ruled many people and religions, its core was Turkish Anatolia and its power resided firmly with the Sunni Muslim Turks. 
10
In 1908, a group of energetic liberal reformers, popularly known as the Young Turks, seized power and made the Sultan a figurehead. 
11
12
13
13
15
16
Enver dominated the formulation of Ottoman military strategy during the First World War. Dynamic, creative, and aggressive, he sought glorious military victories for the Ottoman Empire. The pursuit of such grand designs and his innate optimism led him to overestimate the capabilities of his forces and underestimate the obstacles in his path. 
17
18
14
19
21
22
23
24
25
19 Stone,
190. 20
21
26
27
28
29
30
By 1917, the British were advancing in the Arabian Peninsula, Palestine, and Iraq, then known to the British as Mesopotamia. In the Arabian Peninsula, Arab irregular forces famously aided by British officers such as T.E. Lawrence seized isolated garrison 
26
27
28
29
1917. 31
32
33
34
35
The center third of Persia would remain independent of foreign domination. 
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
The subsequent Russian collapse following the revolution left a gaping hole to the north and east of the British in Mesopotamia. 
43
37 Sinnreich,
138. 38 Moberley,
36. 39
40
41 Townshend,
[3]
[4]
43
44
Entente successes on the Middle Eastern Fronts placed increasing strain on the war-weary Ottoman Empire and resulted in the loss of significant Ottoman territory. Yet the Russian collapse in 1917 provided new opportunities to make up for those losses. The temporary weakness of their colossal nemesis, Russia, encouraged the Ottomans to redraw the geopolitical boundaries. 
45
46
47
49
50
51
52
54
56
58
60
55
56
57
66
67
62
63 Ibid., 383. 
64
65 Ibid., 181.
66 Lieven, 203.  amongst these ethnicities and outside powers. 
68
The Russians had long dominated the region but the revolution splintered their power. Tsarist army officers, nobles, Cossacks, and some businessmen began to coalesce in order to reinstate the Tsarist regime. Across the Caucasus, they allied with any group willing to oppose the Bolsheviks. In addition, the Tsarist Russian Army in the region had been victorious on the battlefield and the relationship between the men and their officers stronger. As a result, the spontaneous demobilization and violent reprisals against officers that occurred on the Eastern Front were slower to appear in the Russian forces of the Caucasus and Persia. 
69
70
71
72
68
69
70
71 Reynolds,
Shattering Empires,
[191]
[192]
73
74
They braced for an Ottoman onslaught and sought any allies who could help them withstand it. 
75
76
77
78
79
Stone,
192. 74
75 
Kennan,
167. 76 McMeekin,
382. 77
78
Kazemzadeh,
4. 79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
81
82
83
84
85 Reynolds,
Shattering Empires,
192. 86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
89
90
91
92
93
There is a dry wind blowing through the East and the parched grasses wait the spark. And the wind is blowing towards the Indian border. Whence comes that wind, think you?
-John Buchan, Greenmantle
The political and military objectives of Dunsterforce
In the midst of the First World War, the best-selling novel Greenmantle thrilled British readers. The tale recounts the daring exploits of British intelligence officers stopping a German inspired plot for the Ottomans to advance against the Russians in the Caucasus. According to the plot, the Germans and Ottomans hoped to enflame the Muslim communities in Central Asia and British India. Published in 1916, over a year before the organization and dispatch of Dunsterforce, it perfectly captures long-held British fears. 1 Following an 1857 rebellion of Indian soldiers, British policymakers held a deep-seated anxiety for the security of their most prized colonial possession. 2 German and Ottoman plans to initiate a Muslim holy war against the Entente only seemed to confirm the worst of these fears.
1 John Buchan, Greenmantle (Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1916), 17.
2 Townshend, 24. As British Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon exclaimed, "As long as we rule India we are the greatest power in the world. If we lose it we shall drop straight away to a third rate power." David Reynolds, The Long Shadow: The legacies of the Great War in the Twentieth Century (New York: Norton and Company, 2014), 90.
The Russian collapse destroyed the carefully constructed cordon sanitaire to block the Central Powers in the region. 
3
5
6
7
India, 1918
-1923," The International History Review 35, no. 2: 275. 4
5 Fisher,
163
6
7
Russia. 8
11
9
10
11 Buchan, 289.   12 Ulrichsen, 21.
Committee -of the British war cabinet, and its chair Lord George Curzon, who were most adamant to block the Ottoman thrust into the Caucasus. 
13
14
Kelly,
276. 14
15
16
17
21
How well did the British government understand the situation in the Caucasus? In spite of a relatively developed intelligence and diplomatic network, the situation was much too fluid and confused for policymakers to fully grasp, hunched over pristine maps thousands of miles away. The ability of these ethnic groups to successfully resist an Ottoman military offensive was questionable. Nor did British policy makers fully comprehend the interests and objectives of the Bolsheviks or the other revolutionary organizations in the area that had sprung up in the wake of the Russian Empire's downfall. The British also did not understand the depth of the growing discord between the Ottomans and Germans, nor the strength of armed Persian nationalists astride the line of advance of any British task force sent to the Caucasus.
What was not understood or known could be overcome by the skill and savvy of the right men, or so thought the political and military leaders who conceived this plan to accomplish British political and military objectives in the region. According to the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General William Robertson, What was needed (in Persia and Trans-Caspia) was to dispatch to the centres of intrigue and disaffection a few Englishmen of the right type to give our version of the state of affairs, furnish them with money to pay handsomely for information and services rendered, and provide them with just sufficient escort to ensure their personal safety. 
22
1. Protection of the Christian Armenians from the Turks. 2. Retention of as many Turkish troops as possible on the Caucasian front, in order to relieve pressure on Mesopotamia and Palestine; and 3. Checking the Pan-Islamic and Pan-Turanian propaganda, in order that it might not create unrest in Central Asia, Persia, Afghanistan, and India. 
23
24
The task force was originally expected to proceed all the way to Tiflis, far beyond Baku, and assume command of the military mission already operating there in order to "reorganize broken units of Russian, Georgian, and Armenian soldiery, and restore the 22 Quoted in Townshend, 419.
23 Colonel Richard A. Steel, "British Measures in Trans-Caucasus and Armenia" (9 February 1918) provided informally to the American Ambassador in London, National Archives, Department of State. George F. Kennan, 187. This document provided to the United States Government lists the protection of Christian Armenians first. While not necessarily misleading, this was most likely an attempt to garner American support as the United States was not interested in the defense of the British Empire. battle-line against the Turkish invasion." 
25
26
As a result, the force was then tasked with only securing Northwest Persia. When the Bolshevik government in Baku fell and Britain again had the opportunity to deploy to the Caucasus, a fierce debate erupted amongst British leaders on the wisdom of such a move before finally authorizing the force to proceed to Baku.
27
28
29
28
29
following the elections that made David Lloyd George Prime Minister in December 1916. 
30
31
32
33
30
31
32
33 Ibid.
34 Ibid., 283.
Presumably, the idea of the Dunsterville mission and its objective emanated from 'The Eastern Committee of the War Cabinet.' I was not consulted in the matter and knew nothing of the political reasons which prompted its dispatch, but had the Eastern Committee done me the honor of asking for my opinion, I should certainly have advised against the whole project. 
35
Long-term British policy interests in the region
The true goals of the British mission to the Caucasus have been a source of debate among historians. Numerous Soviet accounts written during the Cold War claim the expedition's ulterior motives were to crush the communist revolution and secure Baku's oil for the British Empire. 36 This is not surprising considering Allied interventions elsewhere in Russia following the revolution 37 and British intelligence efforts to overthrow the Bolshevik commune in Baku in order to enable the task force to enter the city. 
38
35
36 
Mitrokhin,
11. 37
38
39 PRO CAB 24/72/30, Memorandum to the Cabinet by the Secretary of State for India; George Kennan, "Reviewed Work: The British Intervention in Transcaspia, 1918-1919 By C. H. Ellis," Slavic Review 23, no. 2 (June 1964): 348. repercussions of directly targeting the Bolsheviks. According to the British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, "any overt step taken against the Bolsheviks might only strengthen their determination to make peace, and might be used to inflame anti-Allied feelings in Russia, and so defeat the very object we were aiming at." 40 However, the British long-term interests in the region did include maintaining access to the significant oil reserves in Baku and Persia. In addition, British policy makers were beginning to formulate a plan to govern large tracts of the Middle East in order to secure India. 
41
42
40
41
44
He had graduated from the Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst in 1884 but transferred from the Regular Army to the Indian Army in search of more active service, after which followed a military career on the Indian subcontinent with a deployment to China to suppress the Boxer Rebellion. 
46
47
48
46
47
Perrett and Anthony Lord, The Czar's British Squadron (London: William Kimber, 1981), 163;
Palmer, 195. 48
Brigadier General) J. J. Bryon had made the decision to recruit 'colonials' after witnessing their impressive performance during the Boer War. 
58
Army. 59
Surprisingly, the assigned armored car unit had already fought in the planned area of operations. It was originally led by British Member of Parliament Oliver Locker Lampson and was an armored car unit of the Royal Naval Air Service; a result of First Sea Lord Winston Churchill's interest in technological innovation. 
62
58
59
62
63
64
65
66
67
The task force was known as the "Hush-Hush Army" due to the secrecy surrounding its formation and objectives. 
68
63
64
65
66
67
68 Ford,
192.
69
In addition, the 1st Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC) Wireless Signal Squadron was assigned to establish a communication network. As the campaign developed, a small air and naval contingent extended the reconnaissance ability and reach of the expedition. The Royal Navy, under the command of Captain David Norris,   retrofitted existing vessels to serve as troop and command ships becoming the first members of the British Navy to operate in the Caspian Sea. 
70
69
70
were already operating in Persia. Incredibly, British consular officials were operating in all the major Persian cities and into the Caucasus. 
71
The Imperial Bank of Persia was a British-run organization with branches in many cities of Persia. 
72
In addition, British national level intelligence organizations would support Dunsterforce. The British Directorate of Military Intelligence was reorganized in 1916 and for a short time in 1918, intelligence and operations were combined into a single organization (MIO) responsible for all matters "concerning Russia, Rumania, Siberia, Central Asia, Caucasus, Persia and Afghanistan." 73 MIO and its commander Colonel Richard A. Steele helped develop the original concept for Dunsterforce. 
74
71
72
73
74
75
76
It is clear that the political and military objectives assigned to such a small ad-hoc task force were considerable, regardless of the other elements of British national power available. Dunsterville understood those challenges. Unlike his later memoirs, his diary at the time highlights his personal doubts and awareness of the significance and uncertainty of the challenges his organization would face. On 25 January 1918, he wrote: I wonder if anyone will ever realize what a forlorn hope my mission is? I am proud and glad to have it and I think I can accomplish what I am told to, but that thought is based only on my optimism and not at all on calculation. If I were appreciating the situation for another man, I should say, "can't be done", but I can never say that for myself. I agree with the Government that it is worth trying and the loss of a few lives etc., is a trifle compared with what may be gained. I am up against a hostile-neutral, almost anarchical Persia and a possible hostile reception from our own friends, the Russians. The Turks at Kifri are within 50 miles of my road at the start, and one aeroplane, if it spots us, gets the lot as we cannot defend ourselves from the sky. We pass through 600 miles of barren, cold country, between 5000 and 7000 feet, and no supplies, and through Kurds all the time who are the same sort of independent robbers that the Afridis 77 are. 
78
Foremost amongst the British leader's criteria for the mission was the selection of individuals with the right human qualities. What could be achieved depended on both the leader and men selected and the interplay of numerous variables, many beyond the control of Britain. Dunsterville wrote in his diary on 23 January:
My brain is full of men and horses, guns, rifles, equipment, ammunition, supplies, petrol, motor-cars, aeroplanes, clothing, cold, snow, marches, languages, tribes, politics, information and rumours, spies, pro and anti, finance, routes, tactics, strategy, geography, history. 
3
4
6
After passing through the forward line of British troops and entering the Zagros Mountains that mark the border area between Mesopotamia and Persia they began to face increasing difficulties. 
7
8
5
6
7 Ford,
190. 8
Upon entering Persia, Dunsterville and his men witnessed evidence of the immense chaos and suffering that stalked the region. Undisciplined mobs of Russian soldiers clogged the road, retreating in disorder in order to claim the free land they believed the Bolsheviks' rise to power promised them. 10 Meanwhile, famine was ravaging the Persian population. The convoy encountered dead and dying civilians along the road and starving inhabitants in the villages through which they passed. 11 Furthermore, the breakdown of Russian authority in northern Persia enabled a Persian nationalist organization, known as the "Jangalis", to control the densely forested and canalized terrain that covered the approaches to the Caspian Sea. This insurgent group was hostile to the British and sympathetic to the Bolsheviks. 12 Mirza Kuchik Khan led the Jangalis, an opponent the British grudgingly respected as "a man of character and personality and a strong nationalist." 
13
9
10 MacDonnell, 179. 
11
12 Pezhmann Dailami, "The Bolsheviks and the Jangali Revolutionary Movement,  1915-1920," Cahiers du Monde Russe et Sovietique 31, no. 1 (January-March 1990): 47. 
13
14
15
16
18
It is in these phases that one can discern the lines of operation Dunsterville chose to accomplish his objectives. Simultaneously, major events were unfolding in the Caucasus. 
14
15
19
20
The Ottomans duly produced a "Caucasus Committee" to lobby for the return of Muslim lands in Russia to the Ottoman Empire. On 13 January, the Bolsheviks countered with a decree entitled "On Armenia", signed by Lenin and "Commissar for Nationalities" Joseph Stalin, recognizing the right of Armenians to self-determination and for Armenian refugees to return to their homeland. It also dictated the creation of an Armenian militia and assigned ethnic Armenian Stepan Shaumian to act as a commissar for a Soviet of People's deputies in the Caucasus. 
21
22
23
24
The collapse of Tsarist Russian authority in the Caucasus had thrown the region into chaos. Political and ethnic groups, and combinations of the two, jockeyed for advantage. Outside of Baku, the most powerful socialist political group in the Caucasus was the Mensheviks. They believed that Russia was not yet ready for a true socialist 
21
22
25
26
The Armenians, on the other hand, had long been controlled by a secretive organization called the Dashnaktsutiun. This organization and its adherents, known as Dashnaks, were socialist in outlook but primarily dedicated to freeing the Armenian people from both Ottoman and Russian domination. 
27
28
29
25
26 Suny,
83. 27
28
29
30
Dunsterforce would have to navigate amongst this human terrain. Although in many ways opposing ideologies, the Armenians and Social Revolutionaries' interests temporarily aligned with that of Dunsterforce. In the confused political situation, groups across the political spectrum made alliances of convenience to further their aims and ensure their survival. For the creators of the Commissariat, the leap into de-facto independence was taken with trepidation. The Georgian Menshevik leader, Noi Jordania, bemoaned, Now a Misfortune has befallen us. The connection with Russia has been broken and Transcaucasia has been left alone. We have to stand on our own feet and either help ourselves or perish through anarchy. 
33
As Russian soldiers streamed home from the Caucasian front, little remained to block the Ottomans. An Armenian Corps, a Georgian force, a smattering of Russian volunteers, as well as a division of Greeks and local Tartar tribesmen formed to defend the Caucasus. 
34
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
35
36
37 MacDonell, 189. 
38
Kazemzadeh,
117. 39 MacDonell,
198.
40
41
43
44
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
53
54
55
56
One such man was Captain Goldsmith. British military intelligence assigned Captain Goldsmith to "act as a military advisor . . . in the organization of regular Kurdish and Turkish Armenian forces for the purpose of raiding and destroying the Turkish lines of communication between Diarbekr 58 and Mosul." 59 They subsequently placed him under the command of Dunsterville as an intelligence officer. 
60
Unknown to Dunsterville, it was a result of Goldsmith's negotiations with the Jangalis that they did not attack the main convoy. However, the Jangalis demanded in return that the British force not remain on Persian soil. 
61
62
58
59 PRO WO 95/4960, Report from Major G. M. Goldsmith, acting British Military Agent, Army of Caucasus Front to the Director of Military Intelligence (DMI), London, 1 July 1919. 
60
61
62
On 18 February, Dunsterville told Goldsmith that the main party's arrival in the Caucasus would be delayed and instructed him to proceed onward to Tiflis and report to Colonel Pike. Chaos reigned along the route as Tartars attempted to disarm retreating Russian troops. In Tiflis, Pike ordered Goldsmith to the famous fortress city of Erzerum, then withstanding the Ottoman offensive. He arrived just in time to witness the Russian and Armenian defense collapse. Goldsmith helped evacuate 4,000 Armenian women and children and before the city fell, Goldsmith used explosives to destroy a tire factory and deny this equipment to the advancing Ottomans. 
63
64
65
64
65
66
67
When the Russian Revolution brought turmoil to the region, MacDonell offered his services to the British Army and was given a major's commission. 
68
69
67 MacDonnell, 82. 
68
69
70
71
72
73
70
71
72
73
were mixed and in the case of Noel's capture, they added a complication to Dunsterville's planning. However, the connections they developed and their presence would enable Dunsterforce's later operations in the Caucasus. Thus, while Dunsterville's main force would help secure Northern Persia, other British officers would shape the Caucasus area of operations. These officers sought opportunities to slow the Ottoman advance, gather intelligence, and identify local allies to resist the Central Powers. Alone, they were unable to dramatically change the course of events.
Yet the chaos resulting from the Russian Revolution provided both opportunities and impediments to these men's efforts. It is hard to imagine that British officers could have been able to operate so freely in a more stable environment. On the other hand, the shifting kaleidoscope of power meant that few groups were willing to ally themselves with a distant British force against the present Ottoman threat. However, as the Ottomans continued to advance, the connections made by these British officers would influence those groups that felt the most threatened to seek British aid.
In recording the operations of the 14th (King's) Hussars in Persia during the last year of the Great War, there is considerable difficulty in making the story either comprehensible or connected. The military and political reasons which necessitated the expedition were only vaguely understood at the time, nor were they clearly explained subsequently in published despatches. During most of this period the Squadrons were separated by some hundreds of miles of mountainous, roadless country. 
77
Dunsterforce's initial foray into North Persia highlighted to its commander the dire security situation in the region. During Dunsterville's advance, he had stopped at the British consulates along his route and conferred with those diplomatic, military, and intelligence officers present. They stressed the volatility and vulnerability in the area. 
78
79
85
86
81
87
88
89
90
Yet Dunsterforce itself remained incredibly vulnerable. The initial main body was little more than platoon strength with 12 officers, 41 soldiers, and 2 NCOs. Additionally, 
87 Ford,
192
88
89 Ibid., 58. 
90
93
94
95
92
93 Ibid., 99.
94 PRO AIR 20/662/211, Secret Telegram no. I/252 from Dunsterforce, Kasvin to MOCOL Resht, dated 28 June 1918. 
95
all "the officials, the landowners, the politicians and the merchants." 96 These included the Governor, Deputy Governor, the "Kar-guzar who deals with foreign matters" and the Police Chief. 
97
As important as the ability to intercept enemy communications was the ability of Dunsterforce itself to communicate with British policy makers. The 1 st ANZAC wireless station began to build a chain of wireless stations to link the Caucasus with the British headquarters in Baghdad and London. This was a major undertaking since many of these wireless sets required a 6 horsepower Douglas engine with aerial wires hoisted on 50-foot towers. Additionally, the British built two permanent wireless stations on the grounds of the British consulate in Kermanshah and Hamadan. 
98
According to him, "it was necessary without further ado to tackle the language and get to know the officials and the people. Those of us who had a smattering of Persian soon learnt to improve our pronunciation, and those who knew none began taking lessons. " 99 96 Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 86. 
97
98
99
guard of an army" that "would eat up all the country and commit all sorts of atrocities.
On the other hand, if . . . slaughtered, the army would never dare to come." 
104
The British are here as quite a temporary measure, and have no intention at all of remaining in this part of Persia, where our presence is only necessary to counteract that of the Turks. In all lands our first care is that of the people . . . we have made no purchases of wheat and we are anxious to help to alleviate the famine. 
105
106
107
109
110
It is no coincidence that Dunsterforce's famine relief program focused on improving the road networks. The great vulnerability of the British in Northwest Persia was its long and tenuous supply line to the British forces in Mesopotamia. For many students of the First World War, conditioned by battles in France where success was measured in a few miles seized, the distances of Dunsterforce's area of operations are truly staggering. The distance from the British Headquarters in Baghdad to Baku was the equivalent of that of the British headquarters in France to Warsaw. 
111
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
118
113
115
Barker,
391. 116
117
122
123
Dunsterville realized that additional troops were "urgently needed" to secure Persia. 
124
125
126
127
Bicherakov commanded approximately 1,200 Cossacks. 
128
130
127 PRO AIR 20/662/51, Secret Telegram no. G-174 from Dunsterville to Marling  Teheran, repeated Baghdad, dated 3 April 1918 and Ford, 191.   128 Ford, 188. 
129
130
131
Dunsterville. 132
133
135
133
134 "Our position" most likely refers to the security of the initial contingent in Hamadan rather than to British objectives in North Persia. Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 112. 
135 Ford,
193
136
143
Towards the end of May the passes into Persia were clear of snow, and I had no longer any excuse for not starting the invasion, though I had hoped against hope for the cancellation of the project. 
144
145
146
142
143 Ibid. 
144
Marshall,
304. 145
Ford,
193. 151
152
153
Captain Noel and the other prisoners in the hands of the Jangalis if we declared war on the latter." 
154
155
As a result, a combined arms task force consisting of Bicherakov's Cossacks, a squadron of the 14th Hussars, and two armored cars departed from Kasvin on 8 June. 
156
Supported by two British airplanes flying from the airfield established in Kasvin, the task force broke the Jangali defenses and opened the road to Enzeli. 
157
Dunsterville had to "use all the tact and gifts of persuasion I possessed to restrain" Bicherakov. 
158
155 Ibid, 137. 
156
Browne and Bridges,
457. 157 Ibid.,
163. 158
159
The Cossacks were now concentrated in Enzeli and focused on returning to Russia. That left only the British to secure the lines of communication. Dispersed in small detachments they became tempting targets. The Jangalis counterattacked. On 18 June, a British infantry unit was ambushed and its captain killed.
The British response was swift. A mobile column of 800 British riflemen with two mountain artillery guns, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Mathews, fought the insurgents in a series of punitive raids and small unit engagements. The British estimated the Jangali force in the area to have over 2,000 fighters. The Jangalis had expert knowledge of the heavily wooded terrain, whose jungle like features gave the insurgent group their name. It provided them cover and freedom of maneuver. 
160
Nor were the British without their own experts in jungle warfare. As a prisoner of the Jangalis, Noel remembered:
One day I overheard a conversation which recounted how a number of Jungalis had been raided and surprised by small men armed with choppers with which they lopped off the heads of their opponents with a single stroke. I was at first somewhat puzzled as to who these small men could be, but it gradually dawned on me that the reference must be to our Gurkha troops with their famous kukris. 
161
160
161
At dawn on 20 July, the Jangalis struck. The main element attacked the British troops outside of town, while another contingent penetrated the heart of the city. The main Jangali force was easily defeated, leaving over a hundred dead and fifty prisoners including "several Austrians. 163 " However, another Jangali force had reached and surrounded the British consulate. A British relief force of Gurkhas led by an armored car fought through the city streets and reached the consulate just as the insurgents were setting fire to the outer doors. Fierce urban combat continued for two days with the British using their aircraft to bomb Jangali strongpoints. 
164
The battle of Resht neutralized the Jangali threat. 
165
Only the Armenians were united in their fear of a victory for their long time antagonists. 
162
Dunsterforce,
165. 163 Ibid.,
203. 164
165
170
171
May 28 1918. 180
187
188
189
192
193
194
190
191
192
Dunsterforce,
167. 193 Ibid.,
168. North Caucasus. 195
Dunsterforce. 196
197
Russia. 198
196
Dunsterforce,
186. 197
198
199
200
The Ottomans, however, had already crossed the Kura River. Furthermore, the discipline of the Red Army troops was nonexistent. Soldiers left the front at will, voted in committees against their commanders, and elected their own leaders. 
201
202
203
204
It appeared that the city was doomed. Only 400 soldiers manned the outer defenses. 
205
206
Throughout July 1918, the armed battles outside Baku were mirrored by a clandestine struggle within the city. On 10 July, an extraordinary officer arrived in Baku and invigorated British measures to ensure Dunsterforce could enter the Caucasus. 
214
The then 28 year old had been raised and educated in St. Petersburg and spoke at least five languages, including Russian. 
215
Teague-Jones informed the British Consul, MacDonell, that British policy was now anti-Bolshevik and that he should assist those forces willing to overthrow the Baku commune. He recommended using a coalition of the Social Revolutionary Caspian fleet, Armenians, and Tsarists centered at the military aviation school to organize a coup.
Teague-Jones provided the names of possible key conspirators and left MacDonell with a "couple of thugs who called themselves former Tsarist officers." 
216
214
215
Teague-Jones' energy and enthusiasm were amazing. In spite of my twinges of conscience about my relations with Shaumian, he carried me with him. War is war and a dirty business anyway. 
217
218
219
MacDonell's ability to send and receive encrypted messages was compromised.
Shaumian and the Baku Commune demanded that MacDonell decipher a message he had received from Dunsterville. MacDonell was successfully able to convince the audience that this message had been meant for a formally trained British intelligence officer and he lacked the ability to decipher it. In an indication of the fissures buried within the Bolshevik leadership, the message was later anonymously delivered to MacDonell's residence. MacDonell remembered the telegram from Dunsterville as instructions to: Take all measures to prevent oilfields from falling into enemy hands, and if necessary, to associate myself and the funds at my disposal with certain schemes for destroying oilfields and evicting the Bolsheviks. 
220
227
228
229
227 MacDonell, 254. 
228
229
235
236
237
238
240
235 Ford,
194. 236
237
Dunsterforce,
195;
Ford,
194. 238
239 
Marshall,
307. 240
The circumstances dramatically changed when Marshall next chose to take a month's leave in mid-July. 
241
242
243
244
246
MacDonnell departed from Enzeli on 1 August and returned to Baku, the death sentence of the now interned Bolsheviks no longer a threat. MacDonnell was given "the singularly unpleasant mission of telling the Armenians and Centrocaspie 247 that Dunsterforce would be late." 
248
Marshall,
310. 247
250
251
An Armenian emissary from Baku traveled to Persia to express his disappointment on the size of the initial British deployment. Dunsterville took this opportunity to write an official letter stating the nature of British support. On 7 August, he wrote:
The defense of Baku appears to me quite feasible . . . provided that the inhabitants of Baku are heart and soul with us in our determination to defeat the enemy. . . . The entire defence cannot be undertaken solely by the British.
Herein lay the crux of the matter. The British lacked the troops necessary to defend Baku alone and the inhabitants of the city were hopelessly divided. This dilemma would plague the defense of the city until its seizure by the Ottomans.
Dunsterville's brother in law, Colonel Robert Keyworth, arrived with more reinforcements and took tactical command of the British forces in Baku. Stokes served as the chief of staff of the local Baku Army. Soldiers from the North Staffordshire regiment, armored cars, and more machine guns arrived. Keyworth reported to Dunsterville on the immense difficulty in defending the city with the limited British troops available. 
252
253
254
Dunsterville understood that it might be necessary to evacuate the British forces from the city and commandeered ships to ensure that Dunsterforce had independent means of transportation. The President Kruger became his flagship and headquarters 
252 Ford,
194.
255
260
262
On 11 August, the defenders attempted to recapture the suburb of Mastagi, the location of the main water supply and food for the city. However, the Ottomans were prepared and defeated the attack with interlocking machine gun fire. A British gunner of one of the armored cars was killed through well-aimed fire at the gun ports of the vehicle. 
263
264
266
267
was not yet occupied and raced the Ottomans to the top. Jumping in the trenches below the summit, they destroyed the Ottoman force from a hasty reverse slope defense. 
268
263
264 
Allen and Muratoff,
493. 265
266
267
268
According to him, "it now became an urgent question as to whether I could justify myself in allowing more lives to be risked in a cause that seemed beyond all hope." 
269
It is here where some fault lies with Dunsterville. In the midst of the confused and changing situation, he failed to continually communicate with his higher headquarters.
The British high command grew increasingly frustrated with the sporadic and conflicting updates they received from the field. On 31 August, the Ottomans attacked once again and overwhelmed the defenders.
The North Staffords Company Commander on the high ground was killed and those survivors withdrew to "avoid complete annihilation." 273 A ferocious fight ensued amongst the oil derricks and pumping equipment. 
274
275
276
273
274 Ford,
196
275
Dunsterforce,
272. 276 Ibid.,
276.
277
278
Increased calm along the front lines in the first week of September renewed hope that Baku might be saved. 
279
280
277
278 PRO WO 95/5043, Letter from president of the Dictatorship M. Tushkoff to General Dunsterville dated 4 September 1918. At the same time, the Baku dictators had been secretly negotiating through contacts in Georgia to surrender the city to the Central Powers. The negotiations collapsed due to distrust between Germany and the Ottoman Empire. 
Kazemzadeh,
142. 279 Ford,
198
280
288
289
290
287
288
291
By 1200 that day, Dunsterville decided to evacuate the city. He subsequently informed the dictators of Baku who refused to allow the British force to leave. The North Staffords were ordered "to hold at all costs" their position "covering the south and western entrances to the town"while the rest of the British forces withdrew. 
292
293
294
Dunsterville had kept his ships ready for this eventuality. The fastest were reserved for troops. The last, much slower, was loaded with ammunition and weapons to deny this equipment to the Ottomans. At 2200, the Dictators arrived at the pier and demanded that the British disembark. This, Dunsterville refused to do. The Dictators threatened to order the Caspian Fleet's ships to fire on the British troopships. The British ships immediately departed, trusting that the Dictators' chaotic government would be unable to communicate in time with the Caspian Fleet's gunboats.
These gunboats were stationed at the entrance to the harbor, ten miles from the piers. The British controlled ships sailed with no lights to not betray their positions. British troops their comrades, as well as the ability and initiative of Dunsterforce to exploit the confusion of a city at night in the throes of its final downfall.
On the ship back to Enzeli, Colonel Stokes was ecstatic at their escape, For the last fortnight in Baku I had seen only two possible endings to our adventure, either one would be killed fighting or find oneself marching to Turkey, a prisoner of the Turks. It was a great relief to find that we had been able to get all our people away and we were a very cheerful crowd in the saloon. General Dunsterville, who was sitting at another table, hearing me say the word "General" several times, called to me and asked what I had got to say. I explained that I was telling my table that, if I ever were a General, which I hoped would never happen the problem I would set field officers up for their promotion examination would be the situation at Baku on the morning of September 14 th , 1918. They would all be ploughed for no one would dare to give the correct answer, which was to evacuate Baku. 
298
299
300
In the spring and summer of 1918, Enver Pasha reorganized his forces to ensure that the Ottomans captured the oil rich city of Baku. The different political and ethnic groups in the Caucasus were divided in their response to the Ottoman offensive. British Not all of the British troops had escaped from Baku. Australian Major H.B. Suttor and Sergeant Bullen had been forgotten and continued to fight with their Armenian and Russian troops in the northeastern sector of the defenses throughout 14 September.
Through force of will, Suttor was able to motivate the Armenians and Russians around him to continue fighting. Due to the secrecy of the British evacuation and the chaos of the battle, both men did not discover that the rest of the British troops had withdrawn until 09:30 the next day, 15 September. Earlier that morning at 05:00, Suttor led a dawn raid with 100 men on the railway station at Sabunchi to recover the ammunition that was stored there. While at the station, Suttor saw the first evidence of the massacre of Armenians that had begun the night before. Over 200 Armenian men, women, and children had been slaughtered as they tried to escape by train. 
5
When they reached the wharves, only two ships remained. Both had raised their anchors and refused to allow the men to board. The Ottomans then began to shell the wharves themselves and in the confusion, Suttor and Bullen scrambled aboard. 
6
15
16
In July, an airplane from Dunsterforce flew into the Christian camp, and a plan was devised to support their fight against the Ottomans with "ammunition, machine guns, and money." 
18
19
15
16
17
18
22
23
24
25
20
21
Savige,
126. 22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
31
26 Marshall,
306. 27
28
29 Marshall,
312;
Ford,
199
32
Meanwhile, when Major Suttor escaped Baku by slipping aboard one of the final ships in the city, he inadvertently joined the Bolshevik leaders who had been confined since their overthrow. 
33
34
35
36
On 19 September 1918, General Allenby, the commander of the British Army in Palestine, initiated his final offensive against the Ottoman forces in the Galilee. Over five days, the British shattered the Ottoman Army in a series of engagements known as the battles of Megiddo. 
39
40
41
37
38
42
43
44
45
46
42 Palmer,
211. 43
44
45
46
47
On 17 November, the now-renamed Norperforce, under General Thomson reoccupied Baku. 
53
54
55
Former Dunsterforce staff officer, Colonel Stokes, became the British representative to the new Azerbaijan republic. 
56
57
58
59
60
61
It must be remembered that the various States in the Caucasus for the past 100 years have been practically ruled by an autocratic regime, kept in force only by armies. The result has been to develop a fierce hatred of Russia and in fact of all elements of law and order. The country has now been allowed to split up into socalled republics, each ruled by men of very advanced socialistic ideas little removed from Bolshevism at the head being one or two educated men in Georgia and Azerbaijan but not elsewhere. The remainder are illiterate and dishonest demagogues of the worst type with no ideas of administration . . . The inhabitants of Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan cordially loath each other only a little less than they loathe the Russians . . . From a purely military point of view I cannot see what we are to gain by remaining in Trans-Caucasia. . . .The country and the inhabitants are equally loathsome and we seem to be accepting an enormous responsibility which will incur great expense for no very great reason. . . . I am fully aware that the withdrawal of the British troops would probably lead to anarchy but I cannot see that the world would lose much if the whole of the inhabitants of the country cut each other's throats. They are certainly not worth the life of one British soldier. . . . I think it wants to be clearly understood at home that if we accept responsibility to help these countries we will have to retain troops here not only for one or two years but possibly for 10 years, while the education of the people to manage their own affairs will be the work of several generations. 
62
The campaign of Dunsterforce in Northwest Persia and the Caucasus presents the modern student of war with just such ambiguity. Dunsterforce's campaign ended with its withdrawal from the city it was defending, the relief of its commander, and the massacre of the people who chose to ally with it. Unsurprisingly, many historians, especially those influenced by the writing of the MEF commander, view the campaign as a failure.
Such judgments fail to consider the outsized strategic effects of Dunsterforce on the First World War. In addition, they have too often precluded a discussion on Dunsterville's operational approach. It is in this innovative approach, with the limited means provided to him, that one can discern lessons for today and the future. What stands out during this campaign, is Dunsterville's unique diplomatic abilities. Using impressive interpersonal skills, he tirelessly sought out opportunities to engage the leaders of all the various factions that influenced his area of operations. This included foes, neutrals, allies, and his countrymen. Dunsterville first sent a staff officer to negotiate with Kuchik Khan before fighting him, and convinced the Bolsheviks in Baku to supply his force with needed fuel. Even when he was allied with the Armenians, he continued to meet with Tartars in a futile attempt to split them from the Ottomans.
Finally, he met with British diplomats, intelligence officers, and bank officials to gain their insights on the situation and their support for his initiatives. As a result, he was able to mobilize all aspects of British national power, especially diplomatic and economic power. This is a textbook example of ensuring a whole of government approach to achieve the objectives of his military campaign.
Modern officers are trained to ensure a whole of government approach by leveraging interagency partners and seeking allies amongst the divergent actors in the area of operations. Not nearly as much emphasis is placed on the role a commander's personality plays in the success of military operations. Dunsterville was adept at building diverse coalitions with the British diplomats stationed in Iran, intelligence agents operating in the Caucasus, and the myriad of truculent actors that he was sent to assuage or mobilize.
Ironically, this skill was resented by the one man Dunsterville needed most to ensure the success of the operation-his superior. General Marshall was a veteran of earlier ambitious British offensives that ended in bloody defeats at Gallipoli and Kut. It seems clear he was a devotee of a methodical approach that ensured adequate logistical support and concentrated combat power. As such, he was bound to distrust a risky operation at the furthest end of its logistical tail that was as much political as military. This dislike only increased when British policy makers intended Dunsterforce to be an independent task force, answerable to London, but dependent on Marshall's MEF for support. So long as Dunsterforce remained independent, this animosity was manageable.
This changed after Dunsterforce's entrance to the Caucasus was blocked and he Ottoman offensive and in this, the results are much more mixed. At every opportunity, the officers of Dunsterforce attempted to save those they could. They did so, despite of the opposition of Marshall who saw such humanitarian actions as an additional burden on a strained logistical system. However, by inspiring these local groups to resist the Ottoman offensive, they undoubtedly contributed to the severity of the ultimate retribution.
Thus will always be the price of mobilizing indigenous proxy forces in regions with intractable ethnic rivalries. While it would be easy to cast such ethnic groups as pawns in the struggles of great powers, the Dunsterforce campaign suggests a more nuanced reality. Throughout the campaign, factions, both big and small, manipulated each other and sought alliances of convenience to achieve their aims. In many cases, the greater strategic issues of the First World War were merely a pretext to attain dominance over another local rival.
After Dunsterforce was disbanded, Britain's attempts to achieve long-term objectives in the region floundered. The core interests of the regional titans-Turkey and Soviet Russia-defeated British imperial hubris after its First World War victory. This is a natural outcome for any ambitious foreign policy undertaken in regions at the farthest ends of one's operational reach that clash with the geo-strategic imperatives of local powers. This suggests that only the long-term presence of significant ground forces will consolidate the gains made at the expense of regional hegemons.
The Dunsterforce campaign suggests certain insights into the prosecution of modern armed conflict. The successes achieved by Dunsterforce were in large part due to the innovative use of all elements of national power. The British were especially adept at exploiting all the diplomatic and economic resources available to accomplish their mission. This use of national power included mobilizing individuals with access to, and knowledge of, the area of operations. Whether they were Persian businessmen in England, Russian Tsarist refugees, or a Scottish businessman and part time diplomat living in Baku like MacDonell, the British Army happily commissioned them.
Dunsterville subsequently depended on these individuals for critical tasks where other more conventional Army officers would have arguably been hopeless.
In This is only natural when one considers the sheer complexity of the political situation. Shifting allegiances, revolutionary forces, and ethnic rivalry enfeebled the establishment of an effective local resistance. The British learned then, and we continue to learn today, that you cannot want something more than the people you are purportedly sent to help. In addition, ethnic conflicts and blood feuds are always more real to the local inhabitants than the geopolitical agendas of great powers. In those instances, when the interests of both parties converge, intelligent and charismatic leaders can muster the power of indigenous forces. However, enlisting local ethnic minorities in irregular warfare has repercussions. Rival groups will target these minorities for their alliance with outside powers.
Today, the U.S. Military is preparing to counter "hybrid war." While the name itself is new, the form of warfare it defines is ancient. States will always use all elements of national power, including and beyond purely military means, to achieve their objectives. In fact, the proper combination of diplomatic, informational, military, and economic means is the acme of a good strategy. This will sometimes include the use and mobilization of irregular forces with shared grievances or histories. The U.S. is uniquely vulnerable to this form of war. Our future oriented society rarely understands or respects the long narrative of ancient peoples who have survived prolonged conflict.
Hence modern diplomats and soldiers must have a deep knowledge of the history of the region in which they must operate. Today, the Caucasus remains an arena of competition. In the spring of 2016, troops from Azerbaijan and Armenia fought over Operational environment. A composite of the conditions, circumstances, and influence that affect the employment of capabilities and bear on the decisions of the commander.
Secure. A tactical mission task that involves preventing a unit, facility, or geographical location from being damaged or destroyed as a result of enemy action.
Seize. A tactical mission task that involves taking possession of a designated are using overwhelming force.
Unity of Command. The operation of all forces under a single responsible commander who has the requisite authority to direct and employ those forces in pursuit of a common purpose.
14 Most 8 Moberly, 268. 9 McMeekin, 369. 10 Jacob M. Landau, 11 Strachan, 105.
30  
30  
31 Scott Anderson,
ceasefire
86 PRO AIR 20/662/8, Secret Telegram no. 53319 Cipher from Chief London to General Dunsterville, Hamadan dated March 1, 1918.
174    
174    
261
272
30 Dunsterville, 31 Ibid., 27 September 1918.   
L. C. Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce (London, England: Edward Arnold, 1920), 304.
Havelock was the grandson of famous British officer, Major General Sir Henry Havelock who died in 1857 following the siege of Lucknow in India.
Erich Ludendorff, Ludendorff's Own Story (New York: Harper and Brothers,  1919), 326.
John Buchan, A History of the Great War: IV (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1922), 299.
Roger Ford, Eden to Armageddon: World War I in the Middle East (New York:  Pegasus, 2010), 193.   
Michael Occleshaw, Dances in Deep Shadows: The Clandestine War in Russia  1917-20 (New York: Carrol and Graf, 2006), 9.   
Review ofAnthropology 6, 1 (1977): 283.
Plotke, 174.   
David Lloyd George, War Memoirs: VI (London: Ivor Nicholson and Watson,  1936), 3194.
Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 8.    
Plotke, 226.    
Townshend, 426.   
Brock Millman, "The Problem with Generals: Military Observers and the Origins of the Intervention inRussia and Persia, 1917-18," Journal of Contemporary  History 33, no. 2 (April 1998): 291-320.    
Mitrokhin, 24.   
L. C.Dunsterville, Stalky's Reminiscences (London: Butler and Tanner, 1928), 242. The British Indian Army was a distinct organization from the Regular British Army. Its primary role was the defense of British India and the independent Indian princely states. At the same time, it was a significant source of manpower for British colonial operations in general and the First World War in particular. See Richard Holmes, Sahib: The British Soldier inIndia 1750-1914 (New York: Harper, 2006).
Artin H. Arslanian, "Dunsterville's Adventures: A Reappraisal," International Journal of Middle East Studies 12, no. 2 (September 1980): 200; Townshend, 419.
 27, 35, 79.   
Edward Noel, "A Prisoner Among the Jungali Bolsheviks," in Escape, ed. H. C. Armstrong (New York: Robert M.McBride and Company, 1933), 32.    
Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 13.    
Dunsterville, The Diaries of General Lionel Dunsterville, 25 January 1918.   
Townshend, 420.   
This area was also known to the Ottomans as Elviye-i-Sealase or three provinces.Reynolds, Shattering Empires, 172.    
Ibid., 178.   
Reynolds, Shattering Empires, 184.   
Kazemzadeh, 21.   
Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 142.   
Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 156.   
Perrett and Lord, 168.   
Suny, 291.    
Ibid., 292.    
Perrett and Lord, 169.    
Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 199.    
Suny, 317.    
Ibid.   
MacDonell, 224.   
MacDonell, 224.    
Ibid., 226.    
Ibid., 227.    
Ibid., 232.   
Ibid., 307.    
Marshall, 308; IOR L/MIL/5/806/81 Memorandum for record on what occurred in Northwest Persia and shores of Caspian by H.V. Cox India Office dated 25 September 1918, 4-5.
In June, Marshall conducted a "partial inspection" of the lines of communication in Persia but "owing to pressure of work, I was unable to get much beyond Kermanshah" and thus never visited Dunsterville's headquarters.Marshall, 306.    
Harry Fecitt, "Dunsterforce Part 1," The Western Front Association, accessed 25 November 2015, http://www.westernfrontassociation.com/the-great-war/great-war-onland/other-war-theatres/3305-dunsterforce-part-1.html#sthash.kiBaGlYO.dpbs.
MacDonell, 257.    
 94.   
IOR L/MIL/5/806/42 Letter from H.V. Cox, India Office to DMI Macdonogh dated 14 August 1918.
Ibid.   
Allen and Muratoff, 493.   
IWM 4179, Oral History, Adjutant of the North Staffordshire Regiment, Leslie R. Missen recorded by the BBC in 1963.
Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 235.   
IWM 2347, Personal Papers of Colonel Stokes, 13.    
PRO WO 95/5043 Report on Operations 14 September 1918 by Lieutenant Colonel Commanding 39 th Inf. Brigade dated 15 September 1918, 3.
IWM 4179, Oral History, Adjutant of the North Staffordshire Regiment, Leslie R. Missen recorded by the BBC in 1963.
IWM 2914, Report of Major H. B. Suttor.
Ibid.
Kayaloff, 12.   
The War Cabinet ordered Marshall to re-occupy Baku on 1 November 1918, while the war against Germany continued. This was done, in part, to forestall a reported
Fisher, 186; Kazemzadeh, 272.  According to H.V. Cox at the India Office, "After all this is not going to be a big job, and will probably be effectually performed by holding Batum and Baku, and the railway line between, and Tiflis. An arrangement of this kind would avoid the danger of placing any Great Power on the most feasible and most direct land route to the East from Central Europe." IOR L/MIL/5/806/95, Minute on meetings held by Eastern Committee from H.V. Cox dated 3 December 1918, 1-2.
Immediately after the end of the First World War, Milne commanded the British Army of the Black Sea from which he wrote the letter quoted above.
MacDonell, 326.   
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Art of War Scholar Program
The outcome of World War I was unclear to the belligerents at the beginning of 1918. While men and material were being massed on the Western Front for a climactic struggle, the most significant changes occurred in the East. The revolution in Russia presented new opportunities to the Central Powers. Britain's need to defend the Suez Canal and secure its oil supply led it to conduct offensives against the Ottomans in Palestine and Mesopotamia. In 1917, the Ottomans suffered numerous defeats in the Middle East. The establishment of a new Turkic empire in the former Tsarist Russian states in the Caucasus could make up for those Ottoman losses. In addition, Germany desperately sought the natural resources that would allow them to continue fighting. The Russian Revolution unleashed conflicting social dynamics and gave newfound freedoms to ethnicities in the region. All these factors would influence the establishment of Dunsterforce.
The Task Organization of Dunsterforce Dunsterville was promoted to Major General and given command of a task force that at first existed in name only. The units had yet to be assembled and were being mobilized from across the different theaters of war. 
53
54
55
56
57
53
54
55
Perrett and Lord,
164. 56 Townshend,
419.
In Baku, Noel tried to "find anyone who was prepared to go on fighting the Turks." It was: pure melodrama; midnight meetings, secret rendezvous, plots, and desperate schemes to buy gunboats and aeroplanes and seize the town. All round us was unorganized demobilization, famine. 
74
75
76
Dunsterville's attempt to move his initial force quickly to the Caucasus failed.
The speed and initiative of the small convoy allowed it to reach the Caspian Sea before its opponents could intercept it. However, its large signature and limited firepower left it vulnerable to the various groups who opposed its presence in the region. Had this initial force been able to enter the Caucasus, it is unlikely that the majority of the officers and NCOs of Dunsterforce who had yet to arrive in the theater would have been able to follow it.
On the other hand, individual well-trained British officers with excellent language skills were able to infiltrate the Caucasus. At great personal risk and in the absence of a larger force, they attempted to shape a chaotic operational environment. Their results 
74
75
76
Dunsterforce arrived in Persia in the midst of a tremendous humanitarian crisis. A great famine was sweeping through the country. The estimated number of Persians who died as a result ranges from the many tens of thousands to millions. 
100
101
102
Men and women, shriveled and huddled heaps of stricken humanity, lay dead in the public ways, their stiffened fingers still clutching a bunch of grass plucked from the roadside, or a few roots torn up from the fields with which they had sought to lessen the tortures of death and starvation. 
103
101 Mjad, 3-5. His argument is primarily based on census data of the Persian population from U.S. State Department reporting but does not provide any evidence of an organized plan by any actors to eradicate the Persian people.
102 Ibid. 
103
The situation looks brighter but even "Stalky's" inexhaustible energy is insufficient to bring order out of chaos here. There are too many conflicting parties, too much profiteering for rationing to be easily managed; lastly the material he has to mould into soldiery is too poor. He is a fine character, loved by everyone and positively adored by his personal staff. All his tact and diplomacy is needed there, but I fear the only solution of this problem lies in bringing a British division up -and to that, short-sighted Baghdad will never agree. 
166
Ottomans Reorganize
In the Caucasus, Enver Pasha organized a new operational force, the Eastern Army Group. The Army Group consisted of the Third and newly formed Ninth Armies, as well as the Army of Islam. In total it had ten regular infantry divisions and assorted independent units of cavalry and irregulars. 
167
168
169
167
168 Blent Gkay, "The Battle for Baku May-September 1918: A Peculiar Episode in the History of the Caucasus," Middle Eastern Studies 34, no. 1 (January 1998): 42. 
169
221
222
223
224
225
The first ship escaped unnoticed. The second was challenged but through the flashing of multiple signals, confused the gunboat for a few crucial minutes. The gunboat ultimately fired but missed. The third ship, filled with explosives, approached the mouth of the harbor close to midnight. Colonel Rawlinson held a pistol to the Russian captain's head to guarantee that he continued to steer the ship out to sea. 
295
296
297
296
Dunsterville overcame this vacillation and thrust the small British forces available to him into the defense of the city. Through the creative use of his limited troops, he denied the city and its oil to the Central Powers for a crucial month. 
301
301
1
The Massacre
The unexpected British withdrawal led to the collapse of the remaining defenses.
The commander of the Baku Army, General Dukuchaiev, reported panic spreading through the local troops on the evening of 14 September. Many of the defenders began boarding steamers to flee Baku. That night, the Centro Caspian dictators decided to negotiate the surrender of the city. 2 Dukuchaiev and the dictators boarded ships early on the morning of 15 September. 3 Many neighborhoods had already devolved into a chaos of pillaging and murder.
At the same time, some Russian and Armenian units continued to man their defensive positions. A member of the Baku government, Kristofor Evangulov, was tasked with delivering the Ottomans a letter surrendering the city. However, fighting continued throughout the morning of 15 September and Evangulov could not cross the front lines. 4
1 Kurban Said, Ali and Nino (New York: Overland Press, 1937), 114-115.
2 Jacques Kayaloff, Fall of Baku: Material on the Events of September 15, 1918 (Bergenfield, NJ: Michael Barour Publications, 1976), 5.
3 Ibid. 
4
Armenians. 8 Some claim that the Tartars demanded from the Ottomans the observance of an age-old custom allowing them time to plunder the city. 
9
11
10 An Asker is an Ottoman or Turkish soldier.
11 Kayaloff, 12.   12 Ibid., 7, and Suny, 337. 
13
14 Bey, 203.
After the war, Edward Noel served as a political officer in Mesopotamia. While assigned there, he advocated British support for a Kurdish state. Another British intelligence officer who opposed Noel's plans wrote in his diary, "Noel is an interesting study, typical of many Englishmen who espouse small peoples. He knows no fear, but this is because his valour is born of ignorance." 
76
77 Rudyard Kipling, Something about Myself for my Friends Known and Unknown (London: MacMillan, 1937), 28.
Christian residents of the city were left to face the wrath of the conquerors by themselves.
While the Turkish soldiers remained outside the city, the Tartars massacred the Armenian population. The deep-rooted animosity between the two ethnic groups had been unleashed in the collapse of Tsarist authority over the previous year. Earlier atrocities committed by the Armenians only fueled the Tartar community's desire for vengeance.
An orgy of destruction, including murder, rape, and widespread looting, consumed the city. Those Armenians and Russians who survived these horrible events understandably blamed Dunsterforce for abandoning them. However, it is doubtful that the continued presence of British troops would have saved Baku from its destruction. It is more likely that they would have shared the fate of the city's inhabitants 
78
Nor was that the only tragedy in the final days of Dunsterforce's operations. The Assyrian, Armenian, and Nestorian communities collected around Lake Urumiah were forced to make an epic retreat while constantly harassed by swarms of Ottoman Cavalry and Kurdish irregulars. Only the brave actions of the small element of Dunsterforce accompanying this column saved it from destruction.  Furthermore, the core geopolitical interests of regional states will generally outlast the fleeting focus of greater powers. Russia and Turkey, regardless of their latest political incarnation, continue to shape the geostrategic environment in the Caucasus.
Germany and Britain, on the other hand, have long lost interest and influence in the region. The United States would do well to remember such fundamentals of statecraft.
The operations of Dunsterforce also reinforce the timeless importance of establishing clear objectives and ensuring unity of command in the successful execution of operations. Conflicting guidance from higher headquarters and disagreement between the British commander in Mesopotamia and British political masters in London made an already difficult task almost impossible.
Finally, in spite of such difficulties, the strategic situation may dictate the need to execute similar missions in the future. Such campaigns, if executed skillfully, can contribute to the successful achievement of greater political and military objectives. They should not be undertaken lightly.
Dunsterforce achieved its military objective to delay the capture of Baku's oil fields by the Central Powers and stabilize Northwest Persia. These accomplishments had strategic effects on the outcome of the war that far exceeded the limited British means provided. On the other hand, the limited means available ensured the campaign ended 2 Mariam Harutyunyan and Emil Guliyev, "Azerbaijan, Armenia forces clash as Putin urges ceasefire," Agence France Presse (AFP), 2 April 2016. with ambiguous results. Furthermore, Britain failed to achieve its larger political objectives to strengthen the ethnic groups in Caucasia in order to deny the strategic region to both the Ottomans and Bolsheviks.
So long as military forces are asked to achieve ambitious objectives with limited means in complex situations, the results will be, at best, ambiguous. Forewarned and educated, those brave and intelligent individuals tasked with achieving such objectives can seek out innovative solutions and broad coalitions with those groups that share their interests. If they are knowledgeable of the power dynamics in the area in which they operate, they will be able to further their country's goals at the very limit of complexity. GLOSSARY Area of operations. An operational area defined by the joint force commander for land and maritime forces that should be large enough to accomplish their missions and protect their forces.
Campaign. A series of related major operations aimed at achieving strategic and operational objectives within a given time and space.
Center of Gravity. The source of power that provides moral or physical strength, freedom of action or will to act.
Combat power. The total means of destructive, constructive, and information capabilities that a military unit or formation can apply at a given time.
Insurgency. The organized use of subversion and violence to seize, nullify, or challenge political control of a region. Insurgency can also refer to the group itself.
Line of communication. A route, either land, water, and/or air, which connects an operating military force with a base of operations and along which supplies and military forces move.
Line of effort. A line that links multiple tasks using the logic of purpose rather than geographical reference to focus efforts toward establishing operational and strategic conditions.
Line of operation. A line that defines the directional orientation of a force in time and space in relation to the enemy and links the force with its base of operations and objectives.
Local security. A security task that includes low-level security activities conducted near a unit to prevent surprise by the enemy.
Mass. Mass the effects of overwhelming combat power at the decisive place and time. Synchronizing all the elements of combat power where they will have decisive effect on an enemy force in a short period of time is to achieve mass.
Operational approach. A description of broad actions the force must take to transform current conditions into those desired at end state.
Operational Art. The cognitive approach by commanders and staffs-supported by their skill, knowledge, experience, creativity, and judgment-to develop strategies, campaigns, and operations to organize and employ military forces by integrating ends, ways, and means. 