# ID: 1688094b21e54bfaaef91ac68270716b
# Title: Compelling China: The Strategic Culture of Coercion
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2011.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
This study assesses the utility and challenges of using coercive diplomacy as a strategy to compel China to change its behavior in a crisis situation. The paper examines coercive diplomacy using the lens of China's strategic culture as a means to inform and evaluate United States' policy options. The study: 1) examines the theoretical basis for coercion and briefly compares historical examples of coercive diplomacy, 2) provides an analysis of China's strategic culture as it relates to coercive diplomacy and crisis management, and 3) addresses strategic policy implications for the United States and offers recommendations for revising U.S. China strategy.
[E]ach act of coercion …feeds into the set of assumptions and anticipations about the behavior of others which conditions all power plays in international politics. This is why the study of coercion cannot be considered to be simply about the design of efficient threats. It must also consider the way that strategic actors construct reality and in particular their grasp of how their opponents construct reality. 
1
Preventing a future political-military crisis with China may be among America's greatest foreign policy challenges. History provides plenty of cause for concern for U.S. policy makers. Historically, the expanding influence and interests of a rising power often provoke strategic competition, crises, and even military conflict with established powers. 
2
3
Despite the increased risk of crisis, U.S. -China competition remains constrained by the mutual recognition that the potential costs of a direct military confrontation makes war between the two nuclear powers an exceedingly dangerous and unacceptable option. Therefore, if crisis prevention fails and a serious politicalmilitary crisis with China erupts, U.S. decision makers and military strategists must craft a comprehensive crisis response strategy that prevents unwanted escalation and avoids direct military confrontation, yet is forceful enough to persuade or coerce China to back down and resolve the dispute on terms favorable to the United States. .
Crafting an effective strategy to compel an adversary to back down in a crisis is an exceedingly difficult task. Decision makers and planners must synchronize the proper combination of diplomatic, informational, military, and economic (DIME) instruments of U.S. national power to persuade and/or coerce China. Persuasion relies on influencing the adversary through reasoning or coaxingprimarily soft power, while coercion relies on the use of force, hard power, to make an adversary yield or comply.
A strategy that emphasizes persuasive soft power lowers the risk of conflict but may fail to achieve America's crisis objectives. Alternatively, a strategy that relies on the military instrument and coercive force to punish or physically compel China to back down may be decisive, but obviously increases the risk of war. A potentially less costly strategy involves using the threat of coercive force in an attempt to intimidate China, convincing
Beijing that the costs for not backing down are simply too high to continue its provocative behavior and compelling Beijing to yield or comply. While still inherently risky, strategies that rely on coercive threats provide an attractive alternative to coercive force because they provide decision makers with greater flexibility at potentially less cost. 
4
threatened to destroy the Melians unless they complied with Athenian demands. Faced with an overwhelmingly superior military force, the Melians had every reason to believe the Athenian threat was credible. The Athenians had every reason to believe that the weaker Melians, faced with a credible threat of destruction, would weigh the costs of defiance and make the rational choice to yield and save their people. Yet, in the end, the Athenian attempt at coercive diplomacy failed and the Melians refused to yield. The Athenians felt compelled to make good on their threat, annihilating the Melians but paying a heavy price themselves in both lives and treasure. 
5
The answers to these questions deserve more than a cursory academic discussion. Twenty-four-hundred years later, U.S. decision makers and military planners may face the exact same questions in a political-military crisis with China. Will A crisis arises when there is a conflict over core or vital interests between actors where neither side is initially willing to back down. 
6
7
That is, there is a perception that the threatened party must respond, either through words or deeds, to prevent the crisis from escalating beyond control and inflicting unacceptable costs. In a deliberate crisis, the initiator's actions may be well planned and choreographed. An unintentional crisis may catch the actors unprepared to respond appropriately or force them to adapt already existing contingency plans.
Regardless of intent, actors in all crises suffer from a degree of uncertainty stemming from an asymmetry of information concerning the adversary's perceptions and intentions and further complicated by the shortage of time to gather and process needed information.
To reduce the uncertainty and risk of escalation, actors engage in what is essentially a time-bound crisis bargaining process. 
9
10
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Once deterrence failed and Milosevic began the ethnic cleansing campaign in Kosovo, NATO's threat to bomb Serbia to compel Milosevic to stop the ethnic cleansing and remove his forces was an example of coercive diplomacy. After Milosevic ignored the threat of force and continued with the ethnic cleansing, NATO began the air campaign over Serbia and engaged in coercive force, punishing him for not complying and attempting to compel him to yield by destroying his nation's self-defense capability and its will to resist. In the Kosovo case, the NATO coalition, much like the Athenians, was unable to compel Milosevic and his advisors to comply. They failed to create the perceptionthe state of mindthat the choice of compliance was more favorable than continued resistance, at least until coercive force, along with other DIME levers, were employed.
Coercive diplomacy is not a military strategy. It is an alternative to a military strategy that incorporates military action as part of a larger political-diplomatic strategy that may include other DIME elements. 
21
22
23
24
George's next task requires strategists to factor in the contextual variables for the specific crisis. The context of each crisis situation is unique to that specific crisis and George emphasizes that coercive diplomacy is a highly context-dependent strategy. 
25
26
27
Furthermore, there are a number of external variables that influence the decision making process that the decision maker is either unaware of or misinterprets. Absent adequate intelligence of the adversary, military planners tend to mirror image their own biases and rational calculations. Most military planners will automatically assume a rational adversary because it provides a level of predictability and certainty in their crisis planning process. George warns, however, that for coercive diplomacy to succeed, decision makers and military planners must understand how an adversary -approaches the task of rational calculation.‖ 28 Decision makers need access to analytical tools that will expand their knowledge and allow them to replace a purely -rational‖ opponent with a more realistic model. George explains it best when he writes:
-...policy makers making use of a strategy of coercive diplomacy must replace the assumption of pure rationality with sensitivity to the psychological, cultural, and political variables that may influence the adversary's behavior when he is subjected to one or another variant of the strategy.‖ 29
The preceding review of the coercive diplomacy model points to a recurring strategic theme: crafting an effective coercive diplomacy strategy requires more than a rational calculation of costs versus benefits. The coercer must understand how the opponent thinkshis beliefs, perceptions, and assumptions about the crisis, his adversary, and the interests at stake.
One of the primary challenges to employing coercive diplomacy is that it is rarely a one-sided, asymmetrical strategy. The preceding Kosovo case illustrates that the adversary is likely to engage simultaneously in counter-coercion techniques or coercive strategies of its own. 30 Milosevic gambled that if he could embroil Russia in the political conflict, it might have created enough political-diplomatic turmoil and pressure on NATO to end the bombing campaign and buy him time to complete operations in Kosovo. 
31
32
American decision makers and military planners may be strongly tempted to pursue a coercive diplomacy strategy in a crisis with China. Given America's current military superiority, military analysts may perceive that China, like the Athenians perceived the Melians, will be inclined to quickly back down in the face of overwhelming military capability, thereby avoiding armed conflict. Indeed, like the Athenians, the United States perceives itself as particularly adept at the use of coercive force to compel an adversary to yield, either through physical or psychological defeat.
America's military superiority and global presence provides the basis for the credible deterrent for potential challengers. However, as discussed previously, deterrence and compellence are two very different strategic means. A survey of recent U.S. history may give military planners reason to pause before choosing a coercive diplomacy strategy. Since the end of World War II, the United States' record with coercive diplomacy has been mixed. According to one study, U.S. attempts at coercive diplomacy failed in 68% of the cases. 
34
It is impossible to point to any one reason why coercive diplomacy so often fails to achieve the desired effect. Each historical case succeeded or failed not because of any single cause, but the confluence of several factors unique to the context of that situation. However, international relations literature highlights some useful insights for U.S. decision makers and strategists. 
35
36
37
38
Exploring the relationship between perceptions and intentions leads one to the inherent strategic paradox of coercion: communicating a credible threat of force in order to avoid using force. If an adversary perceives that the coercer's motivation to avoid war is stronger than his motivation to achieve his objectives and is bluffing, the threat of force is meaningless and the adversary will call the bluff. At that point, the coercer either has to resort to force and escalate, or back down. If the coercer backs down, he may lose prestige and bargaining power and thus feel compelled to follow through on the threat. For coercion to succeed, the adversary must believe the threat is credible. That means that the coercer must be willing to follow through on his threat and risk war. Ironically, the coercer might find himself in a situation where he must go to war just to prove the credibility of his intentions to avoid war. When decision makers choose to use coercion, they accept the potential contradiction of their strategic objectives and they accept the possibility of stumbling into an unwanted war.
Coercion then becomes more than a rational calculation of the distribution of power between adversaries or the magnitude of the coercive threat. The success of coercion relies more on how the two opponents perceive themselves, their own interests, motivations, and will to resist, and their perception of each other. This analysis emphasizes ideational variables, i.e. variables that describe the influence of ideas and perception on outcomes rather than structural variables such as relative military strength. Ideational variables include the adversary's self image (identity), shared beliefs, values, and assumptions regarding the use of force, as well as his image of the opponent. 
39
Effective coercion requires an understanding of the adversary's strategic reasoning. 
40
41
To assess the utility of coercive diplomacy and craft appropriate options, decision makers need access to analytical tools that will expand their understanding of the psychological and cultural variables that frame and shape China's understanding of the crisis context and preferences with regard to the use of force.
One such analytical tool that examines many of the ideational variables identified above is the concept of strategic culture. While there is no commonly accepted definition of strategic culture, experts within the U.S. Department of Defense have endorsed the following:
-a set of shared beliefs, assumptions, and modes of behavior, derived from common experiences and accepted narratives that shape collective identity and relationships to other groups, and which determine appropriate ends and means for achieving security objectives.‖ 
42
Deterrence and coercion are states of mind. The outcomes of these theoretical models depend as much on ideational variables, as they do on structural variables or on rational choice. Using the definition above, strategic culture as an analytical tool may provide decision makers and strategists additional insight and clarity with which to expand the model of coercive diplomacy, assess its utility, and craft appropriate crisis response options against China.
Part II: Strategic Culture, China, and Coercion: Substituting the -Rational‖ Opponent Proponents of strategic culture argue that culture, as defined above, has a role in shaping a state's behavior, determining its strategic preferences, and developing national security policies. The term strategic culture first entered the international relations lexicon in the late 1970s but the concept of linking strategic behavior to cultural influence has been around since at least Clausewitz' time, albeit under other names such as National Style or Ways of War. 
43
44
-Culture is the root and foundation of strategy…Each country or nation's strategic culture cannot but bear the imprint of cultural traditions, which in a subconscious and complex way, prescribes and defines strategy making.‖ 
45
46
Chinese strategic cultures: a -Confucian-Mencian‖ paradigm that emphasizes -nonviolent, accommodationist grand strategies‖ over violent defensive or offensive strategic preferences. 
47
48
Second, that the parabellum tradition has persisted throughout Chinese history, implying that even with structural changes in the material distribution of power (e.g. an economically constrained America), China will still prefer the pragmatic use of offensive strategies. 
50
51
Building on the work of Johnston and Whiting, Andrew Scobell also examined the link between China's strategic behavior and strategic culture. Scobell's research also led him to conclude that there were two strategic cultures in China, a Confucian-Mencian non-violent tradition and a realpolitik tradition advocating the pragmatic use of force. Unlike Johnston, however, Scobell found evidence that both of these traditions were operating and influencing Chinese strategic behavior. As Scobell writes:
-The combined effect of these beliefs and assumptions is paradoxical: while most of China's leaders, analysts, and researchers believe profoundly that the legacy of Chinese civilization is fundamentally pacifist, they are nevertheless predisposed to deploy force when confronting crises.‖ 
52
53
54
Scobell argues that in their strategic cost-benefit calculation for using force, a favorable change in the geo-strategic -big picture‖ may be more important than -operational victory‖. That is, in the Chinese strategic calculus, the cost of coercive force was worthwhile if it resulted in a favorable change in the adversary's perceptions of Beijing resolve even if it did not result in an operational military success. 
55
Like Whiting, Scobell also sees culture operating at multiple levels: strategic, political, civil-military, and organizational. To understand the influence of culture at one level, one must also understand how culture influences behavior at the other levels as well. 
56
China perceives American strategic culture as expansionist and hegemonic and therefore sees the United States as a long term threat to Chinese interests, specifically with regard to the unification of Taiwan. 
57
58
59
Rogers' research identifies a series of underlying cognitive frameworks, or ideal types, that shape how decision makers interpret crisis events and inform their response, decisions, and choices. Rogers bases the ideal types according to decision makers' beliefs, perceptions, and assumptions regarding the bargaining process (i.e. use of force, accommodation, and persuasion); their image of the adversary and of themselves; their ability to control crisis escalation; and their ability to modulate risk in a crisis. 
60
61
Specifically, Rogers' framework begins the difficult task of identifying how decision makers may choose the combination and sequencing of actions during the crisis bargaining processes that George identified in his coercive diplomacy model. The image of the adversary plays an important role in China's strategic reasoning. China views the United States as an aggressive, offensive-oriented, hegemonic power that relies on economic and military power to ensure its global dominance. Chinese elites feel the United States views China's rise as a threat to its position. They believe the United States is engaged in a Cold War-style containment policy that relies on bilateral relationships with countries along China's territorial borders that are designed to constrain China's growth and limit its strategic options. 
65
According to this crisis management style, the Chinese view coercive force (or the threat of force) as the most effective means to signal credibility and resolve in a crisis.
As Swaine describes it, Chinese leaders generally perceive the adversary as aggressive in nature. This aggressive image of the adversary justifies their emphasis on relatively strong, coercive actions in the initial phases of a crisis. While cognizant of the need to avoid unintended escalation, Chinese leaders have historically favored significant escalations over incremental steps to signal resolve. They perceive that small steps may be interpreted as weakness and tempt others to engage in countercoercive strategies. As Swaine writes, for decision makers that fall into this category, -the most common cause of war in a crisis is due to a failure to demonstrate resolve early and dramatically.‖ 66 Furthermore, the Chinese tend to value political objectives over purely military ones, indicating a willingness to accept greater military risk as long as there is a good chance of achieving their political goals. Additionally, China's historical behavior indicates a fairly high confidence in its ability to modulate risk relative to political objectives and avoid inadvertent escalation.
Swaine is careful to avoid using the term strategic culture in his writing, acknowledging that his research cannot be used to predict national strategic behavior.
His findings are only helpful in identifying general individual preferences that decision makers may fall back on during crisis situations. However, his findings are based on broad collective beliefs, values, and assumptions shared among Chinese elites that shape their preferences and their crisis behavior. While distinct from strategic culture analysis, his research into shared styles and preferences mirrors and reinforces the findings of strategic culture advocates discussed earlier.
Part III: Analysis and Policy Implications Alexander George's research highlighted what he thought were the most important characteristics of coercive diplomacy: a flexible and highly context-dependent strategy that depends both on adapting the theoretical model to the specific crisis and on the skill of decision makers in implementing it. 
67
As George and others have pointed out, one of the most important tasks in determining the utility of a coercive diplomacy strategy is estimating the opponent's resolve or motivation in a crisis. Compellence is based on credibly signaling the means and the resolve to carry out the coercive threat, thereby making the adversary recalculate the benefits of the unwanted behavior. In some political-military crises, merely signaling a resolve may be enough to make an adversary question the costs and benefits of continuing the provocative action. However, as mentioned previously, the success of coercive strategies normally relies on creating the perception that the coercer's resolve is stronger than the opponent's, or creating an asymmetry of motivation previously discussed. No matter how superior the coercer's military capability, coercive diplomacy will likely fail if the opponent's resolve is equal to or greater than the coercer's resolve. In China's case, strategic cultural analysis seems to indicate that the national resolve will be highest in a crisis involving a threat to a core interest of territorial integrity or national sovereignty, such as Taiwan, Tibet, or even the South China Sea. In a political-military crisis, the United States will likely signal the strength of its resolve through the strength of its military deterrent or coercive threat.
Yet, the findings herein suggest that the balance of military power may be less important in China's strategic calculus than its national resolve to resist external pressure or lose face over a core territorial interest. Therefore, if the United States is counting on military superiority alone to communicate resolve, overcome China's will to resist, and change the rational calculation of its leadership, coercive diplomacy may fail.
Furthermore, as stated earlier, China's strategic culture seems to value political outcomes over military victory. For China, the political cost, in terms of political legitimacy, of even the perception of Chinese capitulation to a stronger adversary is much higher than the cost of a military defeat. It may be that, given China's strategic culture, the United States will be unable to ensure an asymmetry of motivation over China. In a contest of wills, what is important is that, while America's military capability may provide an effective deterrent to precipitating a crisis, it may be much less effective in compelling China to back down once a crisis erupts. This line of thinking is counterintuitive to military planners. Quite often, military strategists advocate that if initial deterrent options fail, then the best course of action is to ratchet up the threat of force, signaling greater resolve but also creating dangerous escalation and the possibility of war. Therefore, a coercive diplomacy strategy based on the threat of military force alone increases the risk of fulfilling the strategic paradoxgoing to war while attempting to avoid it.
Strategic culture analysis also provides insights into China's approach to the use of force. The Chinese have historically preferred coercive strategies over diplomatic ones, especially if there is a good chance that such strategies can advance their geopolitical interests. As several analysts have commented, China historically has sought to avoid any appearance of weakness by demonstrating and communicating strong resolve from the outset of a crisis as part of a -preventive deterrence‖ strategy. 
68
States take actions to enhance the credibility of their threat, their bargaining positions become more and more intractable, increasing the costs of backing down. 
69
China also has a significantly different approach to risk management and rational cost-benefit calculations than the United States. First, Chinese leaders have historically demonstrated a fairly high level of confidence to engage in high risk bargaining strategies and in their ability to manage risk in a crisis. 
70
Much of the analysis herein may appear to be inherently obvious to the skilled and experienced decision maker or military strategist. After all, as pointed out in the preceding introduction, deterrence and coercion are as old as warfare itself, so much so that military professionals tend to accept these strategic options as straightforward and leave them unexamined. However, the dynamic relationship between deterrence, coercive diplomacy, and crisis management is worthy of continued examination by military professionals for several reasons. First, the United States government has historically abdicated its crisis management responsibilities to the military. The military not only monopolizes the use of coercive force within the government but also has a near monopoly on crisis action planning processes, education, and training compared to other inter-agency capabilities. Handing over responsibility of crafting a comprehensive DIME strategy to the -M‖ significantly undermines the whole-of-government approach to crisis resolution. More importantly, military professionals and strategists are raised in a particular culture that separates diplomacy from military action, often equating political success with military victory. Military action is seen as -an alternative to bargaining, not as part of the bargaining process itself.‖ 72 The military scorns the idea that decision makers may use military force as an element of -extortion‖ vis-à-vis an adversary. 
73
Properly managing the threat of coercive force is a critical element of the bargaining process. Finally, the military has a tendency to simplify strategy development and operational plans by applying a universal doctrinal approach, with a reliance on rational calculations and empirically based metrics to help determine courses of actions.
However, an empirically based approach assumes the adversary uses a comparable rational calculation of costs and risks. Strategic culture analysis contradicts this approach to strategy development. As the coercive diplomacy literature has emphasized, each crisis situation demands a clear understanding of the specific adversary's -rational approach‖ and the unique crisis context, which can only be reached by a comprehensive, whole-of-government approach.
The preceding analysis leads to four conclusions and policy implications. First, any crisis with an increasingly confident China is going to be difficult to resolve, let alone resolve on terms favorable to the United States, while avoiding direct conflict. The United States is already carefully developing a long-term China strategy that signals both a strong resolve to deter aggression while simultaneously pursuing diplomatic means to persuade, accommodate, and engage China. However, the risk of a crisis escalating to direct conflict requires the United States to redouble its conflict prevention efforts in two key areas: 1) strengthening regional partnerships and alliances, and 2) clarifying existing policies to prevent miscalculation.
Strategic culture analysis indicates that a superior military capability alone may not be enough to compel China to back down in a crisis. The U.S. will need to craft a strategy that incorporates not only all the other DIME elements of power but also incorporates DIME elements of U.S. allies and regional partners. Moreover, research findings point out that coercive diplomacy strategies have a greater chance of success when the adversary is isolated internationally. 
74
Additionally, existing policies toward Taiwan and the South China Sea rely on a certain level of intentional ambiguity. In these cases, the United States is counting on the fear of miscalculation regarding U.S. intentions to deter potential aggressors that seek to challenge the status quo. However, the regional status quo is rapidly changing as regional actors develop the capabilities to enforce their claims and defend their interests. The United States should consider clarifying its regional policies in order to reduce the possibility of miscalculation. For example, the United States may propose revising its Taiwan policy to announce its intent to maintain and ensure regional stability as long as Taiwan does not claim independence.
Second, coercive diplomacy remains a highly risky and difficult strategy to skillfully implement. Understanding how to compel an adversary to back down is never a simple task, but the preceding strategic culture analysis indicates that using a coercive strategy against China is perhaps even more difficult and likely to fail.
Therefore, if collective, preventive deterrence fails in the region and a crisis erupts, the crisis response strategy must be crafted using all the combined DIME elements at the national command level in close coordination with U.S. partners and allies. The U.S.
government cannot hand over responsibility of the coercive diplomacy strategy to the -M‖ element of national power, but must retain complete control in order to execute a unified strategy. This implies integrating Geographic Combatant Command (GCC) crisis planning into the interagency process rather than vice versa (integrating the interagency into the GCC planning process). Determining the exact combination and sequencing of the crisis response strategy, an element of George's coercive diplomacy model, can only be accomplished at the national command level and not solely within the Department of Defense or the GCC.
Third, if a coercive diplomacy strategy is chosen, then U.S. decision makers are going to have to wrestle with the concept of inducements. Coercive diplomacy literature as well as the preceding strategic culture analysis suggests that the proper sequencing of inducements is critical for achieving success. 
75
resolve and run counter to achieving coercive goals. While the type of inducement is likely highly context-dependent, it must be carefully integrated in the overall coercive strategy and therefore demands attention prior to a potential crisis erupting.
Finally, using strategic culture analysis to assess coercive diplomacy has identified a potentially important gap in U.S. joint military doctrine. Joint doctrine acknowledges the utility of strategic coercion by integrating the concept of deterrence in the joint operational design phase in operational planning. In the generic (and universal) six phase planning model, deterrence is a necessary part of both phase 0, -Shape‖, and phase I, -Deter.‖ Phase 0 shape operations are designed to -dissuade and deter potential adversaries and to assure or solidify relationships with friends and allies,‖ while phase I deter operations are aimed at deterring -undesirable adversary actions by demonstrating the capabilities and resolve of the joint force.‖ 76 Should deterrence fail, joint doctrine implies a transition to phase II, -seize initiative‖ through the application of joint force capabilities, emphasizing the necessity for the application of military force. 
77
There is an oft used, well-known yet unattributed quote: -In a conflict over culture and strategy, culture eats strategy for lunch every time.‖ It is often used to describe the inherent conflict and leadership challenges associated with aligning organizational cultures with business strategies. One can just as easily use the phrase to describe the conflict in aligning and executing national policies and military strategies divorced from an understanding and experience in dealing with an adversary's strategic culture. This study argues thatjust as the United States experienced difficulty in designing 
Alexander L. George and William E. Simons, eds., The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 9.
The following points are summarized from George and Simons, The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy, 13-21.
This SRP is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of 
Strategic Studies Degree. The U.S. Army War College
Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools
Market Street
215
662-5606
U.S. Secretary of Education
Council for Higher Education Accreditation
Department of the Army, Department of Defense
U.S. Government