# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The weaponization of information, culture and money is a vital part of the Kremlin's hybrid, or non-linear, war, which combines the above elements with covert and small-scale military operations.
The conflict in Ukraine saw non-linear war in action.
Other rising authoritarian states will look to copy Moscow's model of hybrid war-and the West has no institutional or analytical tools to deal with it.
501 "Hybrid warfare" has become a widely used and widely interpreted term for describing Russia's actions in Ukraine.
Some analysts have used the narrow focus of irregular combinations of forces and tactics to suggest tactical counter-measures based on the scenarios that played out in Ukraine.
Others have used the lack of solid meaning of 502 Nadia Schadlow, "The Problem with Hybrid Warfare," War on the Rocks (April 2, 2015).
Schadlow described the frustration of a number of NATO members when the term Hybrid Warfare is used to explain Russia's actions.
These countries fear that the effort spent trying to frame these actions as anything less than war are an effort by members of the alliance to avoid having to commit to a response demanded by NATO's Article V. Meanwhile a number of these countries already believe they are being targeted and worry that their states could be crippled before it is even fully aware that a conflict has begun.
Schadlow calls a hybrid threat the "perfect conundrum: the injection of so much uncertainty that NATO collapses under its own principle of allied consensus."