# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The war in eastern Ukraine is demonstrative of the limits of hybrid warfare when the dynamic change of the political relationship is not masked, and when the objectives are unclear.
When Russia decided to press its advantage following the Crimean annexation, and began organizing separatist elements across Ukraine's south and east, it did so under the complete awareness of the government in Kiev and of those in the international community who were not looking for alternative realities.
Russia continued to employ political warfare against the Kiev and to discourage any third party involvement, but the line of contest was quickly reduced to the front in Donbas.
Moscow certainly wanted to continue to exert financial and economic pressure on Ukraine, but "not losing" in Donbas became the most significant priority due to the effect this would have on Putin's domestic support.
What Donbas revealed is that Russia was not conducting hybrid warfare from a position of overwhelming strength.
The Russians need the kinetic aspect of a conflict to be over quickly in order to preserve troop strength and material inventory and to reduce the motivation for foreign intervention.
A drawn out conventional engagement quickly taxes the Russians' ability to sustain combat forces and lacking a clear existential threat, Russian casualties represent a significant domestic political risk.
Without a quick victory, Russia needed to find an acceptable point that would preserve the idea of the rebellion and then used diplomacy to freeze the conflict for resolution at a more advantageous time.