# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
On March 18th, 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed an amendment to the Russian Constitution admitting the Republic of Crimea and the Federal City of Sevastopol into the Russian Federation.
This bold move was a watershed moment in that it marked the first annexation of territory by a foreign power in Europe since World War II.
It also was striking in the manner through which it was accomplished.
In less than a month tens of thousands of Russian soldiers swarmed onto the peninsula, and supplemented by militia, captured the seat of political power, orchestrated a referendum declaring Crimea sovereign from Ukraine, and forced the surrender of every Ukrainian garrison with very little loss of life, all while professing to the world that Russia was not involved in any way.
Since that time, it has become popular to look at the events in Crimea and to link the actions there with the term hybrid warfare.
To the extent that the definition of that term only involves the regular and irregular composition of the occupation forces, this is an easy case to make.
In order to understand how Russia was able to accomplish this action however, it is necessary to look first at the relationship between Russia and Ukraine in order to see that Russia's hybrid efforts to subvert Ukraine's sovereignty had been underway for years.
The annexation of Crimea represented only one strategic objective in this war; an objective that was well defined, could be consolidated in a relatively short period of time, and where the dynamic shift in the political status quo could be temporarily masked by other world events.