# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
333 The 2004 election manipulation and 2006 gas war demonstrate Russia's existing hostility toward Ukraine.
Stephen Blank contends that the planning for the annexation of Crimea began as early as 2006.
See also: Stephen Blank and Peter Hussey, "The Truth about Ukraine," Gatestone Institute (August 25,  2014).
By 2008, with the invasion and pseudo-partition of Georgia, Russia began to demonstrate real intent that may have only been slowed by the election of Yanukovych in Ukraine and Putin's return to office in 2012.
Outright annexation of territory was not part of Russia's action in Georgia.
Russia provided Russian citizenship to the South Ossetians and Abkhaz residents as a pretext for intervention, but neither population are ethnic Russians.
Russia may have been concerned that an actual annexation might increase the potential for outside intervention, but it is more likely that Moscow recognized the benefits of keeping the dispute open-ended.
If the two regions had been annexed, then Georgia may well have cut its loses, relinquished claims to those territories and then pressed harder for NATO membership.
By letting South Ossetia and Abkhazia remain technically Georgian, Russia is able to maintain military bases south of the Caucasus, and continue to frustrate Georgia's efforts to integrate with the West due to the unresolved conflict.
The strategic value of Sevastopol specifically, the symbolic value of Crimea more generally, and Crimea's importance to Ukrainian energy independence would make actual annexation a much more attractive option to Russia than maintaining an unresolved status.
Establishing an unresolved running-sore outside of Crimea, may have been part of the reason for pursuing the subsequent campaign in Donbas.
The trend in the 21st century is to erase the line between war and peace … the "rules of war" have changed dramatically.
The role of non-military methods of achieving political and strategic goals, in some cases, has far exceeded the force of arms in terms of effectiveness.
including information warfare and activities conducted by special operations forces.