# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
419 Yevgeny Bobrov, "Проблемы Жителей Крыма (the Problems of the Crimean Residents)," Council under the President of the Russian Federation on the Development of Civil Society and Human Rights, April 22, 2014.
See also: Paul R. Gregory, "Putin's 'Human Rights Council' Accidentally Posts Real Crimean Election Results," Forbes.
Com, May 5, 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/paulroderickgregory/2014/05/05/putins-human-rights-council-accidentallyposts-real-crimean-election-results-only-15-voted-for-annexation/. The relevant text follows (translated with MS Bing): "According to almost all of the surveyed experts and citizens:-the overwhelming majority of the people voted in a referendum for Sevastopol joining Russia (50-80 percent) voter turnout, according to various sources for joining Russia voted 50-60 percent of voters with a total turnout of 30-50 percent; residents of Crimea voted not so much for joining Russia, but for the termination, in their words, "corruption and lawlessness vorovskogo [criminal syndicate] dominance [of] Donetsk henchmen.
Residents of Sevastopol voted for accession to Russia.
Fear [of] the illegal armed groups in Sevastopol was greater than in other parts of the Crimea."
So the irony is that even of the 15-30 percent of Crimeans who actually voted for unifying with Russia (not counting Sevastopol which did appear to get a majority), a major motivating factor was disgust with the (pro-Russian, Donetsk origin) Yanukovych regime.
Sevastopol did vote to unify with Russia, but was heavily influenced to do so by Russian propaganda.
In this same document, the Russian 'Human Rights Group' discusses getting rid of banned (in Russia) subversive Islamic texts that were not outlawed under Ukraine.
420  That narrow frame of reference fixates on the military forms of war as they were used to consolidate control over a strategic objective, but frequently misses the larger campaign of political warfare that Russia had carried out to subvert Ukraine's sovereignty for years.