# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The Russo-Georgian conflict is an example of hybrid warfare by a state that maintains an offensive-realist perspective and is predisposed to use a wide range of national power, including violence, to coerce an outcome from a neighbor in a time of peace.
Russia maintained the strategic goal of maintaining a dominant position in its near-abroad, ending former-Soviet state's bids for membership in non-Russian controlled bodies, and preventing a liberal government from succeeding on Russia's borders.
The Russian hybrid war against Georgian sovereignty was not solely defined by the 5-day conventional invasion in August 2008.
That was merely a brief manifestation of a much longer campaign of forcing Tbilisi to accept Moscow's will; carefully timed to commence when it wasn't expected, and concluded before necessitating an international response.
Russia used hybrid forms of warfare to effectively divide Georgia and to extend political control over Moscow's objectives, but it is a mistake to assume this effort concluded with the ceasefire that ended the August 2008 "hot" war.
The overt invasion of Georgia forced Tbilisi to accept the dominant presence of the Russian army on Georgian soil, but it was not pursued to the point of a complete national capitulation.
To maintain its narrative of legitimacy and forgo the risk associated with a larger war, Russia stopped its advance near the boundaries of the contested rebel territories.
From this reinforced military position, Russia has simply changed back to the practice of employing different forms of political warfare and lower levels of violence to continue to prevent a successful democratic government from forming in Tbilisi and frustrating ties between Georgia and NATO.
Russia's hybrid war against Georgia is an ongoing effort, whose more violent manifestation is in a frozen status, but one in which the Kremlin retains the initiative for reigniting when it suits Putin's designs.