# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The term "hybrid warfare" is used by policy analysts, military leaders, international organizations, and news outlets to cover a wide range of non-traditional actions that apparently lack a unifying context. Dismissing hybrid warfare as meaningless jargon is pointless, however, because it has already gained a level of common usage, particularly with regard to observations of Russian foreign policy. What hybrid warfare lacks is a general theory that will serve to frame its use in a meaningful manner, and that helps distinguish it from the host of other types of "warfare." More importantly, a good theory can facilitate an understanding of hybrid warfare's impact on conventional deterrence, defensive alliances, and meaningful counteractions. The purpose of this research was to establish the utility of the concept of hybrid warfare and set a framework toward a general theory.
This research began with a review of the existing definitions and positions on the idea of hybrid warfare and discovered that there was a gap between the current thinking and the foundational understanding of strategy, warfare, and state power. The most common definitions of hybrid warfare focus too narrowly on the blending of conventional, irregular, terrorist and criminal organizations and tactics -sometimes including a supporting information campaign and cyber warfare. Hybrid warfare has also been attributed to all manner of state and non-state actors, blurring the obvious differences between a powerful actor who employs select methods as a matter of choice and a weaker entity whose means of aggression are limited. Based on these observations, the following hypothesis was formulated: In a condition of total war, a state would employ every instrument of its national power toward achieving its strategic end but the determinative instrument would be the state's military. In a condition of limited war, the commitment of national power would usually be limited to the strategic objective and only the force necessary to achieve the objective would be employed. Both of these pursuits entail a degree of risk to the aggressor's military. If a state were to attempt to reach the same strategic objectives through all elements of power while preserving its military strength, the objectives of war would be pursued during a time of peace and xiv through a hybrid mixture of political warfare and limited violence. An existing model of potential forms of political and military warfare could then serve as a wider aperture through which to test hybrid warfare.
The methods used for this research involved a summary study of the nature of strategic theory and interstate power. With contemporary Russia selected to limit independent variables, Russian political and military theory was examined in its contemporary and Soviet-era forms for indications of a disposition favorable to hybrid warfare. An investigative analysis of three cases-the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, the 2014 Annexation of Crimea, and the 2014-2015 War in Eastern Ukraine was then conducted utilizing the Callard and Faber Model of the potential forms of war. 
1
In Georgia, Russia created and then froze ethnic rebel conflicts as a point of leverage in Georgian politics. In both Georgia and Ukraine, Moscow engaged in political subversion, armed proxy groups, manipulated economic conditions and used different levels of violence toward achieving strategic objectives for years before the brief introduction of more traditional forms of military warfare. In Georgia and Crimea, Russia masked the dynamic change of the status quo behind other world events and kept the level of violence below a threshold that might induce foreign intervention. In Donbas, Russia lacked a clear strategic objective and attempted to capitalize on the Crimean success while world attention was focused on Ukraine, resulting in a costly war that escalated and risked Western intervention. In all three cases, hybrid warfare continued after the reduction of overt warfare as Moscow worked to prevent the opposition governments from establishing stable democratic environments and reestablishing sovereign control of their territories.
The implications for policy are that defensive alliances and expectations for deterrence against military threats are inadequate when they are limited to defending against a narrow range of military action. Putin knows he cannot defeat the West militarily and for all of his nuclear saber rattling, he is pragmatic and calculating in his calculations about building a strong Russian state, meaning he will back down before he crosses a line that risks the destruction of his government. Policy should therefore be crafted to reduce strategic vulnerabilities in non-military domains and limit Russian options to the military domain. Putin is a realist who believes that only Russia can guarantee Russia's security. The international community, agreements and diplomatic assurances are tools that he will employ toward Russian interests and discard at their first inconvenience. Putin will likely target any Western influence in Russia and will retain the initiative for future action by fomenting and freezing conflict in the near-abroad to coerce his neighbors and as leverage against Western "interference." Finally, Putin believes in the relative nature of power. He will not only continue to build his military strength and demonstrate it to the world, but he will seek to exploit the rifts in what he perceives are his principle geo-political rivals -the United States, the European Union and NATO. Hybrid warfare is a vehicle for working toward all of these themes while retaining the ability to exploit the systems of the globalized, interconnected, and open West to construct an alternate reality where disturber of the peace can be perceived as a defender of virtue, and appeasement-minded leaders are offered excuses for inaction. accurately identify the Crimean annexation as a war. 
3
4
Despite the frequent use of the term, there is no theory of hybrid warfare and the uncertain parameters of the term have frustrated efforts to frame actions like the Russian annexation of Crimea. The narrow focus on the military aspects of the Crimean operation tends to gloss over the manipulation of Crimean political processes to promote pseudolegitimacy, stifle opposition, and slow Ukrainian military countermeasures. A purely military focus also tends to miss the systematic years-long process of subverting the Ukrainian political system through voter manipulation, economic coercion, and the fostering of financial dependency in the years leading up to the 2014 takeover. To dismiss these actions as anything other than deliberate acts of war that enabled the occupation would be like using only the knock-out punch in a late-round boxing match to describe how the dominant fighter won the bout, without looking at all of the body blows that were landed in the earlier rounds or questioning why the winner intentionally selected the timing for the end of the fight. A more holistic assessment of Russia's actions will lead to a theoretical construct that will facilitate the discussion of counteractions and set the foundation for a generalizable theory that will apply to other actors.
3 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 75. Clausewitz also provided a simple differentiation between total and limited war. War takes one of two forms: either it is meant to destroy an enemy's ability to resist, or it is meant to seize a piece of territory along the enemy's frontier with the intention of keeping it or of using it as a means of leverage in future negotiation.
4 DoDD 3000.07, Irregular Warfare (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2014), 14. Irregular warfare is a "characterization used to describe a deviation from the traditional form of warfare where actors may use non-traditional methods such as guerrilla warfare, terrorism, sabotage, subversion, criminal activities, and insurgency for control of relevant populations." This definition includes many of the components that have been associated with hybrid warfare -the "hybridity" being the mixed use of regular military and irregular actors. This thesis proposes a broader definition of hybridity that focuses on the mixture of political and military forms of war.
War therefore is an act of violence intended to compel our opponent to fulfill our will.
-Carl von Clausewitz 5
As force and the threat of violence was used to impose Russia's will on Ukraine, resulting in the complete capitulation of all Ukrainian forces in Crimea, Ukraine's ejection from the peninsula, and the imposition of Russian political control over the space, Russia's actions fit Clausewitz' simplest definition and typology of warfare, despite the limited level of bloodshed. 
6
7
In the post-September 11th era, it has become fashionable to ascribe the world's woes to non-state actors and invisible networks of transnational terrorists. While these entities certainly do pose a threat to Western interests and the world order, the level of that threat is diminished somewhat when a nuclear-armed state begins carving off 5 Clausewitz, On War, 75.   6 Thomas G. Mahnken, "Strategic Theory," in Strategy in the Contemporary World: An Introduction to Strategic Studies, eds. John Baylis, James J. Wirtz and Colin S. Gray (Oxford; New York: Oxford  University Press, 2015), 67-81.
7 Clausewitz, On War, 75. Clausewitz proposed the maximum use of force to bring a conflict to a swift, definitive solution. Hybrid warfare pursues the objectives of war through a slow process of attrition and "frozen" conflict that are contrary to this idea. portions of sovereign neighbors in a region as presumptively "stable" as Europe. The paradigm of asymmetrical warfare methodologies attributed to weak entities wishing to attack the strong has been flipped on its head by a relatively strong power using hybrid, cross-domain approaches to achieve strategic outcomes against a weaker neighbor without relying primarily on the application of overwhelming conventional force. Russia has certainly provided a remarkable contemporary example of this methodology, but the Russians did not suddenly grasp the potential of hybrid warfare absent a costly learning curve, nor did they discover that the conditions for the successful implementation of their innovative approach were less than universal before paying another butcher's bill. It should be assumed, however, that they are learning and adapting these methods and that they are not alone. If hybrid warfare is to become increasingly common among actors who are in general discord with the West and who wish to avoid the overwhelming dominance of conventional Western military power, then the modeling and study of these approaches is an imperative as they may have important implications for expectations of deterrence, estimations of power, and the significance of defensive alliances.
This thesis seeks to answer the following questions: What is the fundamental nature of hybrid warfare? What are the characteristics of an actor that facilitate the conduct of hybrid warfare? What conditions must exist or need to be created in order for an aggressor to conduct hybrid warfare? Does an existing model of military and political forms of war adequately describe the means of conducting hybrid warfare?
After years of simmering debate in academic and military circles, the term "hybrid" as an approach to warfare was thrust to the fore in 2010 when U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates published the Quadrennial Defense Review and used the term to describe the sophisticated means that both state and non-state actors would employ to mitigate a conventional disadvantage with the United States. 8 Secretary Gates' comments under the heading "Shifting Operational Landscape" hypothesized general descriptions of a hybrid threat that could involve "protracted forms of warfare, use of proxy forces for coercion and intimidation, terrorism and criminality to manipulate the information environment, target energy resources, attack economic vulnerabilities and exploit diplomatic leverage." 
9
Since September 11th, 2001 there has been no shortage of terms that have come into vogue as means of describing the type of war(s) in which the U.S. and its allies have become participants. Some of these terms come from a long lineage of military thought and are rooted firmly in the doctrine of the Armed Forces, yet even those definitions may not reflect the intended meaning when the terms are used loosely in policy circles. Others are the creative inventions of modern thinkers, toiling to put a form and function to observations of behavior that seem to fall outside of established paradigms. Some have overlapping definitions, while others merely sound similar. These terms are legion: asymmetric warfare, irregular conflict, compound warfare, combination warfare, distraction warfare, fourth-generation warfare, low-intensity conflict, limited war, unrestricted warfare, special warfare, unconventional warfare and a host of dimensions where the term "warfare" and the role of force is far from obvious: cyber-warfare, economic warfare, political warfare, cultural warfare, and the like. It is part of the human condition that leads us to try to contextualize things that are new or that we don't understand, so it is worth noting how many of those words in the first group have a negative construction. "We use 'not' words to describe things that we deeply believe should not be: non-state actors, failed states, irregular/ unconventional/ unrestricted/ asymmetrical conflict." 10 Thus, the conventional advocates of "regular" war have couched those categories as aberrations to a more pure form of traditional warfare.
The sudden (re)emergence of the notion of hybrid warfare led to a scramble to update existing definitions, reconsider its utility in the context of 2010, and even to discount its usefulness altogether. 11 Among this latter group, strategists like Colin Gray believe we should "forget qualifying adjectives: irregular war; guerrilla war; nuclear war; naval strategy; counterinsurgent strategy. The many modes of warfare and tools of strategy are of no significance for the nature of war and strategy. A general theory of war and strategy, such as that offered by Clausewitz and in different ways also by Sun Tzu and Thucydides, is a theory with universal applicability." 
12
13
"Hybrid" warfare implies a combination of at least two things to produce a unique offspring. The ambiguity lies in what is being combined.
From those who find some utility in the concept of hybrid warfare, there are two general schools of thought. The first group believes that hybrid warfare is a useful concept, but that it is anything but new. They contend that hybrid warfare is simply the combination of regular and irregular forces on the battlefield; "irregulars" being defined 10 Montgomery McFate and Andrea V. Jackson, "The Object Beyond War: Counterinsurgency and the Four Tools of Political Competition," in Unrestricted Warfare Symposium: Proceedings on Strategy, Analysis, and Technology, 14-15 March 2006, ed. Ronald R. Luman (Laurel, MD: Johns Hopkins  University, Applied Physics Laboratory, 2006), 143-178.  11 Davi M. D'Agostino, Hybrid Warfare: GAO Report to Congress (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2010). In response to a request from Congress to define Hybrid Warfare, the Government Accountability Office surveyed the services and came away with various answers. Several services had definitions within service doctrine, but there is no Joint definition, nor was there a plan to write one. The consensus was that whatever "Hybrid Warfare" is, it is covered within the defined spectrum of conflict and there is no reason to add a new definition; "The War of New Words: Why Military History Trumps Buzzwords." Armed Forces Journal (2009).
12 Colin S. Gray, Recognizing and Understanding Revolutionary Change in Warfare: The Sovereignty of Context (Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2006), 4. Gray's affirmation of the enduring understanding of the nature of war and strategy are an important part in the framing of this research, which seeks to connect hybrid warfare to these established foundations. 
13
as militia, guerrillas, insurgents, and terrorists. 
14
15
16
The second school of thought has numerous definitions for what constitutes hybrid warfare. Most of these definitions also include conventional and irregular forces, but give special categorization to the operational reach of terrorism, and then include a wide variety of innovative approaches to applying technology and resourcefulness to negate an opponent's military superiority; a weaker-attacking-stronger dynamic that is generally associated with asymmetric warfare. 17 Others define 'hybrid' as the mixture of battlefields in the information warfare domain through the simultaneous efforts to win influence over the "populations in the conflict zone, on the home front, and in the 14 Peter R. Mansoor, "Hybrid Warfare in History," in Hybrid Warfare: Fighting Complex Opponents from the Ancient World to the Present, eds. Williamson Murray and Peter R. Mansoor (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 1-17.
15 TRADOC G-2, "Operational Environments to 2028: The Strategic Environment for Unified Land Operations" (August, 2012), 5.
16 Clausewitz, On War. Clausewitz describes the exclusivity of military force to the conduct of warfare due to the inability of any other implement of power during his time to either attrite enemy forces, or seize and hold desired territory. 17 Timothy McCulloh and Richard Johnson, "Hybrid Warfare," JSOU Report 13-4 (August, 2013); Nathan P. Freier, Strategic Competition and Resistance in the 21st Century: Irregular, Catastrophic,  Traditional, and Hybrid Challenges in Context (Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2007). international community." 
18
19
20
21
22
19 Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Panama City: Pan American Publishing, 2002), xxi-xxii.
20 David Kilcullen, The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a Big One (Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 2-3. David Kilcullen describes the U.S. as trapped in a conventional thinking cycle that is blinded by its conviction of its own dominance. While America's focus has been on conventional strength, other nations have moved to significantly reduce the role of conventional forces in the conduct of warfare by 'weaponizing' other dimensions of their strategic arsenals.
21 Liang and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare, 16-17   22 Nathan P. Freier, Strategic Competition and Resistance in the 21st Century: Irregular,  Catastrophic, Traditional, and Hybrid Challenges in Context (Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2007), 38. Freier calls these efforts "purposeful irregular resistance" where containment of the U.S. is the primary objective for competitor/ adversary states. describes as a new type of anti-American containment conducted by rising competitors. 
23
The weaponization of what Joseph Nye famously categorized as soft power is a key ingredient to the usefulness of studying hybrid warfare in more immediate applications, and are the best methods to meet the economic, diplomatic and informational aspects of hybrid threats as outlined by Secretary Gates. 
24
26
24 Joseph S. Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics (New York, NY: Public  Affairs, 2004).
25 Thomas X. Hammes, "Modern Warfare Evolves into a Fourth Generation," in Unrestricted Warfare Symposium: Proceedings on Strategy, Analysis, and Technology, 14-15 March 2006, ed. Ronald R. Luman (Laurel, MD: Johns Hopkins University, Applied Physics Laboratory, 2006), 65-88.  26 Frank Hoffman, "The Hybrid Character of Modern Conflict," in Hybrid Warfare and Transnational Threats: Perspectives for an Era of Persistent Conflict, eds. Paul Brister, William H. Natter and Robert R.  Tomes (New York, NY: Council for Emerging National Security Affairs, 2011), 38.  the political leadership of an invading force that the continuation of the war is futile. 
27
McCulloh and Johnson argued for the importance of understanding the nature and principles of hybrid warfare. They proposed seven principles of hybrid warfare that they supported with examinations of the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah War and the Soviet Partisan efforts on the Eastern Front from 
1941-1945. 28
Frank Hoffman is a leading advocate for the study of hybrid warfare. He credits "new wars," "open source warfare," "modern wars," "polymorphic conflict," combinational wars," and "4th Generation Warfare" as the feeder schools of thought that have both informed and stymied the thinking that has led to the emergence of the term hybrid warfare. 
29
30
[There is an] increased merging … of conflict and war forms. The potential for types of conflict that blur the distinction between war and peace, and combatants and non-combatants, appear to be on the rise. 
31
31 Frank G. Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars (Arlington, VA: Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 2007), 7.
Hoffman also highlights the idea that these elements have some level of centralized control. These activities have to be able to be coordinated and directed to achieve synergy that works toward desired political objectives. The implication is that the ability to direct action across all domains is a requirement to conduct hybrid warfare.
Hybrid wars incorporate a range of different modes of warfare including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts including indiscriminate violence and coercion, and criminal disorder." These multi-modal activities can be conducted by separate units, or even by the same unit, but are generally operationally and tactically directed and coordinated within the main battlespace to achieve synergistic effects. 
32
Hybrid adversaries simultaneously and adaptively employs a fused mix of conventional weapons, irregular tactics, terrorism, and criminal behavior in the battlespace to obtain their political objectives….directed and coordinated within the battlespace to achieve synergistic effects in the physical and psychological dimensions of conflict. 
33
What this framework takes for granted is the nature of an aggressor state that is comfortable employing terrorists and criminal networks to fulfill strategic objectives that violate another state's sovereignty; an act of warfare. It then follows that if a state was willing to sponsor those types of actions to meet its strategic ends, the same state would be willing to employ economic, diplomatic, and informational efforts toward the same outcome. Therefore, hybridity must encompass a range of activity that is outside of the military forms of war and suitable for employment during a time of supposed peace.
32 Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars, 14. 33 Hoffman, The Hybrid Character of Modern Conflict, 40.  George Kennan, the father of containment theory, called this range of actions "political warfare."
Political warfare is the logical application of Clausewitz's doctrine in time of peace. In broadest definition, political warfare is the employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives. Such operations are both overt and covert. They range from such overt actions as political alliances, economic measures, and "white" propaganda to such covert operations as clandestine support of "friendly" foreign elements, "black" psychological warfare, and even encouragement of underground resistance in hostile states. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
Taken as a whole, the preceding literature shows that the components of hybrid warfare are not new. 
40
39 Brister, Revisiting the Gordian Knot: Strategic Considerations for Hybrid Warfare, 51.
40 Kilcullen, The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a Big One. David Kilcullen describes Hybrid Warfare's importance, particularly as conducted by nation-states as "new actors with new technology threaten new or transfigured ways of war, but the old threats also remain and have to be dealt with in the same time and space, stressing the resources and overloading the systems of western militaries," 5-6. See also: David Kilcullen, Out of the Mountains: The Coming Age of the Urban Guerrilla (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2013). Kilcullen also describes hybrid threats as the combination of state and irregular forces that will employ any variety of weapons and tactics to "minimize detection and retaliation," 105. numerous forms have taken on new significance in the contemporary world due to globalization, mass communications, and the speed of technological innovation. It is distinct from the narrow options of asymmetric necessity that are shaped by the limited means available to a stateless terrorist organization.
Hybrid warfare is instead the deliberate choice of a state or pseudo-state that could introduce larger degrees of conventional force, but instead attempts to realize some of the objectives of limited war through other than purely conventional military means. In a hybrid campaign, traditional military forces have a role that may be significant, or may be all but invisible. While at least the plausible threat of overwhelming force is an important component, traditional military force is the lesser, supporting effort of a hybrid campaign. Clausewitz' claim that war is "a continuation of political intercourse, carried on with other means" implies a distinct point where political discourse stops and military contest begins. 
41
This research project began with the following hypothesis: Following the end of the Cold War and the spectacular display of overwhelming Western conventional firepower and technology during the 1991 Gulf War, rising powers have continued to pursue strategic objectives while taking care to minimize the risk to their conventional armed forces. These actions employ a variety of combinations of forms as they are adapted to particular targets and geopolitical situations, yet they require certain conditions that can help identify when they are taking place and suggest what range of 41 Clausewitz, On War, 87.  counteractions might be successful. If rising nation states are using hybrid warfare to impose their will on weaker neighbors, then hybrid aggression may not be inhibited by conventional means of deterrence. The economic and military alliances formed to bring stability between regional partners could also be undermined without activating the defensive measures that are built to react to clear acts of overt aggression.
This research involved a heuristic analysis of multiple case studies in an effort to identify common forms and conditions that will assist in developing a general theory of hybrid warfare. The case studies selected all involve modern Russia under Vladimir Putin due to Russia's determined efforts to realize the potential of combining political warfare and violence. Russia is a pioneer in this mode of conflict and is worthy of study. Russia has repeatedly demonstrated aggression toward smaller adjacent neighboring states. As the coming pages will illustrate, this aggression has been to secure limited political objectives and not the outright capitulation of the target state. By limiting the cases to post-1991, the Gulf War watershed moment described by Liang and Xiangsui, this study will examine contemporary Russian conflicts whose hybrid nature may be partially enabled by emerging technology, and also limited in scale out of potential concern for provoking a significant military response from the West. Russia has a wide menu of state means in the form of a relatively developed economy, technical sector, diplomatic core, and media enterprise, in addition to a relative advantage (compared to its adjacent neighbors) in conventional military power. These available means distinguish the use of hybrid warfare as a matter of choice, as opposed to a weak entity that employs any means at their disposal out of necessity. The case studies examined were:
Unfortunately, DIME-FIL is too simplistic to adequately analyze a hybrid campaign, as, for example, "M" would attempt to encompass the range of military forms from conventional to irregular to terrorism to nuclear warfare in one single category without consideration for the level of unique utility that each subordinate form might have. James Callard and Peter Faber categorized Liang and Xiangsui's "10,000 forms of beyond-limits combined war" as military forms of war, non-military forms of war, and above-military forms of war (Figure 
1
42
In order to make a case for the strategic importance of hybrid warfare, it is first necessary to examine the fundamentals of strategy, several applicable theories of power, how power is used to deter and ultimately where a hybrid approach to warfare nests within some of these commonly held concepts. It is well beyond the scope of this project to summarize all of the thinking on topics as widely fielded as strategy, power, and deterrence. Instead, this chapter serves as a very brief overview of several of the most commonly accepted assertions, and only to the depth were the objectives of warfare-the tradition role of the military in the Clausewitzian trinity-may be demonstrated to be attainable through other means.
In its simplest form, strategy describes the desired ends that can be achieved and the ways those ends can be reached with available means. Colin Gray refines this concept in the Clausewitzian tradition with his emphasis on the role of coercive power by "insist[ing] that strategy is about the use made of force and the threat of force for the goals of policy." 
43
44
45
Hybrid warfare changes the strategic dynamic by dividing the military forms of war into elements whose employment may remain below the threshold of traditional war and synergizing those efforts with the coercive and destructive effects with non-military forms of war. "Hybridity" is found in the combination of the various political and violent means, and the synergistic effect of that combination produces a unique way to realize an end. 
46
The conclusion of warfare traditionally results when one of the belligerents is either annihilated in a decisive battle or is exhausted beyond the point of further resistance. 
47
48
49
50
51
There are two traditions regarding the relationship between conflict and politics: realism and liberalism. "For the realist, the central problem of international politics is war and the use of force, and the central actors are states." 
52
53
54
57
58
If the aggressor is an offensive-realist, the parties of liberalism would continuously be confounded as the realist regularly made and then broke agreements or pursued strategies that were painful for both sides. The realist views international competition as zero-sum;
there is a winner and a loser. Pursuing a win-win strategy for a realist only makes sense if 56 Nye, Understanding International Conflicts: An Introduction to Theory and History, 5. The term "liberalism" will be used through the rest of this study in keeping with the sources referenced. Classical liberalism involves the freedom of the individual, and neo-liberalism is the inter-relations of states through an agreed upon context. 57 Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, 23.   58 Ibid., 4.  his gains are greater than and outpacing his opponent's, because the result is the realist's greater relative power. For the same reason, the realist is also willing to accept a loss, so long as the opponent's loss is greater and the gap is increasing.
One useful definition of power is described by the ability a nation can exert to positively (attract) or negatively (coerce) influence another entity in order to reach a preferred outcome. 
59
60
Power projection is the ability to exercise force relative to distance. Historically, those who are most vulnerable to an aggressor are those along its contiguous borders, making armies, or land-power, the traditional yardstick for measuring a nation's existing strength. 
61
62
63
A balance of power typically exists when a state weighs its elements of power and upon comparing them to a rival finds that neither side has a distinct advantage. This lack of advantage means that any attempt to directly challenge an adversary would risk incurring a cost that outweighs the expected value of the desired objective. Accurately estimating the existing balance of power, however, is a highly subjective process that requires a holistic understanding of an adversary's capability and willingness to resist coercion. This calculus is made more difficult with the presence of defensive alliances, international agreements, economic relationships, and historical or cultural linkage between an adversary and other entities. 
64
There is no existing theory of hybrid warfare; however, the term has been used to loosely describe a variety of forms of war without examining the nature of the aggressor state. Hybrid warfare is a natural complement to Mearsheimer's theory of offensive realism and the struggle to maximize relative power. Offensive realism functions under several assumptions that are also applicable in framing the appeal of hybrid warfare:
1.
The natural state of the international system is anarchy.
[States] inherently possess some military capability.
States can never be sure about other state's intentions.
Survival [territorial integrity and political autonomy] is the primary goal of the [state].
[States] are rational actors. 
65
Mearsheimer's list requires one addition in order for an offensive-realist to be capable of pursuing hybrid warfare:
States inherently possess other than military means of interacting with other states.
An offensive-realist who is willing to use force to ensure its dominance over potential adversaries is likely to consider all means at the state's disposal for the same purpose.
There are three principal considerations that determine the 'hybridity' of warfare:
1) the nature of the aggressor state, 2) the presence of requisite conditions, and 3) the primacy and combination of other-than-conventional military forms of warfare. "Hybrid" by definition requires a combination of different types of warfare. As combining efforts within the military forms of warfare, conventional and irregular, or surrogate and terrorist, is fairly common, it is too narrow in scope to serve describe the unique effects that a hybrid campaign can actually achieve. Instead, warfare should only be considered "hybrid" if it aims to achieve the objectives of strategy with a combination of political (non-military, above-military) and military forms of warfare.
The advantage of hybrid warfare is found in the unique ways it provides a state for employing existing elements of national power in coercive pursuit of strategic ends.
There are "three different aspects of relational power: commanding change, controlling agendas, and establishing preferences." 
66
67 Recognizing when these acts are isolated incidents of criminality or when they constitute a deliberate effort on the part of an opposing state to further a national strategic objective (potentially an act of war) is a requisite function for any power that attempts to counter hybrid warfare. The ability to see these actions for what they are requires not only adopting the adversary's perspective for power relations, but also viewing the actions in their entire context and not as isolated points.
Hybrid warfare requires an evaluation of both the existing balance of power and the mechanisms of deterrence to identify the thresholds or constraints for those defensive mechanisms to be activated. The aggressor must then be able to marshal a significant degree of the means available to the state and apply them deliberately, synchronizing their effects across all domains, in an effort to reduce the potential risk of conventional military warfare. The conventional military element of power, the "big M," plays an important role in this effort, but that role is primarily as a threat of far greater escalation of force against the target state, rather than as the primary instrument of aggressive policy. By not committing the entirety of the state's conventional military force, the aggressor protects that force from destruction, circumvents many of the deterrent mechanisms that are built to trigger responses to conventional attack, and forces any response to be measured lest the aggressor be "provoked" into escalating the level of conventional violence involved with the conflict. Hybrid warfare therefore is true to the maxim of economy of force-achieving the desired ends in an efficient manner.
Conventional occupations not only face the taxing prospect of countering insurgent movements, but the introduction of regular forces also incurs an increased level of international and domestic political risk. Conventional force is usually attributable to an aggressor, making the sponsor vulnerable to counterattack, international sanctions, or other punitive measures. Not only do conventional losses degrade an aggressor's aggregate combat power, but mounting casualties can increase domestic political resistance to continued involvement in a conflict. 
68
69
Hybrid warfare requires an aggressor to be willing to violate a target state's sovereignty, to include the promotion of violence, during a time of supposed peace. This perspective contrasts with the Western preference for delineation between peace and war (with an admittedly "gray zone" between the two that has been the space of covert action, propaganda, and less-than-war coercive or punitive military actions). 
70
71
This temporal disassociation from a traditional linear view of a road to war between two states is a critical component in conceptualizing the value of hybrid warfare. Once that determination has been made and the aggressor, mindful of the existing deterrent forces, has begun to direct its national power toward that end, a state of war exists because the aggressor perceives it as being so, despite any formal declaration or use of overt military force.
70 Kennan, The Inauguration of Organized Political Warfare. See also: Nadia Schadlow, "Peace and War: The Space Between," War on the Rocks (August 8, 2014). Schadlow calls the gray zone "the space between" politics and military action. Whatever the name, or whatever hang-ups exist for effective Western policy in that area, it would be a mistake to mirror-image the same perception of a confusing zone between peace and war onto an offensive-realist like Russia.
71 David E. Johnson, "Fighting the "Islamic State": The Case for Ground Forces," Parameters: Journal of the U.S. Army War College 45, no. 1 (Spring, 2015): 16. Johnson uses the American inclination to differentiate between peace and war to make a case for ground forces to combat the Islamic State but his summary of DIME-FIL and the oft quoted Clausewitzian dictum that war is "policy continued by other means" serves as a very succinct summary of the conceptual difficulties that Americans will have regarding hybrid warfare. The hybrid warfare practitioner must be able to secure his strategic objectives through all means, including violence, before crossing a threshold of traditional war. Johnson's larger argument is also pertinent to this discussion as he is admonishing U.S. policy makers for assuming that a fight against the IS requires the same COIN centric nation-building methodologies that were popularized during the Iraq war. Hybrid warfare similarly requires certain conditions for it to be a feasible approach to securing strategic objectives. The absence of these conditions will necessitate either abandoning the campaign or transitioning to more traditional warfare as will be discussed in the Russia -Donbas case study.
Aggressors whose governments are centralized and authoritarian in nature possess a distinct advantage in synchronizing all of the elements of national power. While this is more reflective of the nature of the state, it is not an absolute prerequisite. Liberal states can nationalize economies and information domains, but this is usually indicative of a state of total war and cannot be regularly implemented for limited, hybrid warfare without undermining the liberal nature of the state. Synchronization of the political forms of warfare enables the aggressor state to obscure its intentions, isolate the objective from the target state's control, weaken the target state and international resolve, dissuade external influence, and magnify the perceived cost of resistance.
One of the most critical dimensions in fusing the efforts of military and political warfare is the overlapping application of information warfare. "In the information age…the outcomes are shaped not merely by the side whose army wins but also by whose story wins." 72 Information warfare is used to separate the objective area's population from the target state, to manufacture legitimacy by fabricating a pretext for "intervention," to prevent the target state from responding effectively, and to reduce the chances of external interference. The most successful hybrid campaign will break the enemy's ability or will to resist ahead of the overt introduction of force-the nature of which can now be characterized as an instrument of stability (i.e., peacekeepers) instead of the instrument that created the instability.
State control of all print media, television and radio broadcasts and Internet access makes achieving information dominance over the domestic audience much more likely. To the degree that this control includes the target state, the themes and messages can directly undermine the target population's will to resist. In the spheres where the aggressor's message has to compete with the international press and an unregulated Internet, the specificity of themes are less important than the saturation of these domains with the disinformation to help obscure the aggressor's actions. The goal in this domain is not to generate support so much as it is to continue to mask intentions and to 72 Nye, The Future of Power, 19.  undermine international resolve by planting doubt about the nature of the conflict or the involvement of the aggressor. Similarly, economic warfare toward a specific end is much easier to orchestrate when the state directly controls the economic means of power.
Western nations use economic pressure to attempt to force other states to make certain choices, but marshalling all of the various parts of a free market toward that end is extremely difficult. The impact of information themes and economic coercion can be enhanced through the selective application of violence against the target state.
A hybrid aggressor must be willing to employ or threaten to use select levels of violence against a target state through the formation and sponsorship of terrorists, resistance movements, agitators and saboteurs in order to strike targets that will exacerbate tensions, undermine the target state's governance in an area, and enhance the effects of efforts in other domains. These kinetic actions are meant to compliment other political efforts to separate the objective from the target state's sphere of control. The combined efforts may be aimed at isolating a specific objective or at subverting the target state more generally. This means that violence can either be focused near the expected line of contact (the "front," or boundary of the contested area) or throughout the target state's strategic depth. 
73
74
Given that an aggressor is an offensive realist with the ability to synchronize all elements of national power and a willingness to employ violence during a time of peace, the hybrid actor needs a strategic end toward which it can direct its efforts. At some point, the aggressor will determine the target state's ability to protect the objective has been significantly reduced and the aggressor will dynamically change the inter-state relationship through unexpected force. This change happens on the aggressor's initiative and is based on an assessment of how quickly the objective can be accomplished and the level of violence reduced to prevent a determined resistance by the target state or an intervention from third parties.
Warfare is conducted in pursuit of a political objective-the strategic end-and it can either be total or limited in scope. 
75
75 Clausewitz, On War. Clausewitz identified the different military objectives that would be associated with either limited or total warfare. In limited warfare, such as the occupation of a contested territory, the attacker's aim is to quickly occupy the terrain and then assume a defensive posture that will make any effort to retake it more costly for the victim. In total warfare, the objective of the military is to destroy the victim state's means of resistance -which Clausewitz equated with the target state's armed forces.
force. The understanding of the strategic goal, and that the imposition of the aggressor's will is the determinative point of victory is what distinguishes the hybrid warfare mindset from the war-or-peace binary conception preferred by liberal states. For example, a state that believes itself to be at peace might still seek to gain a competitive economic advantage over another state, or might attempt to influence a political process toward a preferred outcome, but the goal of these activities is to manipulate the atmosphere of the relational environment with recognition of mutual sovereignty. In a perceived state of war, those same processes are used to force an opponent to accept conditions dictated by the aggressor in direct contravention of sovereignty. 
76
States that determine to seek political objectives through hybrid warfare necessarily need to conceal their intentions from the outset so that the efforts of diplomatic, economic, and informational coercion are less readily identified as acts of hostility and countered in kind. While the aggressor may not delineate between peace and war, he is keenly aware that others do. He uses this awareness to his advantage by avoiding the thresholds that will lead the target state to officially change the status of the relationship to open warfare. The aggressor also uses the instruments of the liberal international order: UN mandates, international treaties, environmental laws, commercial agreements, etc., to his advantage for as long as they serve his objectives. When these instruments negatively impact his relational power, he will set them aside in favor of promoting his own survival. 
77
Any dynamic action involving the use of military force should also be calculated to achieve the desired objective and then dramatically reduce the associated violence in the shortest time possible in order to reduce the motivation for international intervention. The goal is to present the world with a fait accompli, where intervention would be the cause of additional violence, not the solution.
An important aspect of hybrid warfare is non-linearity in the application of power.
At any point, the perceived nature of diplomacy, the audience or message of an information campaign or the selective application of violence might change direction in order to exploit opportunities, respond to changing pressures, bypass some form of resistance, or otherwise maintain the aggressor's initiative. Hybrid campaigns are defined by the level of adaptability they afford to the aggressor before the full commitment of his national combat power. 
78
Anticipating an aggressor's cost/ benefit calculation is based on an understanding of the fundamental elements of the aggressor's political and military systems, how they interconnect, what the decision making processes are, and what presumptions they might hold about a defender's intentions, capabilities and resolve. 
80
Hybrid warfare requires a high level of unified purpose and direction in order to be conceptually possible, let alone effective. It must be acknowledged that there is danger in oversimplifying the complex geo-political structure and mechanics of what remains the geographically largest country on Earth. Inarguably, there are powerful forces and competing interests exerting varying levels of influence both within the Russian government and from the parallel oligarchy that provides much of the functionality for the Russian system. There are also different political camps within the current Russian administration that hold divergent attitudes toward Russian foreign and domestic policy. 
81
81 Graham Allison and Dimitri K. Simes, "Russia and America: Stumbling to War," The National Interest (April 20, 2015).
only become more firm in its nationalistic trajectory since December of 1999 when Boris Yeltsin handed the broken empire to a former KGB lieutenant-colonel, Vladimir Putin.
Over the course of Putin's presidencies and the orchestrated 2008-2012 hiatus as prime minister, Vladimir Putin has methodically marginalized any real opposition to his agenda for Russia and shrunk his pool of advisors to a political spectrum that runs from pragmatic nationalists to hardline neo-imperialists. 
82
The collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in the re-emergence of a dormant debate within Russian society. The two principal groups were torn between Russia either adopting Western governmental and economic practices to become a fully integrated member of the Western world, or the strengthening of Russia's Eurasian identity so that Russia could regain its dominant position with respect to Asian influence. The Western, cosmopolitan, "Atlanticists" initially made up the reformative cabinets of Gorbachev and Yeltsin, but they were always strongly opposed by the "nationalist Eurasianists," to whom a post-Soviet doctrine included "a priority for the protection of Russians in other countries … and an appreciable redistribution of [Russian] resources, options, ties, and interests in favor of Asia, or the eastern direction." 83 Among the nationalists, there was a further division between the Russian nationalists who "advocated a new Russia that encompassed all Russians and were closely tied to Orthodox Byelorussians and Ukrainians-but no one else" and the imperial nationalists who wanted to rebuild the 82 Allison and Simes, "Russia and America: Stumbling to War." Allison and Simes caution that Putin is "not the hardest of the hardliners" and is far more pragmatic than the "hotheads" who see overt military opportunism as the first and most proper course of action for advancing Russian power abroad.
83 Samuel P. Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), 143. See also: Alexander Dugin, Putin vs Putin, 2014, 10-16.  dominance and influence of the Czarist and Soviet Empires. 
84
85
86
87
88
89
87 The operative term is "relatively little" violence, given the vast military power of the Soviet Union. The breakup was punctuated with bloody outbreaks of inter-ethnic, localized violence, often involving ethnic cleansing as competing groups attempted to shape the future geo-political maps. These clashes were exacerbated by the Soviet state practices of forcibly moving ethnic groups within the boundaries of the USSR for a variety of political and economic reasons. When the Soviet Union broke apart, a number of these populations were suddenly stranded amongst larger groups that were nurturing ethno-nationalist sentiments, potentially hostile, and with no strong state power to prevent friction.
88 Of the 15 former Soviet states, 12 would form the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). The three Baltic States-Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia-did not.
89 For a brief summary of some of the optimistic assessments of Russia's setting aside of imperial aspirations to join the Western order, see: Marcel Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2014), 239-241.  apparatchiks, angry at their loss of power and determined to retain some control over the shaping of the new Russian Federation, and an opportunistic nouveaux-riches oligarchy who had emerged as the winners during the often corrupt transition from state-owned to privatized business. 
90
91
92
93
93 "Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances, 1994." (Budapest: UN, December 5, 1994), http://www.cfr.org/nonproliferation-arms-control-and-disarmament/budapest-memorandums-securityassurances-1994/p32484.
When the Moscow putsch demonstrated the degree to which Soviet central power had been reduced, an avalanche of declarations of sovereignty ran through the Soviet Union resulting in numerous new "republics," autonomous districts, and a declaration of independence from Russia by Chechnya. 
94
95
96
Russian Army units stationed in the breakaway regions often became involved on the side of one faction or another for a host of reasons including ethnicity, political ideology, or religious identity. The army often assumed positions reflexively that ran counter to the wishes of the leadership in Moscow, such as the army's support for pro-communist factions during the Tajikistan civil war while President Yeltsin was attempting to distance the country from residual elements of the communist party. 
97
95 Ibid., 43.
Russian central government lacked complete control over its forces. The army acted on its own initiative, and created Russian foreign policy with little steering from Moscow. 
98
99
101
99 Fiona Hill and Pamela Jewett, Back in the USSR: Russia's Intervention in the Internal Affairs of the Former Soviet Republics and the Implications for United States Policy toward Russia (Boston, MA: John F. Kennedy School Of Government, Harvard University, 1994), 1. Not only did Yeltsin declare Russian primacy for peacekeeping efforts in the post-Soviet space, his foreign minister secured a mandate from the UN to that affect, along with UN funding. This may have made sense from the perspective of Russia becoming a liberal, Western state, but in reality it ended up shutting out other peace-brokers and observers, allowing Russia to secure its strategic objectives through active support to various belligerent parties and through direct military action.
100 The idea of Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW) was similarly interpreted differently by COLs Liang and Xiangsui in Unrestricted Warfare. The Chinese were disappointed to see an American insistence on limiting the notion to the generally non-kinetic role of the military in times of crisis, instead of exploring the interpretation of the "non-military methods of waging war." Similarly, Liang and Xiangsui note how close the idea of full-dimensional operations in U.S. Army doctrine (TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5) had come to their concept of supra-domain combinations but failed to realize its potential due to conventional constraints on thinking about the role of the military and the nature of war. See: Liang  and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (36-37, 161-164).
101 Kevin Fedarko, "In Russia's Shadow," TIME Magazine, October 11, 1993. http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,979366,00.html. a greater degree of political control over the space for Moscow; to include the instigation of new conflicts or the prolonging of violence to create the pretext for greater Russian involvement at a time of the Kremlin's choosing.
After Yeltsin demanded the absolute right to determine and enforce any peace agreements between belligerents within the former territory of the USSR, Russia secured its dominance in the affairs of its "near-abroad" and minimized the level of external actors who might attempt to shape the outcome of any of these local conflicts. 
102
mismatch favoring superior Russian numbers was marked by a series of conventional defeats and bitter partisan warfare that were all too reminiscent of the Russians' disastrous campaign in Afghanistan. 
105
106
107 Graham, Fragmentation of Russia, 50.
Vladimir Putin. 108 Moscow's desire to reassert central authority was aided by a series of apartment bombings in several major Russian cities, which pushed public sentiment toward both strong, nationalistic leadership and deliberate retaliation. 
109
111
112
109 Lilia F. Shevtsova, Putin's Russia (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2005), 38. There is still widespread speculation regarding the involvement of the FSB and GRU in the apartment bombings as an orchestrated "false-flag" meant to rally nationalist sentiment and give Yeltsin the pretext he needed to readdress the Chechen situation.
110 Ibid., 68-76.
111 Tribune News Service, "Putin Visits Chechnya Near Eve of Vote, War's 6-Month Anniversary," Chicago Tribune, March 21, 2000. http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2000-03-21/news/0003210199_1_southern-mountains-chechnya-acting-president-vladimir-putin.
112 Graham, Fragmentation of Russia, 55.
administrative positions with the siloviki, his trusted friends and allies, many of whom shared a similar background in the military and intelligence services. 
113
115
116
117 Marcel Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism (Lanham, MD: Rowman  & Littlefield, 2014), 195-196.  target population would support Russian intervention and governance as an alternative to local ethnic subjugation and endemic corruption, 3) "contract soldiers" could overcome the operational shortcomings of conscript forces while insulating the government from immediate culpability for war crimes, 4) local conflicts could be frozen and reignited on a timeline that favored Moscow's ultimate designs for the residual political situation, and 5) that blunt application of conventional force alone was a costly way to chase uncertain outcomes. 
118
Western desires to perceive Russian activities such as peacekeeping as comparable to similar Western activities were an unfortunate byproduct of the assumption that Russia had adopted a liberal perspective of its role in the post-Soviet world. 119 However, the cognitive trap of mistaking Russian practices for what the West would have preferred to see was not unique to the post-Soviet era. "It is commonplace that society tends to project its own values when it attempts to study another society or culture. This value projection (or mirror-imaging) has resulted in western analysis that frequently fails to determine the purpose and direction of Soviet military programs because we have too often confused Soviet military concerns with our own." 
120
121
At [the] bottom of [the] Kremlin's neurotic view of world affairs is a traditional and instinctive Russian sense of insecurity. Originally, this was insecurity of a peaceful agricultural people trying to live on vast exposed plain in a neighborhood of fierce nomadic peoples. To this was added, as Russia came into contact with economically advanced West, fear of more competent, more powerful, more highly organized societies in that area. But this latter type of insecurity was one which afflicted rather Russian rulers than Russian people; for Russian rulers have invariably sensed that their rule was relatively archaic in form, fragile and artificial in its psychological foundation, unable to stand comparison or contact with political systems of Western countries. For this reason they have always feared foreign penetration, feared direct contact between Western world and their own, feared what would happen if Russians learned truth about [the] world without or if foreigners learned truth about [the] world within. And they have learned to seek security only in patient but deadly struggle for total destruction of rival power, never in compacts and compromises with it. 122
Vladimir Putin might have been an unexpected choice to rise from relative obscurity to take the reins of the Russian Federation, but as an officer in the KGB he was still a product of Soviet-era military, political, and intelligence schooling. 124 Ibid., 3. Garthoff used the Soviets' official policy rhetoric of "peaceful." In this context it does not discount limited warfare, only large-scale conventional or nuclear confrontation. The Soviets were unapologetic offensive-realists, so the dichotomy between "peaceful" and "expansion of power and influence" was only apparent when the target resisted the subordinate role in this relationship and overt force had to be used to gain compliance.
125 Ibid., 3.
was significant. The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia provides an illustration of one such test.
In 1968, the Soviets were worried about a move toward liberalization in Prague and needed to reverse the action lest it be successful and repeated in other Eastern Bloc When neither happened, Brezhnev ordered the Red Army to invade, confident that the reform movement could be crushed quickly and that NATO would not actively counter the move. 
126
were not likely to include nuclear weapons if there was not an existential threat to the United States itself. In other words, limited war would incur limited response. Testing deterrence, while maintaining options through the use of mobilizations for exercises, has become a hallmark of Russian military practice. For mobilizations to be effective in coercion, and to preserve the decision to commit force until the last possible moment, large exercises work best when the target has contiguous borders to the aggressor state, and the forces can be mobilized and massed without leaving the aggressor's territory. As this practice sought to hide the specific aims of Soviet strategy, strategic deception is a cornerstone of this approach to international relations.
Because hybrid warfare seeks to undermine an adversary's ability to defend its sovereignty without the complete commitment of military force, the aggressor must obscure his strategic intent from the victim (and the victim's sponsors) for as long as possible. 
127
"There existed a Leninist principle and practice in which deception was embedded systemically in the relationships of the Party to all external entities and even in the relationship of the leadership to the membership." 
128
129
130
Effective strategic deception as part of a hybrid warfare campaign seeks to create ambiguity regarding the aggressor's intent so that when decisive action is taken the initiative is gained through surprise. This deception may take a range of forms from carefully crafted disinformation meant to create doubt about objectives, to masking dramatic changes in the nature of the conflict behind significant international events or crises that compete for news coverage and audience attention.
Operation Barbarossa in 1941, Stalin was somewhat dismissive of the role of surprise as having any more than a "transitory, temporary significance" in the outcome of a war. 
132
One of the leading Soviet thinkers in the lead-up to World War II, General Mikhail Tukhachevskii, theorized that "Deep Battle," the simultaneous employment of mobile strike forces through an enemy's operational depth, could overwhelm the enemy's ability to process information and would paralyze the entire defense, leading to its defeat in detail. 
134
Simultaneity is essential to ensure the enemy is not able to respond and organize a defense. 
135
135 Ibid., 33.
warfare similarly demands that its component forms are focused to maximize the strategic effect without forcing an unanticipated escalation and surrendering the initiative by the aggressor. Deep battle is dependent on the "cooperation of arms or all-arms battle"
and each arm is interchangeable if it can accomplish the same result. 
136
properly synchronized it overwhelms the defender's ability to process and respond to what is happening. Where Tukhachevskii's Deep Battle envisioned purely military forms of war attacking military targets across an adversary's operational depth, hybrid warfare conceptualizes the employment of military and non-military forms of war to attack select political, informational, military and economic targets across an adversary's strategic depth to similarly overwhelm his ability to process what is happening and respond effectively. The timing of a hybrid campaign would have to consider the target state's unilateral capacity to resist aggression and the efforts needed to undermine that capability by exploiting social fissures like ethnic or religious differences within the target population. It would also consider undermining economic stability to shake confidence in the target regime and cut the raw materials needed for war. The hybrid campaign can only be helped if the target region also happens to be a geographic space that is somewhat isolated or difficult for the target government to physically project power. If access to the space can be limited by difficult terrain or an ethnic minority population, then the target state will have a difficult time in asserting its authoritative role and countering the aggressor's efforts.
Another long-standing Soviet theory of warfare is the idea of non-linear warfare.
Where Deep Battle still envisioned a front, "non-linear warfare" assumed that tactical nuclear weapons would be frequently employed to create large gaps in defensive lines that could be exploited by follow-on ground forces. replaced doctrinally with precision conventional munitions which similarly made a fixed, linear front obsolete, promoting the concept of Soviet battalion tactical groups who would use maneuver and tempo to conduct "meeting engagements" with enemy forces. 
138
The target state's sovereignty may be attacked away from a contested area, in the capital, in the international economy, or in the information domain.
The military forms of war were also not the only means that the Soviets envisioned as being capable of achieving the objectives of war. "Soviet military doctrine
[held] necessary the coordinated use of all forms of military power, as expedient. This means flexibility in selection among military means, as well as selecting between military and political means." 
139
143
The synchronized efforts of diplomatic, informational, and economic attacks are easiest to control when they can be directed with the same authority that a head of state uses to employ his military. When Putin presented a series of draft anti-monopoly and judicial restructuring laws to the Duma in early 2001, he was initially hailed as a reformer. However, detailed examination of these laws reveal a consistent movement toward consolidating power under the President's office; whatever power was taken away from the judiciary or the oligarchs was simply transferred to the chief executive. 
148
149
150
"In Soviet doctrine, war and politics are the same thing. They are not Clausewitz's 'other means,' but two names of a single concept." 151 This Russian view of the spectrum of conflict is a requisite perception for hybrid warfare as it facilitates the conceptualization of achieving "military" victories well in advance of the outbreak of conventional warfare.
"Soviet military doctrine and strategy are, first and foremost, offensive." 
152
What is most striking and most innovative about Mr. Putin's program is not its unabashed expansionist intent: after all, military rulers have pointed their swords at neighbors since Old Testament days. Rather, it is the seriousness with which he has attempted to coordinate activity in a broad range of seemingly separate spheres so as to provide maximal tactical support for the realization of his national dream. 
154
155
Putin is a pragmatist and the standard risk-cost-benefit analysis remains a central factor in Russian calculus of the feasibility of strategic objectives. "These are not Middle Eastern zealots throwing caution to the winds, but managers fully alive to options, alternative plans, and escape hatches. Soviet warfighting is based on advantage, timing, and finding and exploiting enemy weaknesses, not just bulling ahead." 156 Unlike Yeltsin, who would rush headlong into a political fray, when Putin encounters an obstacle, he prefers to "retreat and wait" to see what options the situation might surface. 157 "Putin is not a long-term planner. He lives in the here and now, just as he did in the KGB." 
158
159
161
The three ideological pillars of Orthodoxy, the "power vertical" and sovereign democracy, support the conceptualization and implementation of hybrid warfare. As the defender of the Orthodox Church, Putin provides himself with a mandate to extend protection not just to ethnic Russians but to all Orthodox Christians regardless of international borders. This can serve as a moral justification for violating sovereignty in a time of supposed peace, and it can also serve to rally support for Russia if Orthodox Christians make up a portion of the target population. Orthodoxy also provides a replacement for the adhesive functions that used to be a characteristic of communism; serving as the ideological glue that held the Soviet Empire together. Orthodoxy may even be a superior choice because it does not have to deliver in the material world. 
163
with Russian identity. The centralization of authority over the functions of the state provides Putin with the ability to marshal the elements of national power toward specific strategic goals. Sovereign democracy also serves two important functions by largely insulating Putin from real democratic opposition to his policies, and by preventing a new administration with divergent strategic objectives from rising to power and derailing an embryonic hybrid campaign.
The Putin regime may have taken steps to insulate the Russian internal political process from external influence, but this does not mean that they also intend to withdraw Russia from the international body politic. On the contrary, Russian membership on the UN Security Council is critical to Russia's sense of global influence. The UN Security Council membership gives Russia what it perceives as its rightful seat at the central table of world affairs, and because Russia already has the seat, they do not need to make any concessions to "lesser powers" in order to gain membership, as they would have to in order to join the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
164
165
166
Prior to the attacks in the United States on September 11th, 2001, Russia had conflicted views of its role in the post-Cold War world. Russia wanted to be seen as a player in world events, a peer that the international community must consult in order to secure a true consensus. Economic struggles throughout the 1990s, multiple small conflicts in the post-Soviet space, and disagreements with the West over issues like confronting the Milosevic regime in Serbia, kept the Russians from completely integrating into European affairs when such a move might have been a possibility. When George Bush unilaterally declared in 2001 that the nuclear arms treaties of the Cold War were outdated remnants of an animosity that had ceased to exist and that Russia and the United States would pursue a cooperative relationship, many Russian Atlanticist-liberals were pleased, but the Russian Eurasianist-conservative power establishment was fundamentally shaken. 
167
168
169
was quick to demonstrate Russia's existing efforts in Chechnya as commensurate with the broad tide of world anti-terror sentiment following the attacks in the United States. 
170
Framing conflicts in a manner that minimized international resistance demonstrates the importance Putin places on dominating the information domain in order to control the narrative. In many of their "peacekeeping operations" Russian forces were often accused of using excessive force which undermined their ability to sustain legitimate international support for their efforts. For example, the Russians learned that the limited tactical value of bombing a rebel Chechen village might be totally reversed by press reports of civilian casualties or losses of Russian soldiers. Bombing the village and then dominating the media reporting to downplay civilian casualties or to attribute the bombing to the rebels on the other hand was a win-win, even when the claims for rebel responsibility were based on implausible "facts." As the Internet and speed of global connectivity began to catch on during this period, the Russians learned to not just disrupt the dissidents' use of these platforms to communicate, but to also saturate these systems with Russian propaganda. These messages would have some unifying themes such as Russia's defense of Russian people and values, and the unprovoked aggression attributed to Russia's opponent, but they would also perform a masking function by generating a white-noise sea of conspiracy theories, baseless claims, and exaggerated actions meant to make any true accounts difficult to find and to provide excuses for appeasement-minded international organizations in lieu of having to take definitive action. Through the uncontested saturation of the entire spectrum of media, Putin is able to manufacture boogeymen by playing to Russian sentiment, such as the repeated association of Ukraine with Nazi-Germany, and to invent historical foundations that support his world view, regardless of the actual facts. "The main difference between propaganda in the USSR and the new Russia…is that in Soviet times the concept of truth was important. Even if they were lying they took care to prove what they were doing was 'the truth.' Now no one even tries proving the 'truth.' You can just say anything. Create realities." 171 A cornerstone of Putin's contemporary world view is the notion of New-Russia, a construct that envisions a future state that redraws existing geopolitical boundaries to encompass populations that are believed to be ethnically or historically more aligned with Moscow than with a foreign state. Putin has forged this New-Russian identity into a supra-nationalist rallying point. 
172
173
174
Only gradually did Putin's single-minded focus on restoring what he defined as the geographical integrity and honor of the Russian state become evident. And it took yet more time for the world at large to understand how far he was willing to go in pursuit of that end. The inability or reluctance of western and other policymakers, intelligence services, and independent foreign affairs experts to grasp this dedication 171 Peter Pomerantsev and Michael Weiss, "The Menace of Unreality: How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture and Money," The Interpreter (2014), 9. This quote is attributed to former Putin election campaign consultant and Kremlin political insider Gleb Pavlovsy.
172 Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism, 116-117. Van Herpen describes poll data that indicates some degree of Russian ultranationalist sentiment is prevalent in a majority of the Russian population, and patriotism has a central place in Putin's ideology. The term "supranational" is used here because the new-Russian identity is very deliberately not limited to the Russians who currently live within the borders of the Russian Federation.
173 "Putin Orders to Amplify Textbooks with Information about Crimea's Role." Crimean News Agency (QHA), June 03, 2014. Putin ordered changes to history textbooks in Russia (and Crimea) that "amplify" the role of Crimea as a part of the Russian empire. See also: Van Herpen, 2014, 118; and  Hedenskog, 2013, 77. on Putin's part ranks as an analytic failure of the first rank. Meanwhile, Putin seized the initiative in his military attack on Georgia in 2008, in his multi-dimensional but non-military assault on Kyrgyzstan in 2010, and then in his invasion of Ukraine and seizure of Crimea and other territories in 2014. 
175
What cannot be so easily deduced [are] the formal and institutional process by which the main opportunities of Russian strategy are identified, and the process of decision-making that sets them in motion. Closely related to this are the organizations and organizational processes that define, organize, coordinate, and set in motion the various tactical steps in each concrete situation. Here, too, the reason is obvious: these are matters of the utmost secrecy. Indeed, the entire mechanism by which strategy is translated into tactics in Putin's Russia is protected by the same shield of secrecy that surrounded high tactics in the U.S.S.R. The one thing that can be asserted beyond doubt is that the process is highly centralized in Putin's own office and that he has been involved in every stage of that process. Putin, a product of the late Soviet KGB, simply assumes that this [is] all a natural and key element of his personal leadership. To compromise tactical secrecy would be to compromise the entire enterprise. 
176
The 2008 Georgian War was another reality check for Russian leadership regarding how badly the Russian Army had degraded since the end of the Soviet Union.
Unlike the first venture in Chechnya, the Russians were able to claim a clear victory in Georgia. However, despite spending the better part of eight years preparing for an inevitable invasion, and employing a concerted hybrid warfare effort against the Georgians, the conventional invasion revealed significant shortcomings in the Russian conventional warfighting functions, and success was largely due only to superior numbers and a symmetrical response from the Georgian side. With this assessment in hand, Vladimir Putin and his proxy Dmitry Medvedev ordered the complete reorganization of the Russian Army in 2008. 
182
183
184
185
186
183 Hedenskog and Pallin, Russian Military Capability in a Ten-Year Perspective -2013, 38.   184 Ibid., 24.   185 Ibid., 18-24.   186 Ibid., 24-25.
Caucasus, Black Sea and Ukraine) are generally closer to full strength, indicating where Moscow's assumption of future problems was focused in late 2012. 
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
192 Ibid., 30.
reinforcements all across Russia. 
194
195
196
197
East. The potential loss of this port due to an inhospitable government taking power in Kiev may have been a driving factor in Putin's decision to annex Crimea in early 2014.
The Russians have also developed a renewed interest in the use of "soft power"
and Vladimir Putin's definition as "a set of tools and methods to achieve foreign policy goals without the use of weapons [but instead] through information and other levers of influence" confirms his emphasis is on the coercive effects of these instruments, despite his claims to the contrary. 
198
Nye. 199
200
These instruments are the tools of the state, and they must be controlled in order to protect the state.
The 1991 Gulf War was troubling for Russian military thinkers due to the devastating effect that coalition "technical warfare" had on Iraqi, Soviet-based communications and information infrastructure. 
201
202
203
204
205
207
208
Russia maintains the offensive-realist perspective of national power and believes it is entitled to a dominant role in its' near abroad. Russia continues to hold the Soviet-era perspective of there being no hard delineation between war and peace, which facilitates its employment of the full spectrum of national power, including certain levels of violence, as a means to assert its authority. Gone are the scores of standing Red Army divisions and the expectations of superiority through sheer numbers. Faced with this new reality, Russia necessarily has to look beyond the purely military forms of war to exploit those tools that can isolate and degrade traditionally military targets while minimizing the commitment and subsequent risk of the few brigades it does have. This modern evolution of Russian limited war draws from a long history of Russian military thinking which included the ideas of warfare not being confined to a fixed front but stretching through an adversary's strategic depth, the instruments of warfare being completely interchangeable so long as they can achieve a disruptive effect on the adversary's ability to process and respond to new information, and the notion of enduring attrition to wear down an adversary with other elements of national power in order to preserve the military for the decisive blow.
Russia also continues to employ widespread deception to create uncertainty on the part of its adversaries and to mask its true intentions for as long as possible. Putin values "soft-power" as a means to achieve hard effects, and his military continues to use mobilizations and exercises as a means of coercion and to preserve the decision to commit forces for as long as possible while he measures changes in the potential costbenefit equation. Putin has formulated A fresh approach to the tactics of union-building-[which] does not preclude a heavy reliance on military force. Indeed, the record to date suggests that it requires it. But Putin's important insight on tactics sees the military as but one of more than a dozen distinct spheres in which pressures and incentives can and must be brought to bear to achieve the desired end. These tactical tools are as diverse as energy, transport routes, training, credit and finance, support of kindred groups abroad, information and propaganda, monetary policy, research, immigration policy, labor law, investments, and open-ended payments that are little more than bribes. 
216
Apart from the novel use of coordinated cyber and physical attacks, there can be an unfortunate temptation to view the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 as a short, conventional conflict when examined from the time that Russian tanks crossed into Georgian territory on August 7th, 2008, and the signing of a ceasefire five days later on August 12th. 
217
The liberal side of this debate claims that Putin made the decision in 2008 when the crisis had deteriorated beyond the possibility of reconciliation. The realists, on the other hand, believe that the 2008 war was merely the overt execution phase of a "Grand Plan" that had been conceived as early as 1999 and was marked in the intervening years with deliberate actions taken to undermine Georgia's ability to defend against Russia's annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia (Figure 
2
218
War for evidence of a deliberate Russian effort at experimenting with hybrid warfare, the 217 Svante E. Cornell and S. Frederick Starr, The Guns of August 2008: Russia's War in Georgia (Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 2009), 5. The Russian-Georgian War has a number of names including "The Five-Day War" and the "War over South Ossetia." Even the name of the conflict is part of the ongoing effort by Russians to frame the war in terms that support their narrative, and similarly on the part of the Georgians to paint their side of the conflict as purely defensive. The August 7th start date is also debated as part of a determined Russian effort to maintain a strategic narrative of being the victim of Georgian aggression. Coordinated Russian cyber-attacks of Georgian systems began two days before the "start" of the ground war, and the Russian invasion was only possible because the requisite troops had been mobilized and massed on the border well in advance of the shooting. Russian forces definitely passed through the Roki Tunnel into South Ossetia on August 7th to "reinforce peacekeeping forces." The Georgian Army later shelled the road in front of this force to prevent them from seizing Tskhinvali. Russia continues to claim that this shelling was the opening hostile act and that the subsequent Russian offensive on August 8th was necessary to protect Russian peacekeepers and South Ossetian civilians.
218 Andei Illarionov, "The Russian Leadership's Preparation for War, 1999-2008,"    Herpen also concludes that the conflict was a war of Putin's choice and that the Russian violations of Georgian sovereignty were a continuous process aimed at realizing Russia's strategic goals. CHECHNYA Socialist Republics resulted in a more prominent status for citizens with Russian identity; enough so that Georgia's most infamous native son, Iosif Dzhugashvili, would be known to history by his Russian-derived revolutionary pseudonym-Joseph Stalin. 
220
221
222
223
224
When the new Georgian President, Eduard Shevardnadze, sponsored a national celebration in August of 1992 to mark Georgia's admission to the United Nations as an independent state, he invited the leadership of the restive Abkhazian region in order to promote greater Georgian unity. The Abkhazians initially accepted the offer, but then failed to arrive in Tbilisi for the ceremony due to strong pressure from Moscow, who subsequently began providing arms to a number of different Abkhazian militant groups. 
225
225 Ibid.
time of their choosing. Russia's post-Soviet political turmoil across the former empire initially left Moscow "reacting to events in Georgia rather than initiating them." 
226
231 Ibid., 39. 
While Russia treats its true strategic intentions as state secrets, the concept of sustaining or increasing relative regional military power paints a fairly clear picture of Russia's desired strategic end-state with regard to Georgia. "Russia's invasion of Georgia was not merely a response to that small country's seeming to thumb its nose at were doomed to fail due to their alien "Western" nature. 
238
239
240
The peacekeeping operations and military exercises that Russian conducted in South Ossetia, Abkhazia and along the Russo-Georgian frontier also provided opportunities for Russia to develop the infrastructure that would ultimately support the conventional invasion. The Russian army was able to use the bases for these operations to preposition large numbers of troops and heavy weapons on Georgian soil, and they were able to build support facilities for future operations at the same time. The Russians build a field surgical hospital in Abkhazia that they then turned over to the Abkhazian's as a "humanitarian" gesture. They stockpiled massive amounts of weapons and ammunition in the forward area as part of their "peacekeeping" footprint. Most tellingly, in April and June 2008, the Russian Army repaired the railway between the Southern Military Zone and Abkhazia. 
242
243
After establishing the local strategic goal of dismembering the Georgian state and placing the two breakaway regions under Russian control, Russia needed to cultivate a degree of receptivity toward this outcome amongst the Abkhaz and South Ossetian populations. Russia promoted a narrative of Georgian abuse of minorities to promote anti-Georgia sentiment, while selectively undermining and removing all reconciliatory parties who were willing to bury the hatchet with Georgia. 
244
As the level of violence escalated in Russia's hybrid warfare against Georgia, the Russians relied on other events in the world to help mask the signs of an impending conventional invasion. Apart from the use of existing "peacekeeping" forces and exercises to attempt to hide the buildup of troops and arms in and near Georgia, the Russians did little to disguise the fact that an all-out invasion was about to take place.
The United States was seemingly caught by surprise when the shooting commenced on August 7th, but Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice had just visited Tbilisi to discuss the deteriorating situation, and the Bush administration had repeatedly warned the Georgians against responding to Russian provocations. 
245
246
Not only was Russia heavily involved in undermining the democratic processes in Georgia prior to the 2008 invasion, but the Russians used the subsequent political resolution of the conflict as a means to demonstrate the impotence of the European Union and to exploit fissures between the Europeans and the Americans, further alienating not just Georgia but other western leaning countries as well. The E.U., under French leadership, was very determined to take the lead role in negotiating the ceasefire that marked the end of the Russian offensive in Georgia, yet failed to take determinative action when the Russians violated the cease-fire. 
247
248
252
253
Russian operatives helped engineer the electoral defeat of Chibirov and promoted a pro-Russian candidate, Eduard Kokoity, a former wrestling champion with ties to organized crime. 
254
255
253 Once the open fighting between Russian regulars and the Georgian army started in August 2008, the Russian Navy blockaded the Georgian Black Sea ports and several critical highway junctions between the coast and the interior. 
266
267
283
284
285
286
287
288
As Russia moved toward a conventional conflict with Georgia, Russian military forces were regularly mobilized for maneuvers near the Georgian border. This overt military posturing was meant to intimidate the Georgians into giving certain concessions, and would ultimately ensure that the forces necessary for the actual invasion was assembled well in advance of the actual invasion. On September 29th, 2006, Russia responded to the arrest of several GRU officers in Georgia by alerting the Black Sea Fleet and Russian Forces in the North Caucasus. The fleet began maneuvers off of Georgia's coast and the army moved to the Georgian border. These forces did not just show force, but implemented a full embargo on Georgia, preventing all commercial traffic and travel. 
289
290
291
292
One of the novel aspects of the 2008 Russo-Georgian War was the introduction of cyber warfare as a complement to a ground attack. The United States had considered a similar effort five years earlier during the invasion of Iraq but ultimately ruled a cyberoffensive out over concerns for the impact on the global economy and for setting a precedent for which the U.S. itself might have a high degree of vulnerability. The United States also enjoyed a significant conventional advantage over the Iraqis and did not believe that widespread cyber disruption was necessary to dominate the battlefield.
Russia, on the other hand, was aware that its ground forces had significant shortcomings.
While the Russians significantly outnumbered the Georgians, Russia needed to ensure a quick victory lest a protracted campaign provide a window for external intervention.
What Russia learned from its strategic miscalculation in attacking Estonian computer networks a year earlier was that "attacks" in the cyber domain can be an annoyance to the victim, and can exact some real price, but they are largely insufficient in and of 290 Illarionov, The Russian Leadership's Preparation for War, 1999-2008, 69-71.   291 Popjanevski, From Sukhumi to Tskhinvali: The Path to War in Georgia, 148.
themselves to force an enemy to accept the aggressor's political will. For several weeks prior to the Russian offensive in Georgia, however, non-attributable Russian "hacktivists" conducted a similar computer network attack (CNA) with the strategic focus of severing Tbilisi's command and control of the Georgian armed forces, rallying ethnic Russian, Ossetians, and Abkhazians to the Russian cause, and to isolate Georgia from the rest of the world. 
293
294
295
296
297
298
Even as the dust was settling in Moscow following the failed 1991 coup attempt, Russia recognized the need to prevent a stable and democratic Georgia from forming on the Federation's southern border. Russia had a strategic need to be able to project military force south of the Caucasus, which would be increasingly difficult if Georgia solidified its control over its territory. Russian siding with South Ossetian and Abkhazian 298 The Russians also claimed that Georgian forces had massacred thousands of South Ossetian civilians as part of the pretext for Russian intervention. This claim served to give pause to the international community and to enrage the South Ossetian militia, who in turn "cleansed" a number of Georgian villages during their counteroffensive.
299 Ibid., 152.
removed rapprochement minded Abkhaz and South Ossetians, and replaced them with separatist proxies whose ministries and staffs were led by Russian officers. With the conditions set to prevent Georgia from peacefully resolving the conflict and Russian "peacekeepers" positioned between the conflicting sides, Russia then used the controlled application of violence, economic coercion, propaganda, and diplomatic pressure to isolate Georgia from the west, portray Georgia as the aggressor, and to justify Russia's eventual occupation of Russian territory as a defensive and humanitarian gesture.
The Russo-Georgian conflict is an example of hybrid warfare by a state that maintains an offensive-realist perspective and is predisposed to use a wide range of national power, including violence, to coerce an outcome from a neighbor in a time of peace. Russia maintained the strategic goal of maintaining a dominant position in its near-abroad, ending former-Soviet state's bids for membership in non-Russian controlled bodies, and preventing a liberal government from succeeding on Russia's borders. The Russian hybrid war against Georgian sovereignty was not solely defined by the 5-day conventional invasion in August 2008. That was merely a brief manifestation of a much longer campaign of forcing Tbilisi to accept Moscow's will; carefully timed to commence when it wasn't expected, and concluded before necessitating an international response. Russia used hybrid forms of warfare to effectively divide Georgia and to extend political control over Moscow's objectives, but it is a mistake to assume this effort concluded with the ceasefire that ended the August 2008 "hot" war. The overt invasion of Georgia forced Tbilisi to accept the dominant presence of the Russian army on Georgian soil, but it was not pursued to the point of a complete national capitulation. To maintain its narrative of legitimacy and forgo the risk associated with a larger war, Russia stopped its advance near the boundaries of the contested rebel territories. From this reinforced military position, Russia has simply changed back to the practice of employing different forms of political warfare and lower levels of violence to continue to prevent a successful democratic government from forming in Tbilisi and frustrating ties between Georgia and NATO. Russia's hybrid war against Georgia is an ongoing effort, whose more violent manifestation is in a frozen status, but one in which the Kremlin retains the initiative for reigniting when it suits Putin's designs.
On March 18th, 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed an amendment to the Russian Constitution admitting the Republic of Crimea and the Federal City of Sevastopol into the Russian Federation. This bold move was a watershed moment in that it marked the first annexation of territory by a foreign power in Europe since World War II. It also was striking in the manner through which it was accomplished. In less than a month tens of thousands of Russian soldiers swarmed onto the peninsula, and supplemented by militia, captured the seat of political power, orchestrated a referendum declaring Crimea sovereign from Ukraine, and forced the surrender of every Ukrainian garrison with very little loss of life, all while professing to the world that Russia was not involved in any way. Since that time, it has become popular to look at the events in Crimea and to link the actions there with the term hybrid warfare. To the extent that the definition of that term only involves the regular and irregular composition of the occupation forces, this is an easy case to make. In order to understand how Russia was able to accomplish this action however, it is necessary to look first at the relationship between Russia and Ukraine in order to see that Russia's hybrid efforts to subvert Ukraine's sovereignty had been underway for years. The annexation of Crimea represented only one strategic objective in this war; an objective that was well defined, could be consolidated in a relatively short period of time, and where the dynamic shift in the political status quo could be temporarily masked by other world events.
Unlike Georgia, which may be situated on a historical cross-roads, but is nevertheless in a peripheral position from a Western perspective, Ukraine (Figure 
3
300
310
Crimea is the historic homeland of the Crimean Tatars, a Muslim Turkic people, whose numbers were reduced from 83 percent of the peninsula's population to around 25 percent during the Tsarist-Russian conquest and occupation from 1793 to the early 20th century. 
311
312
313
314
311 Motyl, Dilemmas of Independence: Ukraine after Totalitarianism, 10.   312 Ibid., 10.   313 Ibid., 10-11.   314 Ibid., 11.  of political control of Crimea to Ukraine, when Ukraine broke away from the Soviet Union in 1991, its internationally recognized borders included the entirety of the Crimean peninsula. This, however, does not mean that the Crimean population was wholly ready to embrace a new Ukrainian national identity.
Even before Ukraine's departure from the USSR, the dominant Russian political entities in Crimea made a push for everything from autonomy to full independence, along with similar movements in the Donetsk Basin, (Donbas) and other Russian majority oblasts in Ukraine's south and east. 
315
316
334
333 The 2004 election manipulation and 2006 gas war demonstrate Russia's existing hostility toward Ukraine. Stephen Blank contends that the planning for the annexation of Crimea began as early as 2006. See also: Stephen Blank and Peter Hussey, "The Truth about Ukraine," Gatestone Institute (August 25,  2014). By 2008, with the invasion and pseudo-partition of Georgia, Russia began to demonstrate real intent that may have only been slowed by the election of Yanukovych in Ukraine and Putin's return to office in 2012. Outright annexation of territory was not part of Russia's action in Georgia. Russia provided Russian citizenship to the South Ossetians and Abkhaz residents as a pretext for intervention, but neither population are ethnic Russians. Russia may have been concerned that an actual annexation might increase the potential for outside intervention, but it is more likely that Moscow recognized the benefits of keeping the dispute open-ended. If the two regions had been annexed, then Georgia may well have cut its loses, relinquished claims to those territories and then pressed harder for NATO membership. By letting South Ossetia and Abkhazia remain technically Georgian, Russia is able to maintain military bases south of the Caucasus, and continue to frustrate Georgia's efforts to integrate with the West due to the unresolved conflict. The strategic value of Sevastopol specifically, the symbolic value of Crimea more generally, and Crimea's importance to Ukrainian energy independence would make actual annexation a much more attractive option to Russia than maintaining an unresolved status. Establishing an unresolved running-sore outside of Crimea, may have been part of the reason for pursuing the subsequent campaign in Donbas. The trend in the 21st century is to erase the line between war and peace … the "rules of war" have changed dramatically. The role of non-military methods of achieving political and strategic goals, in some cases, has far exceeded the force of arms in terms of effectiveness. including information warfare and activities conducted by special operations forces. 
338
339
Creating uncertainty, or increasing the "friction in war" in Clausewitz' terms, through information operations, diplomacy, or economic interaction while masking efforts in those same domains to subvert the integrity of the target state permits the aggressor to dramatically change the political dynamic when he judges the timing and conditions to be right. 
340
Gerasimov's model also plays to a western desire for closure by depicting a resolution and peaceful settlement to the crisis. In reality, a hybrid warfare aggressor is 339 Stephen Blank, "Russia and the Black Sea's Frozen Conflicts in Strategic Perspective,"  Mediterranean Quarterly 19, no. 3 (Summer, 2008): 23-54. Stephen Blank describes a number of conflicts in the Black Sea and Caucasus areas which Russia has intentionally kept frozen as a means of continuing to maintain forces in the region, exert influence locally, and prevent the areas from joining non-Russian trade or defense blocs. 340 Clausewitz, On War, 119.  no more bound to cease his consolidation of political control over a contested space by the cessation of hostilities than he was by the lack of hostilities at the crisis' beginning.
Overt violence should visibly decrease to reduce the stimulus for international intervention. Less visible use of force however, such as the detention or killing of potential political opponents, population control measures including checkpoints, bans on public rallies, control over the Internet and other media, demographic shifts through expulsion, deportation, and ethnic cleansing, and resource controls over electricity, heating oil, food, gasoline, banking services, and control of pensions are all still instruments used by the aggressor to ensure the longevity of the new status quo.
Gerasimov does not use the term "hybrid" but his model depicts the two necessary components: non-military means of political warfare and the use of military force. Gerasimov even supplies a ratio of 4:1 (non-military to military) to ensure the lesser role of force is clearly established. The nature of the aggressor state can be determined both in the model and in Gerasimov's description, and is notable for its ability to synchronize diplomacy, economic activity, and information operations with the covert creation of surrogate political and military organizations well in advance of any direct hostilities. It is somewhat ironic that Gerasimov assigns these attributes to the West, when the necessary degree of control over information and economic instruments of power are much better directed in a centralized, authoritarian political system.
Interestingly, Gerasimov's model specifically lists "opposition forces" (proxy forces or surrogates) as a non-military means, so his division is not based on use of violence, but apparently on the organic, attributable nature of the aggressor state's military power.
Because Gerasimov ties increased military force to the same temporal linearity, this model creates the impression that changes in phases will be necessarily preceded or accompanied by requisite increases in forces. What the model fails to illustrate is the cyclic application of hybrid political and military efforts to wear down local and international deterrence, as Alexander Svechin theorized in the Strategy of Attrition, which would be followed by the sudden, calculated, dynamic change to the status quo. 341 corruption, nepotism, and the graft of tens of billions of dollars of state funds, Putin had to exercise some restraint in handling the Russian opposition in order to preserve the power-building prestige afforded to the games' host. Highly sensitive to the importance of timing, Putin's first strategic goal with respect to Ukraine was to manufacture an external "threat" that would enable him to rally nationalist support and then use that threat as a pretext for crushing any remaining domestic opposition. 
344
Annexing Crimea prior to the Euromaidan was not likely a specific Russian goal due to the limited efforts that were taken to develop a significant political mechanism or to build significant local support for the action. It is much more probable that the Russians had contingency plans for occupying Crimea as annexes to their ongoing efforts to subvert Ukrainian sovereignty. Seizing Crimea after Yanukovych's ouster, however, did serve Putin's international political purposes. "Putin perceives the European Union as a genuine strategic threat. The threat comes from the EU's potential to reform associated countries in ways that pull them away from Russia." 345 Russia has always maintained that it has a vested interest in maintaining a strong (dominant) relationship with the other former-Soviet states, and Russia relies on these relationships to ensure reliable markets for Russian resources, namely oil and gas. Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russian Eurasianists have been alarmed at the number of former eastern bloc and former Soviet states that have been accepted into these organizations.
344 Amy Oakes, Diversionary War the Link between Domestic Unrest and International Conflict (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2012). Oakes describes the practice of waging an unnecessary external war to compensate for internal political shortcomings as "diversionary warfare." Putin's actions in Crimea, if viewed in isolation from the rest of the international stage, fit Oakes' description perfectly, and tamping down domestic opposition to the Olympic construction fraud was certainly a factor in Putin's decision. However, Crimea was not just about domestic diversion. Putin was definitely aware that his move would shock the EU and NATO and he expected to further his international strategic aims as well as fix his flagging domestic popularity.
345 Fiona Hill and Steven Pifer, "Putin's Russia Goes Rogue," Big Bets & Black Swans, Memorandum to the President (January 23, 2014), http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/putin-russia-roguehill-pifer.
Putin views Ukraine's delayed, but still possible, signature of an EU Association Agreement as the greatest threat to his Eurasian Union. If Ukraine adopts EU legislation and regulations, restructures its economy and systems of governance, and enacts European standards in all areas, Ukraine will become more European and, implicitly, less 'Eurasian.' Its vulnerability to Russian economic and political pressure will decrease. 
346
Outside of domestic and international political dynamics, Russia places a high degree of strategic value on the control of the Crimean Peninsula due to the basing of the Black Sea Fleet and several thousand Russian naval personnel at Sevastopol. There are no strategic nuclear submarines at Sevastopol, so the Black Sea Fleet is not a part of Russia's nuclear deterrent capability. 
347
348
349
349 Interfax-Ukraine, "Yushchenko: Russian Black Sea Fleet must be Withdrawn by 2017," Kyiv Post, November 28, 2009, http://www.kyivpost.com/content/ukraine/yushchenko-russian-black-sea-fleet-mustbe-withdra-53835.html.
However, "the Ukrainian conflict and Russia's annexation of Crimea is ultimately not about energy, but about [political] power." 
354
With Ukrainian central authority in disarray, Putin saw an opportunity to resolve the Black Sea Fleet situation once and for all, reduce Ukraine's ability to break free from Russia's orbit, and to play to popular Russian sentiment in a manner that could bolster his flagging domestic popularity. "More than in the conflicts of the early 1990s or even in Georgia in 2008, the Kremlin conceived of the invasion and annexation of Crimea as a deliberate strike against the West, as well as Ukraine. Putin apparently believes that he and Russia have more to gain from open confrontation with the United States and Europe-consolidating his political position at home and boosting Moscow's international stature-than from cooperation."
355
Just as Russia used the world's focus on the Beijing Olympics, the crash of the world's stock markets and American domestic politics to mask its 2008 invasion of Georgia, Putin again calculated that international attention was held elsewhere in February 2014 when he ordered the Russian military to change the political relationship with Crimea. After almost two and a half years of bloody fighting, the Syrian civil war had taken a dramatic turn in the fall of 2013 when ISIS seized the city of Raqqa and began a highly publicized campaign of murder that both outraged the West and created doubts about efforts to overthrow the Assad Regime. Putin undoubtedly drew further conclusions about American willingness to intervene militarily overseas when U.S.
President Obama walked back his so-called "redline" against Bashar Al Assad in September of 2013. 
356
358
The Sochi Olympics represented a $50 billion dollar investment for Russia, and
Putin was determined to capitalize on the goodwill, significant press coverage, and grandeur of the event to promote Russian identity and his leadership on the world stage.
Sochi's location on the Black Sea (between Abkhazia and Crimea) near the restive Caucasus did raise questions about security, especially in the wake of a dual suicide bombing carried out by Chechen terrorists in Volgograd (formerly Stalingrad) only 356 Glenn Kessler, "President Obama and the 'Red Line' on Syria's Chemical Weapons," Washington Post, September 06, 2013, https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/fact-checker/wp/2013/09/06/presidentobama-and-the-red-line-on-syrias-chemical-weapons/. Further bolstering Putin's belief in Russian ascendance was Putin's ability to intervene in the chemical weapons/ redline debacle to offer Obama a compromise. Russia would destroy Syria's chemical weapon stockpiles in exchange for no Western military action against Assad.
357 Georgi Gotev, "EU Seeks 'Time for Reflection' After Vilnius Summit Failure," EurActiv.com, November 29, 2013, http://www.euractiv.com/global-europe/vilnius-summit-time-reflection-news-532048. Moscow of course claimed that the protests were all a carefully orchestrated U.S. plot to foment division between Russia and Ukraine. While they saw the hidden hand of U.S. influence behind the Euromaidan, the Russians did not anticipate an overt military response to the annexation of Crimea as long as the process of seizing the peninsula was not a bloodbath. weeks before the opening ceremony. 
359
360
Seizing Crimea militarily was likely not Vladimir Putin's specific goal before the Euromaidan. 
361
Cold War buffer between Russian territory and NATO. That acceptance however, would remain contingent upon a reliable pro-Russian leader in Kiev. When that surrogate was suddenly faced with expulsion from office, Putin recognized the fleeting opportunity to resolve the Crimean issue while bolstering his domestic popularity and he seized it. As early as February 4th 2014, two weeks before Yanukovych's hasty departure from Kiev, Putin's inner circle determined that salvaging the pro-Russian regime in Kiev was a lost cause but the general chaos presented an opportunity to manipulate existing legal procedures to setup several Ukrainian territories for absorption into the Russian 359 Matthias Schepp, "Securing Sochi: Russia's Elite Counter-Terrorism Fighters," Spiegel Online International, January 07, 2014, http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/elite-spetsnaz-fighters-protectsochi-winter-olympics-from-terrorism-a-941995.html.
360 "Putin's 'Ring of Steel' Forming to Protect Winter Olympics in Sochi." Dallas Morning News, February 04, 2014, http://www.dallasnews.com/news/local-news/20140204-putins-ring-of-steel-formingto-protect-winter-olympics-in-sochi.ece.
361 Robert Coalson, "News Analysis: The Plot to Seize Crimea," Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, March 11, 2015, http://www.rferl.org/content/ukraine-russia-putin-plot-seize-crimea/26894212.html. Coalson's assessment was that the annexation of Crimea was never an end in and of itself but that the action was part of a larger ongoing effort to destroy the Ukrainian state.
Federation. 
362
363
364
363 Blank and Hussey, The Truth about Ukraine. Subversive measures to undermine Ukraine's general sovereignty were well underway by 2006, but if the steps toward annexation were initiated some eight years before the invasion, it would be expected that a more developed pro-Russian insurgent network would have been in place than what actually existed in early February 2014. With so little existing political support in the Crimean parliament, and the ad-hoc nature of the actual "self-defense forces" (not the Russian Army forces masquerading under the same name) at the time the occupation commenced, there was a significant potential for the effort to fail, particularly if the Ukrainian Army had started resisting with force. Ultimately the level of development was adequate, but a deliberate effort at moving toward annexation would have likely reduced some of the residual risk by developing more robust pro-Russian political and surrogate movements.
364 Ra'anan and Martin, Russia: A Return to Imperialism?, 192. Ra'anan and Martin assert that despite the clear indication of subversion, it was the practice of the Clinton administration to try to give Russia the benefit of the doubt and to offer explanations for Russian military action in several of the post-Soviet states as the work of rogue Russian military units, Russian soldiers acting as freelance mercenaries, and any number of other reasons despite clear indications that Yeltsin was directing the destabilizing actions, particularly in Abkhazia. 367 "Party of Regions Hopes for Strengthening Collaboration with 'United Russia' Party," Kyiv Post, November 22, 2009, http://www.kyivpost.com/content/politics/party-of-regions-hopes-for-strengtheningcollabora-53358.html. See also: Andrew Jack, Inside Putin's Russia (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 17. Jack describes United Russia as a reincarnation of the Communist Party, with ever increasing Soviet-era practices that promoted the efforts of the security services in controlling contact with foreign entities and extra-legal practices aimed at persecuting "spies" and other subversives. sovereignty and international law when it took a page from the Georgia playbook and began issuing Russian passports to Russians in Crimea. 
368
369
370
371
A key to the successful Crimean operation would be the lack of effective resistance on the part of Ukrainian defense forces based there. If any had fought back, Russia's narrative of a bloodless, popular transfer of administrative control would have been lost. Well in advance of the annexation, Russia exploited the culture of endemic corruption and divergent sense of ethnic and national loyalties throughout Ukraine to buy the allegiance of those in the position to resist. Ukrainian army generals, intelligence officers, and police officers were recruited by the Russian intelligence service and at the critical moment either defected to the invading Russian side or chose to keep their units out of direct confrontation. 372 A significant psychological blow for the emerging Ukrainian government and its strained relationship with the military was the public defection of Ukrainian Navy Admiral Denis Berezovsky to the self-proclaimed government of Crimea. 
373
374
373 Colby Howard and Ruslan Pukhov, eds., Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine (Minneapolis, MN: East View Press, 2014), 167. Berezovsky attempted to encourage other Ukrainian sailors and vessels to defect and was largely ignored. He was instrumental in getting several of the blockaded Ukrainian vessels to eventually surrender to the Russians and after the annexation, Putin appointed Berezovsky as the deputy commander of the Black Sea Fleet.
374 Mark Galeotti, "Moscow's Spy Game: Why Russia is Winning the Intelligence War in Ukraine," Foreign Affairs (October 30, 2014).
wave of disinformation and propaganda that denied any Russian military involvement in Crimea, and portrayed the Euromaidan as a Neo-Nazi junta that would persecute ethnic Russians, resurrecting cultural fears from World War II. These messages were coupled with propaganda promoting Russian identity, Crimea's historic position as a Russian province, and the perception that Russian citizens were supportive of Crimea breaking away from Ukraine.
Putin himself was part of the disinformation campaign. His outright denial that Russia was involved in the ongoing occupation was eventually replaced with an admission that Russia had in fact conduct the operation, but only out of concern that the people on Crimea were in need of protection.
No. [The seizing of Crimea] had not been pre-planned or prepared. It was done on the spot, and we had to play it by ear based on the situation and the demands at hand. But it was all performed promptly and professionally, I have to give you that.
Our task was not to conduct a full-fledged military operation there, but it was to ensure people's safety and security and a comfortable environment to express their will. We did that. But it would not have been possible without the Crimeans' own strong resolution. Also, I must say that I didn't add the concluding line to my Kremlin speech about initiating a draft law on the inclusion of Crimea in the Russian Federation-until the very last day, last moment, because I was waiting for the referendum results. Polls and surveys are one thing, along with certain groups' sentiments, but a referendum is the expression of the will of all the residents of an area. It was very important for me to know what their will was.
So when the voter turnout reached 83 percent and more than 96 percent supported Crimea's inclusion in the Russian Federation, it became obvious that this decision was made by the majority, if not unanimously. In this situation, we couldn't have done otherwise. 
375
376
377
379
380
377 Roy Allison, "Russian 'Deniable' Intervention in Ukraine: How and Why Russia Broke the Rules," International Affairs 90, no. 6 (2014): 1263. Allison provides a very thorough analysis of the various international and domestic legalisms that Russia attempted to manipulate to provide the appearance of legal justification for its actions in Ukraine.
378 Snake Rootkit Report (Guildford England: BAE Systems Applied Intelligence, 2014), http://info.baesystemsdetica.com/rs/baesystems/images/snake_whitepaper.pdf.
379 Ibid., 4.
Russian forces seized key Crimean facilities, the mobile service provider Ukrtelecom confirmed that its facilities in Crimea had been raided and that the intruders had tampered with fiber optic cables and disrupted local communications. The Crimean Ukrtelecom facility was then identified as the point of origin for denial of service attacks directed at the cellular telephones of members of the Ukrainian parliament in Kiev. 
381
382
When Western leaders prepared to meet with Eastern European leaders in Vilnius, Lithuania in late 2013, the economic cooperation summit was subsumed by Yanukovych's refusal to sign the EU partnership deal and the protests in Kiev. Moscow ensured that Yanukovych and the Ukrainian parliament understood that Russia would inflict hardship if Ukraine backed out of its new agreement for economic cooperation with Russia. "As the Vilnius summit neared, Moscow imposed trade embargoes on various Ukrainian exports to Russia." 
384
385
386
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia has continued to offer loans and to subsidize Ukrainian gas prices at rates that were too good for the Ukrainians to pass up.
This fostering of dependency kept Ukraine from aggressively developing alternative forms of energy and made the political establishment subject to Moscow's dictates as Gazprom demanded payments, raised rates, or shut off services in the coldest parts of the year. This process continued through the election of Victor Yanukovych whose pro-384 Hill and Pifer, Putin's Russia Goes Rogue. In January 2014, Hill and Pifer projected that Russia would use energy and subsidies for leverage in Ukraine, but that the Russians might make a determined effort to undermine the Ukrainian government by making use of ethnic divisions, promoting violent confrontations with state authorities in Crimea to create a reason for Russian "defensive" intervention.
385 Bertil Nygrin, "Russian Resource Policies towards the CIS Countries," in Russia and its Near Neighbours: Identity, Interests and Foreign Policy, eds. Maria R. Friere and Roger E. Kanet (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 224.
386 Chloe Arnold, "Barring 'Obstacles,' Russia Ready to Resume Gas Shipments," Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, December 01, 2009, http://www.rferl.org/content/Russia_Says_Ukraine_Signs_New_Gas_Monitoring_Deal__/1368899.html.
Russian orientation was hoped would bring more considerate treatment from Russia. 
387
388
Russian propaganda efforts since the beginning of the Euromaidan represent one of the more remarkable manifestations of Russian hybrid warfare. Instead of merely trying to curb free-speech domestically (although that practice has also been widely resurrected), Russia has "weaponized" the instruments of free speech to "confuse, blackmail, demoralize, subvert, and paralyze" its immediate Ukrainian victims and the international community. 389 Russia's practices turn the fundamental institutions of liberal societies, namely the free-press, into vectors for propaganda attack in the form of government sponsored press, publication of "academic" articles and editorials and the mass use of social media from official sources and an army of "trolls" who flood discussion forums with a pro-Moscow message. On September 11, 2013, Putin used an American public relations firm to craft a full page opinion-editorial in the New York Times to call for the American people to challenge President Obama's plan to attack Syria, citing instead all of the international standards for conflict resolution, illegitimacy for the use of force against a sovereign nation, and specifically casting doubt about the Syrian origin of the chemical attack that had demanded a response in the first place. 
390
For more than a year prior to the Crimean annexation, Russia executed a series of large scale military exercises in the Black Sea region to "test the readiness" of the Russian fleet and other regional forces. 
396
397
These exercises served to desensitize observers to the potential danger, and to provide a plausible excuse for the Russians to activate their reserve units and undertake the lengthy process of moving men and equipment via rail to different locations in the Federation.
Weeks before the culmination of the Euromaidan and before Putin's acknowledged timeline for his decision to take Crimea, critical actions for the annexation were already taking place in Crimea. In early February 2014, Putin's former Deputy Prime Minister, Vladislav Surkov, 398 suddenly appeared in Simferopol to speak with Crimean leaders about autonomy and to propose a bridge across the Kerch Strait that would link Crimea directly to the Russian mainland. 399 Surkov, also a former KGB officer, meant for the bridge project to serve as a cover for an influx of Russians and equipment, and to serve as an investment that would need to be protected with additional military assets if the Ukrainian security situation were to become questionable. 
400
401
398 Jack, Inside Putin's Russia, 328. Surkov was originally appointed to the Kremlin by the oil oligarchs. He rapidly became one of Putin's principle advisors and is considered one of the main architects of Putin's so-called "managed democracy." Surkov was also a principle driver of Putin's image projection as a reformer while Putin was actually consolidating his authoritarian grip on power. Surkov played a key role in eliminating political opposition to Chechen leader, Akhmad Kadyrov, ensuring that Putin's preferred choice would win the election that brought a favorable outcome to Moscow for an end to the Second Chechen War. See also : Baker and Glasser, Kremlin Rising: Vladimir Putin's Russia and the End  of Revolution, 270, 300-301.  399 Paul Goble, No Longer a Question--'Russia has opened a Crimean Front'. Window on Eurasia. 2014, https://web.archive.org/web/20140303013733/http:/windowoneurasia2.blogspot.co.uk/2014/ 02/window-on-eurasia-no-longer-question.html. This article mistakenly calls him "Vladimir" Surkov. As the issuing of passports to citizens of another country is a violation of sovereignty, a similar disregard for a nation's control over its own territory is demonstrated by the representative of a foreign government meeting with the residents of a particular area to discuss creating a physical link between the two entities. 400 Ibid.
provided the Spetsnaz and FSB with an opportunity to move among the civilian population and conduct close reconnaissance of certain objectives as well as to coordinate with local separatists during the invasion's final planning stages.
In mid-February 2014, Crimean observers were still discounting the possibility of a popular movement paving the way for Russian military deployment on the peninsula based on the lack of significant pro-Russian sentiment. 
402
412 "Moscow Agent Strelkov Admits Russian Army Behind Crimean Referendum." Ukraine Today, January 25, 2015, http://uatoday.tv/news/moscow-agent-strelkov-admits-russian-army-behind-crimeanreferendum-404995.html. See also: "Russian Colonel: Crimea Referendum Was Fake," YouTube video, from the Russian interview titled: И.Стрелков Vs Н.Стариков "ЦЕНТРСИЛЫ / СИЛАЦЕНТРА" [I. Strelkov vs. N. Starikov "CENTRSILY/ SILACENTRA"], aired originally on the Russian program: POLIT-RING on Нейромир-ТВ, posted with English subtitles by "EMPR," January 22, 2015. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mcCqrzctxH4. The FSB is the Russian intelligence service and successor to the KGB. visible presence of Russian armored vehicles on the streets of Simferopol. 
413
414
Russian private security companies and members of the Ukrainian Berkut (the Special Police and "titushky" who were dissolved after the bloodshed in Kiev during the Euromaidan) were absorbed into the ranks of the Crimean separatist forces to provide manpower to the core of GRU, FSB and Spetsnaz operators. 
415
416
417
414 Simpson, Russia's Crimea Plan Detailed, Secret, and Successful.  and helicopters. 
422
423
424
425
from Crimea while rank-and-file Tatar activists have been assaulted or have simply "disappeared." 426 By mid-February 2015, there were 29,400 Russian troops in Crimea. 427
The annexation of Crimea was a shock to the Western sense of international order and forced NATO members and non-members alike to evaluate their organic and mutual preparations for defense as well as their respective vulnerabilities to a surrogate "uprising" being used to mask an invasion. As clever as the operation was, it was neither inevitable nor guaranteed to succeed. Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia has not tried to hide its efforts to maintain a dominant relationship with Ukraine. The Yanukovych's party with strong ties to Putin's United Russia, held 80 percent of the seats in Crimea, but there was very little momentum to vote for succession from Ukraine. The vote still had to be held under armed guard and in secret with some very dubious ballots cast. If the annexation of Crimea had been a deliberate objective prior to 2014, it would be expected that political support for that end would have been more thoroughly prepared. Similarly, the degree to which Aksyonov and others would have been allowed to draw manpower from their criminal associates and the titushky would have also been minimized in order to ensure the application of violence could be closely controlled.
Ultimately, the process worked well, and Moscow may have drawn some erroneous conclusions regarding the level of pro-Russian sentiment there actually was in Ukraine or how easily the process might be replicated elsewhere. Russia's initial military infiltration and easy coordination with its proxy forces was also only possible due to the shared language and ethnicity of the occupation force with the "separatists."
The annexation of Crimea was possible because Moscow had already spent years undermining Kiev's ability to defend its sovereignty. When the Euromaidan removed Russia's proxy from power, Putin was faced with a very narrow window to carry out an operation that would meet his domestic political needs, his strategic goals for domination in the near abroad, and to shock the sources he perceived to be Russia's greatest threat, the neo-liberal West. To reduce the chances of Western interference, Putin hid an invasion behind other world events and maintained the guise of local unrest while minimizing violence to play down the significance of what was happening. With a corresponding assault of disinformation, Putin was able to create doubt about the nature of the invasion until he was signing the annexation of Crimea into the Russian Constitution.
Crimea also possesses some unique attributes that helped Russia overcome potential Ukrainian resistance. Crimea was already home to the Russian Black Sea Fleet.
The existing Russian military bases and thousands of resident Russian sailors and marines served as a Trojan horse for the invading force. Crimea is a peninsula that is connected to the mainland by a narrow strip of land. Once the seizure of Ukrainian installations had begun, it was not difficult to block all movement between the two entities. This chokepoint helped Russia limit the sources of information covering the takeover. It also ensured that any military response from Kiev, who had just lost most of its maritime capability, would be bottlenecked on a narrow land bridge and extremely vulnerable to aerial interdiction and artillery fire. The lack of similar favorable circumstances and the attempt to immediately replicate the success of Crimea when the world's attention was now directly on Russia's action in Ukraine led to a much different outcome in Donbas. and Putin's domestic approval ratings soared from 54 percent in 2013 to 83 percent in 2014. 
429
430
431
Putin." 
432
By insisting the Crimean annexation was a defensive operation to protect ethnic Russians from a neo-Nazi junta in Kiev, he changed the issue from a territorial dispute into an ideological conflict, forcing Moscow to become further involved to "defend" ethnic Russians from the same supposed threat, or risk undermining the support of the domestic Russian nationalists.
The lack of Ukrainian military resistance to the Russian invasion of Crimea forced the interim government in Kiev to evaluate the true status of the Ukrainian military and to deal with some hard truths. For years the various governments had paid lip service to modernizing the military, but the regular national fiscal shortcomings and vastly overestimated revenues from the sales of old military equipment and facilities resulted in an Army that could barely pay salaries and facility operational costs, let alone upgrade equipment and training. 
433
434
When Ukraine struggled to mobilize its reserves to counter the first FSB organized separatists in eastern Ukraine, his assessment had not been altered.
Given the Russian military's demonstrated competence in pulling off the Crimea occupation, and Ukraine's lack of ability to deter aggression, Putin may have been tempted to exploit the situation and seize eastern Ukraine outright. 
435
Western military response likely, Putin did not want to provide an excuse for an intervention in eastern Ukraine that might dislodge him from Crimea as well. While the Russians weighed a full invasion, the Ukrainians "conducted the largest countermobilization of any European army since World War Two and deployed fifteen Brigades east of the Dnepr … Putin blinked, and ,for whatever reason, instead opted for a less overt hybrid-surrogate campaign in Donbass." 
436
437
438
2) PROXY SANCTUARY: Seizing local governmental centers, police stations, airports and military depots; arming and training insurgents; creating checkpoints and destroying ingress transportation infrastructure; cyberattacks compromising victim communications; phony referendum with single party representation; establishment of a "People's Republic" under Russian tutelage.
3) INTERVENTION: Deploying of the Russian forces to the border with sudden large-scale exercises involving ground, naval, air and airborne troops; surreptitious introduction of heavy weapons to insurgents; creation of training and logistics camps adjacent to the border; commitment of socalled "volunteer" combined-arms Battalion Tactical Groups; integrating proxy troops into Russian equipped, supported and led higher-level formations.
4) COERCIVE DETERRENCE: Secret strategic force alerts and snap checksforward deployment of tactical nuclear delivery systems; theater and intercontinental "in your face" maneuvers; aggressive air patrolling of neighboring areas to inhibit their involvement.
The use and abuse of Western negotiated ceasefires to rearm their proxies; using violations to bleed the opponent's Army while inhibiting other states from helping under the fear of escalationdivide the Western alliance by playing economic incentives, selective and repetitive phone negotiations infatuating a favorite security partner. 
439
440
443
Russia's offensive-realist world perspective and years-long strategy of destabilizing Ukraine had apparently paid off with the annexation of the strategically important Crimean peninsula in March of 2014. Given the relative ease of that operation and its popularity with the Russian of momentum in April of 2014. 
444
445
While there was little effort to hide the intended change in the political dynamic, it is possible that the actions in southern and eastern Ukraine were themselves used to mask Russia's consolidation of power in Crimea. With rapidly escalating levels of violence and reports of atrocities, media attention and independent reporting tended to center on the line of overt conflict in eastern Ukraine. It was not on the implementation of laws and the population control measures including disappearances of opposition members in Crimea. Given Russia's vehement denial of involvement in Crimea well past 444 Russian domestic support for the annexation was not universal. In September 2014 thousands of Russians demonstrated in Moscow against the ongoing "undeclared" war in Ukraine.
445 Sergei L. Loiko and Carol J. Williams, "Police Say 42 Killed in Odessa in Worst Violence of Ukraine Crisis," LA Times, May 02, 2014, http://www.latimes.com/world/europe/la-fg-wn-ukraine-russiaodessa-clash-20140502-story.html. In the Odessa case, several hundred pro-Russian agitators got into a physical altercation with several thousand pro-Ukraine marchers. In the ensuing melee, the more hardline Russians were forced to retreat into a trade union building. There are different accounts of the point of origin, but the building was set on fire and the separatists died. While this loss of life was labeled a "tragedy" at the time, no significant separatist movement took place in Odessa after that, even as the situation in the eastern oblasts deteriorated into open war. the point of plausibility, it is not surprising that Russia continued to deny any involvement in the eastern Ukrainian conflict despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Even with the world's attention on Ukraine following the Crimea annexation and the materialization of a "separatist movement" composed mostly of non-natives, Russia continued to use the same tools it had employed in Crimea to create uncertainty and provide appeasers with excuses for inaction.
One aspect of information operations that blossomed with the advent of the war in eastern Ukraine was Russia's domination and manipulation of the social sentiment sections of news source and shared media forums. These "troll" armies, operating on very specific guidance from their Russian government handlers, made efforts to appear to be a variety of private citizens with distinct online personas in order to create the appearance of popular sentiment. 
446
450
451
Instead, Russia attempted to achieve the physical military effect of stopping the Ukrainian advances against the rebels with non-military means. 
452
454
Republics" (DPR/ LPR) into the negotiation process also provided de facto legitimacy to Moscow's proxy as a separate political entity, and his subsequent "appeal" for the separatists to delay their referendum on sovereignty, provided the possibility of a Musin attributes the Ukrainian resistance to Russian domination to "brainwashing" by Western influences. Strelkov concurs and attributes the "zombification" of otherwise educated and decent Ukrainian people to "neuro-linguistic programming," the effects of which he himself felt when he would watch Ukrainian TV while fighting in Donbas and subsequently begin to question why he was fighting against Kiev in the first place. In the same interview, Strelkov claims that counter-propaganda is pointless, but the physical destruction of television broadcast stations is an effective antidote to the demoralizing effects of this "technology." While it might seem a little incredulous from a Western perspective, the theme of "zombification" and the nonchalant referral to "neuro-linguistic programing" are recurring ideas in a number of these types of interviews and either represent an actual belief on the part of people like Strelkov that every television broadcast not of Moscow origin is part of a Western plot at mind control, or Strelkov is consciously propagating this perception for a Russian public that does believe it.
457 Ibid., 16:15.
"Strelkov" Girkin. 
465
Unlike the 2008 invasion of Georgia, where declared Russian forces crossed overtly into Georgian territory, Moscow was determined to continue to mask Russia's direct role in the fighting in eastern Ukraine. This continued subterfuge was maintained largely to minimize the potential political impact resulting from Russian soldiers being killed while fighting an undeclared war against a neighbor who had not attacked Russia.
The extent to which the Russians went to promote this implausible deniability was incredible, but their deception plan was only thinly based on repetitive denial and not any sophisticated ruse. The evidence of active involvement of Russian soldiers and equipment in the fighting quickly became "overwhelming and indisputable." 468 When some of the actual local separatists began looting and following their own directions, Moscow sent in the Vostok Battalion to clear them out of government buildings and assert Russian control. 
469
470
One of the foremost of the Russian operatives posing as a separatist leader was GRU Colonel Igor "Strelkov" Girkin. 
471
472
473
Strelkov. What it does indicate is that as little infrastructure development as there was in Crimea before the invasion, there was even less in Donbas. Not only were there very few local "separatists" in the ranks of the DPR and LPR, but the provision of military equipment and other supplies to the rebels was insufficient to sustain their early momentum. Russia had forces massed on the border, but they had not planned for the logistical sustainment of the separatist force they were trying to raise.
In early July 2014, Strelkov was forced to abandon Sloviansk by the rapid advance of the Ukrainian ATO and he became increasingly concerned the entire rebel movement was at risk of being wiped out. 
474
486 Ibid., 8. This story provides one description of a Russian Buryat tanker who was transported with his crew and their tank from the border with Mongolia to Ukraine where he was severely wounded while fighting the Ukrainian army. Nemetsov's Putin. War also provides a number of similar accounts. Some of these soldiers, including the Buryat, knew they were going to fight in Ukraine and were willing to do their duty, but they did so under orders from their Russian military commanders and were not acting of their own volition. 490 OSCE, Chairperson-in-Office Welcomes Minsk Agreement, Assures President Poroshenko of  OSCE Support (Bern, Switzerland: OSCE, 2014).
491 Rick Lyman and Andrew E. Kramer, "War is Exploding Anew in Ukraine; Rebels Vow More," New York Times, January 23, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/24/world/europe/ukraineviolence.html?_r=0.
492 Andrew E. Kramer and David M. Herszenhorn, "Ukrainian Soldiers' Retreat from Eastern Town Raises Doubt for Truce," New York Times, February 18, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/19/world/europe/ukraine-conflict-debaltseve.html.
In mid-February of 2015 there were an estimated 14,400 Russian soldiers in eastern Ukraine supporting 29,300 "separatists" with the newest generation of Russian tanks, infantry fighting vehicles and indirect fire weapon systems, while another 55,800 Russian soldiers remained massed on the Russian side of Ukraine's border. 
493
494
496
Following two major Russian incursions into eastern Ukraine, first in August This is an exercise of limited value when the narrative, instruments of force, and the existence of the movement itself are the products of an external sponsor's creation. As the military forms of war became the dominant effort in Donbas, Russia's effort evolved into more traditional warfare waged with an interesting mix of proxies and regular soldiers under an uninterrupted campaign of denial.
The war in eastern Ukraine is demonstrative of the limits of hybrid warfare when the dynamic change of the political relationship is not masked, and when the objectives are unclear. When Russia decided to press its advantage following the Crimean annexation, and began organizing separatist elements across Ukraine's south and east, it did so under the complete awareness of the government in Kiev and of those in the international community who were not looking for alternative realities. Russia continued to employ political warfare against the Kiev and to discourage any third party involvement, but the line of contest was quickly reduced to the front in Donbas. Moscow certainly wanted to continue to exert financial and economic pressure on Ukraine, but "not losing" in Donbas became the most significant priority due to the effect this would have on Putin's domestic support. What Donbas revealed is that Russia was not conducting hybrid warfare from a position of overwhelming strength. The Russians need the kinetic aspect of a conflict to be over quickly in order to preserve troop strength and material inventory and to reduce the motivation for foreign intervention. A drawn out conventional engagement quickly taxes the Russians' ability to sustain combat forces and lacking a clear existential threat, Russian casualties represent a significant domestic political risk. Without a quick victory, Russia needed to find an acceptable point that would preserve the idea of the rebellion and then used diplomacy to freeze the conflict for resolution at a more advantageous time.
More than a year-and-a-half after the annexation of Crimea and Russia's offensive in eastern Ukraine, the conflict largely disappeared from international headlines. With Russia's new "intervention" in Syria, the urgency for arming Ukraine largely abated, but without a definitive resolution the conflict has only entered a frozen status. 
497
498
The vitriol of Moscow's propaganda efforts to portray the Kiev government as a Nazi junta and Kiev's designation of all separatists as "terrorists" will make Ukrainian reassertion of governance over the rebel held region problematic. Reuniting with the entirety of Donbas is already a political issue in Kiev that will affect voter sentiment and drive politics, while taking priority away from other issues like properly addressing corruption and diversifying the national energy resources. These vulnerabilities will leave space for Russia to continue to exert coercive influence. Future regional and national elections will also undoubtedly be contested as so many of the Donbas region's residents are displaced. Ukraine has to take control over its border with Russia if it is to reassume a semblance of sovereignty, which Russia has demonstrably proven it is determined to undermine. Russia will continue to interfere with Kiev's ability to govern in the east, only now, Russia's means include a heavily armed population that has been forced to pick a side in an manufactured conflict, an unknown number of displaced Russo-Ukrainians in Russia with claims to property and political participation in Ukraine, and a border between the two entities that Russia will not relinquish to Kiev.
A.
We can now see that in war many roads lead to success, and that they do not all involve the opponent's outright defeat. They range from the destruction of the enemy's forces, the conquest of his territory, to a temporary occupation or invasion, to projects with an immediate political purpose, and finally to passively awaiting the enemy's attacks.
-Carl von Clausewitz
499
The continued study of hybrid warfare, as a general theory for describing the behavior of states that pursue aggressive action below the threshold of conventional warfare, is important for promoting the continued stability of the modern state system. To date, explanations for this behavior have been limited to observations of the military forms of "internal" conflict and have been largely lacking examinations of the nature of the sponsoring state systems that enable the violation of other state's sovereignty in a time of peace. It is not sufficient to claim that the nature of hybrid warfare is limited to the use of terrorists, criminal networks, irregular forces, or non-attributable conventional military forms of war, but even in this limited scope conclusions can be made about the nature of an aggressor state. In order to condone the forceful violations of foreign sovereignty during a time of peace, the aggressor must have an offensive-realist perception of inter-state power relations. An aggressor must also have the ability to direct a significant portion of the elements of national power toward achieving a specific goal in order to achieve synergy. It can also be surmised that the aggressor must have strategic objectives that violate another state's sovereignty and a desire to at least partially achieve those objectives without a full-scale conventional invasion. The aggressor must then be able to sustain the strategic direction through any changes in his domestic government.
After establishing that an aggressor state has these characteristics, hybrid warfare then involves the selective combination of a wide range of political and military instruments to economic warfare, primarily through Gazprom's monopoly of Ukrainian heating oil and natural gas, to pressure the population into turning on the government.
In both Georgia and Ukraine, Russia placed embargoes on goods produced in those countries in order to warn against or punish other movements in the Western direction. Dependency on Russian gas supplies was fostered through subsidies and then followed with demands for payments and threats of shutoffs during the height of winter.
In Georgia, Russia regularly used violence, in the form of sabotage against critical infrastructure, terror attacks against security forces and civilians, and air support for separatist actions in order to stymie Tbilisi's efforts to reestablish control over the restive regions. Russia initially used lower levels of violence in Ukraine but the Russian dominated Berkut Special Police were regularly heavy handed when putting down prodemocracy protests, including the killing of dozens of protesters during the Euromaidan.
In both instances, Russia used cyber-warfare to disrupt command and control systems and to help spread propaganda and disinformation to minimize local and international resistance. Despite all of these efforts, Georgia and Ukraine continued to resist Russian domination and Russia ultimately had to use military force to dynamically change the nature of the relationship, albeit at significantly lower levels than an all-out conventional invasion would have required.
During the five-day war in Georgia and during the occupation of Crimea, Russia masked the outset of the military action behind other significant events. Both actions began while world leaders were expressing goodwill at Olympic Games, and while other significant crises and political events indicated a minimal chance of a military reaction from the West. Both actions had limited military objectives that were able to be quickly reached, which minimized the level of ongoing violence and reduced the impetus for Western intervention. The war in Donbas lacked all of these things. It was started while international attention was directly on Russian action in Ukraine. It had unclear objectives, and became increasingly violent as "volunteers" and heavy equipment were introduced piecemeal. Russia attempted to dominate the information domain during all three conflicts to characterize each as an internal ethnic struggle, and Russia's actions as necessary to prevent genocide, while simultaneously denying the level of Russia's involvement and providing disinformation that would further confuse a Western response. In Georgia and Donbas, Russia used diplomatic processes to freeze the conflicts without definitive resolution so that Russia was justified in keeping intervention or "peacekeeping" forces in the region and so that the open nature of the conflict could be used to derail future efforts for either state to join the EU or NATO. Crimea was annexed outright to eliminate the threat to the long-term basing of the Black Sea Fleet, and because the annexation provided a much needed boost to Putin's domestic popularity.
Hybrid warfare is the combination of political and military forms of war to achieve strategic objectives while minimizing the cost and risk associated with a conventional military campaign. Hybrid warfare by definition does not imply the absence of military force or the use of violence, it requires it. The projection of offensive power is expensive and politically risky, more so when it comes at the end of a linear increase in hostilities and the victim has time to accurately interpret the aggressor's intent and prepare to resist. By weakening the Georgian and Ukrainian states' ability to control the entirety of their territories, undermining political, economic and defense development in both countries, and fomenting ethnic divisions, Russia was able to undermine the will and ability of each state to counter Russian aggression before Russia presented a "resolution" of its own design. When Russia continued to pursue the military aspect of hybrid warfare in eastern Ukraine, Kiev was finally able to mount an effective response. The result was a bloody contest of attrition where Russia's attempts to maintain some level of deniability constrained its ability to introduce a decisive amount of force.
This research involved a heuristic analysis of the nature of Russian hybrid warfare and its relationship to strategy and interstate power. Because of the focus of study on cases involving a single aggressor, it can claim to be a theory that applies only to Russia, but was crafted with expectations of generalizability. Further testing is needed to make a more universal claim of applicability.
This study began with an examination of the different literature that framed the ongoing questions regarding the nature of hybrid warfare. To bridge the gap between common uses of the term and the theoretical foundations of strategy and state power, further study was conducted in these areas to produce a preliminary theoretical framework regarding the nature of hybrid warfare and the actor capable of practicing it effectively. As the term "hybrid warfare" is frequently associated with Russian actions, Russia was selected to limit independent variables across the cases. Russian political and military thinking in the contemporary and Soviet-eras was then examined for the conceptual roots and disposition necessary to employ political and military warfare against a neighbor during times of supposed peace in pursuit of strategic objectives.
This research concluded that Russia has a longstanding view of all foreign entities as a potential threat, and therefore desires relative superiority with its neighbors. Russia does not limit this perspective to military force alone. Vladimir Putin believes Westernliberalism is an alien concept that represents a threat to a strong Russian state that must not be allowed to take root on Russia's borders. Russians do not share a Western perspective of the difference between peace and war. To Russians, war is not the continuation of politics by other means. In the anarchic space between states, war and politics are part of the same continuum. Putin's emphasis on the "power vertical" as the strong centralized direction of state power, and his increasingly authoritarian control over the economic and informational domains provides him with the necessary level of control to synchronize their efforts toward strategic objectives. Through "managed democracy"
Putin has a firm grasp on power and is able to maintain a stable trajectory for his strategic initiatives.
It was also determined that Russian strategic thought was built on the foundations Soviet-era political-military philosophy. Russians have long examined strategies for attrition of an adversary's defenses through combinations of political and military means, the interchangeability of the means of war based on effects in a deep battle, and nonlinear warfare conducted throughout an adversary's geopolitical space. Russian strategic objectives are state secrets, but Russia's actions indicate three principle themes: 1) solidify and maintain the Putin's hold on power, 2) ensure Russian dominion over the near-abroad, and 3) restore Russia's status as a global power.
This framework was then partnered with a model of Chinese Unrestricted Warfare All of the cases included a phase of conventional military primacy, but these efforts were most effective when they were limited to quickly consolidating clear objectives.
The findings from these case studies resulted in a mezzo-level theory of Russian hybrid warfare which will set the stage for general theory development. Russia has characteristics that facilitate the practice of hybrid warfare.
Offensive-realist 2.
Willing to employ violence and violate sovereignty during "peace" 3. Centralized/ authoritarian government 4.
Other-then-military means of national power Russia also recognizes its own military shortcomings. Putin desires to be perceived as a military power and he is taking steps to rebuild some of Russia's diminished military capability. Even in their present state, Russia could militarily force the governments of Ukraine or Georgia to capitulate outright, but such efforts would incur a significant cost to existing military capability. Those efforts would also be drawnout and bloody, which would increase the possibility of international intervention and a humiliating punishment to Putin's conventional power. Russia uses hybrid warfare to pursue its strategic objectives at reduced levels of risk. This implies two things:
1. Strategic ends that were the traditional objectives of military warfare 2.
The practice of deception to mask the offensive nature of political actions Russia has long theorized and practiced the combination of political and military warfare. Russia employs any number of non-military and above military forms of political warfare to undermine a target states sovereign ability to administer its territory and govern its population. During this process, Russia employs limited levels of violence toward the same ends while remaining below the threshold of state-on-state warfare.
These activities include terrorism, assassination, sabotage, arming of proxy forces, and the use of deniable state military forces. Russia uses diplomacy to freeze conflicts and delay overt warfare to a time of Moscow's choosing. When Putin determines the timing is right, Russia uses deception to mask the dynamic change in the level of force, and quickly consolidates the limited objectives before freezing the conflict and presenting a new status quo. It is a characteristic of Russian hybrid warfare that no conflict examined has yielded a complete discernable "victory." Each case has the potential to flare up again in the future and Russia may very well use this to make further gains against the target states or as leverage against the international community.
One of the worst reactions to hybrid warfare may be to perpetuate its effectiveness by being "diplomatic" in addressing it. Fear of provoking an aggressor who is already conducting offensive actions, regardless of the domain, and not calling out that aggression does not aid the immediate victim or help deter similar action elsewhere.
Allowing the aggressor to define the terms used to describe the conflict and thus maintain control of the narrative will also frustrate any effort to counter the aggressor's actions.
There was no "separatist" movement in east Ukraine and the fighting there was not a civil conflict or an internal dispute. The war in eastern Ukraine was entirely a product of the Kremlin's design, as were the armaments and Russian troops who made up the bulk of the pro-Russian forces. This was an invasion of Ukraine by Russia as was the Crimean operation by Vladimir Putin's own admission after months of public claims to the contrary. The West must "counter, not abet, Russia's hybrid war by speaking clearly, consistently, and publicly about Russia's war against Ukraine." 500
The weaponization of information, culture and money is a vital part of the Kremlin's hybrid, or non-linear, war, which combines the above elements with covert and small-scale military operations. The conflict in Ukraine saw non-linear war in action. Other rising authoritarian states will look to copy Moscow's model of hybrid war-and the West has no institutional or analytical tools to deal with it. 501 "Hybrid warfare" has become a widely used and widely interpreted term for describing Russia's actions in Ukraine. Some analysts have used the narrow focus of irregular combinations of forces and tactics to suggest tactical counter-measures based on the scenarios that played out in Ukraine. Others have used the lack of solid meaning of 502 Nadia Schadlow, "The Problem with Hybrid Warfare," War on the Rocks (April 2, 2015). Schadlow described the frustration of a number of NATO members when the term Hybrid Warfare is used to explain Russia's actions. These countries fear that the effort spent trying to frame these actions as anything less than war are an effort by members of the alliance to avoid having to commit to a response demanded by NATO's Article V. Meanwhile a number of these countries already believe they are being targeted and worry that their states could be crippled before it is even fully aware that a conflict has begun. Schadlow calls a hybrid threat the "perfect conundrum: the injection of so much uncertainty that NATO collapses under its own principle of allied consensus."
Hybrid warfare is a whole-of-government approach to waging a subversive, limited war and it requires a whole-of-government effort to assess the nature of the aggressor, identify signs of a strategic design in motion, and to take steps to counter the potential impact of the instruments of political warfare while bolstering the forces of deterrence. Potential victims of hybrid warfare must identify and mitigate vulnerabilities to an aggressor's forms of political warfare to include diversifying economic sectors that are solely reliant on one actor. Laws must be passed and enforced that prohibit certain relationships with a threatening state to include political party affiliation, board membership or "consulting" relationships with aggressor state's businesses, and media platforms used to promote the aggressor's propaganda. Treating foreign government platforms like RT as equal members of the free press is absurd; allowing them to purchase access directly into the living rooms of millions of Western households is suicidal. Target states must invest in thorough counterintelligence activities to identify, isolate, and remove aggressor agents from their political, military, and intelligence organs. International organizations must also introduce severe punitive measures aimed at modifying behavior and then at isolating and undermining the regimes of aggressor states.
Moscow's behavior and should probably be seen as ineffective as a deterrent against future hybrid aggression. 
503
503 John R. Haines, "Putin's "New Warfare,"" Foreign Policy Research Institute (May, 2014)
Soviet power, unlike that of Hitlerite Germany, is neither schematic nor adventuristic. It does not work by fixed plans. It does not take unnecessary risks. Impervious to logic of reason, and it is highly sensitive to logic of force. For this reason it can easily withdraw-and usually does when strong resistance is encountered at any point. Thus, if the adversary has sufficient force and makes clear his readiness to use it, he rarely has to do so. If situations are properly handled there need be no prestige-engaging showdowns. 
505
506
513
Hybrid warfare is likely already being practiced against near/regional and far/Western targets by Russia and other offensive-realist, authoritarian states that desire to reach strategic ends without directly confronting the West militarily. It must be the objective of Western policy to identify these actors and to minimize the potential effects of their political means of warfare while military planners examine the defense vulnerabilities that begin in the political sphere. This means that first and foremost, the sponsors of hybrid warfare have to be called out without equivocation. If hybrid warfare is to be deterred, its practice must invite a direct threat to the regime that sponsored it.
The 
challenging me to develop innovative paradigms while maintaining a foundation in historical precedent and established theory. I owe special appreciation to my Swedish classmate, Major Anders Westberg, for his assistance in delving through the invaluable research conducted by the Swedish Research Agency (FOIR). Special Forces Warrant Officers play a unique role in Special Operations, and my attendance at Naval Postgraduate School was only possible due to the support of COL George Thiebes, LTC Joshua Walker, CW5 Richard Kunz, and CW5 Al Bowden. I dedicate this thesis to the teammates I have served with over the years whose feats of valor have rarely been properly recognized and whose best qualities were knowable only in the worst of circumstances. De Oppresso Liber! xviii THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
36 Ronald R. Luman, "Introduction," in Unrestricted Warfare Symposium: Proceedings on Strategy,
43 Colin S. Gray, Irregular Enemies and the Essence of Strategy: Can the American Way of War Adapt? (Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2006), 14.
131 Jon Latimer, Deception in War (New York: Overlook Press, 2010), 3.
131 Jon Latimer, Deception in War (New York: Overlook Press, 2010), 3.
150 Dziak, Soviet Perceptions of Military Power: 
150 Dziak, Soviet Perceptions of Military Power: 
160 Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism, 57.
foreign and domestic policy in order to pursue a single objective, namely, the establishment of a new kind of union comprised of former Soviet republics and headed by Russia itself."
foreign and domestic policy in order to pursue a single objective, namely, the establishment of a new kind of union comprised of former Soviet republics and headed by Russia itself."
246 Joel Roberts, "Senator Reid on Iraq: 'This War is Lost,'" CBS News, April 20, 2007, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/senator-reid-on-iraq-this-war-is-lost/.
247 Blank, From Neglect to Duress: The West and the Georgian Crisis before the 2008
247 Blank, From Neglect to Duress: The West and the Georgian Crisis before the 2008
255 Illarionov, The Russian Leadership's Preparation for War, 1999-2008, 52.   
255 Illarionov, The Russian Leadership's Preparation for War, 1999-2008, 52.   
268  
268  
302 "Ukraina means borderland," and for a thousand years it has been the frontier between Russian and European empires, Orthodoxy, Catholicism, and Islam, and Slavic, Turkic high aspirations, Joseph Stalin used intentional famine to starve millions of Ukrainians to death during the 1932-1933 Holodomor. 308 From 1942 until 1950 Western Ukraine was the operational area of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian
302 "Ukraina means borderland," and for a thousand years it has been the frontier between Russian and European empires, Orthodoxy, Catholicism, and Islam, and Slavic, Turkic high aspirations, Joseph Stalin used intentional famine to starve millions of Ukrainians to death during the 1932-1933 Holodomor. 308 From 1942 until 1950 Western Ukraine was the operational area of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian
This violation is a clear example of Moscow's willingness to set aside legal obligations out of pure pragmatism, despite Putin's preferences for wrapping his actions with the airs of legalism. In 1993, renowned strategist John Mearsheimer advocated keeping a nuclear capability in Ukraine in order to deter future Russian incursions, but the Clinton administration firmly asserted that a world where fewer countries had nuclear weapons was inherently more desirable.
This violation is a clear example of Moscow's willingness to set aside legal obligations out of pure pragmatism, despite Putin's preferences for wrapping his actions with the airs of legalism. In 1993, renowned strategist John Mearsheimer advocated keeping a nuclear capability in Ukraine in order to deter future Russian incursions, but the Clinton administration firmly asserted that a world where fewer countries had nuclear weapons was inherently more desirable.
Outright annexation of the Donbas would also work against Moscow's future ability to influence the political situation in Kiev. The seizure of Crimea had already removed one significant pro-Russian voting block from Ukrainian national politics. The annexation of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts would virtually ensure that no pro-Russian position would ever gain any significant support in the Ukrainian government. It would therefore be in Russia's interest for eastern Ukraine to remain under Kiev, but in a federated status with as much autonomy as possible. The idea of a "special" status and federation with the freedom to pursue independent trade relations with Russia would later become a regular talking point for the rebels during ceasefire negotiations.
Outright annexation of the Donbas would also work against Moscow's future ability to influence the political situation in Kiev. The seizure of Crimea had already removed one significant pro-Russian voting block from Ukrainian national politics. The annexation of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts would virtually ensure that no pro-Russian position would ever gain any significant support in the Ukrainian government. It would therefore be in Russia's interest for eastern Ukraine to remain under Kiev, but in a federated status with as much autonomy as possible. The idea of a "special" status and federation with the freedom to pursue independent trade relations with Russia would later become a regular talking point for the rebels during ceasefire negotiations.
443 Andrei Kolesnikov, "The Russian Regime in 2015: All Tactics, no Strategy," Carnegie Moscow Center, September 09, 2015.
They then saturated the blog sections of any story involving Russia, the Ukraine, or other Western political policy with pro-Putin, anti U.S. messages, often providing links to sources of disinformation, conspiracy theories, and real but derogatory news. Troll farms served to sow doubt and disinformation among other readers, manipulate any attempts at analyzing public sentiment, and to compliment other narrative-shaping efforts through Russia's more well-known mechanisms like RT. More insidiously, Russia used an instrument of a free society, the unrestricted sharing of ideas through new media, as a weapon to undermine the value of open discourse. Taken together with Russia's efforts to promote the Kremlin's version of "facts" through official statements, press-releases, documentaries, select video clips, and carefully orchestrated "interviews"
mediated
James Callard and Peter Faber, "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War: Combination Warfare and Future Innovation," Georgetown Journal of International Affairs (Winter/ Spring,
2002): 63.
Robert M. Gates, Quadrennial Defense Review Report (Washington, DC: Dept. of Defense, 2010).
Gates, Quadrennial Defense Review Report.   
James Callard and Peter Faber, "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War: Combination Warfare and Future Innovation," Georgetown Journal of International Affairs (Winter/ Spring, 2002): 63.
Naval and Air Forces can affect the calculus of relative strength, but land combat power is the traditional benchmark for a state's ability to wage war and defend against aggression. Nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence are unique factors in shaping states' objectives for war.
There are numerous factors that may influence a calculation of strength that exceed just the numbers of fighting men in uniform or main battle tanks. These can include the state's production capacity, population of fighting age males, ability to convert economy to war time production, food production, and availability of raw materials, to name a few.
Nadia Schadlow, "The Problem with Hybrid Warfare," War on the Rocks
(April 2, 2015)
Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics,[30][31] Mearsheimer uses the term "great power" in his listing of the assumptions for offensive realism. I have substituted "great power" with "state" here to prevent confusion.
Nye, The Future of Power, 30.    
Nye, Understanding International Conflicts: An Introduction to Theory and History, 11.   
This concept can lead to some interesting conclusions about the perspective of a transaction where one side believes it is pursuing its interests in a peacetime environment, while the other has a view of a constant state of war and believes it is being forced to accept the dominant state's will only because it lacks the ability to resist.
Ibid., 43.    
Dimitri K. Simes, After the Collapse: Russia Seeks its Place as a Great Power (New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 1999), 211.
U.S. State Department, Office of theHistorian, "Milestones: 1961
-1968
Smith, Domestic Influences on Russian Foreign Policy: Status, Interests, and Resentment, 51.   
Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism,[117][118] 
Starr and Cornell, Putin's Grand Strategy:  The Eurasian Union and its Discontents, 5.
Starr and Cornell, Putin's Grand Strategy:  The Eurasian Union and its Discontents, 9-10.
Albert K.Weinberg, Manifest Destiny: A Study of Nationalist Expansionism in American History  (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1935). Manifest Destiny was the mid-19th Century American belief in a divine mandate for territorial expansion of the United States, which served as the moral justification for western settlement and wars with native tribes and Mexico.
Starr and Cornell, Putin's Grand Strategy:  The Eurasian Union and its Discontents, 6.
Stephen Blank, The Intellectual Origins of the Eurasian Union Project, eds. S. Frederick Starr and Svante E. Cornell (Washington, D.C.: Johns Hopkins University-SAIS, 2014), 18.
Ibid., 30.   
Starr and Cornell, Putin's Grand Strategy:  The Eurasian Union and its Discontents, 8.
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Pomerantsev and Weiss, The Menace of Unreality: How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture and Money, 9.
Ibid., 39.   
Gordadze, Georgian-Russian Relations in the 1990s, 41.    
Ibid., 43.    
Starr and Cornell, Putin's Grand Strategy:  The Eurasian Union and itsDiscontents, 6.   
Svante E. Cornell, "The European Union: Eastern Partnership Vs. Eurasian Union," in Putin's Grand Strategy" the Eurasian Union and its Discontents, eds. S. Frederick Starr and Svante E. Cornell (Washington, DC: The Central Asia-Caucasus Institute, 2014), 186.
Gordadze, Georgian-Russian Relations in the 1990s, 46. The 2005 "Tulip  Revolution" in Kyrgyzstan can also be included in this list, although it was somewhat less worrisome to Moscow due to the Central Asian nation's physical remoteness from Europe.
Ronald D. Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World: Georgia, Russia, and the Future of the West (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), 108.
Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World: Georgia, Russia, and the Future of the West, 73.
Mikheil Saakashvili, "Full Text: Saakashvili's Address at UN General Assembly -2006," Civil  Georgia, September 22, 2006, http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=13622.
Felgenhauer, After August 7:  The Escalation of the Russia-Georgia War, 176.
"Saakashvili Says Energy 'Saboteurs Destroyed.'" Civil Georgia, October 21, 2004, http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=8129.
C. J. Chivers, "Georgia Reopens Old Gas Line to Ease Post-Blast Shortage," New York Times, January 24, 2006, http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/24/international/europe/24georgia.html?_r=0.
Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World: Georgia, Russia, and the Future of the West, 21.
Paulo Shakarian, "The 2008 Russian Cyber Campaign Against Georgia," Military Review  (November-December, 2011), 63-68.   
David Hollis, "Cyberwar Case Study: Georgia 2008," Small Wars Journal (January 06, 2011).
Popjanevski, From Sukhumi to Tskhinvali: The Path to War in Georgia, 149.    
Ibid., 151.   
Alexander J. Motyl, ed., Dilemmas of Independence: Ukraine after Totalitarianism (New York: Council on Foreign Relations Press, 1993), 1. Ukraine has the fifth largest population in Europe after Germany, Great Britain, Italy and France and had the largest land area of any of these countries before the loss of Crimea in 2014.
Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism, 4.   
Harrison, The Russian Way of War: Operational Art, 1904-1940, 129.   
Frank Umbach, "Russian-Ukrainian-EU Gas Conflict: Who Stands to Lose most?" NATO Review Magazine, 2014.
Jeffrey Mankoff, "Russia's Latest Land Grab: How Putin Won Crimea and Lost Ukraine," Foreign Affairs (May/ June, 2014), 65-66.
Georgi Gotev, "Spirit of 'Detente' Prevails at EU-Russia Summit," EurActiv.Com, January 29, 2014, http://www.euractiv.com/global-europe/spirit-detente-prevails-eu-russi-news-533090. See also: http://www.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/20113 for a Russian transcript of the speeches at the Vilnius summit and Putin's affirmation of Ukrainian sovereignty, even as his surrogates were already beginning to organize for the seizure of Crimea.
"Russian Cyber Attacks on Ukraine: The Georgia Template." Channel4.com, May 03, 2014, http://www.channel4.com/news/ukraine-cyber-warfare-russia-attacks-georgia.
Pomerantsev and Weiss, The Menace of Unreality: How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture and Money, 6.
Associated Press, "Russian Propaganda War in Full Swing Over Ukraine," Haaretz, March 15, 2014, http://www.haaretz.com/world-news/1.579964.
Howard and Pukhov, Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, 63.
John Simpson, "Russia's Crimea Plan Detailed, Secret, and Successful," BBC News, March 19, 2014, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-26644082.
Mat Babiak, "Is Russia opening a 'Crimean Front'?" Ukrainian Policy (February 21, 2014), https://web.archive.org/web/20140221171849/http:/ukrainianpolicy.com/is-russia-opening-a-crimeanfront/.
403 Babiak, "Is Russia opening a 'Crimean Front
'?" 404 Simon Shuster, "Putin's Man in Crimea is Ukraine's Worst Nightmare," TIME, March10, 2014, http://time.com/19097/putin-crimea-russia-ukraine-aksyonov/. Aksyonov was a representative of the "Russian Unity" Party, a fringe political movement that promoted unification of Crimea with Russia. Before the annexation, the Unity Party held only three out of one hundred seats in the Crimean legislature and none at the lower governmental levels, indicating how little existing popularity for annexation there
actually was. 405 Ibid.
Karber, "Lessons  Learned" from the Russo-Ukrainian War. Karber uses the term "hybrid" as many western observers/ analysts do; to generally imply a mix of proxy/ surrogates and conventional forces.
John R.Haines, "Putin's 'New Warfare,'" Foreign Policy Research Institute (May, 2014). Haines lists four tactics of Putin's "New War": 1) Use noncombatants as human shields, 2) dominate the media, 3) accuse others of what you are doing yourself, 4) influence the "liberated" to become proxies for continued ethnic cleansing against opposing population. Haines concludes that this type of warfare is effective at bypassing an opponent's traditional military ability to resist, and minimizes the potential for external intervention by using a narrative of civil unrest to mask military action.
Czuperski et al., Hiding in Plain Sight: Putin's War in Ukraine,[4][5] 
"In Russia, Fake Bloggers Hired to Spout Pro-Kremlin Propaganda," Japan Times, April 13, 2015, http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/04/13/world/politics-diplomacy-world/russia-fake-bloggers-hiredspout-pro-kremlin-propaganda/#.VmD1A3bTmUk.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Michael Howard, trans. Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton  University Press, 1984), 94.
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
____N/A____. 12a
Besides describing the blurring of distinctions between war and peace, and the achievement of military-like effects through non-military means, Gerasimov identifies a critical component that does not receive enough weight in most discussions of hybrid warfare; the "protest potential of the population." Discussions of surrogates, irregulars, political proxies and other elements derived from the target area's native population often presuppose that some disaffected population is already in place and waiting for a sponsor to mobilize them. The absence of such sentiment might not completely remove the possibility of conducting hybrid warfare as economic, diplomatic and informational activities could still be employed, but a sympathetic population provides the aggressor with a degree of political and military power within the target's territory, as well as the potential to frame aggression as intervention.
1.
The importance Vladimir Putin places on the power vertical-the enduring central authority of the state, and his unique role at the apex of that structure-is a reminder that Remaining a part of Ukraine was not a ballot option.
For the next two weeks the remaining Ukrainian garrisons were forced to surrender while thousands of Russian reinforcements were ferried across the Kerch Straight or airlifted into the airports. 
420
421
419 Yevgeny Bobrov, "Проблемы Жителей Крыма (the Problems of the Crimean Residents)," Council under the President of the Russian Federation on the Development of Civil Society and Human Rights, April 22, 2014. See also: Paul R. Gregory, "Putin's 'Human Rights Council' Accidentally Posts Real Crimean Election Results," Forbes.Com, May 5, 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/paulroderickgregory/2014/05/05/putins-human-rights-council-accidentallyposts-real-crimean-election-results-only-15-voted-for-annexation/. The relevant text follows (translated with MS Bing): "According to almost all of the surveyed experts and citizens:-the overwhelming majority of the people voted in a referendum for Sevastopol joining Russia (50-80 percent) voter turnout, according to various sources for joining Russia voted 50-60 percent of voters with a total turnout of 30-50 percent; residents of Crimea voted not so much for joining Russia, but for the termination, in their words, "corruption and lawlessness vorovskogo [criminal syndicate] dominance [of] Donetsk henchmen. Residents of Sevastopol voted for accession to Russia. Fear [of] the illegal armed groups in Sevastopol was greater than in other parts of the Crimea." So the irony is that even of the 15-30 percent of Crimeans who actually voted for unifying with Russia (not counting Sevastopol which did appear to get a majority), a major motivating factor was disgust with the (pro-Russian, Donetsk origin) Yanukovych regime. Sevastopol did vote to unify with Russia, but was heavily influenced to do so by Russian propaganda. In this same document, the Russian 'Human Rights Group' discusses getting rid of banned (in Russia) subversive Islamic texts that were not outlawed under Ukraine. 420  That narrow frame of reference fixates on the military forms of war as they were used to consolidate control over a strategic objective, but frequently misses the larger campaign of political warfare that Russia had carried out to subvert Ukraine's sovereignty for years.
Even as the Russians were finishing the capture of the last Ukrainian garrisons on Crimea, they seemed to answer the question about their next objective when small groups of pro-Russian "separatists" began demonstrating near and threatening to seize government buildings in cities across Ukraine's south and east, beginning a series of actions that would result in bitter conventional warfare and cost thousands of lives. Given the same aggressor and victim it is valuable to examine the differences in conditions that resulted in completely opposite outcomes between the mostly bloodless annexation of Crimea and the very bloody war in eastern Ukraine.
Heady from their "bloodless" success in annexing Crimea, the Russians rushed to duplicate this process in eastern Ukraine and, thus far, have failed. The Russian effort in the Donetsk Basin (Donbas) is an example of an attempt to force a dynamic change in the status quo when the necessary conditions for successful hybrid warfare were no longer present. While the central Ukrainian government was too disorganized to orchestrate an effective resistance against the occupation of Crimea, by the time the first Russian proxies began seizing government buildings and declaring independence in Eastern Ukraine, the Ukrainian government and the international community were paying close attention. The annexation of Crimea had a psychological effect on the Putin regime; its masterful execution and the lack of consequences silenced any remaining skeptics and engendered a sense of invincibility. 
428
461
462
463
NATO estimated that Russia had 40,000 troops on the Ukrainian border in early April 2014 when pro-Russian "separatists" began seizing government buildings in Ukraine's southern and eastern oblasts. 
464
After examining Russia's war with Georgia and the actions against Ukraine in Crimea and Donbas it is apparent that the focus on the military aspect of the operations has marginalized the importance of the long term deliberate political warfare that Russia waged against both countries. For these actions to be considered warfare, it must be concluded that Russia held strategic goals of forcing both countries to accept Russia's will. Russia's methodology for subverting Georgian and Ukrainian sovereignty included political coercion, economic warfare, information warfare, and select applications of violence all aimed at undermining governance, fracturing the territorial integrity of both states, and paving the way for the introduction of Russian armed forces to dynamically change the status quo in Russia's favor. Both Georgia and Ukraine were subject to different hybrid combinations of political and military warfare for years prior to the commonly accepted period of "war."
Putin's strategic themes of strengthening his domestic power, dominating the near abroad, and promoting Russian strength while frustrating the West, were all supported to some degree during the hybrid campaigns in Georgia and Ukraine. Following the color revolutions in the early 2000s, Russia risked losing both Georgia and Ukraine to blossoming democratic movements and deepening ties with the EU and NATO. Not only did these movements threaten Russia's sense of entitled interest in the affairs of the former Soviet states, but they represented the spread of Western ideology closer to Moscow, which the increasingly revanchist Russians interpret as a deliberate, Western plot to undermine Russia's governing system. To derail Georgian and Ukrainian efforts to pull away from Russia's orbit, the Russians made multiple efforts to take control of the political systems in both countries through manufactured crisis, economic coercion, selective violence and political manipulation, before the ultimate use of overt force to consolidate Moscow's objectives.
In Georgia, Russia promoted the separatists in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, providing both groups with heavy weapons and Russian officers to serve in leadership roles, while systematically removing any local leaders who were inclined to mend the relationship with Tbilisi. Moscow extended Russian citizenship to Abkhaz and Ossetian
Georgians through the issuance of Russian passports, effectively creating a population of 'Russians' abroad to whom Moscow would be inclined to extend protection in the event they were to be threatened. Russia then used the ensuing acts of violence, both the interethnic and direct military confrontations, enabled by the equipment Russia provided and directed by Russian officers, to manufacture a 'threat' and justify the presence of large garrisons of Russian "peacekeepers" in Georgian territory. Moscow made its strategic objectives clear in 2004 when they offered to help support the Georgian President put down a pro-democracy uprising in exchange for Moscow's future ability to appoint the Georgian Ministers of Defense, Interior, and Security, which would have effectively relinquished Georgia's most powerful political offices to a foreign state.
When the Georgian president refused Moscow's offer, Russia doubled its efforts to undermine Georgia's control over its territory.
In Ukraine, Russia already maintained a large military presence at the Black Sea Fleet's base in Sevastopol, Crimea. Years before the onset of wider military operations, Russia again offered passports to ethnic Russian citizens of Ukraine. Instead of initially trying to create an ethnic conflict however, Russia used the large population of Russians in Ukraine to attempt to take control of the Ukrainian government through political proxies. In 2004, Russian political operatives funneled over $300 million dollars to a pro-Russian presidential candidate and Russian security services helped orchestrate massive electoral fraud to manipulate the outcome of the election. When the vote was overturned and the new Ukrainian administration began building closer ties to the EU, Putin used demonstrates anything, it is that Russia is willing to pursue multiple hybrid campaigns against both near and far targets simultaneously. Game theoretic analysis of possible Russian strategies may indicate Russia's calculations regarding the conditions for hybrid warfare outside of the purely post-Soviet space. This approach may help illuminate Russia's strategic objectives, as well as identify specific vulnerabilities in the international system.