# ID: 16e38a229da040228edb3a468495a264
# Title: Toward a theory of hybrid warfare: the Russian conduct of war during peace
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
During the five-day war in Georgia and during the occupation of Crimea, Russia masked the outset of the military action behind other significant events.
Both actions began while world leaders were expressing goodwill at Olympic Games, and while other significant crises and political events indicated a minimal chance of a military reaction from the West.
Both actions had limited military objectives that were able to be quickly reached, which minimized the level of ongoing violence and reduced the impetus for Western intervention.
The war in Donbas lacked all of these things.
It was started while international attention was directly on Russian action in Ukraine.
It had unclear objectives, and became increasingly violent as "volunteers" and heavy equipment were introduced piecemeal.
Russia attempted to dominate the information domain during all three conflicts to characterize each as an internal ethnic struggle, and Russia's actions as necessary to prevent genocide, while simultaneously denying the level of Russia's involvement and providing disinformation that would further confuse a Western response.
In Georgia and Donbas, Russia used diplomatic processes to freeze the conflicts without definitive resolution so that Russia was justified in keeping intervention or "peacekeeping" forces in the region and so that the open nature of the conflict could be used to derail future efforts for either state to join the EU or NATO.
Crimea was annexed outright to eliminate the threat to the long-term basing of the Black Sea Fleet, and because the annexation provided a much needed boost to Putin's domestic popularity.