# ID: 16f21e2673654ff79fece40a8e80c961
# Title: The Matryoshka Doll: A Model for Russian Deception, Disinformation, and Chaos
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
iii  The US is not alone and it we rely heavily on our allies and partners who are closer to the threat to combine our efforts and maintain I am deeply indebted to my mentors Dr. Ben Jensen and Dr. Brandon Valeriano for their patience, guidance, and even more patience. I owe my new-found hunger for knowledge about international relations and especially Russia to Dr. Jensen. My understanding of cyber threats and actions in the information environment have been expanded significantly thanks to Dr.
Valeriano. I have only begun to scratch the surface in both of these realms and "finishing" this MMS is only the beginning. Thank you for the push to publish my ideas in the marketplace of ideas, "iron sharpens iron." My peers were instrumental in encouraging me and providing tough love in reviewing parts of this work, as Faulkner says, "In writing, you must kill all your darlings." Thanks to Ender's Galley and Conference Group Niner HARD! You all pushed me to cross the finish line and endured my proselytization of information operations. I owe you all a round of beer. Finally, to my family, thanks for your understanding a patience as I toiled through this. Especially to my wife, thank you for taking care of the house and the kids and kicking me in the hindquarters to keep working on this.
vi
Russia wants to be a strong global player but views their position in the world from a zero-sum standpoint and looks like they are trying to balance against the U.S. to regain a position of power. 
1
According  In the age of information, the proliferation of "new media," defined as social media plus mobile technology, has presented new and ingenious opportunities for states like Russia to gain power through a combination of "malicious" soft power and sharp power by layering deception, political warfare (PW), information warfare (IW), cyber, and military action, much like a matryoshka (nesting doll) to undermine faith in the democratic system and gain a competitive advantage against perceived adversaries. Russian actions in Ukraine provide an opportunity to evaluate the layers of the matryoshka and Russia's primary use of PW and IW to achieve success.
It is important to frame Russian actions within a theory of international relations, realism, to better understand their motivations and goals. Historically, humans create organizations and systems to exert or explain order from chaos. Organizations, like the nation-state, formed and systems of governance developed. But, how do these organizations interact within a system? The ancient Greek Thucydides attempted to explain human nature and the sources of motivation for nation-states through fear, honor, and interest. Machiavelli and Hobbes noted similar core motivations for humans and thus human organizations. 
8
Power politics, or realism, has had many theorists, but there are a few common threads that allow for a general definition. Jack Donnelly fuses the various viewpoints of realism into major points by saying:
Whatever their other disagreements, realists are unanimous in holding that human nature contains an ineradicable core of egoistic passions; that these passions define the central problem of politics; and that statesmanship is dominated by the need to control this side of human nature. Realists also stress the political necessities that flow from international anarchy. 9
Essentially human nature is inherently self-interested, and the status quo of the world is one of chaos. States act in competition with one another to gain or maintain power for survival. 
10
11
Traditionally, in both multipolar and bipolar systems, states have employed the strategy of hard-power, which is a direct strategy that includes the formation of alliances, military and arms buildup seeking to meet strength with strength. 
12
13
14
In 2004 Nye defined smart power as, "the ability to combine hard and soft power resource into effective strategies." 
15
16
Rising powers especially seek to utilize "malicious" soft power, which is aimed at achieving effects with the lowest possible risk. The key distinction with soft power is that the "malicious" employment involves the spread of information and disinformation to exert political influence. 17 Strategic political maneuvering to ensure relative advantage is key, and this is supplemented by the use of sharp power. 
18
and cannot be simply defined as soft power, nor hard power. Rather, Walker and Ludwig describe these authoritarian influence efforts as, "'[S]harp' in the sense that they pierce, penetrate, or perforate the information environments of the targeted countries." 
19
The Russian theory of victory is based on maintaining their sphere of influence and a buffer to NATO and the West through undermining democratic ideals and driving a wedge between the US and her allies and partners. 
20
21
They achieve this through combining "malicious" soft power and sharp power methods and means.
Political Warfare (PW) is not a new concept, and the British rightfully identify this fact in their manual developed during World War II (WWII), The Meaning, Techniques and Methods of Political Warfare. As wars became more encompassing and included the civilian populace support political warfare became more vital as an instrument to be employed as part of the greater strategy. In their manual, the British describe political warfare as encompassing of the elements of psychological warfare, ideological warfare, morale warfare, and propaganda. 
22
Russia has a history of defensive aggression fueled by a lingering perception that the West undervalues their position as a great power. 
34
Russian political and informational methods echo to the Soviets' active measures and reflexive control during the Cold War. Christopher Chivvis' article "Hybrid war: Russian contemporary political warfare," clarifies this sentiment, and provides context for the difference between 31 Ibid, 7. 32 Ibid, 7. 
33
34
hybrid war and political warfare. Hybrid warfare has a key ingredient of military aims, and the use of military force, but there is critical interplay with political warfare. The Russian model uses political warfare as a pretext to military action, as well as means to accomplish foreign policy objectives. 
35
General Gerasimov developed a doctrine for taking advantage of all elements of national power with a heavy focus on the informational. The so-called "Gerasimov Doctrine" is focused on civil populations, persistent, and "economizes the use of kinetic force." 
36
37
"mobile, mixed-type groups of forces, acting in a single intelligence-information space…has been strengthened…Tactical and operational pauses that the enemy could exploit are disappearing. New Information technologies have enabled significant reductions in the spatial, temporal, and informational gaps between forces and control organs." 
38
39
1
40
2
41
42
Even with the recent modernization of the Russian armed forces, they are bound by the nationally weak economy and must be used sparingly. Putin and the Kremlin know they cannot instigate actions in Eastern Europe that would commit the US, NATO, and partner nations and risk starting a global war. So, the IW/PW is combined to widen gaps/seams and the military forces only take action when they can fully exploit and consolidate advantageous gains.
It is illuminating that Gerasimov concludes by saying, "We must not copy foreign experience and chase after leading countries, but we must outstrip them and occupy leading positions ourselves." 
43
The matryoshka doll, or matron doll, usually has five layers working outward from one solid wooden doll at the center. Russia merges PW and IW with covert and overt military actions
to "[P]unch above its weight, largely by exploiting weaknesses…" 
47
3
Further they manipulate information resulting in chaos and confusion and ultimately weakening the response of entities like NATO.  The first two layers in Russian sharp power seek to drive wedges in existing gaps. To this end the first layer of political warfare seeks to use reflexive control and active measures to influence the target audiences and exploit existing divisions. When compared to Gerasimov's "primary phases (stages) of conflict development" the non-military measures include formation of the political opposition and disruption of diplomatic relations. 
48
The second layer reinforces these with information warfare (IW). Russia employs all tools at their disposal to include traditional media, cyber-attacks, and third-party actions. 
48
Finally, once the physical goals are met in support of the informational and political strategies Russia can "intervene" in the political legalist sense. Often this is conducted through a referendum citing "commitment to defend…territorial integrity in accordance with the many international agreements…"
51
Analogies, however problematic or insufficient, are a common tool for communicating an unusual or nebulous concept. For instance, the first automobiles were aptly names "horseless carriages," and more recently the internet earned the moniker of the "information superhighway." Regardless of the efficacy, humans use analogies to create mental models of concepts that may be otherwise very difficult to describe. There is a concerted effort to describe and define the combination of operations, cyber means, and "new" media. Recent operations by the Kremlin have perplexed the Western world in general, and the United States specifically, leading to imprecise analogies and terms being developed to describe their seemingly novel blending of ways and means.
The term "hybrid warfare" displays a misguided attempt to apply analogy to something perceived as new, but in reality, is the Russian combination of military with their longstanding doctrine in information warfare. 
52
52
53
The operations in Ukraine are informative to describe Russia's integration and combination of methods and means to achieve their goals. Ukraine reflects the logic that Russia can win with minimal force applied by offsetting with 4:1 non-military measures:military. The matryoshka model provides a visualization of the application of "Gerasimov Doctrine" and old Soviet reflexive control as means to apply "malicious" soft power and sharp power.
The Ukraine case study begins by observing Russia's goals. Next, the audiences, Russian populace, Ukraine government, and international community are analyzed. Following the discussion of goals and audiences the methods are examined utilizing the matryoshka model.
Finally, the results are analyzed to determine the efficacy of the model and Russian employment.
The goals of the Kremlin, and more specifically Vladimir Putin, are multi-leveled, and interwoven with Russia's broader history as a nation seeking regional and international power. 
54
Professor of Political Science at the University of California, Los Angeles, sketches these through the lenses of Putin as the "defender," the "imperialist," and the "improviser." 55 These roles are not mutually exclusive and belay nuanced international and domestic motivations.
The first goal, based around Putin as the defender, was to prevent Ukraine from joining the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and secondarily to 
54
maintain the key port of Sevastopol for the Black Sea Fleet. Second, as the "imperialist," Putin sought to repair the damaged stature of the Soviet Union by re-acquiring former territories.
Finally, events outside the Kremlin's control led to a more impulsive reaction to following the collapse of former President Yanukovych's government and the establishment of the interim pro-Western government. 56 However, Treisman notes the lack of efficacy for leaning too heavily on the imperialist or revisionist model for motivations in Ukraine saying, "[I]t suggests that Putin has become willing in recent years to take major strategic risks to counter seemingly limited and manageable threats to Russian interests." 
57
58
59
The audience and means of messaging are where the stacking doll, matryoshka, method can truly take form. By using a layered approach of political warfare (PW), Information Warfare (IW), and military special operations the Kremlin conducted signaling for the global, regional, and internal audiences. Each level of the matryoshka, nesting doll, was designed to present a 
56
57
58
multilayered and customized message, each fitting into the larger theme, and preventing the audience from seeing clearly what was at the center. The strategic cyber intelligence analyst Emilio Iasiello noted the use of reflexive control to "influence internal, regional, and global audiences," where the message is specifically primed for a target audience based on a thorough assessment of that target. 60 Further, he says, "[T]he information space lends information resources, including 'weapons' and other informational means, to affect both internal and external audiences through tailored messaging, disinformation, and propaganda campaigns." 61
Regionally, the target audience included, besides Ukraine, other former Soviet-bloc countries. In the other former Soviet-bloc countries, the messaging was less direct, albeit with significant importance. Through broad proliferation across cyber means the message is clear, and that is the mother bear will protect her "cubs." 62 Russia also used the "stories" covered by their media outlets to message the Russian populace and build nationalist support for the broader actions in Ukraine. Control of the population is a key factor to any authoritarian regime maintaining power and influence. Russian television and radio promulgated false narratives demonizing the EU and Ukrainian government.
First, the PW Russia conducted could be seen as the narrative aimed at the broader global audience. The messaging begins with cyber coercion, like Operation Armageddon in 2013, to set the conditions for "future crisis bargaining," and begin "isolating Kiev, and demonstrating the 
60
62 Dmitri Trenin, "The Revival of the Russian Military," Foreign Affairs (May, 2016): 26; Giles, "Russia's 'New' Tools," 4.
futility of the Ukrainian state." 
63
64
65
66
In the second layer of matryoshka, the IW takes a larger role in targeting the regional audience, to include the specific country at risk. It is important to understand the two aspects of Russia's view of IW. There is the information-technical aspect, consisting of the "hardware and software that convert digital input into useful data" and the information-physiological, that includes "the effect that this data has on the subconscious and behavior of the population." The first two layers of the nesting doll model prepare the global, regional, and internal audiences through traditional and "new" media methods, combined with cyber espionage, to allow Russia to act militarily utilizing the third and fourth layers respectively. To this end Russia supported separatists and organized their special operations units into Rapid Reaction Forces. 
One major lesson that can be derived from the Crimea campaign is that Russia learned and adapted after their foray into Georgia in 2008. The Kremlin's actions in Georgia show a major landmark as "cyberattacks occurred concurrently with Russian military operations," and these actions were further refined and executed in Ukraine. 
71
There is a surplus of think tank reports, academic journal articles, and opinion pieces describing what to do about Russian "hybrid" warfare, or "sharp" power. It is best to bin these recommendations into categories of DIME. First, diplomatic measures must be taken to increase analysis and information sharing across NATO and the EU. One way to accomplish this is through the formation of the Global Engagement Center and increased intelligence and law enforcement collaboration internationally 74 which will send the message that "NATO, an alliance 
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
The international stage is complex and fluid, continuously changing, but human nature and the selfish intentions to achieve power have not changed in millennia. States still attempt to gain leverage over one another and maintain their sovereignty by gaining relative power through balancing. Multiple forms of balancing can exist together, but in the system softbalancing is the status quo. Russia has latched on to a new paradigm of malicious soft-balancing by utilizing political warfare and savvy exploitation of "new media." The liberal world order could begin to crumble if the bear is allowed to continue to tell his story in this corrosive way.
To avoid this, the U.S. should not try to meet the threat of Russian political warfare head-on.
Instead, a long-term view should be taken to find gaps and seams to degrade Russian deception while upholding the ideals of liberal democracy.
occupying Ukraine as the latest step to keep prior Soviet states firmly in Russia's orbit effectively turning Eastern Europe into a "[Z]one of sharp geopolitical conflict and made stable and effective democratic governance impossible outside the Baltic states and Poland." 3 Further, Russia "sees themselves as victims of a sustained unconventional, information warfare campaign by the United States," as Dr. Brandon Valeriano, Benjamin Jensen and Ryan Maness note this "mirror imaging heightens this preference for manipulation." 4 Soviet active measures (aktivnyye meropriyatiya), reflexive control, and deception (maskirovka) are antecedent to the post-Cold War Russian disinformation (dezinformatsya) actions employed today.
occupying Ukraine as the latest step to keep prior Soviet states firmly in Russia's orbit effectively turning Eastern Europe into a "[Z]one of sharp geopolitical conflict and made stable and effective democratic governance impossible outside the Baltic states and Poland." 3 Further, Russia "sees themselves as victims of a sustained unconventional, information warfare campaign by the United States," as Dr. Brandon Valeriano, Benjamin Jensen and Ryan Maness note this "mirror imaging heightens this preference for manipulation." 4 Soviet active measures (aktivnyye meropriyatiya), reflexive control, and deception (maskirovka) are antecedent to the post-Cold War Russian disinformation (dezinformatsya) actions employed today.
18  
18  
the forceful political expression of what a nation is about in a particular conflict."
the forceful political expression of what a nation is about in a particular conflict."
43 Ibid, 29. 44 Janis Berzins, Russia's New Generation Warfare in Ukraine: Implications for Latvian Defense Policy, Policy Paper no. 2, Center for Security and Strategic Research National Defence Academy of Latvia (Riga, Latvia: Center for Security and Strategic Research, 2014): 5.
69 Marina Psenti and Peter Pomeranstsev, "How to Stop Disinformation: Lessons from Ukraine for the Wider World," Transitions Forum, Legatum Institute (London: Legatum Institute, 2015): 5. 70 Charles K. Bartles and Roger N. McDermott, "Russia's Military Operation in Crimea: Road-Testing Rapid Reaction Capabilities," Problems of Post-Communism 61, no. 6 (November/December 2014): 59. 71 Bartles McDermott, 51.
69 Marina Psenti and Peter Pomeranstsev, "How to Stop Disinformation: Lessons from Ukraine for the Wider World," Transitions Forum, Legatum Institute (London: Legatum Institute, 2015): 5. 70 Charles K. Bartles and Roger N. McDermott, "Russia's Military Operation in Crimea: Road-Testing Rapid Reaction Capabilities," Problems of Post-Communism 61, no. 6 (November/December 2014): 59. 71 Bartles McDermott, 51.
76  
76  
This article was later translated by Rober Coalson, editor, Central News, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty in 2014, and published in Military Review in 2016.
Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science is in the Foresight," Military Review 96, no. 1 (Jan, 2016): 27.
Pape, "Soft Balancing," 9; Paul, "Soft Balancing," 58.   
Ernest J. Wilson, "Hard Power, Soft Power, Smart Power," The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 616 (March 2008): 114, http://www.jstor.org/stable/25097997.
Nye, "Public Diplomacy," 96.   
Nye, The Future of Power. 23. For more on smart power see Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics, (New York: Public Affairs, 2004), 32, 147; and Suzanne Nossel, "Smart Power," Foreign Affairs 83, no. 2 (March-April 2004): 131-142.
Nye, "Public Diplomacy," 107.   
Modern Warfare Institute, Analyzing the Russian Way ofWar,
63.
The White House, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America(Washington, DC, 2017), 35. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf   
Berzins, Russia's New Generation Warfare, 3.   
Approved:-~~~~-----------Date: -----'--::........L.. --t,/-----------=--- O r al Defense Committee Member: ~~ ~" " ~ /,,(le I•,..,' PhD Approved:-----~---------