# ID: 180b9ffb3e734341b1338f31c61624bb
# Title: I^ ATION^ SECURIT CHALLEhrCES OR THE 21st CENTURY
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
• Potentially could be packaged as a "reduction in threat" in negotiations with the North in support of reconciliation or disarmament. •
Allows more tailored training and packaging for the current regional forces in Japan that today respond to many nations within the PACOM area of responsibility. •
Sets the conditions for enduring U.S. military regional capability within Korea post-reconciliation or reunification. •
Supports the creation of a Partnership for Peace type organization in Northeast Asia to improve regional military to military engagement, potentially involving China, Russia and perhaps even North Korea. •
Adds significant regional capability with no increase in force structure. •
Sets the groundwork for a combined regional peacekeeping/ humanitarian force that could include Korean and/or Japanese elements, i.e., U.S. forces with strategic lift provided by Korea or Japan that would appeal to both Nation's desires for greater regional security roles. •
Would continue to give South Koreans more responsibility for defense of their nation, which matches their own desires of Chu'che (self-reliance). •
Finally, most significantly, all Northeast Asian states and other Asian nations have their military power built around land power (army forces).
A regionally focused army ground force with staying power is greatly needed.^" Following a reconciliation or reunification of the two Koreas, the United States will undoubtedly need to make additional major changes to its regional defense structure.
As part of reuiufication one can expect a rise in nationalism, and demands for an American withdrawal from Korea.
Assuming confidence-building measures and conditions for reunification results in reduction of the North Korean threat, especially artillery and weapons of mass destruction, a fires-based combat force could be withdrawn from theater.
The removal of U.S. Forces Korea may be part of reunification conditions.
However, the Joint Task Force with a regional focus, and by then credibility established through theater security engagement actions, should not become part of such a withdrawal.