# ID: 18fbf5d1e1c040199652a79cd03745ca
# Title: Blunt Challenges: The Blunt Layer in Future Large-Scale Combat Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Chinese and Russian investments in anti-access / area denial and other capabilities raise the possibility they may rapidly invade a US ally or partner. The 2018 National Defense Strategy introduced a new warfighting approach that includes a blunt layer of forces resisting the invasion from the start, until sufficient strength surges to transition to the offense. As the United States prepares for the future fight, it must identify the challenges associated with the blunt layer as a necessary first step to deter or defeat, an adversary fait accompli.
Conducting the blunt layer in large-scale combat operations would prove very challenging. Review of the operational requirements to deny, or degrade and delay enemy gains, provides clarity on the specific demands of blunting aggression. The opening days of the Korean War offer a useful, but imperfect, case study to illuminate these challenges in action. Reflection on subsequent changes in the US Army and relevant technological advances, as well as possible future scenarios, tests the analogy. From this reflection, blunt layer challenges are framed into eight categories: political, competitive, positional, manning, training, equipping, organization, and leadership. In most categories, conducting the blunt layer to oppose a future Chinese invasion of Taiwan or Russian invasion of Estonia would prove even more challenging than blunting the North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950.
We are fighting a battle against time. There will be no more retreating, withdrawal, or readjustment of the lines... There is no line behind us to which we can retreat. Every unit must counterattack to keep the enemy in a state of confusion and off balance. There will be no Dunkirk, there will be no Bataan. A retreat to Pusan would be one of the greatest butcheries in history. We must fight to the end.
-General Walker, Eighth Army Commander, from Appleman, South to the Naktong On June 25, 1950, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), intent on rapidly reunifying the peninsula under communist rule, launched an attack on the Republic of Korea (ROK).0 F 
1
3
The DPRK, a small country with half the population of its southern neighbor and an inconsequential air force and navy, nearly expelled American forces from the peninsula and presented the world with the fait accompli of a Korea united under communism.4 F 
5
1
2 Roy E. Appleman, CMH Pub 20-2-1, South to the Naktong, North to the Yalu, June-November 1950 (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1992), 19-20, 34. 
3
Army, 1997), 14-15, 20. 4
6
7
8
The 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) introduced the Global Operating Model to inform a new warfighting approach to counter the fait accompli theory of victory. The model includes four layers: contact, for gray zone competition below the level of armed conflict; homeland to protect US sovereign territory; and blunt to deny, degrade, or delay the adversary until the deployment of a surge of war winning forces.8 F
9
Though the least studied, the blunt layer is arguably the most crucial and challenging layer of the model. US Army doctrine emphasizes that large-scale combat operations (LSCO) are "intense, lethal, and brutal," and will, "present the greatest challenge for Army forces."9 F 10 In a fait accompli by China or Russia, blunt layer forces will include the first US units to experience LSCO in the 21st century. The United States has a poor track record in first battles, especially defensive ones.1 0F 
11
As the US military orients for great power conflict, it must not succumb to over confidence, and neglect preparing for the essential blunt layer. A credible capability and capacity to blunt Chinese and Russian fait accompli theories of victory may be the most effective means of deterring the attempt.1 1F 
12
1
13
14
Finally, leadership challenges include those related to the preparation, capability, and resilience of decision-makers faced with the trying conditions of LSCO in the blunt layer.   
Through the lenses of history and doctrine, this monograph relies on archival material, historiography, and potential adversary scenarios to identify challenges US forces will face when blunting an adversary's aggression in future LSCO as envisioned in the NDS. Strategic guidance and doctrine provide the basis to better define the purpose and requirements for forces in the blunt layer. Subsequently, a case study examining the opening months of the Korean War will provide an example of the challenges associated with the blunt layer and the practical impact of those challenges on the forces operating there. With this foundation established, a survey of current US strength and posture, as well as technology changes since 1950, illuminates how blunt layer challenges have evolved. An examination of Chinese and Russian fait accompli scenarios facing the US reveals the implications of geography; alliances; and threat capability, capacity, and doctrine for these potential threats going forward. Thus, finally, collective analysis of this information derives a list of blunt layer challenges by category and a qualitative assessment of the difficulty of each challenge in the future scenarios relative to the historical case study.
This monograph seeks to broadly describe the challenges of conducting the blunt layer in accordance with the NDS in future peer-conflict. It draws on lessons from the opening months of the Korean War that, by comparison, may remain relevant to future conflict. It then pursues further understanding by contrasting the case study with subsequent changes and likely future conflict scenarios. It is not intended to be a detailed study of the challenges of the Korean War in general and examines only the period up to September 15, 1950. Detailed analysis of specific events is less important to the research question than the extraction of broad types of challenges related to the concept of blunting an adversary fait accompli. The focus area for the case study is within the contested land domain. Notable exceptions include the role of political decisions in shaping the conduct of the war and that of air and naval power in establishing and maintaining supremacy within their domains.
The 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) shifts the focus of the Joint Force from terrorism to the threat posed by great power competition, particularly with China and Russia. US security and prosperity is reliant on maintaining the current rules-based international order and the favorable balances of power which support it. China and Russia both seek to subvert this order by undermining the US alliance and partnership network. Each seeks regional hegemony.
China aspires to displace the United States as the global superpower in the future, and has long sought reunification with Taiwan, never having renounced the use of force to do so.1 5F
16
17
The overwhelming success of the US-led coalition in the 1991 Gulf War provided lessons for China and Russia. Following a slow build-up of massive military might, the coalition rapidly dismantled Saddam Hussein's air defenses, liberated Kuwait, and destroyed the Iraqi armed forces. The US military appeared to hold an unchallengeable, all-domain, military superiority. For decades, they could deploy forces globally and operate uncontested. Chinese and Russian planners took this as a compelling illustration of how not to fight the United States and set about developing alternative strategies.1 7F 
18
The NDS introduced the global operating model to inform a new warfighting approach to defeat the fait accompli theory of victory. The 2017 National Security Strategy requires the military to convince adversaries that such attacks can be defeated, not just punished after the fact.1 9F 20 Rather than deterring through the threat of punishment, potentially requiring nuclear escalation, deterrence by denial is achieved by undermining the adversary's confidence in his ability to achieve his objective. This can be accomplished by demonstrating the capability and will to block or reverse the action to be deterred, or by raising the perceived cost of success higher than the adversary is willing to pay.2 0F 
21
22
23
24
To conduct a successful fait accompli, the adversary must seize territory rapidly and then consolidate gains by extending an A2/AD cover and seeking a political resolution that leaves them in control of the new territory. Forces in the blunt layer must act quickly to frustrate these objectives. Preferably, blunt layer forces deny the initial seizure. Failing that, they work to degrade the adversary and delay him from locking in gains until decisive surge layer forces can be readied, deployed, and brought to bear.2 4F 
25
Deny, along with delay and degrade, it is a key term proposed in the joint doctrinal note on the competition continuum, where to deny is to "frustrate the strategic objectives of the adversary."2 5F 
26
27
28
31
Who, When, and How Long? Blunt Layer Composition and Duration 29 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984)
33
If deterrence fails, blunt layer activity begins with the first resistance by the targeted partner. It continues until sufficient surge layer forces are available to transition to the offense.
How long this requires depends on the force needed to counter the adversary, the size and nature of the blunt forces, and delays in mobilization and deployment. A 2019 RAND study based on a large-scale deployment derived from an approved concept plan, estimated an additional 10,000 soldiers could be surged in three weeks, rising to 30,000 by week six and, 50,000 by week eight.
In the RAND model, which assumes no adversary interference with mobilization or deployment, it requires eighteen weeks for the surge to reach 100,000 soldiers (see figure 
1
33 Matthew Cox, "Emergency Paratrooper Deployment is First for New Army Response Force," military news at Military.com, January 2, 2020, accessed 12 October 2020, https://www.military.com/daily-news/2020/01/02/emergency-army-deployment-first-new-paratrooperresponse-force.html; "NATO Response Force," North Atlantic Treaty Organization, last modified March 17, 2020, accessed 24 November 2020, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/topics_49755.htm?selectedLocale=en.  
The opening days of the Korean War provide a useful case study of the challenges of conducting the blunt layer in LSCO. Similar to the adversary theory of victory the global operating model is intended to counter, North Korea sought the fait accompli seizure of South Korea before the United States could intervene.3 5F 36 To foil this strategy, the US forces that could be most quickly shifted to the peninsula combined with the South Korean Army to delay, degrade, and ultimately, deny DPRK success while a surge of offensive capability was assembled.
Other examples of LSCO involving the United States are less effective as analogies. The Gulf War and Iraq War were the anti-thesis of the conditions proposed in the blunt layer. In each case, the United States was able to slowly build offensive force and choose when to begin ground combat.3 6F 37 America entered the Vietnam War incrementally, never facing the rushed conditions of the blunt layer.3 7F 
38
First Days of the Korean War, June 25 -September 15, 1950
The DPRK's KPA launched a four-pronged attack into the ROK, intent on reunifying Korea under communist rule on June 25, 1950 (see figure 
2
36
37 Allan R. Millett and Peter Maslowski, For the Common Defense: a Military History of the United States of America (New York, NY: Free Press, 2012), 593-601, 655-656. 
38
39
40
41 Hastings,
73.
3
42
War is political in nature, so it is no surprise that there are political challenges to the conduct of the blunt layer.4 2F 43 Centered on the defense of a partner, operations in the blunt layer are inherently multi-national. Pre-conflict, security cooperation investments shape the capability and capacity of the targeted nation as well as US access and local posture.4 3F 
44
45
46
43
48
49
52
54
47
48
49
50 Dean Acheson, The Korean War (New York, NY: Norton, 1971), 18-19. 
51
52
53
54
Western Europe.5 4F 55 To avoid escalation with China, Truman declined Taiwan's offer of 33,000 soldiers, instructed the Nationalists not to attack the mainland, and ordered the navy to the island to deter invasion by the PRC. Additionally, the Soviet Union had detonated its first nuclear weapon only the year before, and this capability further raised the stakes of escalation on the peninsula.5 5F 56
An attempted fait accompli is a war of choice by the aggressor. Initial force ratios in the blunt layer will favor the attacker. The United States has long applied "offset strategies" to counter numerical strength with technological superiority.5 6F 
57
58
Schnabel,
41. 57
58 US Department of Defense, Summary of the NDS, cover pages, 1, 3.
59 US Department of the Army, FM 3-0, 1-5 to 1-6. 
60 Webb,
[11]
[12]
[13]
Even with this superior competitive edge in multi-domain superiority, 24ID paid a heavy price to delay the KPA while additional divisions arrived on the peninsula.6 4F 65 Committed piecemeal on the ROKA left flank, the tragic experience of Task Force Smith was repeated timeand-again on the withdrawal southward. In the failed defense of Taejon, the division lost most of their equipment, and suffered the capture of their commander.6 5F 66 Two newly arrived US divisions did not perform much better than 24ID and continued to withdraw through the rest of July.6 6F 67
Absent air and naval superiority, the blunt layer would certainly have failed in Korea.
Countering a fait accompli requires blunt layer forces to resist the adversary from the start.6 7F 68 Flowing units, especially with heavy equipment, is time consuming. General MacArthur 61 Webb, 3. 
62
63
64 Webb,
12.
66
67
68
The United States was well positioned to conduct the blunt layer in Korea.
Approximately 500 American advisors were serving alongside the South Korean Army at the time of the invasion.6 9F 70 108,500 of the US Army's 591,000 soldiers were stationed in the Far East, including four divisions in Japan.7 0F 
71
81
75
76
77
78
82
83
84
85
It is in the nature of the fait accompli that blunt layer operations take place with little or no time for preparation. Initial forces must fight with the equipment and supplies they have on hand, a particular challenge if they are mismatched to the enemy's capabilities. Industrial mobilization is too slow to supply the blunt layer, which must rely on existing stocks. Sustainment operations to ensure the flow of the right materiel to the soldiers who need it most, depends on the organization of the system, available service personnel, and the local infrastructure.
82 US Army ADP 7-0, 4-2. 
83
84
85
86
87
American soldiers in Korea at the start of the war lacked the types and quantity of equipment needed to stop the North Korean advance. This point is illustrated by the case of Task Force Smith, the first US unit to face the KPA. The combined armor and infantry attack of the KPA routed the ROK and US forces on the peninsula because they lacked any effective antiarmor capability. Neither had tanks or anti-tank mines, and US rocket launchers and recoilless rifles were unable to penetrate North Korean armor.8 7F 88 Due to equipment shortages, Eighth Army infantry regiments had no tank companies and division tank battalions included only one light tank company. Artillery battalions were reduced to only two of three authorized batteries.8 8F 
89
In 1945, large stocks of supplies and equipment were left scattered across the far east. MacArthur began Operation Roll-up in 1947 to recover and rehabilitate useful war surplus that later proved critical to supplying UNC forces in Korea.9 1F 
92
93
94
88
89
90
91 James A. Huston, "Korea and Logistics," in The Long Haul: Historical Case Studies of Sustainment in Large-Scale Combat Operations, ed. Keith R. Beurskens (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Army University Press, 2018), 79. 
92
93
94 Schnabel,
[45]
[46]
Units must be properly organized in order to survive in the blunt layer. Peacetime unit design and task organization are often better suited to preserve structure in a resource constrained environment than to prepare for the challenges of the blunt layer.9 5F 96 Additionally, piecemeal deployment, ad hoc task organization, dispersion, and combat overmatch, including the possible need to withdraw under fire, undermine cohesion.9 6F 97 Eighth Army was structured for occupation duty, not for the fight they would face in Korea. Due to personnel shortages, corps headquarters had been eliminated and infantry regiments reduced from three to two battalions.9 7F 98 Lacking a subordinate corps, the Eighth Army staff had to assume even greater responsibilities as the war in Korea expanded. The reduction to two battalions per regiment tactically impeded commanders.9 8F 
99
95 Schnabel,
116. 96
97
98 Schnabel,
[53]
[54]
Millett,
War for Korea,
14.
One example that demonstrates the cumulative effects of training, equipping, and organization, is that of tactical logistics in the early weeks of the war. There were insufficient trained service troops to support combat units in Korea. During the post-war draw down, combat soldiers (teeth) were preserved over support troops (tail). The wartime tooth-to-tail ratio of 1:3 had been reversed to 3:1, providing a false economy that critically hampered the ability to meet supply and maintenance needs.9 9F 100 MacArthur requested 200 company-sized service units to meet demand, but the Army provided only 80.1 00F 101 These limited and under-trained service troops organized and reorganized in non-doctrinal, ad hoc units, from crisis-to-crisis in the opening days of the war.1 01F 102
During the first weeks of the war, American units were often employed piece-meal, in isolation from one another, to slow the North Korean advance.1 02F 
103
101
102
103
104 CMH Pub 21-1, 19. 
105
Confidence and courage are foundation stones of leader presence. Both will be tested in the blunt layer in ways that cannot be truly assessed in peace. Confidence, not tempered with the humility of experience, can result in disaster. If senior leaders, focus on the offensive surge that they want, while underestimating the challenge of the defensive blunt they must fight, soldiers will pay in blood. In the intensely trying conditions of first combat, junior leaders must not only stand and fight, but accept responsibility for leading soldiers in harm's way, knowing they may not survive.1 05F 106
Senior leaders underestimated the challenge of the blunt layer. On arriving in Korea, Task Force Smith's commander was assured that, "all we need is some men up there who won't run when they see tanks." With half of TF Smith's men soon unaccounted for and the KPA making steady progress southward, it was clear North Korea would not be stopped easily.1 06F 107 Shaped by his World War II experiences, MacArthur's strategy from the start was to clear the North Koreans from the south with an amphibious strike toward Seoul.1 07F 108 His initial estimates were that he could defeat the KPA with two divisions -one in the south to hold Pusan and one for the landings planned in late July. North Korean success soon caused him to push back his timeline and revise his estimate of forces needed to four and half infantry divisions, an airborne RCT, and an armored group. 24ID commander, General Dean, wrote in early July that he was convinced the North Korean army had been underestimated.1 08F 109 This proved a prescient thought, as Dean was captured soon after the fall of Taejon.1 09F 110 106 US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-22, Army Leadership and the Profession (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2019), 3-2, 8-1 to 8-2. 
107
108
109 Schnabel,
[83]
[84]
Unfortunately, this included few of the officers in command of combat units. Headquarters staffs, constantly short of experienced officers, levied many of the most experienced. New personnel policies drove regular rotation of officers through command to ensure equity in promotion. Many leaders were untested, inexperienced, and new to their commands just as they entered combat.1 11F 112
The early days of fighting are replete with cases of units who fled, sometimes with their "leaders," but without their weapons, and counter pointed with cases where calm and experienced leadership averted panic.1 12F 113 111 Appleman, 61. 
112
113
Although brigade combat teams have been reorganized to add a third maneuver battalion, audits show chronic shortages in spare parts and other equipment key to readiness.1 26F 127 At echelons above brigade, about three quarters of all sustainment units are in the reserve components and will not be available in the early days of a no-notice contingency.1 27 F 128 Encouragingly, the Army modernization strategy prioritizes development of long-range precision fires, armor, network resilience, and more lethal infantry arms, all capabilities important in the blunt layer.1 28F 129 A2/AD Versus Force Projection Anti-access and area denial are key to any adversary fait accompli strategy. Anti-access is intended to prevent or attrit the deployment of friendly forces, while area denial impedes operations where the enemy was unable to stop entry. Effective A2/AD involves multiple, layered 
131
135
138
In a mutually degraded space and cyber environment, the geographic home team has a marked advantage. Adversaries can rely to a greater extent on land-based communications and unmanned aerial vehicles to fill capability gaps.1 40F 141 They enjoy interior lines for logistics and 
142
The United States, China, and Russia are all developing hypersonic weapons, but for different ends. Maneuverable hypersonics, traveling Mach 5 or greater, compress the timeline for response and, because of their non-ballistic trajectory, are better able to defeat air and missile defenses.1 43F 144 The United States sees these weapons as part of global strike, providing stand-off capabilities that reduce the need to expose vulnerable platforms.1 44F 145 China and Russia view hypersonic weapons as a strategic deterrent to American missile defense systems, and as a supplement to A2/AD.1 45F 146 Due to the accuracy, speed, and survivability or hypersonic weapons, US forces would have to be hardened or dispersed, further complicating force projection. The threat of surprise and inability to distinguish between conventional and nuclear strikes increases the risk of escalation and encourages preemption.1 46F 
147
149
The US AI strategy emphasizes commitment to ethics and humanitarian considerations.1 51F 152 America remains reluctant to allow machines to make the decision to kill. For example, the Predator drone is only semi-autonomous, with a human in the control loop.1 52F 153 On a battlefield where remote operation is impossible, China and Russia may be more willing to unleash "killer robots." Never-the-less, even non-lethal AI systems would benefit the United States in the blunt layer. For example, autonomous supply vehicles could distribute sustainment to dispersed defenders with reduced risk to human lives, and relatively low-cost drone swarms could trigger an adversary's air defenses to expend expensive munitions.1 53F 154
Possible fait accompli seizures of Taiwan and Estonia have been the subject of multiple studies.1 54F
155
China seeks regional hegemony in the Indo-Pacific and is applying a whole of government approach, including military modernization, to meet its ends.1 56F 
157
168
Taiwan's proximity to the mainland means an invasion would take place under a robust Chinese A2/AD shield (see figure 
4
176 Long,
et al.,
Smarter Power,
vol. 2,
18,
41.
Kelly,
et al. Smarter Power,
vol. 1,
[104]
[105]
et al.,
War with China,
49.
Russia seeks to shatter the NATO alliance and exercise power over its neighbors.1 80F 181
Estonia is among the most vulnerable NATO members. It is a former Soviet republic, bordering Russia, with a sizeable ethnic Russian minority, and a small military.1 81F 182 Russia conducted a denial of service cyberattack on Estonia in 2007, promotes a false narrative of oppression of ethnic Russians and of NATO as an occupation force, and holds large exercises near the shared border.1 82F 183 As members of its former sphere of influence increasingly turn to the West, Russia has resorted to force against non-NATO neighbors Georgia (2008) and Ukraine (2014), despite international condemnation. If Russia invaded Estonia, NATO would be obliged to join the war or face dissolution of the alliance.1 83F 184 Although Estonia is the targeted country in this scenario, Russia has the military capacity to extend its attack to any, or all, of the Baltic states.
Russian forces will solidify their defenses and attempt to consolidate gains politically. Estonian leaders may be convinced to decline NATO assistance to avoid loss of life in a counterattack or even to renounce membership in the alliance. Alternately, Russia may copy their script from Crimea and annex part or all of Estonia, extending their nuclear umbrella and declaring any counterattack to be an invasion of their homeland.1 99F 200 Initially, only Estonian resistance cells would be able to directly contest Russia on the ground and NATO's blunt layer would be limited to effects generated from outside of the occupied territory.2 00F 
201
203
214
2
234 However,
236
237
240
However, there are no divisions assigned in Europe, even though a contingency there would probably demand a larger ground force.2 41F 242 American units that deployed piecemeal in Korea were often outflanked, isolated, and lost cohesion.2 42F 
243
244
active component mix is an organizational challenge with the potential to require untrained supplementary logisticians to man sustainment units, with the ultimate result of challenges to equipping. 
241
242 Kelly,
et al. Smarter Power,
vol. 1,
196.
244 US Army, FM 3-0, 2-51. 
245
246
Chinese and Russian investments in A2/AD and other capabilities raise the possibility they may rapidly invade a US ally or partner. They could then extend their defensive umbrella over the occupied territory such that any attempt to expel them by force might prove to be too militarily or politically onerous.  
253
251 Appleman,
[34]
[35]
247;
Hastings,
73.
253
With few exceptions, every blunt layer challenge faced in the Korean War will be at least as demanding in a future conflict. Applicable to both adversary scenarios presented here are greater challenges in risk of nuclear escalation, multiple contested domains, relative military capability, forces in theater, pre-conflict strength, and stockpiles. China's efforts to politically isolate Taiwan may make gaining international support to counter an invasion there more difficult. Although nuclear escalation and forces in theater are a greater challenge for both scenarios than in the case study, the demand is especially tasking for a Russian invasion of Estonia. Additionally, the lack of a dedicated division in Europe leaves insufficient headquarters in place for initial task organization. On a positive note, prepositioned equipment sets and capabilities from NATO partners offer more rapidly deployable forces in Europe. Modern US Army combat brigades, with three maneuver battalions, are better designed for the blunt layer than Korean War regimental combat teams. Some challenges remain too indeterminate to assess and deserve future research. Few US soldiers have experienced the intense combat likely in the future blunt layer, which will be, not only large-scale, but under conditions in which US forces are in the minority, operating with few advantages, and uncertain how long they must endure. Under such conditions and in a dispersed battlefield, are modern US soldiers sufficiently resilient to meet the challenge? In the Korean War, the materiel solutions to defeat KPA armor existed, but were not present in theater because senior leaders dismissed the possibility of tank warfare on the peninsula. For the future fight, it is less clear that the necessary requirements are fully understood. US Army modernization efforts require time and must compete with current demands and constrained budgets. Which materiel solutions needed to blunt China and Russia are currently underestimated or overlooked?
Week Figure 1. Size of surge layer force over time. Created by author using data derived from Michael E. Linick et al., A Throughput-Based Analysis of Army Active Component/Reserve Component Mix for Major Contingency Surge Operations (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2019), 36 and 42, accessed 14 September 2020, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1516.html. 35 Michael E. Linick et al., A Throughput-Based Analysis of Army Active Component/Reserve Component Mix for Major Contingency Surge Operations (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2019), 36 and 42, accessed 14 September 2020, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1516.html.
Appleman, 2, 18; "Fait Accompli," Merriam-Webster, accessed 09 October 2020, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/fait accompli?src=search-dict-box.
US combat casualties totaled 19,165 by September 15, including 4,280 killed in action (KIA), 2,107 missing in action (MIA) and 401 reported captured;Appleman, 547.    
Unless otherwise specified, in this monograph China refers to the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Taiwan to the Republic of China.
US Congress, Senate, Implementation of the National Defense Strategy: Hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee. 112th Cong., 2nd sess., January 29, 2019, 3-4, accessed 10 August 2020, https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Colby_01-29-19.pdf.
US Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sustaining the American Military's Competitive Edge (Washington, DC: US Government Publishing Office. 2018), 7, accessed
July 2020, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
US Department of the Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1 The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations, 2028 (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2018), 17-18.
US Department of Defense, Summary of the NDS, 2; US Department of Defense, Indo-Pacific Strategy Report: Preparedness, Partnerships, and Promoting a Networked Region (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, June 1, 2019), 8, accessed 12 September 2020, https://media.defense.gov/2019/Jul/01/2002152311/-1/-1/1/DEPARTMENT-OF-DEFENSE-INDO-PACIFIC-STRATEGY-REPORT-2019.PDF.
 17  The Baltic States include Estonia, the target of the scenario presented here, as well as Latvia and Lithuania; US Congress, Senate, Implementation of the NDS, 11
.18  Michael, Puttre, "Winning on the Battlefield Is Not Enough," Mercatus Center, May 13, 2020, accessed 12 September 2020, https://www.mercatus.org/bridge/commentary/winning-battlefield-notenough.
Glenn H. Snyder, "Deterrence and Power," The Journal of Conflict Resolution 4, no. 2 (June 1960): 163, accessed 11 December 2020, https://www.jstor.org/stable/172650.
US Department of Defense, Summary of the NDS, 7; US Congress, Senate, Implementation of the NDS, 6.
US Department of Defense, Summary of the NDS, 7; US Congress, Senate, Implementation of the NDS, 6.
Search conducted onSeptember 12, 2020.   
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 1-19, Competition Continuum (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2019), 5.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-90-1, Offense and Defense, Vol. 1 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), 9-19 to 9-20; US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-15, Barriers, Obstacles, and Mine Warfare for Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2018), II-7.
US Joint Staff,
5.
See opening epigraph;Appleman,[207][208] 
Andrew Krepinevich, "Protracted Great-Power War: A Preliminary Assessment," American Competes 2020. Center for a New American Security, February 5, 2020, accessed 10 December 2020, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/protracted-great-power-war; US Department of Defense, Summary of the NDS, 6.
James Schnabel, The United States Army and the Korean War Policy and Direction: The First Year (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, United StatesArmy, 1992), 20-21, 34-35, accessed 12   September 2020, https://history.army.mil/books/p&d.htm.
Joseph F. Dunford, "The Strategic Implications of Defensive Operations at the Pusan Perimeter, July-September 1950" (Strategy Research Project, US Army War College, 1999), 12, accessed 09 October 2020, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a364614.pdf
"I Corps, America's Corps," I Corps, accessed 27 November 2020, https://www.army.mil/icorps, #.;"Army Reactivates V Corps at Fort Knox," Association of the United States Army, October 16, 2020, accessed 11 October 2020, https://www.ausa.org/news/army-reactivates-vcorps-fort-knox.
US Department of the Army, Army Modernization Strategy: Investing in the Future (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2019),10-11.   
The RAND studies,Kelly, et al. Smarter Power, vol. 1 and Long, et al., Smarter Power, vol.  2 provide detailed looks at different versions of possible Taiwan and Estonia scenarios. Additionally, for motivations and wargaming of a PRC seizure of Taiwan, see US Department of Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2020 (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), accessed 04
US Army,
[1]
Sydney J. Freedberg, "A Perfect Harmony of Intense Violence: Army Chief Milley On Future War," Breaking Defense, October 8, 2018, accessed 10 December 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2018/10/a-perfect-harmony-of-intense-violence-army-chief-milley-on-futurewar/.
  213  Clausewitz, 136; Lawrence Freedman, The Future of War: A History (New York, NY: Public Affairs, 2019), 277-280,
287.214  Appleman 18, 234.
The Blunt Layer in Future Large-Scale Combat Operations Approved by: _______//signed/ 18 MAR 21/ERP//______, Monograph Director Eric 
R. Price
ABD ______//signed/ 31 MAR 21/MJY// _________
Seminar Leader Matthew J. Yandura
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
Anti-Access / Area Denial ADP Identification of challenges the United States will face in the blunt layer is a necessary, but insufficient, first step. The US military must also consider how to mitigate the risks they pose.
Just as China and Russia's investments in A2/AD are intended to undermine the United States' ability to defend its alliance architecture, demonstrating the ability to blunt a fait accompli is essential to deterring the adversary's strategy. Failing to attempt to blunt such an invasion compromises the system of alliances that lie at the foundation of Western post-World War II prosperity. Blunting unsuccessfully may prove even worse, risking a humiliating defeat and the possible death or capture of thousands of American service members. In order to avoid such a disaster, the United States must recognize and overcome the significant challenges of conducting the blunt layer in large-scale combat operations.