# ID: 19b0eeba2c104dc9b977d1364361e00a
# Title: The Rise and Fall of a Coalition: The Supreme War Council and Marshal Foch, 1917-1919
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In 1917, a revolution in Russia forced it to withdraw from the Great War, the French Army was consumed by mutinies, and coalition operations remained disjointed and unable to break the stalemate in France. British Prime Minister David Lloyd George established the Supreme War Council as a Coalition body of political and military leaders that would develop a unified strategy for the Coalition and end the war with Germany. Many historians argue that the Supreme War Council failed to provide the effective command structure needed by the coalition. The premise of this paper, however, is that the Supreme War Council did not fail in developing unified command, rather that it enabled development of a theater strategic approach. The interplay between the Supreme War Council, Ferdinand Foch, and his operational level commanders provides relevance to the current force. It explains how the principles of mission command and multinational operations in Joint, Army, and NATO doctrine are still relevant and if not appropriately addressed in planning, can fracture a coalition. It also expresses the dangers
Thucydides and Machiavelli, were influenced by successes and failures of coalitions and the political conditions that surrounded them. 
2
Nearly a century after the Seventh Coalition defeated Napoleon at Waterloo, a new war of coalitions was on the horizon. Preceded by a boom in technology and the industrialization of national economies, new military capabilities developed that history had never seen making global logistics and strategic coordination even more important to coalition warfighting. In late 1914, a Balkan conflict combined with a series of political agreements soon expanded the quarrel into a global war between the French-British-Russian Entente and the German-Austro-Hungarian 1 Azar Gat, A History of Military Thought (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 9.
2 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, eds. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 605, 725-726.
Alliance. After three years of war, Russia succumbed to social revolution leaving France, Britain, and Belgium hemorrhaging forces and money along the western front. Growing disunity among national leaders and a society frustrated with great losses was weakening the coalition to the point of crisis. It is here that the First World War provides a unique example to analyze the strategies and challenges of a coalition.
The Bolshevik Revolution removed Russia, an important member of the coalition, from the war. Leaders of the nations within the coalition knew large formations of German and Austro-Hungarian troops previously occupied in the fight against Russia would soon be transferred west to break the stalemate in France. No governing body of authority controlled actions of the Allied coalition. Various national armies were assigned a portion of a front or theater and given guidance by their political leaders. 
3
4
They also considered other strategic options and incorporated resources available with the entry of the United States into the war effort. 
6
He then developed a theater strategy that enabled operational artists, who were the commanders of each national army, to arrange tactical actions under a unified command structure.
As the war came to a close, the political nature of the Armistice and transition to a force of occupation altered the focus of the council and military commanders. National policies became more important to different nations than the coalition's strategic aim. Placing national interest over that of the whole coalition increased international tensions within each occupation zone and led to an early withdrawal of forces. The coalition Lloyd George strengthened began to break apart, and by 1923 the premature withdrawal of American troops from the Rhineland symbolized the beginning of the end of the partnership.
The First World War is one of the most highly documented events in European military history. Many annotated bibliographies exist that document sources from personal accounts, to official records, and special holdings at different National Archives. While there are an impressive number of sources, interest in American involvement, and therefore the formation of an energized coalition under a unified command, peaked particularly around 1993 with the 75 th Anniversary of its offensive action in Cantigny. This included many of the secondary sources used in this monograph. 
7
8
9
Other memoirs such as those of Generals Robert Bullard, Hunter Liggett, Henry Allen, and Fox Conner are sources that offer both a tactical and command perspective. They describe the employment and integration of American Division, Corps, and Army level forces with their coalition partners through the occupation. Fox Conner, like many other officers, published an article in the Cavalry Journal reflecting on the challenges of fighting as a coalition. These sources help to identify concerns of American Commanders, and also the actions that triggered changes in how British, French, or American troops felt about their colleagues. 
10
Between 1963 and 1975 the multinational aspect of the First World War grew in popularity. The authors of this period are the first that offer a broad analysis of the Great War. David Trask, Correlli Barnett, Donald Smythe, and Keith Nelson laid the foundation for many future works. 
13
Other authors focused on doctrinal subjects and helped to bridge the implications of policy to the organizational capabilities. Authors like James Rainey, Timothy Nenninger, and 
12
13
James Agnew looked at the foundations of tactical and operational doctrine and how dysfunction changed over the course of the war for the AEF. 
14
By 1993 other essential authors like Jehuda Wallach, James Cooke, Margaret MacMillan, Priscilla Roberts, and John Mosier published works with analysis of national and theater level strategy of the coalition. 
15
16
Patrick Cohrs and Margaret Pawley published two comprehensive histories of the occupation of the Rhineland through the 1920s. The transition to occupation they described allowed the return of separate national policy aims within the coalition. Explaining the shift of the Supreme War Council, they point out tensions that developed and spoiled the effectiveness of the coalition. An increasing lack of trust among commanders combined with diverging political policies and social concerns brought an early withdrawal from the Rhineland and concerns that would last through the inter-war period. 17
Many of these authors focus on the mechanics of developing unified command for the coalition, and the Supreme War Council's failure to provide it. This monograph, however, will discuss how problems encountered by the coalition were resolved by the council. In addressing these obstacles, they enabled General Foch have the resources needed to develop a strategic approach. The Council did more than simply create a unified command structure by appointing General Foch, the political and military members of the Council framed logistical and constraints and prioritized planning efforts. As the conflict came to a close, different national political and domestic problems turned the focus of military and political leaders away from the occupation and exacerbated intra-national tensions leading to the fracture of the coalition in 1923.
In the initial years of the Great War, the Triple Entente, a formal alliance between France, Britain, and Russia, grew into a loose coalition that, by 1915, included Belgium, Serbia, 
17
Montenegro, and Italy. At the outset of the war, it was evident the western front extending from the coast of Belgium to Italy became the decisive theater. The significant challenge was aligning military efforts between Belgian, British, French, and Italian armies considering each nation had different political objectives. The French priorities were to protect the line in France, the Belgians to remain in the fight for their homeland, the Italians, to fend off Austrian aggression, and the British, to avoid the stalemated trenches that depleted their small force. Fighting on the front failed to bring military results since 1914. In 1915, a strategy of attrition, developed by General Joseph Joffre, was considered a solution that would deplete Germans resources while they fought on two fronts. 
18
Joffre was subsequently relieved and replaced by Robert Nivelle in December 1916.
In early 1917, the allies searched for other options to end the stalemate that was exacerbated by shortages in manpower. To make matters worse the Bolshevik Revolution broke out and mutinies erupted across the French Army the same year. These were indications of a failing strategy. With the loss of Russia, the Germans could transition forces from the Eastern to the Western Front. It increased the possibility to launch a strong offensive before the Americans could mobilize and come to the aid of the coalition. Social unrest pressured politicians to avoid attrition and different national priorities began to shift the focus of commanders at the front. The result of this pressure was poorly coordinated operations by the separate national armies. 
19
19 Chickering, Great War, Total War, 314; Robert Doughty, Pyrrhic Victory: French  Strategy and Operations in the Great War (London: Belknap Press, 2005), 310; Wallach, The Uneasy Coalition, 22-24.
The new British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, a conservative appointed in late 1916, promised to bring change by looking for new ways to coordinate coalition efforts. What was needed on the Western Front was a clear theater strategy and a level of command to develop unity under a single strategy. The entrance of the United States into the war on April 2, 1917 brought resources and energy to sustain the coalition and the potential for success, but a lack of coordination still challenged the allies.
After French Commander Philippe Petain recognized the poor condition of his troops and took steps to slow his operational tempo and restore order by easing the conditions of service for his soldiers.
20
21
The armies arrayed along the western front needed a theater strategy to prevent the conflicting national demands. By late 1917 the French and Italians required an operational pause but British forces were prepared to resume a limited offensive. None of them, however, were willing to accommodate and support one another because of political pressure. It was clear that social anxiety was influencing politics and breaking down any semblance of unity among allies.
Each separate national army no longer had the resources to be effective against the increasing strength of German forces.
The only solution was to create a system with the international representation that provided common military strategy. The French proposed that placing a single commander in charge of forces in the west would achieve this, they call this supreme commander a Generalissimo. A Generalissimo, they suggested, provided an authority figure that gave operational level commanders of the national armies' direction and avoided unnecessary objections. 
22
23
The national armies had assigned sections of the front where they operated independently. Each force with separate staffs and headquarters managed their own logistics, intelligence, and manpower, leading to a narrow understanding of the front. Politicians compounded this issue giving them objectives aligned to their specific political goals. In 1917, a single coalition was not fighting the Germans, independent national armies were. Lloyd George believed forming an international war council would unify the disjointed allied operations and allow them to a strategic aim as a coalition. He explained that "Our strength, as far as our own forces are concerned, is being sapped by the enemy in indecisive attacks which attain inadequate results… If such [strategic rather than tactical] results can ever become possible, they can only be 
22
By June 1917, General John Pershing, charged with overall command of American Forces in Europe, arrived in Paris. Pressure to incorporate the American's into the war effort was immediately apparent. Lloyd George met regularly with the Prime Minister of France, Paul Painleve, to formalize a council of politicians and generals that could discuss war matters and provide a unified direction to forces at the front. In late October, political and military leaders planned to meet in Rapallo, Italy and discuss the allocation of troops. Foreshadowing the difficulty, the council would have with its coalition partners, Pershing refused to participate explaining, "the advice of war councils was not usually of any great value…the conduct of operations by the combined armies should be left entirely under military direction." 
25
26
27
Access to American forces increased as did discussions addressing operational objectives. These talks became catalysts bringing the council to a pressing underlying issue: resources. Logistical matters became the main topic of debate among the Council. While national leaders made decisions on how to support the coalition's field armies, a gap in theater strategy that could bring victory to the Western Front lingered.
Council members framed an important part of the strategic problem that plagued all the armies on the western front; not enough soldiers. Petain, Foch, and Sir William Robertson, the British Chief of the Imperial General Staff, wanted American regiments and battalions to serve under French and British commands. Pershing and his staff, however, intended to organize an American Army in the field and refused the requests for amalgamation. Frustrated field commanders pleaded with the French and British governments who addressed their concerns directly with President Wilson. 
28
29
Denying the request for amalgamation frustrated the French and British but led to changes in the planning priorities of the Council. In November of 1917, the Supreme War Council included a base committee, the Military Council, where permanent national representatives resided. It coordinated with the Allied Maritime and Transportation Council (AMTC), to discuss American troop movements to France. 
30
31
29
30
31
32
The establishment of an inter-allied reserve was an important topic with the Supreme War Council. It provided a force that could halt a large-scale German break penetration, and gave the coalition an opportunity to exploit success. Unfortunately, it required commanders of each national army to remove divisions from the front and consolidate them in a centralized location.
The council retained the authority to allocate combat power across the front. Conceptually, the idea made sense, but commanders refused to make do without units that were critical. But who would be the single approval authority for this reserve if it was needed quickly? Generals Petain and Haig particularly criticized the idea and did not want to give up forces to support the other national army. British Generals Haig and Robertson opposed the idea, recommending the French and British keep their divisions but sign a formal agreement to help one another if necessary. General Tasker Bliss immediately recognized that cooperation between the military commanders and the political leaders on the council was a considerable challenge that prevented the coalition from being successful on the western front. 
34
As American units continued to arrive and take positions on the front, it became increasingly apparent that someone had to provide unified direction to the various allied forces on the front. The council now had to coordinate with British, French, Belgian, Italian, and American members. American and French military representatives at the council, although supportive of a centralized reserve, argued that a coalition would fight best with a clear chain of command. 
35
34
35
The German commander, General Erich Ludendorff, launched his offensive to break through the front and defeat the British and French forces before the Americans could reinforce them. He wanted to crush the smaller British and Belgian armies and then turn south to defeat the French exploiting the fragile coalition. Recognizing that cooperation and coordination between forces were intermittent at best, he focused his attack on the seam between the French and British troops, attempting to physically split the coalition. By March 24, the situation was dangerous as the Germans advanced nearly twenty miles at the French and British boundary. 
36
37
38
Although selecting a Supreme Allied Commander was a step in the right direction, national armies were on the verge of collapse. With significant resource shortages and no common strategy, mistrust and jealously plagued the different national armies. Foch had to organize a centralized reserve, leverage the council to provide the logistical support for each of his armies, and foster an environment where the different commanders could develop a level of trust and respect among one another to go on the offensive as a unified force. His first challenge would be to halt the German attack, and to do this he needed a reserve. General's Petain and Haig continued to test Foch in his new position by limiting the number of troops they could make available. 
39
Foch had to balance the interests of the coalition and maintain enough pressure to defeat the German offensive. His command structure and flow of information and support needed to allow the coalition to achieve its objectives while preventing favoritism for one nation. General Foch permanently assigned General Maxime Weygand as his chief of staff to mitigate this concern. Weygand was also to serve as the French representative to Supreme War Council and direct liaison to the Generalissimo. 
40
41
40
42
43
The British Expeditionary Force retrograded toward the English Channel protecting valuable British shipping ports, and the French Army withdrew in a direction to protect Paris. The rearward moving armies presented a vulnerable gap that separated the two forces. 
44
45
46
43
44 Clayton,
General Maxime Weygand,
36;
Trask,
The AEF and Coalition Warmaking,
[49]
[50]
[51]
51
52
53
Foch. 54
51
52
53
54 Ibid., 35; Trask, The United States in the Supreme War Council, 89; superior to the Americans, but the two nations needed to build trust, rapport, and experience with one another to improve their relationship. 
55
56
57
58
59
His staff recognized vulnerable German positions around Soissons and began to pressure Haig to 
55
59
60
62
60
Foch and Weygand had to balance the pressure of intense political disputes and internal friction at the operational level. Initially, the Supreme War Council considered matters like managing the allied reserve within their role of responsibility. Lloyd George's vision of the Council was to provide political influence on some of the military affairs along the front. The nature of Foch's appointment, however, gave him authority to use military means and develop theater strategies, including the employment of a centralized reserve. 63 General Foch's unified command of forces diminished the influence that the council had on actions along the front allowing Foch to prepare military strategies. The political and military members of the SWC, with a shift in focus, addressed strategic options for the coalition and solved logistical problems that were brought up as important by Foch. As a result, the Council, with political influence and the ability to prioritize and coordinate shipping resources, shaped what military means were available to Foch for him to develop an effective strategy.
By June, the American Expeditionary Force had fourteen divisions along the front, and an influenza pandemic became a significant concern but affected Germans forces the greatest, helping to halt their attack westward. 
64
65
63
64
65
The Germans attacked as suggested on July 15 attempting to seize the strategic city of Reims. However, the French 5 th and 6 th Armies along with divisions from Hunter Liggett's I Corps put up stubborn resistance. The American 3 rd Infantry Division defended a fourteenkilometer stretch that included a crossing over the Marne River critical to Germans. The division's stiff resistance earned its the nickname "Rock of the Marne." 
66
American units fought under the French, and the American I Corps was the first Corps to command foreign troops since the American Revolution. 
67
69
70
71
While Foch began prepared to seize the initiative from the Germans, the political and military leaders of the SWC debated on strategic options to help bring the war to a close in 1919. 
72
69
70
Marshal Foch,
368;
Greenhalgh,
Foch in Command,
406. 71
73
74
75
76
President Wilson however, refused to violate the territorial integrity of Russia. Only when there 
73 Palmer,
Bliss: Peacemaker,
311;
Trask,
74
75
76
was widespread support for an intervention in Murmansk and Siberia, did the United States support a response, which was often very limited. 
77
78
The Americans, much like their initial opposition to Russian intervention, did not want to divert more men and materials away from where its field army was taking shape. 
79
The Supreme War Council spent most of June and July coordinating with the AMTC to organize and prioritizing shipping efforts to bring 500,000 American troops to France by August. 
81
82
83
84
Petain, having taken heavy casualties, was not robust enough to deliver a severe blow and therefore had to maintain gains provided by the British attack. 
85
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
The First Army began its attack on the St. Mihiel Salient on September 12 and Pershing assured Foch the Americans were prepared to attack towards the Meuse after it reduced the St Mihiel salient. 
92
86
Marshal Foch,
398. 87 Ibid.,
383;
Greenhalgh,
Foch in Command,
427
88
89
90
91
92
93
By September 15, the German salient near St Mihiel was reduced, but the Mezieres-Sedan-Metz railway and the iron reserves in the region were still in use by the Germans. Foch continued to pressure Pershing to shift quickly from the St. Mihiel salient towards the Argonne. 
94
General Henri Gouraud, commanding the French Fourth Army, supported the American attack by moving west to turn the Germans out of their positions and compel them to withdraw, facilitating the American advance. 
95
96
97
93
94
95 Lloyd,
Hundred Days,
153;
Trask,
The AEF and Coalition Warmaking,
149
96
97
98
99
98
99
100
As October came to a close, the Supreme War Council and National leaders considered terms for an Armistice. Prince Max of Baden, deemed a political moderate by the Germans and therefore suitable to deliberate with the allied powers, reached out to President Wilson to negotiate a peace proposal based on his Fourteen Points. 
101
101 Macmillan, Paris 1919, 19;
Trask, The US and the Supreme War Council, 153.
Despite the challenges the coalition overcame and the significant growth of its leaders in less than nine months, mutual harmony did not last. This period of transition placed stress on its leaders causing hostility between political, strategic, and operational commanders. As the value of political gains increased with a potential for peace, coalition relationships broke down and returned to a state where national priorities become more important than that of the coalition. The Germans deliberated an Armistice with President Wilson, who attempted to maintain diplomatic efforts not tied to territorial commitments with the intent to prevent militarism and balance the world order after the war. 
102
Foch. 103
102
103
104
105
107
Foch and his commanders created a list of military demands for the armistice between October 23 and 25. It became a source of immense tension between field commanders. Foch and Petain outlined an almost uncompromising list of demands. Haig, fearing an increased German resistance, put forth his recommendations that were considered both moderate and acceptable. 
104
105 Herring, From Colony to Superpower, 421;
Macmillan, Paris 1919, 22;
Seymour,
106
107 Palmer,
Bliss: Peacemaker,
346;
Seymour,
The Intimate Papers of Colonel House,
[93]
[94]
Trask,
The US in the Supreme War Council,
[156]
[157]
108
109
The transition to occupation provided new challenges to the coalition. The occupation force was established to maintain order and civil governance, enforce disarmament and reparations, but also to be prepared to fight the German Army if they failed to cooperate with the cessation of hostilities. The French, British, and American Armies reorganized their forces and planned to a long-term occupation of German territory. Personal agendas and separate national interests influenced the long-term occupation, although its initial operational planning and execution were efficient and effective. 
108
109
The armistice went into effect on November 11 at 11:00 am. Foch's General Headquarters published a stand-fast order at 6:50 am to all forces on the front, emphasizing that defensive precautions be taken to minimize unnecessary loss of life.
110
111
The plan to occupy, called "Watch on the Rhine", was designed to allow 'breathing space' for the German Army. It provided them with six days to move away from the front and return to the fatherland. There was evidence that Marshal Foch saw the occupation as the beginning of a process that would establish the Rhine as the new French and German boundary or establish a buffer zone between the two nations. 
113
114
Ultimately Foch and the Allied commanders agreed to stop their offensive if they obtained an advantageous position. That position was along the Rhine, a large natural obstacle that Germany may have used to significantly slow or defeat allied attacks into Germany. 
115
116
In response to growing requirements, Foch delegated much of his military authority to the subordinate British, French, American, and Belgian commanders. After establishing zones of control and the guidelines of civil affairs for each army, Foch turned his planning focus upward into the political and strategic levels. The Supreme War Council transitioned its focus to policy matters of the occupation, leading to the establishment of the permanent Inter-Allied Armistice Commission (IAAC). As the supervisory organization, the IAAC ensured all the conditions outlined in the armistice were being adhered to and maintained formal communications with the German Government. 
119
Deliberations for the final Versailles Peace Treaty conferences also took place at this time. Fundamental differences between the coalition's approach to peace would ignite further conflict during the occupation. These political disagreements -unresolved after the Treaty was signed -revolved around four main issues: the occupation of the Rhineland, the future of security 118 United States Department of the Army, The United States Army in the World War,  1917-1919, Volume 11 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1948), 144. 
119 Allen,
The Rhineland Occupation,
35.
120
121
122
123
120 Cohrs, The Unfinished Peace, 46;
Edmonds, Occupation of the Rhineland, 185-186;
Macmillan, Paris 1919, 200-201. 121
122
123
Macmillan, Paris 1919, 492. control. 124
125
126
128
Understanding the organization of the Supreme War Council and the appointment of General Foch helps explain the challenges of coalition warfighting. A common strategy, unified command structure, the capacity to solve logistical problems and deliberate strategic options made the coalition successful in 1918. These elements transcend coalitions through history and are important in current multi-national doctrine. 
129
124
125
126
127 Nelson Victors Divided,
222. 128
129 FM 3-16, The Army in Multinational Operations, 1-1-1-2; Joint Publication (JP) 3-16, Multinational Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), III-1-III-3; AJP 5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-Level Planning, 1-9-1-11; NATO Publication, Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive, Version 2.0 (Brussels: Allied Command Operations, 2013), 4-101-4-103. however, weakened the coalition and prevented it from being successful both in 1917 and again during the occupation of the Rhineland through 1923. By exploring these areas, the Western Front case study allows operational artists to recognize and mitigate the issues that frustrate coalition activities.
Enabling partners to build trust and rapport is a critical factor in allowing forces with different cultural values to operate collectively. The coalition's field commanders slowly improved their once bitter and independent relationships during the German Spring Offensive.
Foch, considered commander with authority in the coalition hierarchy, enabled this by acting in an impartial manner taking in the considerations of all the coalition partners but focusing them onto the objectives of the coalition as a single entity. During the pre-armistice negotiations, however, the decisions made by Foch were no longer impartial for the betterment of the coalition.
As Foch took more efforts to support French policy above other nation's considerations, it undermined his authority and decreased the confidence in the coalition. This planted the seeds of discontent among politicians and military commanders that bore bitter fruit by 1923.
Without a strategic aim between 1915 and 1917, the Belgian, British, French, and Italian armies directly managed offensive and defensive actions in their portion of the front, but never presented operational dilemmas to the Germans. Ludendorff's Spring Offensive is a good example of how a strategic aim was translated into operational art. He believed that he could splinter the coalition along the French and British boundary near the Somme. At a time when the coalition was weakened by the loss of Russia and unable to mobilize American resources, Ludendorff visualized the defeat of the British Expeditionary Force as a tactical action that supported the aim of defeating the coalition. Lloyd George recognized the weakness after and established the Supreme War Council to develop a coalition military strategy.
The Council attempted to develop a deliberate strategy, but was soon preoccupied with unrealized logistical problems and bureaucratic political discourse. The appointment of Foch as the Generalissimo in charge of all Allied forces came at a point of crisis when Ludendorff attacked a vulnerable position at the front. Committing a multi-national reserve proved difficult in a council of political and military leaders. The Council realized the need for a unified command and the Supreme Allied Command emerged to streamline communications and decision-making for the coalition.
While Foch and his multi-national force attempted to halt the German attacks, he used his authority and influence to manage relationships within his command. Foch's leadership required him to balance hard and soft, direct and indirect communications with subordinates who were prone to conflict. 
130
131
After halting the Spring Offensive, Foch, focused on developing an effective theater strategy. His first priority included regaining the initiative from the Germans, and then preventing Ludendorff from using logistical nodes supporting the German war effort with raw material and troop transportation. At this point, Foch had to leverage and coordinate with the Supreme War Council to ensure he had the means necessary to achieve his intended strategy. The Council continuously deliberated with ministerial organizations to prioritize shipping assets and engaged in heated political discourse to quickly incorporate American troops to the front. The political dialogue between Foch and the Supreme War Council allowed him to create a deliberate strategy that synchronized the reduction of the St. Mihiel salient and an attack into Flanders.
The Supreme War Council's development of strategic options in Russia and Macedonia could have removed troops available for Foch's great counter-offensive. This balance of resources provides an example of political influence on strategy and military operations. The Coalition developed an umbrella strategy and a broad outline where details could emerge within it. 
132
While politicians deliberated the risk and reward for each of those options, they directly adjusted the resources available to Foch. By sending only limited troops to intervene in Russia and deciding not opening a Macedonia theater, Foch was able to accelerate his summer offensive.
When Prince Max of Baden began discussions with President Wilson in 1918, the influence of policy on war is overwhelmingly apparent. Two-levels of politics became entangled in the political pre-armistice deliberations within the Supreme War Council as indicated in the informal political meetings held outside of the council increased in October. 
133
The lifecycle of the coalition between 1917 and 1923 shows the interactions of policy on military strategy and operational art and reinforces the fundamentals of multinational operations.
It describes how boundaries of strategy are within the realm of both military and political leadership as seen in the interactions between the Supreme War Council and General Foch.
General Foch managed his multi-national force through the legitimacy of his position, and by impartial and transparent decision-making. Over time domestic concerns influence the national interests and then shift international relations among the coalition. This interaction shapes the strategies that can support a coalition or fracture it as seen in both 1917 and 1923.
Complications inherent in coalition warfare have existed since the earliest records of history, and operational artists and strategists will continue to manage the complex interconnectedness of international politics and war. By examining the efforts of political leaders like Lloyd George, and Wilson, the actions of strategists like General Foch and Weygand, and how they affect operational artists like Generals Pershing and Haig, we can anticipate challenges when fighting as a coalition. In doing so, operational artists and strategists of the future can identify trends that may lead their organization to failure and use fundamentals of multi-national operations to promote success.
15  
15  
62  
62  
J. H. Johnston, Stalemate: The Great Trench Warfare Battles of 1915
-1917
Elizabeth Greenhalgh, Victory Through Coalition: Britain and France During the First World War (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 169.
World Peace Foundation, "The Supreme War Council," in A League of Nations 1, no. 7 (October 1918), 366.
David Trask, The AEF and Coalition Warmaking, 1917-1918 (Lawrence, KS:  University Press of Kansas, 1993), 30.   
David Woodward, America and World War I: A Selected Annotated Bibliography of English-Language Sources (New York: Routledge, 2015).
Ferdinand Foch, The Memoirs of Marshal Foch, trans. T. Bentley Mott (New York:  Doubleday, Doran and Co., 1931); Frederick Palmer, Bliss Peacemaker: The Life and Letters of GeneralTasker H. Bliss (New York: Dodd, Mead, & Co., 1934); Charles Seymour, The Intimate Papers of Colonel House(New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1928).
John Pershing, My Experiences in the World War (New York: Frederick Stokes Company, 1931); Stephen Ryan, Petain the Soldier (New York: A.S. Barnes Co., 1969).
Doughty, Pyrrhic Victory,[364][365]  Stephen Ryan, Petain the Soldier (London: A.S.Barnes and Company, 1969), 124-126, 133.    
Doughty, Pyrrhic Victory,[376][377] Blake, The Private Papers of Douglas Haig,  
Lloyd George, The War Memoirs of David Lloyd George, Volume IV (London:  Odhams Press, 1938), 531-540; as cited in Shumate, The Allied Supreme War Council, 1917- 1918, 73.   
 25  Pershing, My Experiences in the World War, Volume I, 213-214.
Schumate, "The Allied Supreme War Council: 1917-1918, Volume I," 103; Rapallo  
Pershing, My Experiences in the World War, Volume I,[215][216] 
James A. Huston, The Sinews of War: US Army Logistics 1775-1953 (Washington, DC: Center for Military History, 2014),
  33  Underlined indicates ministerial, solid lines show reliance on information and coordination, dotted lines express consistent maritime coordination. This chart is approximate since interactions changed regularly. Organization dates are listed as month/year.
Blake, The Private Papers of Douglas Haig,[299][300] Takle, Nine Divisions in  Champagne, 13.    
Greenhalgh, Foch in Command, 300; Greenhalgh, Victory through Coalition,[200][201]  Seymour, The Intimate Papers of Colonel House, 249; Trask, The AEF and Coalition  Warmaking,
[49]
[50]
Clayton, General Maxime Weygand, 33.   
Greenhalgh, Foch in Command,[310][311] Schumate, The Allied Supreme War Council,  Volume II,[570][571] 
Clayton, General Maxime Weygand,[37][38] 
Takle, Nine Divisions in Champagne,[107][108] Woodward, The American Army and  the First World War,[280][281] 
Trask, The AEF and Coalition Warmaking, 83; Liggett, Commanding an American  Army, 31.    
Greenhalgh, Foch in Command,[399][400][401] Ryan, Petain the Soldier, 171.   
Trask, The United States in the Supreme War Council, 95.
Trask, The United States in the Supreme War Council, 134.
Bayliss, The Occupation of the Rhineland, 10; Seymour, The Intimate Papers of Colonel House, 143-145.
Bayliss, The Occupation of the Rhineland, 12.
Blake, The Private Papers of Douglas Haig, 354; Nelson, Victors Divided,[81][82] 
John Kotter, Power and Influence (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1985), 44.
FM 3-16, The Army in Multinational Operations, 1-2-1-3; Army Doctrinal Reference Publication (ADRP) 6-0, Mission Command (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 2-1-2-2.
Henry Mintzberg, The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning (New York: Simon &  Schuster, 1994), 24-25.    
Robert Putnam, "Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level Games," InternationalOrganization 42, no. 3 (Summer 1988), 427, 434.   
SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 8. PERFORMING ORG REPORT NUMBER 9
SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) School of Advanced Military Studies
Advanced Military Studies Program 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release