# ID: 1c50bc626cb14395b5a86363fdc1c487
# Title: Prussia and the Evolution of the Reserve Army: a forgotten lesson of history
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1992.0
# Fulltext:
The U.S. Army has long had an interest in European military power. From the very founding of the Republic. American leaders have looked to Europe for the perfect model from which to create our own military institutions. This has been particularly true concerning Prussia, the land of Frederick the Great and precursor of modern Germany. After Prussia's stunning victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War. Americans from Emory Upton until Albert Wedemeyer looked at the German military machine as the epitome of efficiency and professionalism. For an American military disgusted with its minor role in a post-Civil War nation, the German military represented the best of what could be. It was no coincidence that U.S. Army dress uniforms of the late 19th century sported spiked helmets. quite similar in appearance to a Prussian pickelhaube.
The tragedy of World War II soon changed the American attitude towards the German military from admiration to revulsion. It was not until the cold war, with Federal Germany's entry into NATO, that opinions began to moderate. And now. in the 1990's, an age of diminished resources. we find that the Prussian army still has much to teach.
In this monograph the author explores yet another aspect of the Prussian army, the use of mobilizable reserves as the foundation of its military power. Forced by defeat to rely on reserve and militia forces to rebuild their army, the Prussians created a reserve system that allowed them to field a world class military force at a cost their small. economically strapped state could afford. With detail, yet brevity, the author examines how this highly successful "reserve army" came to be. noting both good and bad aspects of the system, and their possible impact on the U.S. Army today. Indeed, the implications for modern force planners are obvious. Above all, however, the author shows once again how critical an understanding of the past is for soldiers to prepare for the future. It is with that in mind that the Strategic Studies Institute is pleased to publish this historical report. .It just shouldn't have happened like this!" We don't know who exactly muttered these words on September 1. 1870, when the remnants of nearly 124.000 crack French troops surrendered to the Germans at the ancient city of Sedan. Perhaps it was Napoleon Ill. the Emperor of France, who personally surrendered after vainly trying to get himself killed in combat. Perhaps it was the French commander, Marshal Marie Edme Patrice de MacMahon. It could have easily been any private or lieutenant in France's shattered Army of Chalons. And if the embarrassment of surrender weren't enough, the German Army to which the capitulation was made was not an army of fellow military professionals, but an army of damned reservists and militiamen! "How could this have happened?" wondered many French soldiers.
Sedan, the climatic battle of the Franco-Prussian War (1870-71), was more than just a military disaster for France. It was the culmination of a clash between two entirely different military systems. MacMahon's French Army of Chalons was radically different in many respects from Prussian Chief of Staff Helmuth von Moltke's Army of the North German Confederation. The most glaring difference remembered by historians is the superiority of the Prussian General Staff and its command and control system over that of France. Remembered too are the differences in technology, such as the superiority of the German's breech loading Krupp field guns over France's muzzle loaders. Glossed over, sadly, is the subject of people. The Franco-Prussian War saw the well-trained, battle hardened, professional armies of France go toe-to-toe with the armies of the German states, led by powerful Prussia. The Prussian army was unique in that its very foundation of power lay in a structure that demanded the 1 large scale mobilization of reserve and militia soldiers. In the harsh courtroom of combat. Prussia's reserve system had proven superior. This, neglected fact may have mcre relevance than ever before for the U.S. Army. Faced with downsizing due to the end of the cold war. force planners must contend with developing an American army that will offer the biggest bang for a continually shrinking buck. In this planning atmosphere will inevitably arise the question of how to use the Reserve Components (the U.S. Army Reserve and the Army National Guard) in the Army's overall military strategy. Clearly. Reserve Component units offer an economical alternative to their more expensive Active counterparts. Questions remain, however. on the ability of the Reserves and National Guard to meet established standards of combat proficiency soon after mobilization. In the wake of such concerns, the experience of 19th century Prussia deserves another look. When one considers that the Prussian army, like our own. was designed for national power projection. as opposed to just regional defense, a relook becomes even more enticing. The next several pages provide this examination of the Prussian reserve system, both good and bad aspects, in order to present force planners with at least one more alternative for the future.
Ironically. the Prussian reserve system was born out of a Prussian military disaster at the hands of France. namely the battle of Jena-Auerstadt (October 14, 1806). Dr Richard Gabriel, a military historian at the U.S. Army War College. frankly noted, "Before Jena-Auerstadt people wondered if the current Prussian army was still the army of Frederick the Great. The answer was a resounding 'yes' and this was the whole problem!" 
1
2
The conquest of Prussia and defeat of her army in battle was not enough to satisfy Napoleon. however. The French Emperor also remembered the legacy of Frederick the Great and desired to ensure that Prussia would never again pose a military threat. The terms dictated to the Prussians at the Convention of Paris (September 8. 1808) were militarily harsh. Prussia's 220.000 man army was-to be permanently reduced to a mere 42,000. of which 22.000 could be infantry. 
4
Prussian General Gerhard Johan von Scharnhorst, the Army Adjutant General. was one of a number of officers charged by King Frederick William II to find out what was wrong with Prussia's army and fix it. Among the many reforms recommended. Scharnhorst's solution to the calamity of expected force reductions came in a memorandum published July 31, 1807, a few weeks after the Treaty of Tilsit formally ended hostilities between France and Prussia (as well as Prussia's tardy allies, the Russians). He proposed establishing a system where every infantry company would yearly furlough 20 of its senior and older soldiers. At the same time this company would receive 20 recruits as replacements. The cycle would continue year after year and had the effect of placing the most experienced soldiers into a reserve status. The reasoning was that these individuals would need little training upon mobilization, to the extent that they could be used as cadre for new units as well. Scharnhorst believed that a trained and mobilizable reserve of some 17,000 men would be available after about 3 years if this system were adopted. Only infantry was considered in Scharnhorst's scheme. as the training required of cavalry and artillerymen could not be maintained as easily under such a system. and also because mandatory reductions in these arms were not expected to be as severe as for the foot soldiers. In any case. this program came to be known as the Kruemper (from a German word meaning to "crumple") system.5 Surprisingly, the use of military reserves was not new to the Prussian army. Scharnhorst took his ideas from one Colonel von Below who had used a similar system in his own regiment since 1805.6 In fact. a similar 'furlough system had been discussed as far back as the reign of Frederick the Great. There were several reasons why these schemes were not implemented fully, however. The first was a simple fear of revolt against the Prussian throne if the general population was armed and trained in military matters. A second reason was the fact that the 18th century mind did not perceive war as a matter in which the general population should be involved. War was the final argument of kings. not of their people. To suggest otherwise was to imply that the people had the right of approval or disapproval over national military policy-truly unthinkable. A reserve system could lead to such an involvement by the general masses. Finally there was the question of time. When such matters as a reserve system surfaced again in 1787. there simply wasn't enough time to implement such a program before the Napoleonic thunderbolt hit. The world renowned lethargy of the Prussian court exacerbated matters.
Defeat in 1806, however, removed all arguments and Scharnhorst's Kruemper system was quickly adopted. Prussian King Frederick William II and his advisors realized that the country had little other choice given the treaty obligations forced upon them. Also the humiliation of the 1806 campaign provided the atmosphere where any reform was seriously considered as a viable alternative to the past. Further, the Kruemper system had the advantage of not only being in accordance with the Convention of Paris. but also of being of such a nature that it did not attract undue attention. As no new military units were actually raised for service to the Prussian crown, it is not surprising that the watchful French allowed the system to continue almost without interruption.
Continue it did and the Kruemper system proved enormously successful. There were problems in the beginning, of course. A report issued on May 10. 1810, stated that of 22.380 Kruemper soldiers available, only 11.213 were fit for duty. Changes were made to correct this problem and, as war between France and Prussia grew more likely, the number that each infantry company was allowed to furlough and replace grew dramatically. By the end of 1811. there were 31.259 furloughed soldiers fit for field duty and a further 8,410 fit for garrison responsibilities. Prussia's mandatory support for Napoleon's invasion of Russia took many of the Kruemper producing batialions out of production. Nevertheless. by October 1812, the number of furioughed soldiers fit for field duty was up to 33.337 whiile those fit for garrison service stood at 3.087. This, in effect. allowed the Prussians an infantry force more than double that allowed by treaty.'
The acid test for the Kruemper system came after Napoleon's disastrous retreat from Russia. With the decimation of the French field army. Prussia saw the chance for both an alliance with the Russians. and the opportunity to strike at the French while they were still weak. Lieutenant General Hans David Ludwig von Yorck. commander of Napoleon's Prussian contingent in Russia, had already taken the first step in the Convention of Tauroggen (December 30, 1812).8 This agreement with the Russians declared Yorck's contingent to be neutral and not subject to further orders from the French. King Frederick William completed the process by formally declaring war on France on March 16. 1813.9 Prior to this. the Kruemper system's wartime action plan had already been implemented to increase the size of the army.
The first increase in the size of the Prussian army was ordered by the King as soon as the Convention of Tauroggen was made public. This increase ordered the establishment of a reserve battalion of 801 men for each of the army's line infantry regiments. Theoretically, these were to consist of two thirds Kruemper and one third recruits. While some battalions were only able to form with one half of their men as Kruemper, some formations were able to do much better. Lieutenant General Frederick William von Buelow, for example, took the cadres of the depot (training) battalions of the 2d through 4th East Prussian Line Infantry Regiments to form three reserve battalions, all fully manned by Kruempersoldiers. On February 1,1813, a further increase in the size of the army was ordered. Seventeen more reserve battalions were formed, each of 801 men of which 85 were cadre drawn from the regular line regiments. and the rest Kruemper. The reserve battalions were initially attached to each of the line infantry regiments, but the armistice of August 1813 allowed the Prussians to reorganize. The reserve formations were formed into 12 reserve regiments, each consisting of three battalions. Normally. one reserve regiment was made organic to each Prussian infantry brigade (a three regiment formation nearly the size of a division). By all available accounts the reserve regiments performed admirably, so much so that in March 1815 they were redesignated as permanent line regiments (numbers 13 through 24).10
The Kruemper-based reserve regiments were not the only way the Prussian army was figuratively raised from the dead. On March 17,1813. King Frederick William formally authorized the establishment of the Prussian Landwehr (provincial militia). effectively instituting the French levee en masse in his own country. 
1
The public opinion of the Prussian masses. as opposed to the Prussian Court and Army, was by no means the blaze of indignation which the fate of its very near neighbors might have been expected to evoke, for they were still unoer ar illusion that War was merely a struggle between Governments. carried out with all possible respect for private interests, and it seemed to them a matter of indifference whether a few more hundred thousand fellow countrymen passed under the French yoke or remained under that of their own Monarch.
12 The reformers declared that this total disassociation of the army from the people for whom it fought had been the greatest military disaster of 1806. This disconnection, and its resulting lack of public support for the army or state policy, only amplified the lack of spirit among the soldiery, thus causing wretched field performance. Scharnhorst believed that the only way to correct this problem was to mobilize and arm the entire population, thereby permanently linking them with the military and state policy. 
13
Landwehr units were formed. Recruits were drawn from all males between the ages of 18 and 45, though exemptions were given to priests, teachers, some civil servants, and married men or those with children. 
1 4
5
The Landwehr trained initially on two days a week (Wednesday and Sunday, so as not to disrupt the economy too greatly) and after they received their equipment. in companies for a week. battalions for two more weeks and then in regiments for a further two weeks.` Then off they went to war. Every Prussian infantry brigade included one Landwehr regiment (the other two being one line and one reserve regiment) and half of all corps cavalry was militia. The entire IV Corps. in fact. was composed of militia troops. At first, most of the soldiers were wretchedly uniformed and poorly equioped for battle. Some. in fact. carried pikes instead of firearms. This in itself was not a problem as captured French weapons soon became available and also because early losses among the militia were so high. The lack of experience meant high casualties and many militiamen simply fell out along the way. The journal of the 13th Silesian Regiment noted:
On these forced marches. the consequences of the extremely poor clothing of the militia became apparent. Largely without greatcoats. in simple linen trousers. barefoot since their shoes came off in the bottomless mud-even with the best will and with the strongest of constitution. how could these poor militiamen, being quite unaccustomed to such exertion. put up with this? It was three days since they last had more than a mouthful of bread. as the damp spoiled the small stocks: there was even less brandy. too little to give the soldiers a ration. Filthy. exhausted. many fell to the grouna. and more still would die as they had to stay behind in hospital. sicK with fever.
The Landwehrbecame much better. however, learning the art of war on the university of the battlefield and fighting side by side with the regulars until the final act of Waterloo (June 18, 1815). General Yorck, now the Prussian I Corps commander, at once lamented the fact that he had received four of the worst militia battalions imaginable. At the battle of Loewenburg (August 21, 1813) he changed his opinion based on the performance of a battalion of the 5th Silesian Landwehr Infantry Regiment. The battalion slugged it out with French regulars all day, twice throwing them back into the village of Plagwitz at bayonet point. When, their ammunition gone. they were finally withdrawn, General Yorck ordered every regular line unit they passed to snap to attention and present arms. After the battle of Wartenburg (October 3, 1813), General August Niethardt von Gneisenau seconded Yorck's opinion of the militia when he wrote. -These young troops teach themselves how to fight. I only hope our commanders can make proper use of such a spirit in the army. 
'" 9
2 0
The victory over Napoleon permanently changed the nature of the Prussian army, unlike the other continental European powers who returned to military systems much like those prior to the French Revolution. For Prussia. the manifestation of the change came in the form of two legal statutes. The first was the National Defense Act of September 3, 1814. which not only fixed the size of the standing army to but one percent of the country's population, but also implemented permanent universal military conscription. 
21
22
2 3
24
2 5
This system fit Prussian military theory quite well. Senior Prussian military officials. as well as the King himself. had several serious problems with the physical arrangements. however, most concerning the status of the Landwenr. A primary complaint was simply that the militia was not as well trained or disciplined as the regular soldiers. The autumn maneuvers showed that there were indeed shortcomings in the performance of the Landwehr. and this brought a call from the regular army for more centralized control over the activities of the militia. The lack of prowess on the part of the Landwehr had its origins in several areas. For one, the economic weakness of the state led to the assignment to the Landwehr of soldiers, after only very sketchy training, who could not be accommodated by the regular army. The lack of funds also caused the reduction of drill time to one 1 4-day period per year. Finally, a number of Landwehr officers began to be recruited from among the Einjahrig-Freiwilliger. a group of officers required to serve only one year of active duty because of their status as students of medicine or other professions. This lack of training invariably manifested itself in the form of poor leadership.
There was probably a more serious concern about the Landwehr among the senior Prussian military, however. This was the question of the militia's political reliability. While most Prussian officers recognized the Landwehr's worth in mobilizing the national will in time of war, it soon became evident that this very fact gave the people a de facto outlet in which they could express their approval (or disapproval) about war policy itself. The Landwehr was an institution which belonged to the provinces and their people as opposed to the King. As an institution of the people, it could easily turn against the King's war policy when the people disagreed. For example, if a mobilization order went out, the Landwehr might not show up at all. If they did, and the people did not fully support the King's policies, some Prussian officers were genuinely afraid of which way the militia might shoot.
This situation leads many historians to conclude that most of the Landwehr's problems were contrived by the Prussian military. Contrived or not. the King was convinced enough to issue a decree in December 1819 that placed the militia under more regular army control. Some 34 Landwehr battalions were disbanded. local control was reduced. regular officers were assigned to all field commands, and combat formations were now incorporated directly into regular army units. A Prussian division, for example, consisted of a regular brigade, a Landwehr brigade, a cavalry brigade, plus artillery and technical troops. With such a fusion the Prussian military, and no doubt the King, hoped to not only increase combat efficiency, but also to expose the militia to the -proper" discipline and political views that traditionally had characterized the Prussian military. To the many reformers who had supported Scharnhorst. the changes meant that "the progress made towards a reconciliation between the army and civilian society would be reversed.' 
2 7
In September 1859, Prince William appointed General Albrecht von Roon to draw up a series of proposals to reform the military. William and von Roon were intimate friends and after receiving the General's blistering report on the state of the army in July 1858. the Prince Regent had no reservations about putting the wheels of change in motion. Von Roon's memorandum to William had specifically called for such things as an increase in the number of conscripts to be drafted each year, and the building of new military schools to support an increase in the size of the NCO and officer corps. Von Roon also complained about the lack of discipline, expertise and general military attitude (eigentlichen richtigen festen Soldatengeist he called it) of the militia. Von Roons remark about attitude, however, betrays the fact that his greater problem with the Landwehr was quite political, and quite honestly expressed the concerns of the regular military establishment as a whole. He wrote that the fact that "every Landwehrmann has become an elector, thanks to our present parliamentary form of government," meant that the state could not employ the militia like a normal military force but had to consider the wishes of its members. 
2 8
30
3 1
32
3 3
34
The soldiers of the Landwehr were reservists who had completed their fourth year. By law they were required to serve an additional 5 years in the Landwehr. In keeping with the regional nature of the Prussian army, the militia unit in which the soldier served was local and in the same district administered by the active army unit in which he served. He was liable for periodic training for periods of up to 2 weeks each. Again, this training was conducted by, and was the responsibility of, the local active component military unit. The Landwehrmann could voluntarily serve further training periods, normally with his old regular regiment, in hopes of qualifying for promotion. 
3 5
Today, however, history has come full circle. Force planners the world over are looking for methods to provide adequate defense without breaking the budget, and while taking advantage of the peace dividend delivered by the end of the cold war. It is interesting to note that the present Federal German Army, due to its treaty obligations, is now reducing its size and looking to convert to a "training army" as opposed to a "fighting army." 3 8 Many of the proposals for this "reserve army" would not be unfamiliar to tough old generals like Albrecht von Roon or his Prince Regent. For our own army, like that of one of our major allies, the Prussian reserve structure indeed has much to teach. Caution must be used however, for while the Prussian experience provides much to copy. there are things to avoid as well.
The first thing that one might notice about the Prussian reserve system is that several facets of the institution simply would not work in the United States. The United States is a democracy while, for most of its history. Prussia was an autocratic monarchy. This fact allowed the central government to institute changes without the advice and consent of its people. Things would not be so easy in the modern United States. From a purely military standpoint several things about the way Prussia formed her reserves would cause quite a stir within the American military, much less the general populace. Few officers. Active or Reserve Component. seem to like the idea of using reserve soldiers as "fillers" for active duty units. particularly active combat units. The Reserve Components would surely balk at the idea of having Active Component officers in charge of their larger formations. Universal conscription would find few supporters anywhere.
A potentially more touchy issue, however, is the Prussian treatment of their Landwehr. a component which (very) roughly corresponds to this country's National Guard. Force planners who consider the Prussian model should recall that the Germans stripped power from the Landwehr (thus "federalizing" their entire reserve structure) for more political reasons than ones military. One should remember crusty old General Albrecht von Roon snarling, "every Landwehrmann has become an elector, thanks to our present parliamentary form of government," noting that the state could no longer employ the militia without considering the opinions of the people who made it up. 3 9 Such a statement flies in the face of traditional American thinking, both political and military, on the issue. For while the competency of the U.S. Reserve Component is still a hotly debated topic, most involved people acknowledge the political wisdom of the Total Army concept as created in 1972 by General Creighton W. Abrams. This program came as a result of the chaos of the Vietnam conflict and sought to meld the Active and Reserve Components into a cohesive whole. Noted military writer Colonel Harry G.
By incorporating reserve combat brigades into active-Armv divisions, Gen Abrams sought to eliminate the disastrous Vietnam War fallacy that wars could be fought "in cold blood" without paying the political price for national mobilization. It was precisely what many saw as the reserves greatest weakness-their politicai sensitivity-that Gen Abrams recognized as their greatest strength. Unlike the draft. which had degenerated into a nationai disgrace. the reserve forces. he believed. -represented the true bridge between the active force and the American people. 
40
42
Regional Organization. The Prussian military system was formed around both reserve and active units which were stationed in and drew their manpower from a specific geographic portion of the state. This fostered a relationship between the military and the people which promoted public support when the "hometown" unit went to war. This. in turn, assisted the military in the morale building efforts that went into the training of the troops. The idea is not unlike the present day regional orientation of the British system (i.e.. the 23d Regiment. Royal Welsh Fusiliers) and as General Crosbie E. Saint noted of the Gulf War. -The moral ascendancy that US troops had when they knew their country was behind them can not be discounted." 
4 3
" Experience. To insure quality standards for their reserve soldiers and units. the Prussians used a flow through" system in obtaining their reserve and militia soldiers. No one could enter the reserves without 3 years of active military service, whether officer or enlisted. No one could then enter the Landwehr without at least 4 years as a reservist to a regular army unit. Such a system not only provides active duty know-how to reserve units, but it also serves to insure the retention of initial training skills and. again. helps shatter any jealousy between the reservist and active soldier. The Prussians were absolutely convinced that a soldier who had practiced his military skills on active duty made a better reservist or Landwehrmann. than one who had not. The campaign of 1870 seemed to back up that conclusion.
The items listed above should not be perceived as detailed guidance, but general principles. As such they hit home in several ways. specifically in regards to Reserve Component readiness. For example. the amount of time spent by typical National Guard and U.S. Army Reserve units in tending to administrative and planning tasks is quite large and. from personal experience, certainly detracts from the time available for training. For training to be provided, in total, by the Active Component would certainly mean not only more training time available, but also training of a quality that should theoretically be on a par with Active Component ur;'-. This would particularly be the case once the realizatjn hits home that, come hell or high water, these sn'ie reserve units would be deployed alongside the active unit training them when the shooting started.
Likewise. the Prussian flow-through system could well provide at least a partial solution to the current problem of too few prior service personnel in the reserves, a vexing issue which many feel particularly plagues the National Guard. Leadership problems were. rightly or wrongly, singled out in the aborted call-up of the Roundout Brigades during Operation DESERT STORM, and some think it no coincidence that only 45 percent of National Guard officers and 38 percent of National Guard enlisted have had more than 2 years active duty experience. 
4 4
Admit:'dly, modifying America's military system to partially duplicate that of Prussia will be require some serious overhauling and will be painfully slow. In the case of the flowthrough system, for example, there will be a need to begin at the lowest levels of the officer and enlisted personnel structure. and it will be years before these soldiers move on to positions of greater responsibility in the reserves. Filling the reserves' mid-level and senior-level positions with soldiers who have active duty experience is possible. but not immediately easy. Attrition would be the only equitable way to accomplish this. and care must be taken to insure that reservists who lack active duty experience are given a fair opportunity to advance their careers as well. Career programs may well have to be redone. for Reservists and Guardsmen in particular. All of this will take a great deal of time and this points out the fact that even a partial adoption of the Prussian model should be considered a long-range planning goal.
But even this will only become possible, however, if one other important aspect becomes a reality. Thai is the conversion of an all too prevalent attitude that looks upon the active army as solely a fighting force to a mindset that recognizes its additional mission as a national training force as well. Note that a complex reserve system such as Prussia's only worked well when all of its components worked together. No one facet was independent of another, no one facet could work alone If one aspect failed. the system failed. It was a system that integrated many different concepts into a workable whole because of the Prussian military's willingness to accept the fact that the army existed not only to fight and win wars. but to train the nation for war as well. This only happened because Prussian generals were willing to make the mental conversion from the era of Frederick the Great to a time more modern in its outlook. It is interesting to note that times have changed and Germany, once again, has changed with them. publicly announcing a desire to convert to a "training army." 
45
But the world is a fickle place and one can not guarantee a future of only short. small "police actions." Deployments requiring a relatively long build-up time, such as Operation DESERT SHIELD/STORM. are still a distinct possibility. Such military actions are vastly different from crisis response and may well be suited to a reserve army concept. Thus. the system developed by Prussia potentially provides many answers plaguing these same force planners embroiled in the Reserve-Active Component debate. We recommend that the system be objectively studied, jointly by both the Active and Reserve Components. Those items which don't fit the American way of war should be rejected, those which do adopted and fused into a workable whole. The secret of success will lie in determining what fits and what does not. Considering all alternatives, such as the ones presented here, is the first step. The result could very well be an armed forces structure that fits the nation's needs in all respects, to include economic considerations. Certainly, the future of the nation, and its military, deserve nothing less. The chief idea was to arouse a moral. religious and patriotic spirit in the nation to instil into it again courage. confidence. readiness for every sacrifice in behalf of independence from foreigners and for the national honor. and to seize the first favorable opportunity to begin the bloody and hazardous struggle. Cambridge, Ont: RAFM. 1984. p. 5. Normally the officers chosen to lead the Landwehr were retired military officers or officers released from active service due to the force reductions of 1808. Often officers from the FreiwIlliger battalions (volunteer units raised and trained at private expense for service to the crown) were used to augment the militia. The Landsturm ("landstorm") were local defense units hastily formed to protect the nearby area from French marauders or deserters. 17. Hofschroer 
MAJOR
7.
7.
18. Ibid, p. 36. 19. Ibid. p. 37. 20. Craig, pp. 60-61.
C-1 U.S. ARMY 
WAR COLLEGE Major General William A. Stofft Commandant STRATEGIC STUDIES INSTITUTE Acting Director Dr
Research Dr. Gary L. Guertner