# ID: 1c50bc626cb14395b5a86363fdc1c487
# Title: Prussia and the Evolution of the Reserve Army: a forgotten lesson of history
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1992.0
# Fulltext:
Sedan, the climatic battle of the Franco-Prussian War (1870-71), was more than just a military disaster for France.
It was the culmination of a clash between two entirely different military systems.
MacMahon's French Army of Chalons was radically different in many respects from Prussian Chief of Staff Helmuth von Moltke's Army of the North German Confederation.
The most glaring difference remembered by historians is the superiority of the Prussian General Staff and its command and control system over that of France.
Remembered too are the differences in technology, such as the superiority of the German's breech loading Krupp field guns over France's muzzle loaders.
Glossed over, sadly, is the subject of people.
The Franco-Prussian War saw the well-trained, battle hardened, professional armies of France go toe-to-toe with the armies of the German states, led by powerful Prussia.
The Prussian army was unique in that its very foundation of power lay in a structure that demanded the 1 large scale mobilization of reserve and militia soldiers.
In the harsh courtroom of combat.
Prussia's reserve system had proven superior.
This, neglected fact may have mcre relevance than ever before for the U.S. Army.
Faced with downsizing due to the end of the cold war.
force planners must contend with developing an American army that will offer the biggest bang for a continually shrinking buck.
In this planning atmosphere will inevitably arise the question of how to use the Reserve Components (the U.S. Army Reserve and the Army National Guard) in the Army's overall military strategy.
Clearly.
Reserve Component units offer an economical alternative to their more expensive Active counterparts.
Questions remain, however.
on the ability of the Reserves and National Guard to meet established standards of combat proficiency soon after mobilization.
In the wake of such concerns, the experience of 19th century Prussia deserves another look.
When one considers that the Prussian army, like our own.
was designed for national power projection.
as opposed to just regional defense, a relook becomes even more enticing.
The next several pages provide this examination of the Prussian reserve system, both good and bad aspects, in order to present force planners with at least one more alternative for the future.