# ID: 1cb513c08c4a457f8acd56cf479b696c
# Title: Chinas Use of Power and Implications for the United States Military
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Over the last two decades, with US military forces primarily focused on conflict in the Middle East, China's power projection proliferated from the Indo-Pacific region and spread Beijing's influence across all US geographic combatant command (COCOM) areas of responsibility (AORs). China's efforts put US national interests and security at risk and challenged the presence of US hard power resources in regions outside the sustainable operational reach of the People's Liberation Army (PLA). To fill the gap in the PLA's capabilities, China fostered relationships outside its immediate borders and challenged the Western-dominated status quo across the globe.
An operational framework (operational close, operational deep, and strategic deep) serves to understand the proliferation of China's influence across three US COCOMs: INDOPACOM, CENTCOM, and AFRICOM. Differences in Eastern and Western thought underpin the difficulty faced by US planners developing operational and strategic plans to address competition. Theoretical definitions of power resources and behaviors across a geographically board arena, coupled with an understanding of organizational culture, provide clarity to China's regionally-focused objectives to achieving a "China Dream" of national rejuvination. US COCOMs, therefore, plan against the threat China's rising competition provokes. Encouragement of synergy amongst COCOMs, flexible and dynamic doctrinal changes, and a whole-of-government approach address challenges relevent to the US military.
15.
Thank you to my monograph director, Dr. Dan Cox, for his tireless guidance and encouragement in developing my interests and thoughts into this monograph. Thank you to my seminar leader, Colonel Larry Geddings, whose candor and "things to consider" always provided valuable insight to me in my endeavor to conduct thorough research and continue my war against passive voice. Special thanks to Ms. Amanda Karlin from the Defense Intelligence Agency and Ms. Cindy Hurst from the Foreign Military Studies Office for their profound insight on China and eastern thought, and their unwavering support. To my fellow SAMS classmates, thank you for your feedback, motivation, and humor through the monograph process. Last but not least, I am grateful to have the love and support from my amazing husband, Matt, through   This military structure allowed the United States to ensure its national defense against near-peer, non-near-peer, state, and non-state competitors through outward projection of influence and force.
The United States, therefore, maintained an offensive posture. As regional threats emerged, priorities and allocated resources of COCOMs shifted to counter the determined effects of perceived adversaries.
In an effort to stay ahead of emerging threats, including China, and remain the dominant superpower, US military planners must strive to understand problems across a broader spectrum, create opportunities for shared understanding across all COCOMs, and conceptualize solutions outside the limitations of current doctrine. In doing this successfully, acting in concert with all elements of national power, the US military can remain the world's premier fighting force, operating with available means to achieve politically driven national ends.
With US forces primarily focused on conflict in the Middle East, China's power projection spread Beijing's influence across all US geographic COCOMs, proliferating from the Indo-Pacific region and putting at risk US national interests and security. China challenged the presence of hard power in regions it was unable or unwilling to project its military. China fostered relationships outside its immediate borders due, in part, to a modernizing society in need of an increased supply of natural resources. This realization highlighted the necessity for cross-COCOM communication and coordination to counter the potentially threatening effects of this proliferation.
To achieve these priorities and resource requirements, China incorporated the use of hard and soft power, or what political scientist, Joseph Nye, refers to as smart power, focused on key actors in South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. As such, China's areas of interest resembled a operational framework, each with separate priorities and efforts, in operational close, operational deep, or strategic deep regions, closely aligning with US geographic COCOMs. 
1
2
3
The Middle East, or the US Central Command (USCENTCOM) AOR, occupies China's "operational deep" fight. This region remained important to China's operational framework due to its abundant resources, which supported its growing industrial base. Unlike in South Asia, the primary way to project power was through soft, versus hard means. Infrastructure development, trade deals, and gaining favor with Middle Eastern leaders were primary approaches China pursued to secure favor in the region, while simultaneously competing with US and Russian initiatives and actions.
Finally, Africa, or the US Africa Command (USAFRICOM) AOR, becomes China's "strategic deep" fight, focused on peacekeeping operations to enable politically and economically driven "win-win" situations. 
4
5
Globally, China provided influence with its soft power behavior using soft and hard power resources to set conditions to deliver hard power effects. By exercising all instruments of national power, China tested the limits of its operational and strategic reach and remained aligned with the goals set forth in the People's Republic of China (PRC) national defense policy. The imperatives of the Chinese defense policy rallied around modernization and fostered a common cause of its entire population from all ethnic groups.
6
7
In light of increased Chinese influence across the globe, the United States must recognize when, where, and how all forms of Chinese power projection subvert the effects of military hard power projection. As China continues to target long-standing and fragile alliances, increase its natural resource interests, and challenge the status-quo for great power basing, the United States must create a framework and posture appropriately for mutually supporting efforts. Furthermore, these efforts should transcend all COCOMs to ensure the security of US interests, always from a position of strength. 
8
In the face of tragedy, hope was given to this prospect, captured in the 2002 NSS as, "today, the international community has the best chance since the rise of the nation-state in the seventeenth century to build a world where great powers compete in peace instead of continually prepare for war." 9 This sentiment, echoed in the 2006 National Defense Strategy (NDS), heightens the need for an investigation of China's actions, not in ensuring peace but exploiting opportunities to strengthen its global posture using various forms of power. This is not a first look at China's attempt to strengthen its global standing, nor is the use of a combination of power resources and behaviors new when attempting to gain a relative advantage over global competitors. The results of this study may be useful to military strategic planners to achieve synergy across multiple COCOMs in response to a single great power competitor, like China. To do this effectively, it is important to understand the concept of powerits types, scopes, domains, and the intended and unintended effects of each. By doing so, the application of traditional realist views on power, and the application of power's effects on strategy, can inform strategic decisions when posturing military forces in response to China's presence or actions. The study of writings that categorize power, including those of early twentieth century British realist, E.H. Carr, and contemporary writer, Joseph Nye, provide insight on relevant planning considerations against perceived threats. Carr describes international power in three categories: 1) Military Power, 2) Economic Power, and 3) Power Over Opinion. 
10
conditions. 11
Second, a literature review focuses on the delineation between the types of power and how the interplay between Chinese and US power projection affects global affairs and respective interests.
Third is the description of the research methodology for the study and includes the procedure for case study selection and the analysis of three case studies. The fourth, fifth, and sixth sections contain the analysis of three case studies -the nine-dash line and Spratly Islands, Iran, and The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), respectively. Finally, the conclusion discusses the findings of the study, answering the research questions and proving the hypothesis, and provides recommendations for US military actions in respective AORs.
Over the last two decades, the United States' strategy to ensure homeland defense revolved around maintaining dominant military influence abroad. It is vital to recognize the potential threat to national interests, primarily focused on resources and diplomatic influence, China conveyed across a broad combination of hard and soft resources and behavior. The United States continued to maintain a hard power approach to national security while China continued to build its capabilities and expand its influence in space predominantly occupied by the United States as well as geographic locations of little interest to the United States.
As China continues to grow as an economic power, its leaders recognize that effective power projection can actualize Chinese influence in global affairs. This section presents a summary of key points for analysis of China's power projection and the potential problems its proliferation poses for US force projection. Outlined in its 2015 Military Strategy white paper, China maintains that in a changing world, the Chinese people continue an endeavor to realize the "China Dream" of great national rejuvenation. 12 To achieve this rejuvenation, the strategy asserts that maintained peace, pursued development, and shared prosperity is key. 
13
First, conceptualizing a Chinese mindset reveals how China possibly developed its strategy. Accordingly, an exploration of China's actions across multiple US COCOMs will pinpoint what China sees as a threat to its "China Dream." Further, understanding the types of power gives clues to how China projects power. Finally, the analysis of actions asserts how Chinese power projection threatens US interests and security.
Recognizing Chinese strategy as ambiguous underpins its main difference from Western security strategy. A comparison of Chinese and US strategies' resemble the differences between the board games "Go" and "Chess." Go personifies the Eastern approach to strategy and world affairs, generally viewed as a humanist approach with the potential that a situation will play into one's favor. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Carl von Clausewitz viewed the ultimate military goal as the destruction of an adversarial army. Conversely, Chinese strategy places a premium on the deconstruction of an enemy. Driven by efficiencies, deconstruction, or bringing an enemy over to one's side, takes much less energy to achieve than actions and resources required for the total destruction of an army. 
21
22
23
What China Sees as a Threat to its "China Dream"
Chinese policy lacks, compared to US security strategy and policy, the specificity of its threats. Unlike current US national security, defense, and military strategies, that identify China as a threat, China's state documents maintain a tone of intended peace, rather than conflict, with other global powers. The term "threat" is used throughout state security documents, but "who" is the threat remains unstated while "what" is the threat focuses mainly on the intangibles China views as potentially tarnishing its legitimacy to the world. In China's 2015 Military Strategy, the United States is referenced twice: first, acknowledging the US "rebalancing" of military presence and alliances in the region and second, fostering a new model of military structure mirroring the US armed forces. 
24
Arguably more important than military parity is China's concentration on power diplomacy. Since taking office in 2012, President Xi Jinping proclaimed China would undergo a period of strategic opportunity, enabled by a powerful economy, to bolster civil and military development. 
25
Department of Defense budget is projected at $686 billion for fiscal year 2019. 
27
Militarily, PKOs afford the opportunity to gain real-life experience operating below the threshold of high-order war and the opportunity to gather intelligence. This is important considering the  Power. Published in 1990, the essay discusses five trends that contribute to a diffusion of power amongst global actors -economic independence, transnational actors, nationalism in weak states, spread of technology, and changing political issues. 
29
30
31
32
China embraces diffusion of power by investing heavily in cultivating its peaceful image to the world.
To China, the proliferation of power takes many forms across the power spectrum, including economic driven initiatives through Asia and the Middle East and peacekeeping efforts in Africa. In any case, the underlying intent is rooted deep in the "China Dream" to emerge from the "century of humiliation" as a prosperous and proud people. 
33
34
The biggest threat China's methods of power projection pose to US interests and security is competition for access to the global commons. With China's influence growing in Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, US forces must counter China's regional activities to maintain a legitimate presence. Recalling China's strategic approach towards global threats, it is prudent to acknowledge indirect action likely aims to achieve direct results. Along this line of thinking, China's hardening of fortifications in the SCS and an increase in naval presence may welcome a predictable US response. Additionally, focused efforts by China in the SCS likely redirect US attention and resources away from China's interests in Africa. This allows, to some extent, China's actions in Africa to remain largely self-serving and exploitative. 
35
A logical goal in the "China Dream" of national rejuvenation is regaining its status as the predominant regional hegemon. Critical to this goal are three overarching regional interests outlined in a 2018 RAND study on the BRI. First is the aim to protect Chinese sovereignty and territorial integrity, including upholding claims to disputed territories and an increased naval presence. Considering China's disputed territorial claims, the SCS remains a geostrategic imperative in the effort to maintain control of this region. Second, China looks to promote and protect its trade, investment, and other linkages to the region to support its economic growth.
Lastly, China seeks to promote and expand its influence over Southeast Asian cooperation while minimizing the influence of external actors, including the United States. 
36
35
Implied in China's overarching regional interests is maintaining freedom of navigation (FON) on the SCS and unimpeded access through the Strait of Malacca. Paramount to the "road" portion of the BRI, China's westward expansion of influence helps circumvent eastern tensions while strengthening political and economic ties preventing strategic encirclement. 
37
As the world's largest oil importer in 2017, China receives up to eighty percent of its oil imports through the Strait of Malacca, primarily from the Middle East and Africa. 
38
39
40
In its effort to ensure security of its natural resource requirements, maintain a strong economy, and prevent strategic encirclement, China is becoming a major actor in the Middle 
37
38
39
40
East. The Middle East also acts as a crossroads for the BRI, providing both sea and land nodes. 
41
To maintain access, China retains cordial relations with every country or governing authority in the Middle East -something no other major power in the world possesses. 
42
43
44
45
41
46
47
48
While benefiting from trade with Iran, as an importer of energy resources and an exporter to Iran's growing market, China also leverages this relationship against the United States' ability to project power globally. 
49
50
China remains the principle external actor on the African continent. As of 2015, China maintained positive diplomatic relations with 51 of the 54 African nations. As such, China remains Africa's top trading partner and distributes roughly half of its total foreign aid throughout the African continent. 
51
52
Ultimately, China's activities in Africa ensure its resource security while gaining political legitimacy and global recognition and respect from other great power nations. 
53
54
55
The primary goal of this study is to provide a structured, focused comparative case study analysis. The research objective is to test questions that related to China's use of power projection and implications to the US military, using a combination of heuristic and theory to test against case studies. The case study comparison aims to provide a structured reflection of the research objectives, regionally focusing in South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. The study compares three regionally focused case studies that address three research questions. This method provides structure and these questions provide focus aimed at relating China's use of power to possible US military responses. Gathering data from primary and secondary sources enables an analysis of comparative findings pertinent to measure the validity of the proposed hypothesis.
This section provides an overview of the case study comparison process, data collection, and regionally focused concepts addressing limitations and delimitations ubiquitous throughout the study. This section is divided into six sub-sections: introduction, research questions, case study comparison process, limitations and delimitations, assumptions, and summary.
Three research questions guide this study. To provide qualitative results, each question is applied to each of the three case studies highlighting unique circumstances and characteristics of each region. This study applies the US doctrinal concept operational framework as a lens to understand the Chinese strategic landscape within operational close, operational deep, and strategic deep areas. This framework remains geographically within the USINDOPACOM, USCENTCOM, and USAFRICOM COCOMs, respectively. Comparison of case studies from each COCOM against the research questions determines the validity of the proposed hypothesis.
First, how does China's global power projection threaten US national interests and security? This question aims to determine the assertion that China's power projection will threaten US national interests and security. This is the starting point of the analysis because it creates a baseline understanding of China's capabilities, strengths, limitations, and constraints, and brings to light the general methodology for its growth as a great power. The researcher attempts to provide clarity regarding China's power resources and the expected behavior of each resource by region, focusing on the what, where, and when aspects of China's approach and use of each to regain its status as a great power.
Second, is China's power projection across all instruments of national power setting conditions to achieve national strategic goals? This question builds on assertions made from research question one. It addresses the "with what" aspects of China's power resources, which span all instruments of national power -diplomacy, information, military, and economy. Analysis of this question, by region, determines the feasibility, suitability, and acceptability of China's expected projection of power to create sustainable effects.
Finally, how can the US military posture itself to create synergy across multiple COCOMs and address China's power projection? Each of the case studies highlights unique, regional challenges for the US military, as a hard power resource delivering soft and hard power behavior, simultaneously. This allows the researcher to determine major successes and shortfalls in sustaining a global presence and measures regional effectiveness. From the first and second research questions, the researcher makes assertions regarding the rebalancing and improved integration of the joint force to provide a more effective, synergistic posture. This remains vitally important to determine the validity of the hypothesis since the US primary power resource remains the military.
In an effort to provide structure and focus to this process, the study uses Alexander George's and Andrew Bennett's case study analysis method. This methodology provides structure to the study by guiding and standardizing data collection that results in a systemic comparison of the case studies' findings. 
56
This method proves effective in comparing three case studies and generating data by answering the same three research questions in each case. Through this process, context is established providing further focus to effectively address the research questions. Well-defined research objectives and a research strategy establish a guide for the selection and analysis of the case studies. To limit the scope of the study and enable explanation of findings, variables are established that remain standardized across all case studies. 57
There were three limitations to this study. The first limitation is its classification level.
All material is maintained at the unclassified level to ensure the widest possible distribution. The result is a limited depth of analysis, which, to the fullest extent, may include classified documents and correspondence. As such, the sample size of relevant and available documents to this topic is relatively small. The second limitation is the lack of access to and specificity from many Chinese strategy. While adequate studies exist on China's plans for power projection across all instruments of national power, consensus on China's way forward, and the domestic and global impacts, remains divided amongst scholars. Finally, definitions of the types of power referenced throughout the study are derived from geopolitical and military-focused sources. As such, determining metrics that measure a comparison between varying types of power effects was inferred.
The study provides delimitations in two ways. First, the scope of the study is limited to the last two decades and is geographically focused. Second, the study limits the US view to that of military action, not a whole-of-government approach, when examining responses to China's power projection.
The study assumes China's actions are of an adversarial nature. Dividing China's regional interests into an operational framework geographically resembling US COCOMs asserts the United States views, and develops strategic and operational plans against, China as an adversary. Therefore, the study assumes that China views the United States as an adversary and remains dynamically engaged against the United States across areas of interest.
The study also assumes the use of power was consistent across all strategies, and the use of varying types of power was overlapping to achieve a desired effect. As such, types of power are delineated based on key factors and the ways of employment of an instrument of national power. This assumption leads to the understanding that each instrument of national power could be used in a coercive or persuasive manner. This study also assumes nuclear weapons and their proliferation were generalized to military power and can be factored into a strategy as a hard or soft means of projecting power; using them as a hard power, coercive act to achieve an end or possessing them to encourage co-opted, attractive approaches to achieve common goals.
Operational Close: China's Nine-Dash Line and the Spratly Islands Defining the nine-dash line and analyzing the geostrategic and military importance of the Spratly Islands to China's national strategic objectives serves to provide logic to China's actions in this region. As China's "operational close" fight, geographically within the USINDOPACOM AOR, the SCS represents the PLA's primary theater of operations where it conducts operations short of the threshold for high-order war including unilateral training exercises within all domains. US presence in the region threatens China's prospects for regional hegemony as economic and political competition extends into military contention. The nine-dash line refers to territorial claims, primarily in the SCS, and remains the highly contested epicenter of China's military efforts to become and remain a regional hegemon.
The nine-dash line is China's historical claim to the "traditional maritime boundary line" dating back centuries and revived following the Chinese Civil War. 
58
59
Modern day contention links to the nine-dash line's revival. The Kuomintang Nationalist Government, which fled to Taiwan due to the rise of the CCP, in effect bequeathed to the PRC the claim along with its regional disputes. Taiwan's own dispute extended to Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, and the Philippines, whose territorial and jurisdictional claims manifested as competition for natural resources increased. 
60
61
58
59
60
61 Jeffrey A. Bader, "The U.S. and China's Nine-Dash Line: Ending the Ambiguity," Brookings, last modified February 6, 2014, accessed December 1, 2018, https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/the-u-sand-chinas-nine-dash-line-ending-the-ambiguity/.
"historical claims" as it exploits the ambiguity of the UNCLOS definition of "historic title." This, along with China's vague and misleading strategic messaging, leaves opportunities to justify the creation of habitable islands within the nine-dash line in an attempt to extend the operational reach of its civil and military efforts. 
62
The Spratly Islands archipelago consists of more than 100 small islands or reefs and covers an area of nearly 158,000 square miles within the SCS. These islands have no indigenous inhabitants but are occupied by Chinese military garrisons, and in limited capacity Malaysian, Filipino, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese military personnel and garrisons. Of the claimant nations, China, Taiwan, and Vietnam claim the archipelago in its entirely. China and Taiwan's claims are predicated on historic precedence, which amplifies the contention among nations. Brunei, Malaysia, and the Philippines look to international law, specifically UNCLOS, for territorial claims. 
63
64
65
66
China's game of balancing its ambition of regional hegemony with regional stability remains calculated in an effort to maintain a level of perceived aggression below the threshold that would warrant kinetic action from the United States and its allies. In order for China to rise as the dominant power in Asia, it must be seen as a credible competitor to those projecting opposition. China must create an image of itself that attracts support and builds legitimacy in the eyes of those countries from which it aims to gain support.
In the SCS, China has ceased substantial land reclamation projects but continues to build infrastructure on three outposts and improve infrastructure on as many as seven artificial islands in the Spratly archipelago. While these larger islands are capable of supporting military operations, no permanent large-scale air or naval presence has been witnessed. 
67
68
As Eliot Cohen asserts in his book, The Big Stick, "the point is not to impoverish or subjugate, much less absorb those countries; rather, to ensure that they become part of a hierarchical system at the top of which is the government of Beijing." 
69
Nearly one-third of global shipping passes through the SCS annually, with China, Taiwan, Japan, and South Korea accounting for the preponderance of that global market share. 
70
72
73
71 Ibid.
72 "How is China's energy footprint changing?" China Power.
military operations across the domains of land, sea, air, space, cyberspace, and the electromagnetic spectrum during a conflict." 74 Modernization and development efforts weighted towards ground, air, naval, and missile forces allow for power projection during peacetime and a robust capability to contest US military presence approaching the threshold of high-order war. 
75
76
Iran also plays a role in the "China Dream" of national rejuvenation. As China's "operational deep" fight, geographically within the USCENTCOM AOR, this region serves as a shaping theater that enables the CCP's ability to build upon its political clout, strengthen its economic ties, and proliferate its military capabilities and influence. 77 Key to enabling these efforts in Iran is maintaining economic ties revolving around energy resources -Iran's export lifeline. The China-Iran relationship provides China access to and within the Middle East as it continues to assess the operational environment, shaping the physical domains through interconnected economic and political influences, to expand its national objectives. 77 US Joint Staff, JP 3-0, Operations 2018, V-9. In general, shaping activities help set conditions for successful theater operations. Shaping activities include long-term persistent and preventive military engagement, security cooperation, and deterrence actions to assure friends, build partner capacity and capability, and promote regional stability. They help identify, deter, counter, and/or mitigate competitor and adversary actions that challenge country and regional stability. China and Iran possess many similarities that make their partnership in the Middle East prudent and predictable. They share an anti-Western narrative towards governance, a similar view of their standing in the world, and mutual political, economic, and military dependencies. These ties shift geostrategic balancing against the United States, as the global attitude towards China in the Middle East continues to improve. 
78
80
78 Harold and Nader,
China and Iran: Economic,
Political,
and Military Relations,
ix;
Scobell et al.
79
81
83
84
85
China receives a relatively low percentage of its overall energy requirements from Iran despite China being the top destination for Iranian oil. Iran routinely fulfills approximately eight percent of the Chinese demand, which pales in comparison to the ratio of oil exports from Iranian oil producers. 
86
81
87
88
89
Despite the perceived strength of the China-Iran alliance, divergent interests provide opportunity for the United States to remain a key actor in the Middle East, since US actions have the potential to provoke Iranian actions or verbal threats. Iran's naval forces are inferior to US naval forces, however, any attempt by the Iranian Navy to block the Strait of Hormuz, perhaps in response to US imposed sanctions, will disrupt the flow of oil from the GCC producers. 
90
88 Guy Taylor and Dan Boylan, "China moves to cash in after Trump exits Iran nuclear deal," The Washington Times, June 7, 2018, accessed January 24, 2019, https://www.washingtontimes.com/ news/2018/jun/7/china-steps-business-iran-after-trump-exits-nuclea/. Fortunately for President Xi Jinping, the issue of border security is largely an issue of the past. In 1996, with the development of a cooperative security arrangement referred to as the "Shanghai Five," China came together with Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan to negotiate a series of treaties to demilitarize nearly 4,300 miles of border. 
93
94
Grygiel, Great Powers and Geopolitical Change (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 2006), 164. 92
93
94
project power outside of Asia, provides added leverage with the Iranian regime to ensure a geographic foothold within the Middle East. As seen throughout the region, China accomplishes this primarily through economic and political means, with only modest involvement from the PLA. 
95
96
Among this cohort of disparate states, China intends to break the post-Cold war paradigm that Western liberal democracy is the prominent form of governance. 97 This is particularly enticing to Middle Eastern countries, whose collective energy reserves satisfy global requirements, since China has taken a generally non-judgmental stance towards hot-button Western issues, including human rights. 
98
95
96
Leonard,
What Does China Think? 96. 98
China's growing presence in Africa validates the persistent desire to project power and expand its operational reach outside of Asia. As China's "strategic deep" fight, geographically within the USAFRICOM AOR, Africa serves as a theater of operations focused on peacekeeping to enable politically and economically driven "win-win" situations. This focus serves multiple purposes, primarily aiming to gain legitimacy with international organizations through participating in UN PKOs, securing trade routes and natural resource reserves, and providing a theater for the PLA to conduct tactical and operational level operations below the threshold of high-order war. The PLA's ability to conduct such operations allows units to exercise specialty skills, stress test sustainment support capabilities, and increase flexibility through secured basing.
These shaping operations do not ensure China's immediate defense and security, or its economic survival, but does allow China to gain political favor and economic opportunity far outside of its sustainable military operational reach.
China's actions in Africa deserve examination, especially as its economic, political, and military influence continuous to grow. By strengthening ties with African nations, China continues to strengthen its position among African leaders and the international community.
These efforts facilitate increasingly exploitative operations in support of national rejuvenation.
Chinese attention towards African coastal countries, such as Djibouti, Sudan, and South Africa, are prudent and consistent with a broad view of the BRI objectives. However, China's focus on inland African countries, what author, Jeffrey Herbst, refers to as "hinterlands," does not follow the logic of achieving an effective occupation near littoral nodes linking the Maritime Silk Road to a Chinese controlled land bridge. 
99
99
111
118
120
Analysis of China's use of power indicates Chinese activities threaten US interests. Case studies highlight instances, by region, where varied but deliberate methods of Chinese power projection counters US activities.
Visible in named efforts, including the BRI, China continues with its aim to achieve a "China Dream" of national rejuvenation. President Xi proclaims China will accomplish this transformation through a period of strategic opportunity focused on civil and military development utilizing increased economic power. China continues to maneuver through all domains, across the full spectrum of power resources and behaviors, primarily using an enhanced PLA bolstered by increased spending, organizational reform, and modernization programs. 
121
123
Brokerage of strong and lasting alliances and partnerships remains a theme throughout US strategic correspondence, including the NSS, NDS, and COCOM posture statements. The commodity ostensibly linked to alliances and partnership, and continuously competed for, is access. Access is what underpins US efforts to maintain its global presence. The backbone of persistent access is the combined force cultivated by enduring partnerships and alliances. To maintain this access, the United States must focus its policies towards challenging China's strategic flexibility. 
125
These efforts must aim to challenge China within all domains to stress their capabilities and 
123
125 Grygiel,
Great Powers and Geopolitical Change,
171.
Due to China's increasing ability to compete across the strategic landscape, the United States must develop creative ways to attract new and maintain current security partners. The US military approach, nested with the NDS and NSS, must communicate a narrative reflecting moral strength and democratic values to set conditions for mutually supporting efforts. Whether in training or when conducting operations by, with, and through a host nation, the US military must remain the partner of choice within highly competitive and emerging theaters. Professor and organizational theorist, Jamshid Gharajedaghi, brings to light a profound realization about winning a war of narratives within his discussion of systems principles, stating "the world is not run by those who are right," rather, it is "run by those who can convince other they are right." 
126
130
Joint doctrine, as the set of fundamental principles that guides military action in support of national objectives, is based on current force structures and materiel and provides insight on how, not what, to think about operations. 
131
RAND Cooperation, to investigate the changes needed to face future problems. Seven updates made to US Army Field Manual 3-0, Operations since the end of the Vietnam War serves as an example of informed and aggressive change synonymous with doctrine keeping pace with, or out pacing, emerging large-scale threats. 
132
27 Ibid.; Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Chief Financial Officer, Defense Budget Overview: United States Department of Defense Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Request (Washington, DC: Government Printing Press, 2018), 1-2, accessed December 13, 2018, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/ 1/Documents/pubs/FY2019-Budget-Request-Overview-Book.pdf.
27 Ibid.; Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Chief Financial Officer, Defense Budget Overview: United States Department of Defense Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Request (Washington, DC: Government Printing Press, 2018), 1-2, accessed December 13, 2018, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/ 1/Documents/pubs/FY2019-Budget-Request-Overview-Book.pdf.
30  
30  
36
44  
44  
US Joint Staff, JP  
3-0, Joint Operations 2018, GL-14. Operational reach is defined as the distance and duration across which a force can successfully employ military capabilities.
Daniel Hurst, "China-Japan-South Korea Trilateral (Finally)  Meets Again," The Diplomat, May 12, 2018, accessed March 11, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2018/05/china-japan-south-korea-trilateralfinally-meets-again/.
4 Cindy Hurst, "The Changing Strategic Design of Chinese Peacekeepers: In Line with UN or Chinese Goals?" Foreign Military Studies Office, April 19, 2017, accessed November 1, 2018, https:// community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195103.
Ben Connable, Jason H. Campbell, and Dan Madden, Stretching and Exploiting Thresholds for  High-Order War: How Russia, China, and  Iran Are Eroding American Influence Using Time-Tested Measures Short of War (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2016), ix, accessed December 17, 2018, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1003.html. The terms outlined in this report are used throughout this paper and are common amongst friendly and adversarial employment of the instruments of national power as measures short of war. The terms used from this report include high-order war, threshold, threshold stretching and threshold exploitation.
Information Office of the State Council, The People's Republic of China, China's National Defense in 2010, accessed October 28, 2018, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/ 1353697/chinas-military-strategy-white-papers/.
Center for Strategic and International Studies, "Is China contributing to the United Nations' mission?" China Power, last modified August 3, 2018, accessed October 25, 2018, https://chinapower.csis.org/china-un-mission/.
James Mattis, Summary of the National Defense Strategy of the United States of America (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 1, accessed September 29, 2018, https://dod. defense.gov/Portals/ 1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
Donald J. Trump, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House, 2002), vi, accessed October 28, 2018, http://nssarchive.us/NSSR/2002.pdf.
Edward Hallett Carr, The Twenty Years' Crisis, 1919-1939: An  Introductory to the Study of International Relations (New York: Perennial, 2001), 108.
Joseph S. Nye, The Future ofPower (New York: Public Affairs, 2011), 21.   
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, accessed October 28, 2018, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/CASI/documents/ Admin/2015%20White%20Paper-Eng%20and%20Ch.pdf, 1.
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, 1.
François Jullien, A Treatise on Efficacy: Between Western and Chinese Thinking, trans. Janet Lloyd (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2004), 17.
G. John Ikenberry, After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Resistance, and the Rebuilding of Order After Major Wars (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), 11.
Merriam-Webster, "Go," accessed December 13, 2018, https://www.merriam-webster.com/ dictionary/go.
Merriam-Webster, "Chess," accessed December 13, 2018, https://www.merriam-webster. com/dictionary/chess.
Jullien, A Treaties on Efficacy: Between Western and Chinese Thinking, vii.   
Jeremy E. Henkel, "A Treatise on Efficacy: Between Western and Chinese Thinking (review)," PhilosophyEast and West 56, no. 2 (2006): 347-451, accessed December 11,  
2018, https://philpapers.org/ archive/JERATO.pdf.20  Jullien, A Treaties on Efficacy: Between Western and Chinese Thinking, 15.21 Ibid.,47.   22  Ibid., 1.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Peter Paret and Michael Howard (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 1976), 80.
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic ofChina, China's Military  Strategy, 3, 19.   
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, 6.
The World Bank, "The World Bank in China," last modified September 26, 2018, accessed December 13, 2018, https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/china/overview.
Scott Harold and Alireza Nader, China and Iran: Economic, Political, and Military Relations  (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2012), 2.
Scobell et al., At the Dawn of Belt and Road: China in the Developing World, 213.
Cordesman and Kendall, Chinese Strategy and Military Modernization in 2017: A Comparative  Analysis, 167.    
Central Intelligence Agency, "The World Factbook: Spratly Islands," accessed January 17, 2019, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/pg.html.
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, 3, 1.
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, 1; Cordesman and Kendall, Chinese Strategy and Military Modernization in 2017: A Comparative Analysis, 11.
Cordesman and Kendall, Chinese Strategy and Military Modernization in 2017: A Comparative  Analysis, 11.    
US Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2018 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 17, accessed January 17, 2019, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Aug/16/ 2001955282/-1/-1/1/2018-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT.PDF.
US Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2018, 45.
Robert Feldman, "Is China Practicing 'Debt-Trap Diplomacy' in Africa?" Foreign Military  Studies Office, April 4, 2018, accessed February 5, 2019, https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/ w/o-e-watch-mobile-edition-v1/22527/is-china-practicing-debt-trap-diplomacy-in-africa/.
Peter Schwartz, The Art of the Long View: Planning for the Future in an Uncertain World (New York: Crown Business, 1996), 167.
Ibid., 169.    
Hurst, "The Changing Strategic Design of China Peacekeepers: In Line with UN or Chinese Goals?"
Jack Farchy and Hayley Warren, "China Has a Secret Weapon in the Race to Dominate Electric Cars," Bloomberg, December 2, 2018, accessed February 5, 2019, https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/ 2018-china-cobalt/.
Cordesman and Kendall, Chinese Strategy and Military Modernization in 2017: A Comparative  Analysis, 34.    
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, 1.
Jamshid Gharajedaghi, Systems Thinking: Managing Chaos and Complexity, 3rd ed. (New York: Elsevier Inc, 2011), 37.
The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy, 6.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), VI-3, accessed October 22, 2018, https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp1_ch1.pdf?ver=2019-02-11-174350-967.
Luke O'Brien, "The Doctrine of Military Change: How the US Army Evolves," War on the Rocks, July 25, 2016, accessed February 15, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2016/07/the-doctrine-ofmilitary-change-how-the-us-army-evolves/.
The World Bank. "The World Bank in China." Last modified September 26, 2018. Accessed December 13, 2018. https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/china/overview.
The US military must continuously reallocate its limited resources to present multiple dilemmas to China across all COCOMs. Hand-in-hand with partners and allies, the US military must maintain flexibility to use simultaneous direct and indirect approaches that challenge and exploit China's strengths and weaknesses. Using the concept of globally integrated operationsremaining dynamically flexible to quickly reallocate forces across the globe -enables the joint force's ability to remain strategically predictable but operationally unpredictable. 
127
Much is learned viewing current and future problems we face with China through the lens of history, theory, and doctrine. History informs our understanding of the purpose behind China's actions -a once strong and proud civilization subjugated by European colonialism seeking emergence of the "China Dream" of national rejuvenation. 
129
127