# ID: 1eadd9ceafd24c4794df6d9150eab290
# Title: A Century of Us Involvement in the Philippines and the Human Domain
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
The list of individuals I
For some, the past 15 years could be summed up it two words: strategic failure. 
1
There has always been an invisible entity within warfare. Theorists such as Carl von Clausewitz and J.F.C. Fuller understood this entity as the moral element. This element is an intangible and difficult-to-measure aspect of strategy and war, but one known to have a dramatic effect. Much as an astronomer observes a black hole in outer space, the strategist observes tangible factors that surround and respond to this invisible force. Unless the observer knows of, and understands the central force, he perceives the purpose and behavior of objects within a limited paradigm. When there is an inability to explain observations or to solve problems there is a shock to a system. Thomas Kuhn refers to this as a "scientific crisis," which leads to a paradigm shift. 
2
The armed forces have attempted to gain a better understanding of humans in conflict historically. Concepts such as COIN, the Human Terrain, and Stability Operations were environments. Non-state actors only reveal some of the global issues facing the US and allies.
State actors are also exploiting the new global realities.
Russia and China are capitalizing on the new security environment to reclaim their lost power and prestige. Russian leaders have found low-risk and politically feasible method of restoring their greatness, which some have called "hybrid war." 
7
8
The perceptible change in the character of conflict in the modern security environment appears to have rendered conventional US approaches to conflict impotent. The US has relied excessively on technological solutions for military and political problems. Understanding people became an exit strategy from conflicts-a last resort-rather than an entry requirement or operational planning factor. 
9
1
10
At first glance the depiction of the gray zone is intuitive. There is a zone between peace and war and it is complex and difficult to operate within. But upon closer scrutiny there is more.
Where a state or non-state entity operates in the gray zone depends on perspective. For example, Russia is not in the "war" section of the chart, but Ukraine certainly is. Russia can use strategies other than war that can negatively affect or topple a sovereign government in the war section.
The Russian approach is an effective strategy for Russia because its primary competitor, the US (in the peacetime zone), only has peacetime or wartime options to deal with this situation. The US military, with its focus on conventional war, needs Russia to be in the war zone of the spectrum in order to have effective military options that are palatable to the international community. The US is ill-equipped technically and strategically to deal with the subsequent gray zone gap. Thus, the gray zone comprises the US military's strategic flank and it is exposed. In recognition of this vulnerability, the senior leaders of the land components of the US military, the senior leaders of the Army, Marines Corps, and SOCOM, think they have found the beginnings of an answer: the Human Domain (HD).
The HD comprises the study of those factors that influence human behavior. The HD, as a strategic concept, was first mentioned in SOCOM 2020, the strategic vision for US Special Operations Forces (SOF). In SOCOM 2020, the HD was defined as the "totality of the physical, social, and cultural environments that influence human behavior." 
11
According to OHD, success in the Human Domain "depends on an understanding of, and competency in, the social, cultural, physical, informational, and psychological elements that influence human behavior," so that the US can be better positioned to achieve strategic ends. 
12
Theorists such as Charles Callwell, Mao Zedong, David Galula, and John Nagl, among others, have written extensively on the importance of understanding people, albeit using different terms. 
13
New concepts raise opportunities for new inquiries, and this thesis seeks to assess the value of the HD. Specifically, it attempts to answer the following question: What value, if any, does the Human Domain have in the strategic and operational spheres? To answer this question the analysis will use the 2015 SOCOM OHD Concept document as the departure point for scrutiny. The inquiry separates the five elements of the HD, as they are written in the OHD Concept, and evaluates each in turn. The elements will then be used as a framework to examine three case studies: the Philippine-American War, the Huk Rebellion, and the recent Moro rebellion (known to the US as Operation Enduring Freedom -Philippines [OEF-P]). In a qualitative case study analysis, it can be difficult to hold variables constant and draw firm conclusions about value. Therefore, to reduce selection bias, all of the case studies for this thesis occur in the Philippines and are interactions between the same two countries. Although imperfect, this methodology offers an appropriate qualitative examination of the HD because it keeps the people of the Philippines and the US government as constants. This methodology will keep the same geography, population, and sources of grievances throughout different periods across a century of American involvement in the Philippines. If the HD has any strategic or operational value it should reveal itself over this arc of time.
As with any analysis, this study has limitations. Although bounding the problem to the Philippines holds certain variables constant, these case studies limit transferability. What succeeded or failed in the Philippines may or may not work in other areas. Bounding the problem is critical to effective analysis. The author hopes that good boundaries will make for a more credible and applicable synthesis. Additionally, this analysis uses commonly held successful examples of conflict. This limitation is an unintentional aspect of the study, but if the HD is to have explanatory and predictive power, it must be applied across the arc of time and avoid what Niels Mulder refers to as, "periodization [which] highlights transient affairs." 14 Thus, using the HD concept as a framework for case studies may highlight failures in periods of US involvement that, until now, have been considered a success.
Chapter One examines the HD in detail. It is here, that the HD will be broken into its constituent parts before using them as tools for analysis against the three case studies. Chapter 14 Niels Mulder, "Filipino Identity: The Haunting Question," Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs,  32, no. 1 (2013): 55-80.
Two describes the Philippines in broad terms. This chapter lays the foundations for understanding the geography, people, and economy, as well as introduce the main social actors.
These foundational elements remain relatively constant throughout the analysis and are imperative to identifying and understanding the common threads that tie the Philippine conflicts and its people together.
Chapter Three uses the HD as a framework to study the Philippine-American War. The Philippine-American War presented the US with a modern and expeditionary combat experience and represents a large-scale conflict, which will help challenge the utility of the HD in large-scale war. Chapter Four employs HD elements as lenses to study the Huk Rebellion. This case study temporally and socially links the early twentieth century and modern twenty-first century interactions between the US and the Philippines. The Huk Rebellion was a conflict that occurred during and after a world war, and as such, it should also help bridge the conceptual gap between large-and small-scale war. If the HD is to have value in the strategic realm, it must have value in all conflict regardless of scale and intensity.
Chapter Five uses the HD to analyze the Moro rebellion. This analysis challenges the HD in a post-modern ideology, national strategy, and warfare methodology. The Moro rebellion is a small conflict that is wholly different from the previous case studies. The Moro rebellion has elements of terrorism, internal ethnic identity, and governmental corruption. It is representative of the new security environment and relates to the gray zone concept. If the HD is complete and sufficient as a concept it must offer strategic or operational value in the current and future fight.
The final chapter takes a step back from case study specifics and answers the inquiry about strategic and operational value. Most of the US responses to human-centric conflict have been tactically focused, and temporary. If the HD concept is to have longevity and utility, then it must offer the strategic and operational spheres valuable insights to achieve strategic success.
The final chapter also analyzes any limitations of the HD as it is currently proposed, and what implications there may be from implementation. To begin the analysis, we start with an exploration of the Human Domain concept.
This is the so-called theory that "weapons decide everything," which constitutes a mechanical approach to the question of war and a subjective and one-sided view
The security environment has changed, and so has much contemporary thought on security relationships. In the past, the monopoly on the use of violence rested with the state, kings, or professional military forces. Increasing complexity, trans-regional threats, and democratization of technologies means the authority on the use of force and violence has shifted to anyone with the will to carry it out. State and non-state actors use these capabilities to challenge the status quo, incite terrorism, or start a revolution. Particularly since the end of the Cold War, the US has trained, organized, and equipped its military services to be a conventional hammer while simultaneously avoiding as much as possible the messy gray zones of conflict.
The combination of a new security environment and relationships, ubiquitous technology, and conventional war mentality has created an environment in which American military force cannot be applied appropriately or cost-effectively across the spectrum of conflict. In response, SOCOM is attempting to address the issues of security, complexity, and military rigidity, to provide feasible options for commanders at all levels. The answer, according to SOCOM, is the Human Domain.
At first glance the Human Domain (HD) does not appear to be a new concept. Wars of the people were present before Genghis Khan conquered the Mongolian steppes. Irregular warfare has always been a tool for the disadvantaged to combat and defeat a superior adversary.
The previous strategies used to counter terrorism, insurgencies, and revolutions are numerous.
The strategies have employed concepts such as strategic hamlets, civic affairs, human terrain teams, stability operations, and the ideas found in the recent doctrinal tome on COIN, FM 3-24,   are all examples of attempts to bring balance to asymmetry and, with it, advantage. SOCOM, however, is promoting the HD as a means to success in more than just small wars.
According to the SOCOM concept, the HD is a rich vein that transcends the small war approach, one applicable across the range of military operations. 
1
The goals of the OHD Concept include creating an HD mindset, equipping forces with appropriate HD tools, and designing operations for success in all domains at all levels of conflict. 
2
Although the HD is similar to other military operating constructs, the OHD Concept does not merely examine a physical location such as the sea or the air. Instead, the HD is a way of thinking about an environment. According to its authors the OHD Concept facilitates insight, and control of the environment by enabling options for commanders through human engagement.
The Concept advances this idea by focusing on five main elements that influence human behavior, which are the Physical, Psychological, Cultural, Social, and Informational (PPCSI); and their relationships, see Figure 
2
The Physical element of the HD has a sub-structure, which includes geography, resources, climate, and hydrology. The physical environments that surround humans influence specific behavior patterns. If the physical environment can be seen and understood from a human perspective, the military can better grasp the priorities of people and their values. The example given in the SOCOM OHD is people who live in desert climates will value water more than those who live in the rainforest. 
3
1
3
The sub-structure of the Psychological element includes judgment, cognition, and emotions. These sub-elements deal with how a people perceive their situation and then act according to the information they have. The Psychological element draws on behavioral theories to understand the relationship between intentions, cultural norms, beliefs, and actions.
Consequences of personal actions, emotions, and behavioral norms can have significant influence on behavior and the perceived difficulty of the action under consideration. In the Philippines, for example, peasants choosing between insurgency and loyalty to the government may not have had a choice at all. Rather, their decisions may be based on their perceptions of their environment and judgment about their future. Insurgency may to them have been the only option that had any reasonable chance to live a satisfactory life. The Psychological element also has varying effects depending on location. For example, an individual living in urban Manila will view violence or politics differently than his rural Filipino neighbors. The Informational element of the HD is rooted in how people receive information, what pathways this information takes, and which mediums are critical to receiving information. For example, in one village, locals may trust only family members while in another the villagers may trust their local priest. Understanding this practical aspect can be critical, not just to understanding the environment in which humans inhabit, but also how people orient themselves and structure their society. Knowing how people receive, process, and disseminate information is critical to monitoring and assessing who is relevant and what information is important or not in a given group, society, or population.
The sub-structure of the Cultural element of the HD includes ideologies, customs, religions, and communication. People tend to look through their own cultural lenses when perceiving their environments. Understanding cultural concepts of family, ethics, shame, or hierarchy can greatly assist others in developing operations that adhere to sensitivities and help the US plan operations, build trust, and communicate intentions. The HD appears to go beyond cultural awareness, however, and attempts to build a cultural thoroughness with which to recognize different cultures and attribute behaviors to beliefs.
The final element of the HD concept is the Social element; it includes state institutions, local governments, and civic groups. People tend to join into social structures for reasons of security, identity, and support. According to the SOCOM OHD document, social relationships and organizations can shape behavior, priorities, beliefs, and customs. The OHD document also notes that how a society organizes and influences behavior can be observed through theoretical lenses such as Social Network Theory (SNT). 
4
The OHD Concept can also become, or comprise part of an operational cycle, as depicted in Figure 
3
4 SOCOM OHD,
13.
5
If the HD Concept has strategic and/or operational value, there should be clear applicability of the five elements in all levels of analysis. In the strategic sphere, the HD concept should be able to identify relevant actors and groups, as well as influence group and governmental behavior. For the HD to have value in the operational sphere it must guide operational planners, shape regional alignment, inform the scope and scale of the use of force, and tie strategic goals to tactical actions. In short, if the HD is to have operational-level value it must translate strategy into tactics, as well as provide insights and influence regarding the relevant population, groups or individuals.
Throughout this study, the definition of each element does not change with each level of analysis, but the scope of the analysis will. For example, the strategic-level cultural element still includes tribalism and ethnicity, just as the tactical level does. But at the strategic level of analysis there may be more than one tribe or ethnic group. The OHD Concept does not make distinctions between tactical, operational, or strategic level elements. Therefore, this analysis tests the strategic and operational value of the HD by examining the continuity of meaning of the five elements over the course of time.
A parallel element of this thesis identifies the interdependence of the elements. The interdependence of the elements refers to their relationships to one another within the framework of the HD. For example, at the tactical level in Philippine villages the Social element is directly related to the Cultural element. Here the local government and hierarchical structure consists of familial or tribal customs. At the strategic level, the interdependence is less binary and more complex. Common cultural and social traits cannot be attributed to entire regions or populations, and the interactions among differing groups become a necessary study. This thesis puts forward the hypothesis that as the observer is elevated to higher levels of analysis, the interdependence of the five elements become more complex and difficult to attribute in the manner outlined in the OHD. Thus, categorizing human behavior into five categories appears to be overly simplistic and indifferent of the relationship between the elements. The case studies should illuminate if this is true.
The HD can be misunderstood as being similar to IW, Unconventional Warfare (UW), COIN, and other "small war" approaches. However, these terms are limited in various ways.
First, small-war tactics are warfare methodologies. Use of IW, COIN, or other terms is typically limited to geographic locations that are considered to be in conflict. The HD, however, is neither relegated to conflict geographically or methodologically. According to SOCOM, it can be used in all areas in peace, war, and all spaces in between. The OHD Concept document argues that successful implementation of the HD could prevent conflict, a goal that is not necessarily evident in reactive approaches such as COIN or IW.
A second way terms are limited is that methodologies such as COIN and UW tend to center around the tactical level for short durations. The HD embraces more than a specific conflict area, time-frame, or level of analysis. The HD can be used at all levels of leadership for long-term activities that have no "end-state." Third, in COIN and IW there must be specific and well-identified threats or adversaries. The HD has no such limitation. According to SOCOM, the idea is to engage a "range of individuals, groups, and populations (friendly, neutral, and adversary)." 
6
7
The HD involves a process of analysis and re-framing observations and actions to find the relevant actors, and predict or influence human behavior. The HD can easily be misunderstood as another method to conduct war among the people. But as this brief section has explained, the HD seeks to transcend tactical methods and make humans a strategic and operational focus.
If a concept has value in the strategic and operational spheres, it must be able to identify what is important and assign metrics for success. In some military endeavors this can be quantitatively assessed by measuring commercial shipping sunk, tanks destroyed, or aircraft shot down. Humans, however, pose interesting problems in terms of traditional metrics and measurement. Once a group of people has been observed, the data may soon become obsolete.
People are constantly acting upon, and reacting to, their environment; any change to their system may produce a change to themselves. Complicating matters, humans can change on purpose to hide their behavior or intentions. Additionally, the HD may offer new ideas about success, and how best to measure effectiveness. For these reasons, successful performance and successful effects are two very different things, as Emile Simpson points out in his book War From the Ground Up. 
8
9
10
All theories and concepts have limitations, and the HD is no different. The first limitation is the lessons learned from one HD endeavor may not translate to another. Typically, in military operations, many of the lessons learned about how to engage the enemy can be transferred to the next conflict. In the HD methodology this is not the case. At the local level, for example, experiences in the rice paddies of the Philippines may not translate well to Colombia.
The culture, society, and physical environment are much different in both, which means the people are different and respond to different incentive structures. Thus, application of previous lessons from other HD endeavors should be applied carefully.
Another limitation is the time required to understand the environment and establish trust with the population. The HD requires long-term engagement at all levels. The US is not known 
8
10
for its persistence or patience when it comes to engaging or understanding people. 11 The rotational system for military units lends itself to short duration operations. The US military, for example, maintains force health through rotational deployments overseas. Force health, however, comes at the cost of learning and developing leadership, and strategy can start anew with each deployment. 12 This limitation may not reside internally with the HD, but rather how it conflicts with the structure and culture of Western society and military forces. The HD is focused on the long-term, while much of the US military establishment focuses on short-term objectives and incentives.
This chapter has performed two main functions. First, it provided an understanding of the goals and methods of the OHD Concept as it is currently written. Second, it identified the lenses from the OHD Concept-Physical, Social, Cultural, Informational, and Psychologicalthrough which the case studies will be analyzed, and provided amplifying data about interdependence, measures of success, and inherent limitations in the concept. For clarity, the remainder of this analysis uses the HD concept in its recent articulation by SOCOM to represent the prototypical use of human analysis used by previous actors. Before moving into the case studies, the next chapter uses the HD lens to develop a Philippine-specific contextual and historical foundation, as well as identify which aspects of the Philippines and the people have remained relatively constant throughout the 100 years of US involvement. 
The Philippines: A Summary of Human Domain Elements
We might say that understanding the Philippines begins in the realization that it is one nation made up of three countries
A study of the HD in the Philippines begins with a basic understanding of the history, context, and the elements that remain constant in the archipelago. This chapter summarizes the five HD elements with respect to the Philippines and provides basic knowledge from which to conduct the case studies. Much like the United States, the Philippines cannot be cast into a single, or even a few, social or cultural categories. Part of HD study is becoming comfortable with the ambiguity of data; however, major themes do invariably stretch across the islands, just as they do for any other country or peoples. These major themes, drawn from the broad physical, social, cultural, psychological, and informational elements, are discussed below for the specific context of the Philippines.
The Philippine archipelago is a politically young yet geologically old country. 
1
2
3
4
South of Luzon, and in the center of the Philippine island chain, lay the Visayas. This group of islands includes Cebu, Leyte, Negros, Panay, and Samar. The Visayan area is known for its sugar and rice crops, as well as its fishing. The islands of the Visayas have also acted as a buffer between Luzon and the third region further south in the Philippine archipelago known as Mindanao. The southern region includes the island of Mindanao, Palawan, and the Sulu archipelago. 
4
The Philippine archipelago is also situated in an active geopolitical area. Spain, for example, used the Philippines as a Pacific base from which to project its economic power, which is discussed in greater detail in the next chapter. The US, for its part, also used the Philippines as a Pacific hub from which to project its power, first to spread its influence in Asia as examined in Chapter 4, and then to prevent the spread of terrorism as outlined in Chapter 5. Currently, the Philippines is balanced politically between two great powers, the US and China, both of which are vying for Filipino influence. The archipelago has long been an important trade route across Asia, and rich resources in the region have made the Philippines a lucrative target for foreign businesses and colonizers alike. Although the Philippines are located in an important area, the country's regional neighbors such as Malaya and Indonesia have enjoyed the full attention of foreign business and investment based on a singular geographic reality. Both countries controlled the sea lines of communication through Asia. As a result, the Philippines have been interesting to foreign governments and businesses as a thoroughfare or way station, but not one to warrant, in Spain's case, its full attention or investment. 
5
As Luis Francia observes, "The smallest politico-social unit" in the Philippines is the barangay (neighborhood). 
6
7
8
5
6
7
8 Francia,
32.
9
The social structures at the higher levels of government and civic action included the "ruling elite, their peers, and followers." 
10
Many societal groups emerged in the mid-nineteenth century and continued well into the twentieth century. Social groups were extremely diverse; some consisted of political affiliations such as the Nationalista and Federalista parties, while others included ideological and economic groups such as the communist party, socialist party, and labor unions. These groups helped local Filipinos organize and communicate, as well as pool resources for reform or rebellion. The social structure of the Philippines has important implications for understanding the HD.
Asian countries tend to have different social structures than Western societies. The Philippines is unique in that it fits both Western and Asian molds. By 1900, the Philippines became the only Asian country with Western religion and Western governmental structures, but was still able to maintain a distinctly Asian and uniquely Filipino culture. The Western and Asian duality of Philippine society confused US leaders when they attempted to categorize, understand, or predict Filipino behavior. The Philippine social duality is an important point because social structures help shape human behavior. While the US military and policy makers observed or imposed many Western influences in Philippine society, they also misunderstood indigenous social behavior, organizations, and structures, which were distinctly non-Western.
Given its geography, it is not surprising that the Philippines is culturally diverse. There are approximately 60 cultural minorities throughout the islands, with the majority of people identifying as Tagalogs, Ilocanos, Bicolanos, or Visayans. 11 Even within the cultural majority three of these are a mix of backgrounds, with some of Spanish descent and others being Chinese or Malays.
There were also cultural hierarchies deriving from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in the Philippines. Luis Francia observed that the Spanish clergy and Spanish government were at the top of the hierarchy; the Chinese comprised the small, but important middle class; and the indigenous population was at the bottom. 12 As Brian Linn points out, the term "Filipino" does not clearly define all the people of the Philippines any more than being American implies a certain race or religion in America. 
13
Philippine diversity is not merely limited to ethnic or tribal background. The numbers vary depending on the source, but there are reported to be over 170 unique languages and dialects in the Philippines. 
14
15
12
13
14 Francia,
39.
15
Culturally, the interpersonal relationships are largely familial and originate from tribal and barangay culture, which accounts for much of the deeply ingrained importance of kinship and loyalties. 
16
17
These attributes combined have resulted in dependency, corruption, and nepotism. 
18
19
The Spanish spent the better part of 300 years converting Filipinos to Catholicism. The Spanish did so well that today over 80 percent of the population is Catholic. 
20
This thesis will not attempt to place all Filipinos analytically into one psychological category. There are, however, a few generalities that may help the reader understand major trends and common interpretations of the timeframes. The main theme that permeates the Psychological element in the Philippines is that Filipinos have perceived their environment directly according their social status, rural or urban situation, and economic position.
The rural social structure fostered a paternalistic hierarchy whereby each Filipino depended on their local patriarch to provide security, direction, and leadership. These were also rural areas isolated from civilization and dependent on agrarian forms of income and subsistence. Most people's perceptions were based on their relationships with the social hierarchy. The patriarchal system, however, was a two-way street. While farmers and peasants worked for the local leader or landowner, the patriarchs returned the social and psychological favor by becoming heavily involved in religious and family ceremonies and the economic well being of the farmer and his household. In contrast, urban elites tended to look toward the government and businesses for their direction and subsistence. Most elites were land or business owners with obligations to their political or business societies, many of which resided in Manila. Thus, each of the classes, rural peasant and elite, viewed their environment from their own economic and social perspective.
Cultural upbringing underpinned Filipino views such as kinship bonds and familial loyalty. Centuries ago, the people we now call Filipinos travelled on barangays in and around the Philippine islands. As mentioned above, the barangay was a self-sufficient neighborhood with each member helping others and dependent on others for the collective good and prosperity. The dependency among members of a tribe or barangay fostered relationships whose lineage can be traced to today. For example, many Filipinos, regardless of class, feel obligated to help their family first, which has led to nepotism and corruption in local and central governments. Aside from corruption, the strong familial loyalty can also be observed by the economic dependence on remittance from migrant workers. 21 Thus, the social class, cultural traditions, and familial bonds help shape how different islands, peoples, and classes developed perceptions on how they viewed the environment and how best to interact with that environment. Any changes or increased risk to socio-cultural norms and/or economic well-being would be viewed from a perspective influenced by hues from an agrarian, familial, security, and dependency palate. 
21
Perhaps the most dynamic HD element in the Philippines is the informational realm.
Between Spanish colonization and US intervention in 1898, the majority of the Filipino population was illiterate. Rural social hierarchy and agrarian cultural structure led to dependence on face-to-face communication. Additionally, locals depended on either their nearest Filipino leaders or Spanish clergy to interpret or communicate outside their dialect or language. In the late nineteenth century the Spanish began to implement new economic and social reforms, which helped to build a new and educated elite class of Filipino. The educated and elite class of Filipinos, whose members included Jose Rizal and Andres Bonifacio, were able to travel abroad and study at universities. Such opportunities for most Filipinos, however, were rare.
The new minority class of educated Filipinos began to participate in the politics of Philippine society by writing for journals and newspapers. By the end of the nineteenth century there were 74 of the burgeoning news and political outlets. 
22
23
By the late twentieth century literacy had improved dramatically due to a massive influx of English teachers and Western education systems. Most Filipinos learned English, but Westerners struggled with understanding that old habits die hard and many locals still depended on and trusted face-to-face communication over other forms of communication using English.
US leaders may not have realized it, but teaching someone English did not mean they would trust, or even want to talk with anyone other than local leaders. Today, Filipinos enjoy the same literary and intellectual development of any modern state. Such development has been slowed, however, by cultural and nationalistic anchors stemming from Spanish and US colonialism, a condition that causes tension to this day.
In sum, this chapter has laid the contextual foundation needed to investigate the three case studies in the Philippines. It has provided a short survey of the Physical, Social, Cultural, Psychological, and Informational elements and those aspects, which have remained relatively constant throughout the 100 years of US involvement. The cultural influence on behavior, 
22
23 Francia,
104.
Thus, with a proper foundation, this thesis turns to the end of the nineteenth century when the short Spanish-American War provided the US with its first colony.
The Philippine-American War
The sleep had lasted for centuries, but one day the thunderbolt struck, and in striking, infused life
The island was practically in the possession of a blind giant: strong, but unable to see where to strike
This case study separates the Philippine-American War temporally into three periods.
The first is the prelude to war, which involves the specific context of the Spanish, US, and Philippine governments and people. The second period includes the beginning of the war, which is characterized by a tenuous relationship between the US and Filipinos, followed by a series of misunderstandings and movements toward violent confrontation. The third epoch includes the end of the war when violence was declining and the modern US-Philippine relationship began to take its initial form.
By 1898 the US had weathered the Industrial Revolution, healed itself from a Civil War, and was recovering from a debilitating depression. The westward expansion, crystalized in the thoughts and writing of Frederick Jackson Turner, had been a success, leaving the US public and its leaders of right and necessity to expand beyond the country's borders. The speed of US expansion was fueled by fear of European expansion into Asia and losing critical resources and business opportunities. In response, many in the US warmly embraced Alfred Mahan's theory about sea power and the prosperity of nations. 
1
Meanwhile, Spain had become a waning power. Successive Spanish rulers overextended their empire and proved unable to defend or suppress uprisings within their colonies.
Spain's trade, commerce, and prestige pivoted on its global holdings in Mexico; Cuba; and, to a lesser extent Asia, specifically the Philippines. Cuban rebels reacted to repressive and violent Spanish government measures in 1895, garnering support within the US. US diplomats overtly acknowledged Cuban independence and demanded Spain give up its control over the island. 
2
In response to Spanish actions in Cuba and elsewhere, the US positioned itself diplomatically and militarily in Asia so it could better secure markets and defend against the Spanish if fighting broke out.
By 1898, the Philippines had been a Spanish colony for over three centuries. Much like Cuba, Filipinos had rebelled against Spanish rule for decades. The two main socio-economic classes within the Philippines that existed at the time were the tao (peasant) and the elite. 
3
Manila provided the only treasure for leaders in Madrid. Very few Spanish officials ventured out into the islands, or rural areas, as most of their time was spent securing resources and business deals with foreign traders. 
4
Numerous missionaries were organized throughout the islands to keep the Filipinos "under the bells." Over centuries, the Spanish and Filipino elites, along with clergymen, were able to change Philippine social structures by congregating small villages and barangays into larger municipalities, or municipals. Historically, the barangays were self-sufficient and selfdetermining. Forcing Filipinos to live in municipals, and "under the bells" of the church, uprooted the traditional social system of small, self-sufficient barangays. The dissimilar groups and tribes now served a Spanish purpose. The Spanish also changed the names from barangay to barrio, and from datu (chief) to "village headman."
5
6
The Spanish clergy gained a tremendous amount of power in the Philippines as a result of the change in social structure. Stanley Karnow writes that "The friar exercised power," because he "audited the parish budget, conducted the census, registered the residents, directed the tax board, managed health and public works projects, screened recruits for military service," and "presided of over the police." 
7
8
Keeping the masses illiterate anchored the colonial socio-cultural structures, but also stunted Philippine rural development and growth.
By the mid-nineteenth century, Spanish leaders recognized the importance of the Philippines as a possession and base after two events: the loss of Mexico and the opening of the Suez Canal. As a consequence, Spanish leaders attempted to build the Philippines into a commercial powerhouse. New regulations went into effect, which opened borders for immigration, suspended tariffs, and implemented "economic catalyzers." 
9
10
11
12
13
The new cultural, social, and legal frameworks changed the barrios substantially.
Traditionally, the local leader of the barrios, or province, looked after the well-being of their workers. The locals, in turn, looked after the leaders' needs for the town. A dramatic social change occurred when the power shifted from the locals to those who were literate and understood the Spanish legal system. In essence, the local leaders and inhabitants were supplanted by Spanish and Filipino outsiders who were not of their tribe, language, or customs.
There was also an economic incentive to work with Manila rather than tend to the traditional and more local relationships. The new power brokers became an agent of the state, rather than a leader of local people. This was the beginning of the "rural elite," which was a result of, and contributed to, a change in social hierarchy, economic incentives, and loyalties.
14
Bonifacio began the Katipunan (revolutionary group fighting against Spanish rule) movement, which is credited for the start of the Philippine Revolution in 1896. 
15
Aguinaldo became a national figure, fighting against Spain with his exploits, aggressiveness and prowess as a military leader. He was originally a member of the Katipunan and heavily involved in a number of pitched battles against the Spanish, many of them successful.
In 1897, however, the Spanish government and Aguinaldo reached an agreement. The Spanish essentially paid off Aguinaldo to leave for Hong Kong and lay down his arms in exchange for governmental reforms. The rebel version of the agreement is that it was a clever ruse to get more money to support the rebel insurgency. 
16
The first shots of the Spanish-American War were not fired off the coast of Cuba but rather in Manila harbor by the order of Admiral George Dewey. He was sent there to interdict Spanish supplies and ensure the Philippines could be used as a bargaining chip for the US during post-war negotiations. 
17
The popular sentiment within America at the time was that the Filipinos could not govern themselves. 
19
16
18
Karnow,
125. 19 Bernstein,
78
Linn,
5. 20
Wesley Merritt was ordered to make peaceful preparations for annexation. The problem, however, was that the Navy was unable to establish control of an entire country, and the Army was "ill prepared" for an occupation in tropical conditions. 
21
22
Despite a crushing naval victory fighting in the archipelago was not over because the US still had to deal with Spanish forces inside Luzon. In an effort to defeat Spanish holdouts throughout the country, Admiral Dewey decided to return Aguinaldo to the islands, and supply his forces with equipment. Initially, the reassembled rebel groups made quick work of Spanish fighters throughout the countryside, but the co-habitation of US and rebel forces would prove both tense and tenuous. There were diplomatic misunderstandings, duplicity, and distrust between American leaders and Aguinaldo. Aguinaldo believed that the US brought him back so he could begin preparations for independence. American leaders, however, had no such intention. Shortly after defeating Spanish holdouts, Aguinaldo restarted an interim government based on many of the same constitutional foundations as the US. 
23
The final battle between US and Spanish forces occurred where Spanish power was centralized: Manila. The US immediately shipped 5,000 troops to the islands to help preserve the peace and eliminate the remaining Spanish troops, who numbered 5,600 and were fortified inside the walls of Manila. 
24
25
26
27
Each side in the Philippine-American War-business elite, rebel elite, peasant, and various US leaders-viewed it from its own perspective based on personal or group interests.
The rebels (mostly Tagalogs from Luzon) wanted self-determination and independence. Peasants The rebels and the US agreed on more topics than either realized. The Aguinaldo government wanted religious freedom. Aguinaldo lived under Spanish colonialism and understood the inherent problems associated with clerical rule. The US political leaders, even though McKinley wanted to "Christianize" the Filipinos, took a stance that supported a separation of church and state. As one example, the Filipinos of a recently secured town were shocked when the officers assured them their churches would continue offering services and that the US 
25 Baclagon,
74. 26
27
28
29
30
"respected and protected everyone's religion." 
31
From a contemporary perspective the fighting seems unwarranted. The US had come in peace and benevolence; thus the inhabitants should simply submit to colonial rule until independence can be granted at a later date. For Filipinos, the choice was less clear. Their fate was fluid because the unsigned treaty between the Spanish and the US provided that the US could return the Philippines, or at least parts of it, back to Spanish control. If the treaty stipulated a return to Spanish rule, overtures of US support from Filipino business or government could be seen as collaboration. Additionally, the rebels could not wait for the treaty. Any control had to be taken immediately, as a fait accompli, and a Filipino republic had to be installed. Decades Senior US decision makers had difficulty clearly seeing the issues confronting them in the Philippines. Gen Elwell Otis, commander of US forces in the Philippines, made close contact with Filipino business elites who convinced him and others that Aguinaldo wanted a "Tagalog dictatorship." 33 They suggested the proper Filipino, meaning the landed and wealthy ones, sought annexation by the US instead. 
34
35
31
May 5, 1900
, Telegram from Major Baldwin to General Schwan, Dec 13, 1899, 111. 32
Karnow,
116. 33 Linn,
29
34 Linn,
29. 35
Major themes resulting from this conflict are control and bias. The US military and political officials had difficulty identifying important individuals, understanding behavior, and observing the environment correctly through unbiased lenses. Stathis Kalyvas, in his groundbreaking work, developed a theory of understanding violence in civil war through a mechanism he terms "agency." Knowing to whom to attribute violence and control requires more than stating that a particular person represents all Filipinos, or that all violence is due to a desire for independence. Kalyvas argues that "the locus of agency…is simultaneously located at different levels of aggregation: the center, the region, the village, and so on." 
36
Kalyvas suggests their reasoning could be "qualified, cautious, and ambivalent collaboration along the two poles of sympathy and fear." 
37
38
The ignorance of US leadership about Filipino culture and class structures could perhaps be written off as a product of its time. The US began its involvement in the Philippines on what a military leader today would call a "cold start." The US knew little about its new colony and even less about the inhabitants. After the first battle in Manila harbor against the Spanish, President McKinley said that he, "could not have told where those darned islands were within two thousand miles." 
39
In its day, establishing the Schurmann Commission and following through upon its recommendations was perceived as representing a rather enlightened approach. With help from Dean Worcester, who had years of experience in the Philippines prior to this particular service, the Commission's members would investigate and seek to understand the problems of the people, government, and judicial system. Its members, however, largely stayed in Manila and interviewed elite, educated, and wealthy Filipinos. Dean Worcester wrote home early in his duties in the Philippine Commission that some of his Commission counterparts drew conclusions about the Filipinos solely from those who were in Manila. He wanted them, however, to "broaden their horizons by a little trip to the provinces" and see the Filipinos as they really are. 
40
The policies and strategy of the US in its first year in the Philippines were dithering, but that was about to change. After months of facing down rebel forces in Manila, President
McKinley declared that an occupation of the entire archipelago was required. 
41
43
44
40
41 Linn,
30. 42
43
44
45 Linn,
34.
46
A number of military campaigns in Luzon followed from this irruption of hostilities.
Although interesting in their own right, and worthy of study, they are outside the scope of this analysis. The critical element in an analysis of the war from an HD perspective is the US Army in the Philippines began to view the conflict through social, as opposed to strictly military perspectives and improved the living condition of the local Filipinos. US soldiers began to clean up the streets, inspected hospitals, built a secular education system, and improved the public works system. 
47
46
47
48
49
will remain opaque to outsiders." 
50
51
On Luzon alone, there were five different tribes, each with a distinct language. As David Bernstein points out, one of the biggest issues confronting nationalism was the "lack of a common language." 
52
53
54
When US soldiers arrived, they could only speak through interpreters, which made communication difficult and, in some cases, dangerous. The tactical commanders in the southern islands such as Mindanao found it difficult to communicate because of their interpreters. The officers distrusted them to transmit their desires accurately because of the interpreter's personal interest in the matter. 
55
56
50
51
52
Linn,
15. 53
54
55
December 1, 1900
to October 15, 1901
, Part 2, 1901, 86. 56
inadvertently lost a window into the psychology and behavior of Filipinos, thereby blinding itself to Filipino culture.
By 1900 the peasant class had been converted to Christianity, were legally separated from their land through Spanish regulation, had their social structure and cultural hierarchy upended by external incentives, and were only able to communicate through a foreign (occupying) language. Niels Mulder expanded on the this point when he wrote, "The very cultural imperialism that thwarts nation-building also destroys historical continuity, and so the Filipino sense of a collective becoming has been obliterated." 
57
According to Elihu Root, then Secretary of War, by 1900 the US Army totaled 100,000 men, including reserves. At the height of the Philippine-American War, almost 70,000 men were serving in the archipelago. 
58
After a year of buildup the US had a sufficient number of troops to increase the scope and scale of the conflict. Specifically, the US began a pacification campaign that spread into other parts of Luzon and the Visayas. Aguinaldo's Revolutionary Army was outgunned and outmatched, as the US had better rifles, artillery, and logistics to carry out the occupation of Manila and support expeditions. After a year of fighting, and incurring numerous losses, Aguinaldo's forces adopted guerrilla tactics. After defeating the regular Revolutionary Army in late 1899, Gen Otis, and his successor Gen Arthur MacArthur, proclaimed the war to be all but over. Macarthur wrote in November 1899 that, "The so-called Filipino republic is destroyed" but he misunderstood the underlying issues. 
59
57 Mulder,
56. 58
59
60
61
MacArthur, for example, thought the reorganization ruined his mobile reserve and spread US forces too thin. Operationally, MacArthur may have been right, but Gen Otis accepted the risk to his forces because his strategy was centered on Filipinos, not rebels. In practice, the new general orders had troops living among the people, but this did not immediately translate into success.
The guerrilla units organized shadow governments for tax collection and intelligence gathering for their own strategic goals. 
63
Although the Filipino insurgency was a nationalist movement, it did not spread to the southern areas of the Philippines such as the Visayas or Mindanao. Uldarico Baclagon, an instructor and Lt Col in the Philippine infantry, wrote in 1952 that the Visayas could not fall to the revolutionary government because they "were not well organized for insurrection." 64 Aguinaldo's government and the Visayan rebels may not have been well organized, but a Tagalog rebellion was also not well received in the Visayas where many long-standing disputes between 
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
As the US gained small victories across the island chain the insurgent fighters grew more desperate and turned increasingly violent and oppressive of the people who had supported them. the US Military Governor, Gen MacArthur. 
68
69
70
66
67 Linn,
180
68
69
Bernstein,
88. 70
71
The sudden change in Filipino loyalty can be explained by a number of factors. First, the cultural-linguistic barriers were overcome by the Second Philippine Commission members who travelled to each provincial capital and talked directly to the people in their own language. The Commission's representatives used Filipinos speaking local dialects to explain the plan for governance, answer questions, and address grievances. Direct personal communication also demonstrated US power and ability to provide security and stability in the barrios. Second, the psychological aspect of face-to-face communications reduced local fears. Rural peasants worried that once the Americans won, those who sided with the insurgents would be held as criminals and put to death or left to rot in jail. For this very reason many chose to hold out in the mountains. 
72
73
The root of Filipino support for the insurgency was not based on hatred or contempt for Americans or America. Rather, they feared the unknown and consequences of choosing the wrong side. Gen Smith, who went to Bacolod, understood these fears. He telegraphed Gen Otis noting, "When the influential man fears…he ceases to be our earnest advocate," and that most people "come valiantly to our side once the storm has passed." 
74
75
There is another important difference between the Luzon-Tagalog rebellion and the rest of the Philippines: variance in ideologies and customs between the different islands. For example, although the entire archipelago was agrarian at its foundation, each region contained its own crops and methodologies for growing and selling those goods. The Spanish did not care to become involved in economic endeavors outside of Manila, and the lack of central government gave those within each region carte blanche to trade and interact with other regions, the rest of the country, and even the rest of the world based on their own customs, preferences and needs. 
76
72
73
74
75
Aside from the economic development and cultural differences, there were historical and situational reasons for the disparity in rebel support, which contributed to a long-standing tension between the Tagalos and the Visayans. According to Gen Otis, the Tagalos had for some time prejudiced, directed, and restrained the Visayans, leading to long-standing animosity between the two. 
77
78
79
Gen Otis understood the importance of socio-cultural issues but did not refrain from using force. He designed an approach to strike balance between the two, and it would pay off when Aguinaldo was captured during a daring raid in 1901. Although Gen Otis had left the Philippines by then, his operational guidance laid the groundwork for Aguinaldo's capture. The idea of Aguinaldo's capture, however, was interpreted in two ways. First, Gen Otis thought his capture would be insignificant because he was already hiding in the mountains and ineffective as a military commander. 
80
Paul Staniland suggests rebellious behavior and organizational theory are intimately connected. In his in book, Networks of Rebellion, Staniland develops a social-institutional theory of rebellion based on models of rebel organizations. These models are: Vanguard, Integrated, Parochial, and Fragmented. 
81
77
78
79
80
81
the rebel movement followed a Fragmented model as it had weak central and local control. 
82
83
84
85
The work to bring the fragmented guerrilla forces to heel was painfully slow.
MacArthur, newly appointed as Commander of US forces in the Philippines, noted this when he wrote, "week by week, situation shows little improvement; month by month, progress slow, but quite apparent." 86 MacArthur and many of his subordinates, such as Gen Jacob Smith and Gen Frederick Funston, were growing tired of their men being killed and wanted more firmness of action. MacArthur granted them leeway when he ordered a "new and more stringent policy" and counseled that "whenever action is necessary the more drastic the application the better." 87 While MacArthur did not abandon Gen Otis' civil focus, there was no doubt he emphasized a more military approach to dealing with insurgency, which included burning villages, relocating civilians, and confiscating property. 
88
89
82
83
84
85
Staniland's,
[53]
[54]
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
Gen Smith had achieved a military victory but at substantial cost. Filipinos would remember the Samar expedition, and others like it, for many years. 
95
96
91
Karnow,
189. 92
Bruno,
36. 93
Linn,
315. 94
Bruno,
36. 95
96
In the midst of a great-power conflict such as the Spanish-American War, the US had stumbled into a revolution for independence in the Philippines. The US had little knowledge about the geography or people, but endeavored to develop what we would consider today "HD knowledge" by centering on a civic affairs and a national-level Philippine Commission. During the Philippine-American War, the US began to understand the nature of a complex social structure that had been rearranged in over 300 years of Spanish absenteeism and cleric control. To complicate the social structure further, the disaffected peasant class and ruling landedelite were also accompanied by educated and revolutionary elites, e.g., Rizal, Bonifacio, and Aguinaldo. This class of educated-elite benefited from the previous economic and educational opportunities. Unlike the landed-elite class, the educated-elite focused on developing a new form of democratic government to break free from the Spanish and begin to build their own nation.
The revolutionaries wanted wholesale governmental and economic changes to be selfdetermining and sovereign.
Each of the social classes viewed the Spanish-American War from its own perspective, according to its own interests. Landed elites wanted to continue to preserve the status quo under US occupation. The revolutionary educated-elite wanted to continue the independence movement. The peasant class wanted to return to security and predictability. To the US, the Philippines had to be westernized through education, new forms of government, a Western judiciary, and modern civil developments.
The US also unknowingly entered a country undergoing a substantial cultural change.
Filipinos had experienced three centuries of religious conversion, poor local representation, and drastic changes to power structures. Spanish clergy kept those in the barrio ignorant and uneducated in order to keep their own intermediary position strong. Clerics also changed the hierarchical structure by changing from a self-sufficient barangay to a larger, less familial municipality that lived under the bells. Religion played a key part in the cultural underpinnings of conflict when the US espoused a separation of church and state to a country that depended on the church for three centuries. The social and cultural foundation was built upon religious control. Those in power would not relinquish control easily.
The US, even with a benevolent policy, did not uncover the socio-cultural issues until several years into the Philippine-American War. Even when people such as Gen Otis did realize the complex situation, they had already developed and implemented their strategies and operations, which may or may not have been well informed or appropriate. Of note, the US Army placed a rather progressive general, Gen Otis, to lead US forces, but his selection did not lead to victory. Gen Otis had many faults, but his progressive stance on the use of force, and appropriate organizational design did set the stage for success. It took many years of developing knowledge of the people and society before Otis' efforts began to produce positive results.
Similarly, the members of the Philippine Commission developed HD knowledge about Filipinos, but it did not translate to victory. The Commission's recommendations had to be connected to strategic and operational planning through Otis' command. Success in the Philippine-American War can be attributed to the symbiotic relationship between Otis and the Philippine Commission.
In contrast, Generals MacArthur, Chafee, and Smith are examples of leaders who used HD knowledge as military intelligence, for targeting, and not in support of strategic or political objectives.
The implications for the HD from this case-study are that knowledge alone is insufficient.
HD knowledge must be connected to the operational level structure to train, organize, and equip to support the process of socio-cultural change. Being able to see and sense is a good first step, but the organization must also be made to act, or not act, appropriately. A comprehensive HD approach, therefore, requires a combination of HD-minded leaders at the strategic and operational levels. A HD-minded leader should recognize in advance or as early as possible when host nation and US interests clash. HD-minded leaders should also be able to recognize their personal and institutional biases. The example of the Philippine-American War suggests that the HD starts with a look inward before developing strategies and policies. President McKinley, for example, wanted to demonstrate US benevolence and the positive aspects of Western influence, but most Filipinos did not want either. Some wanted independence; some wanted a return to the status quo, while the vast majority desired security and a return to traditional social systems. US leaders were initially blinded by their ideology and firmly believed not only were they in the Philippines to help, but also that Filipinos wanted it.
From the evidence in the Philippine-American War, and with the benefit of hindsight, there does appear to be operational value to the HD. Value at this level works in three ways. The first is the ability to identify the enemy's organizational structure. The second is by informing restraint in the scale of action and the use of force. The third way is through the identification within the population, and between the population and insurgents, of cleavages and alliances.
The identification of the enemy's organizational structure is critical to the application of force. Initial knowledge of the HD would have helped the US military planners identify the key agents and their type of organization. Adm Dewey and Gen Otis never fully understood the dynamic nature of the revolutionary forces until they turned into guerrillas. Unfortunately, it took several years for the Philippine Commission and US military leaders to recognize weak vertical and horizontal ties. Fortunately, for the US, the fragmented rebel forces helped the American cause by turning violent and repressive on their own supporters. The US waited more than two years to begin applying pressure to organizational and regional cleavages. Had Aguinaldo been a better general, the Philippine-American War could have turned out much differently.
Operational value from the HD is also about restraint. Typically, military operators want action against the enemy. An HD perspective, however, suggests action should be tempered through informed restraint. In 1898, the US had a strategic opportunity to either occupy the islands or allow Aguinaldo the space to develop a democratic government. US politicians, particularly President McKinley, chose the former not because he wished it, but rather he felt he had no other options. Although counterfactual, an HD mindset may have informed restraint and allowed US leaders to develop different relations with a revolutionary government that had many of the same interest as the US. Instead, US leaders felt compelled to occupy and civilize the Philippines.
During the Philippine-American War the US was better able to use informed restraint at the operational level after hostilities began. For example, understanding of the archipelago in its entirety allowed US leaders to recognize the revolutionary limits of control. Gen Otis, for example, understood that the people in the Visayas and Mindanao were suspicious of a revolution, and he used that knowledge to avoiding making insurgents in the south. In another example, in the beginning of hostilities, Gen Otis did not land on the island of Iloilo in the Visayan chain. The US would have been able to militarily take the island at some cost, however, Gen Otis took a more informed tack, based on the knowledge that if the US landed on the island, its presence would "rally the moderates" behind the revolution. 
97
98
Initially examining a conflict environment from an HD perspective may also provide operational planners with the ability to identify alliances and cleavages. General Otis spent his first year in country attempting to identify aspects of the HD. In his report in 1900, Gen Otis mentioned that the opportunity to watch the human terrain before taking action allowed him to "acquire a knowledge" of the "political situation…government…judiciary…trade…immigration, and international interests." 99 The period before hostilities appeared to be the most opportune time to understand the operational aspects of the HD.
The period before overt hostilities also allowed the US opportunity to build alliances with business owners, town officials, and local paramilitary and police forces, which built intelligence and decision space. In one example, new intelligence from the field led the US to shut down food shipments in the islands to disrupt the insurgent supply line. 100 Gen Otis, having knowledge of the social and cultural aspects, also understood such disruption would cause hardships on the peasants.
In another example, Gen Otis's HD knowledge enabled him to build alliances with some of Aguinaldo's closest advisors. During negotiations, Gen Otis was able to turn Aguinaldo's followers into partners who would eventually oust one of the leaders of the revolution and instill further dissention in the rebel ranks. 101
The HD offers strategic value by providing leaders with the ability to identify biases.
Biases are inherent within all peoples, groups, and organizations. It is important for the leaders to identify those biases and seek to correct them. For example, the US political base and those within the military institution knew little about the Philippine people or geography, but attempted 
97
98 Linn,
41. 99
100
101 Linn,
109.
The Filipino elite, who stood the most to gain from US governance, supported the recommendations of the Commission. Maintaining the status quo under US annexation was helpful to the elites who wanted to retain their wealth and political power. The US could not determine, as Kalyvas warns, who had agency. The HD can be valuable at the strategic level if it looks inward first. It can also assist those at the strategic level to recognize their own political, social, and cultural self-interests. Instead of projecting those biases on others, the HD can help shape policy and strategy into something more beneficial to the people it is meant to help.
In this case study, identifying the strategic value of the HD was more difficult than at the operational level. This difficulty may reflect the large scale of the war, or the vacillating political and military policies. It may also be a function of the operational level, where victory or success can be attributed quickly. At the strategic level, in contrast, success and value can only be observed over long periods of time. The next chapter examines another uprising in Philippines, almost a half-century after the Philippine-American War: the Huk Rebellion. dependable export market, as well as key regional military basing and access. For the mass of Filipino insurgents, however, the islands were much more than markets and basing.
Between 1910 and 1940, the peasants and the Philippine government grew further apart.
New economic legislation such as free trade ensured the US had a steady market for its goods as well as guaranteeing the Philippines did not build internal and self-sufficient industries. The US had promised independence, but deep governmental and economic integration wedded the two countries into a dependent relationship. In fact, the Philippines, under US direction, began to build a bicameral congress and branches of government that resembled their colonial headmaster. 
1
2
3
4
1
3
4 Kerkvliet,
42.
5
The arrangement worked well until economic incentives, such as free trade, began driving alternate behavior. Specifically, landowners, who had been physically connected to the land, increasingly moved to larger cities to tend to their trade interests. The cultural tether of loyalty and paternalism was being usurped by urban incentives. Additionally, with market forces driving landowner behavior, the absentee landlords stopped giving interest-free loans and began to only approve usurious loans (with interest rates ranging from 50%-200%) to peasants knowing that they could never repay them. 
6
7
8
9
In addition, the emotional and psychological impact of a suddenly repressive central government was another blow to the collective psyche of the peasant class. The collective impact of these pressures and changes on the peasants is difficult for outsiders, specifically Westerners, to understand. But it is vital to comprehend subsequent peasant behavior. The peasants began agrarian revolts, which spread across the rural areas of the archipelago in the mid-to-late 1930s.
In response to landowner and elite requests, President Manuel Quezon established a violent "mailed fist" policy against the peasants. Benedict Kerkvliet characterizes the policy in the following way: "The government's actions were a mixture of force, intimidation, moderate legislation to govern landlord-tenant relations, and pledges of sympathy." 
10
11
12
In terms of social and cultural arrangements, the divide between the government and the peasants was becoming unbridgeable. Overt rebellious behavior by the peasants began in the late 1930s because of the heavy hand of the government. Although the new peasant social groups were beginning to gain political ground in late 1930s, World War II (WWII) would rearrange the political landscape in the Philippines.
In 1941, in the midst of a peasant rebellion based in Luzon, the Japanese invaded the Philippines. The rapid collapse of American and Filipino forces, led by Gen Douglas MacArthur, 
10 Kerkvliet,
56. 11
Kerkvliet,
56. 12
13
14
15
16
The Huks grew in size and popularity throughout the Japanese occupation. Their growth was a reflection of the popularity of their stated purpose: engage and harass the Japanese, as well as defend the people from Japanese exploitation. 
17
18
The Huks differed dramatically from the USAFFE guerrillas in that their leaders and members wanted to engage and kill the Japanese regardless of the costs before liberation. Many Huk members saw their families slaughtered and livelihoods shattered by the Japanese. They were angry; wanted justice; and, above all else, they desired revenge. Many individuals who joined the Huks believed sincerely that their cause was just, and after the war they planned to disband and continue the work they began prior to invasion. US leaders could not separate the personal motivations from the broader organizational ones and reported to MacArthur's command that the Huks were "subversive," "radical," and "communist." 
19
20
21
22
23
25
In an effort to forestall insurgent violence, US and Philippine authorities offered amnesty to the Huks if they forfeited their guns and individually registered with local authorities. The Philippine government, with US backing, took advantage of these circumstances to arrest or kill many of the former guerrillas. The same treatment was not given to USAFFE guerrillas or the Japanese collaborators in the PC. The latter, in particular, were given veterans benefits by the government while they oppressed the peasant class. Additionally, the landlords were returning to their farms and demanding high interest rates, as well as back rent, and began to evict farmers who failed to comply. Without any legal means of recourse, the peasants looked to a political group called the Democratic Alliance (DA). The DA merged two ideologies: the peasant movement and the urban left. It was designed to help elect representative candidates in 
22
Kerkvliet,
107. 23
Kerkvliet,
108. 24
25
26
27
28
29
27 Kerkvliet,
125
Taruc,
26. 28
31
Kerkvliet,
157. 32
34 Taruc,
26
Greenberg,
[36]
[37]
36 Francia,
191
42
43
44
45
The Co-opt Phase, which lasted from 1950 to 1954, was marked by significant changes in approach by all sides. Previously, the US needed the Philippine government to help fight communist expansion in Asia and overlooked its transgressions. The corrupt Philippine government needed the US financial aid to maintain its internal political power. By 1950, however, the US military forces in the Philippines began to look at the Huk Rebellion from a social and governance perspective. Specifically, the US and the Philippine government began to co-opt the Huk's demands for social changes, justice reforms, and connecting the people to the government. In contrast, the Huks came under tremendous pressure from this reformed US-Philippine approach. As a result, the Huks began to turn on each other and their support base, the peasants.
Prior to 1950, the US looked at this rebellion in the Philippines primarily through an economic and political lens. Considering the global situation, and given events such as, Korea, the Soviet Union, Greece, and Germany, this view was not irrational but rather skewed. As Robert Jervis points out, "Perceptions are influenced by immediate concerns ("evoked sets") as well as deeply rooted expectations." 46 For the US, the evoked set was communist expansion.
From an economic standpoint, the US needed a strong trading partner and began to implement massive reconstruction. By 1949, total US expenditures to the Philippines were $1.5B. 
47
48
49
In contrast, the Huks had the pulse of the people. Its leaders understood the changes in social hierarchy through absentee landlords and provided a replacement patriarchy. They realized the psychological aspect of having your patriarch abandon you, collaborate with Japanese, then return to demand back rent. The Huks also understood the informational elements given that most in the barrio were illiterate, and those who could read did not believe what they read.
Instead they trusted their barrio lieutenant to give them information. 
50
51
52
More importantly, awareness of the extant human conditions on the ground gave the Huks the needed perspective to assign agency. Prior to 1950, the Philippine and US government placed agency at the presidential and landowner levels. This level was the deepest their analysis of issues in the archipelago had penetrated. In contrast, the Huks built their basic unit around the barrio. Jose Abueva highlights the barrio as a "well-knit community" with roots in the family structure. 
53
(AFP) well, so they did not have to steal from the people they were there to protect. Magsaysay instilled discipline and professionalism in the AFP, but did not necessarily seek to make them stronger. He took such actions to win back the respect of the locals who feared the Philippine Armed Forces (AFP) and the PC. Maj Lawrence Greenberg notes that, "three months into his term as secretary children ran to greet Army trucks…rather than running to hide in the jungle. The newly professionalized AFP reorganized into smaller units, following unconsciously the approach Gen Otis instituted decades prior. After the reorganization its units were better able 
69
70
71
Greenberg,
117. 72
73
74
75
Co-opting of the psychological and informational elements continued into 1952 when the AFP built the Public Affairs Office, which conducted programs using "pamphlets, posters, and public address systems." 
76
77
78
The last co-option problem to be addressed was perceptions of the illegitimacy of the Philippine government. In 1953, Magsaysay resigned from his position as Secretary of National Defense and ran for president with the Nationalista party. He wrote in his resignation letter, "It would be futile to go on killing Huk while administration continues to breed dissidence by neglecting the problems of our masses." 
79
80
81
At the end of WWII, the Philippines had been devastated. William Manchester notes that of all the cities in WWII, "only Warsaw suffered more [than Manila]." 
82
83
The Huk Rebellion is often mistaken for a "small wars" but in reality it was much more.
The richer vein to this conflict is the human aspects bookended by large-scale (WWII) and smallscale wars (rebellion), as well as the spaces in-between. It was not until the US and Philippine governments recognized the combined meaning of the social (tenancy, politics, corrupt government), cultural (paternalism, familial bonds), psychological (collaborationist, veterans benefits), and informational (face-to-face, barrio focus, messaging) elements that they forged a new approach based on more than pure repression. Centuries of Spanish colonization and decades of American colonization had divided the Philippines into what Dr. Mina Ramirez describes as the indigenous and the dominant cultural spheres. The indigenous culture stemmed from the barrio, familial, and Filipino language society, whereas the dominant culture was the impersonal, and externally incentivized "mediated" culture. 
84
81
82
83
84
The Huk Rebellion was largely a reaction to an environment that emerged slowly over decades of economic downturn, exploitive and absentee landlords, socio-cultural transformation, and psychological trauma. Furthermore, the capitalist-induced termination of patriarchal responsibilities, coupled with the abuses that come with absenteeism, broke the cultural traditions that the peasants relied on for generations. The violence and shock of Japanese occupation provided political opportunities for the Huks and the PKP to grow and fill the void left by those who abandoned the masses. From a cultural, social, and psychological perspective, rebellion was the only rational option for the population. Their landlords turned on them, the government left them, and the US was complicit.
After the elite abandoned the peasants, the interested parties attempted to be the paternalistic leader, each pursing its own interests. The US was trying to educate its "little brown brother" out of economic self-interest and to ensure Asian security. The communists were trying to absorb both the peasants and the urban proletariat into their political sphere. Even though communism was anathema to democracy and religion, two ideologies that Filipinos have historically defended, the communist agenda succeeded temporarily because it overlaid a new social hierarchy on a cultural transformation. This also helps explain why the Huk rebellion did not spread past the island of Luzon. Not all of the islands had the drastic changes in social and cultural traditions or the governmental repressions that accompanied them. Much as occurred during the Philippine-American War, the spread of rebellion stopped at the Visayas. Both the US and PKP attempts at winning the people failed because neither had the true interests of the peasant at heart.
Three major operational values of the HD come to light in the Huk Rebellion case study.
The first is knowledge of the environment and looking beyond the superficial to find underlying causes. The second is the value of providing purpose to presence. Presence in a country, no matter how lengthy, is not necessarily equal to knowledge of the people. The third operational value of HD includes freedom of action.
When deployed to new terrain the first thing military forces do is refer to a map to orient themselves. Maps provide a two-dimensional representation of three-dimensional space with large and fairly obvious terrain features with major roads and cities. Maps are useful for targeting and navigating, but insufficient for explaining, defining, or anticipating behavior or consequences of action. At the operational level, the HD provides a different sort of map in many other dimensions, including the economic, cultural, social, political. Instead of telling the observer where to go, an HD map helps him understand where he is, but it is a snapshot in time and must be routinely reevaluated. This ever-changing map may also show the relationship between elements of the HD. Each element is connected to the others and can push or pull depending on the context of the situation. For example, over many generations in the Philippines there was a cultural impetus to develop the social hierarchy of patronage and tenancy. Added to this dynamic was an economic pull from global markets, which lured the landowners and elites away from the proximity to the peasants and toward abandoning their traditional social roles. Thus, the HD may provide knowledge and a deeper understanding of the environment by revealing the terrain and also the interdependence between its various elements.
The second operational value of HD provides purpose to presence. The tactical level will provide much of the context and information needed to develop sound operational plans, but as Ed C. de Jesus observes, focus on the tactical level runs the risk of "learning more and more about less and less." 85 He goes on to suggest that we should avoid the "pedantic interests" at the "local/national axis levels" and instead "focus on the linkages between sub-national units" and identify "patterns of relationships" instead. 
86
85
86
87
The HD provides a new methodology to avoid the shorthand and move toward freedom of action, similar to what Kilcullen refers to as the "co-design" process. The JUSMAG provides a clear example of this relationship and freedom of maneuver. JUSMAG members, whose control fell under the State Department, were able to take a long view of the Huk problem. Lansdale and Magsaysay were better able to produce local results from local intelligence, with operational and even strategic assets as a supporting role, after high-level pressure was released and they were granted freedom of action. 88 Thus, the value of freedom of maneuver in HD is in the ability to send few resources, over long periods, with sufficient autonomy to make mistakes and adjust.
When the strategy is executed in too directive a manner from the top-down approach, mistakes tend to be amplified and are difficult to reverse.
After studying the Huk Rebellion through an HD lens, three aspects of strategic value are evident. The first relates to the previously mentioned biases, however, HD may also provide an ability to perform self-assessment as well. The US changes the environment it is attempting to study or operate in and HD may provide an ability to elevate our assessment of the subject. The second aspect of strategic value relates to coercion and international relations. On a grander scale, having HD capabilities means greater influence in the new security environment. Lastly, HD may offer value by revealing a new way to think about the temporal domain.
When the Huk Rebellion started, the US had been in the Philippines for forty years.
During that time the policies and connections changed the environment. Voting rights, land agreements, taxation and trade, all influenced the socio-cultural changes that occurred throughout the period of colonization and independence. The US changed the environment it was attempting to study but made no concession to that fact. The strategic value of an HD approach came when the JUSMAG, Lansdale, and the US government abandoned overly simplistic explanations and biases, and began to see the conflict in broader terms. Programs such as EDCOR, and the improved local security, were solutions to problems the US either caused or was complicit in causing. Groups and individuals desire to see themselves on the side of good, however, the HD mindset helped the US overcome this hurdle and find appropriate solutions. Only then did its actions produce effective results. Therefore a crucial insight is that the HD should not just be a 87 David Kilcullen, Out of the Mountains: The Coming of Age of the Urban Guerrilla (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2013), 240. 
88
The HD may also add value to strategic coercion. 
89
90
The second dimension the HD offers to strategic coercion relates to the limits of US economic, political, and military power. Prior to 1950, the US responded to challenges first by authorizing funds. After funding, and if the problem escalated, the next preferred response was military in nature. When Lansdale arrived to the Philippines in 1950 he received briefings that focused solely on military operations. 
91
The third value of HD relates to the temporal domain. Historically, time has been used in small wars as a weapon to wear-down an enemy and drain resources. The HD offers a more expansive look at time. For example, the Huk Rebellion is typically understood as taking place from 1946 to 1954. From an HD perspective strategically, however, many of the issues that 
89
91
prompted the Rebellion date back to the 1920s and 1930s or even back to the Philippine-American War when the regarding voting rights, tenancy, and economic incentives were made. There were US and Philippine government opportunities before and after WWII to alter the trajectory and tempo of the socio-cultural changes, but the former lacked the capability or perhaps even the interest to intervene in this manner. Instead of looking at the problem of fast or slow, the HD may have offered a more informed strategy to avoid bad situations, and capitalize on opportunities. Having more options at strategic levels suggests there are "on-ramps" and "offramps" for conflict, at a pace of our choosing. The HD then, is beneficial as it alters a mindset of an "on/off switch" for the use of the military and suggests there are other, middle-ground options over time. The HD may even suggest interim solutions when political interest is insufficient for action.
In sum, the Philippine-American War and the Huk Rebellion were two separate conflicts with very similar traits. From an HD perspective these conflicts share the lineage of centuries of colonialism, repression, and socio-cultural change. Interestingly, the rebellions studied so far have been limited to Luzon. By the 1980s, however, the policies and military decisions of the US during and after both of these conflicts indirectly set the stage for conflict farther south in the archipelago. The Moros of the southern islands were affected by socio-cultural change, spurred by economic incentives and myopic policies and strategies.
analyze the utility of the HD in this type of conflict. In short, the Philippines, the roots of run deep.
The history of the southern Philippines dates back centuries but is beyond the scope of this thesis. This chapter surveys broadly the salient historical events and their context in order to assess the Muslim rebellion in the Philippines from a HD perspective. Islam arrived in Southeast Asian region and the southern parts of what are now the Philippines in the 14 th century. During Spanish colonization from the sixteenth century until to the end of the nineteenth century, the Muslim population was largely separated from the northern region in almost every way, including language, culture, and social structures. The Muslim population, known colloquially by the name given to them by the Spanish, the "Moros," had been present in all parts of the Philippines until Spanish occupation. 
1
Prior to colonization, Moros were not static peoples simply living in peace and tranquility. They had been a part of a 16 th century world-system and underwent changes in economics, ideologies, power, and cultural identity, as did their Christian neighbors. 
2
3
4
5
1 Francia,
58. 2
3 Frake,
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
5 Linn,
180.
6
During Spanish colonization, the Moros also expanded into other regions of the Philippines. Tulisanes (Muslim outlaws) frequently invaded the northern islands in search of recently cultivated rice or other sea-traded crops. 
7
8
The US Army recognized the Moro fierceness and defensiveness first-hand when it arrived in the Philippines in 1898. Gen Kobbe, commander of the Mindanao-Jolo area, and Dean Worcester witnessed the fierceness of the Moro tribes and the inhospitable terrain. As a result, both concluded they should not attempt to push the Moros into a western social structure too soon. 
9
10
12
13
14
11 Encyclopedia Britannica Online, s. v. "Moro Wars", (accessed April 20, 2016)
12
Karnow,
194. 13 Francia,
308.
14 Francia,
13. 15
The Moros viewed the Huk Rebellion as a Christian-based power struggle in the north.
Even worse, the power struggle resulted in a resettlement of 20,500 Huks and their sympathizers into Muslim territories. 
16
17
After the mid-twentieth-century, Filipinos throughout the archipelago became increasingly aware of their dire situation. The economy was poor, rural areas were underdeveloped, and the Philippine government was corrupt. Activists such as Alejandro Lichauco ascribed the problems to American imperialism, military basing, a colonial educational system, and a general undermining of Filipino culture and self-determination. 
18
16
17 Tuminez,
[122]
[123]
[124]
[125]
19 World Bank Report,
92.
21
The Presidential Administration of Ferdinand Marcos, elected in 1965, led to the slow decline of the Philippine economy and a return to a representative government. Its progress was accompanied, however, by the growth of corruption, which made the troubling economic situation in the Philippines worse. By 1980 prices on basic needs had tripled, wages were down 20 percent, and commerce was down 40 percent. 
22
24
25
26
21
22
23
25
26 Frake,
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
27
29
31
33
Unable to sell his agenda as being inclusive, Misuari and the MNLF increasingly clashed with the AFP. The MNLF was able to do so with backing from countries in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and Muammar Qaddafi during the 1970s. 
34
36
37
38
39
In 1978, Hashim Salamat, a more orthodox Muslim from the Magindanao tribe and deputy to Nur Misuari, broke away from MNLF and formed the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). 
40
The relationship between the Philippine government and MNLF was tenuous but improving. Internal Philippine political turmoil persisted until the election of 1986 when Corazon Aquino took power. Aquino was able to reverse some of the harm done by Marcos when she released political prisoners and returned to a bicameral legislature, rather than a dictatorship. 
41
42
43
By 1990 there were two main Muslim movements: the MNLF and the MILF. Over time, the MNLF grew more moderate in its political demands and was never able to unite the Muslim community because internal fractures and divisions among tribes and goals became more acute.
In contrast, the MILF was growing in numbers and turned more violent and began to turn to terrorism and larger cities. The MILF built training camps and shadow governments throughout its area of control, and subsequently became more brazen in the mid-1990s, when its leaders plotted to kill the Pope, as well as blow up a passenger airliner. 
44
45
As the divide among Muslim tribes grew wider, other groups sprang up. One of these new groups, called Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG), was founded in 1991. ASG had bases in Basilan, Jolo, and Mindanao; it was led by Abdurajak Janjalani. Charles Frake notes that, "Janjalani was a student" of fundamentalism in Zamboanga when it was "filled with [Muslim] refugees from the violence." 46 Later, Janjalani received his military training in Egypt before returning to the Philippines. 
47
42
Francia, 265. 43 Tuminez, 122-125. 44 Bruce Vaughn et al, "Terrorism in Southeast Asia," Congressional Research Service, (RL-34194, 2009)
45
46
47 Frake,
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
48
49
Given its connection to other violent Islamic extremist groups, ASG gained a degree of international recognition. Senior ASG members had linkages to al-Qaeda and, more specifically, Osama bin Laden. Bin Laden's brother-in-law had cemented his connection to ASG through marriage to a Filipina and began to funnel funds through a local charity. 
50
51
ASG was blamed, for example, for the 1995 Ipil (a Christian town) massacre of 57 people. 
52
ASG leaders soon discovered criminal activity was easier and more profitable than violence. One journalist concluded, "the group's Islamic identity was subordinated to the quest for profit." 53 It was not until the turn of the millennium that ASG's criminal actions, specifically kidnapping and ransom, earned Western attention. In 2000, ASG raided a resort taking 21 foreign tourists hostages and demanded the following: an Islamic State, large sums of money, and terrorist organization taking its instructions from al-Qaeda. It did, however, receive training and some funding from al-Qaeda. Such support represented less a commitment to the global Islamic cause as was driven by necessity, in same way the Huks used the Communist Party. ASG used al-Qaeda and regional powers for similar self-interested reasons. The connections between global terror and the MNLF and the MILF were also sporadic and opportunistic at best. The arrival of US forces in the Philippines was accompanied by temporary and localized successes in the JSOTF-P operations. The AFP, with help from the US military, aggressively pursued members of ASG, and many of them fled to neighboring countries or went into hiding.
After successful training, clearing operations, and the rescue of one of the American missionaries, the JSOTF-P reduced their presence in country. After the reduction in forces, however, ASG returned even more aggressively. Figure 
6
65
For example, the JSOTF-P mission statement in 2006 read as follows:
"JSOTF-P, in coordination with the country team, builds capacity and strengthens the Republic of the Philippines' security forces to defeat selected terrorist organizations in order to protect US and Filipino citizens and interests from terrorist attack while preserving Philippine 
65 Frake,
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
12.
In a striking parallel, Aquino's election was reminiscent of the election of Magsaysay described in the previous chapter. The net effect was that only by 2011 did the US and the Philippine governments pay serious attention to systemic, as opposed to transient, problems.
The new Philippine commitment to inclusiveness was demonstrated in 2011. Colonel Fran Beaudette, commander of the 1 st Special Forces Group (Airborne), points out, "[the Philippine government] recognized the need for a fundamentally different approach and adopted the Internal Peace and Security Plan-Bayanihan (IPSP)." 
73
74
75
77
78
79
80
81
In May 2015, after 13 years of work, JSOTF-P was deactivated in a ceremony in Zamboanga. According to Admiral Samuel Locklear, Commander of USPACOM, the Task Force's mission of tactical advise and assist had come to an end. 
82
83
84
85
86
The repression of Muslim rebellion in OEF-P appears on the surface to be an unconditional US success. Upon further examination, however, this case study suggests caution.
Initially, the US observed the violence in the Philippines as an extension of the threat to the homeland. Even the name Operation Enduring Freedom-Philippines implied a US-centric approach. To the US decision makers, OEF-P was an area of operations. To Filipino Muslims, the term "OEF-P" is a foreign categorization of their environment. The Moro simply refer to it as "home." On closer inspection, the violence in the Philippines was a result of long-standing disputes about power, socio-cultural changes, corrupt government, and a construct enabled by US policies and intervention decades earlier.
When examined through the lens of HD, three main points emerge from the Muslim Rebellion in the Philippines. The first is the long-standing conflict surrounding ethnic identities, which influenced radical groups to rebel. According to the US, violence in the southern Philippines was a manifestation of global terrorism. The violence and its causes were not, however, a product of al-Qaeda. Andrew Tan observed that the ethnic identities and cleavages "predated the events of 9-11and Al Qaeda." 87 When the US responded to global terrorism and Islamic fundamentalism in Asia and the Middle East, its reaction was swift and militarily focused.
Moros viewed US strategic responses as representing a realignment of the US with a corrupt and ineffective Philippine government, which led to further Muslim disaffection. In response, 
85
87
As Steven Rogers notes, "Mindanao's enduring poverty is an effective incubator for violence." 
89
88
89 Rogers,
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
95
While there is evidence strategies incorporating cultural analysis have been used with success in moments of crisis, there is less evidence these lessons are being assimilated…within the infrastructure of US intelligence and security policy 
95
with an expansionist ideology that sought to Christianize an already Catholic country, as well as assimilate an Asian culture into Western social and governmental structures. Additionally, inherent biases also led the US into harmful collusion with the Filipino elite whose interests aligned with the US military, which caused cognitive closure and ultimately what Colonel Wagner referred to as, blindness. Although internal beliefs and the perspectives of Filipino elite biased Gen Otis, in hindsight he appears to have been rather progressive for his time. Gen Otis used what is referred to now as HD to develop a new approach enabling him to recognize biases, then account for them in his strategy. The Second Philippine Commission was also able to use a prototype of this methodology to develop a sound strategy and provide a link between the operational and strategic levels. After the war, however, US policy and strategy regressed to prewar chauvinism and was unable to sustain a successful momentum.
Study of the Huk Rebellion also identified three main operational benefits to HD. These include: enhancing knowledge of the environment, binding purpose to knowledge, and gaining freedom of action. Gen Douglas MacArthur had been present in the Philippines for many years but he knew little about Filipinos. On the positive side, an HD mindset enabled Lansdale and the JUSMAG to observe their environment from an accurate perspective and operate effectively. The HD also gave a purpose to their knowledge of the environment. For example, Lansdale and Magsaysay used their deep understanding of the socio-cultural issues within the Philippines to build useful outlets and strategies to end the rebellion. To do this, they needed a semiautonomous framework in which to act. Lansdale and the JUSMAG, under direction from the Department of State, were able to operate within the environment without restrictive policies clouding operational judgment and inhibiting flexibility. The new operational framework of the JUSMAG and its relationship with Magsaysay enabled knowledge accumulation and provided purpose so that the operational actors were able to identify agency, categorize behavior, and provide influence.
Gaining freedom of action is also an important outcome of an HD mindset because it allows success to be reconceptualized. Instead of bounding success within narrow US operational metrics, HD success measures progress within a native socio-cultural framework, which had more durable roots. JUSMAG measured success prior to 1950 in terms of numbers of Huks killed or missions accomplished. After 1950, it defined success by the degree of support of the population and the quality of incentives to resist rebellion. Thus, freedom of action gives the operational level the authority to determine success according to the attitudes of the people. Put simply, HD will let you know what is needed; and the people will let you know when you have won. surge of forces, followed by a meeting of initial objectives, declaration of success, and then going home, only to return after violence reemerged. After returning, the US adapted its strategy by redefining success, metrics, and operations. The US and Filipinos still attacked ASG and other violent groups, however they had adapted to HD realties at an operational level by integrating their efforts with the Philippine government to address systemic grievances and eliminate The case studies in this thesis have revealed a number of limitations to the HD concept as it currently exists. Specifically, the HD lacks a theoretical foundation, a common interpretation of interdependence, economic lenses, regional influences, and organizational modeling. Analysis of the three case studies revealed a difficulty in analyzing and interpreting the epochs due to a lack of theoretical foundation. Currently, the HD concept is based on an assumed patchwork of theories on social networks, cultural understanding, and behavioral models. The lack of a consensus on which theories to use and which to discard and when, means that any number of observers using disparate theories and relationships could have arrived at substantially different perspectives from the same evidence. Admittedly, the social sciences have never had a unifying "theory of everything;" the HD, however, is limited by its overly broad and compartmentalized framework. The HD concept is in its early stages of development. For future growth, it needs a more robust theoretical grounding. For the HD to be useful for more than tactical checklists, it should have a well-developed theoretical foundation on which to attach the operational musculature. Theory helps elevate the concept to higher levels of analysis, but also provides agreed-upon definitions, explanations of behavior, and anticipatory methods for future analysis.
After the groundwork is laid, the keepers of the HD concept should explore the relationships and interdependence among the elements, as well as between the elements and the environment. For example, a social networking model based on resource mobilization is interesting, but it is overly specific for operational and especially strategic value. It appears from the evidence of this thesis that the HD would be more useful in operational and strategic arenas if, for example, resource mobilization theory (social) were used with a behavioral model (psychological) in a layered approach that also recognizes the interdependence between the two theories and what that relationship tells us about human behavior. Neither can arrive at the right answer alone, but together they can derive a more accurate answer, and that could lead to better strategic decisions. The key to success is not in a single model or theory per se, but in the relationships and interdependence between theories and models, and the environment.
The HD is also limited by its lack of an economic perspective. The lack was evident in the Philippine-American War and Huk Rebellion. At the dawn of the twentieth century the Philippines had developed a diverse set of incentives based on regional and global trade markets, internal crop development, and inter-island commerce. The US did not, however, fully understand the economic incentive structure during the first half of the twentieth century demonstrated in the deleterious policies for trade, markets, and land reforms. Without an accurate understanding of economics and the relationship to behavior, US policy makers, members of the Philippine Commissions, and General Douglas MacArthur all underestimated the influence of economics on behavior and the second and third-order effects its decisions would have on elites, peasants, and politicians. US and Philippine economic decisions not only had an impact on local and national behavior, but also had influence on regional actors such as China, Malaysia, Indonesia, and European powers who all have interests in the region.
In its current form, the five elements are focused inward toward a country, group or entity. To be useful to the strategist and operational commander, the HD should also adopt a regional lens to recognize sources of influence. As previously mentioned, the security environment has changed into a connected and integrated whole, and understanding such links becomes imperative to understanding behavior. The new security environment demands, and the case studies show, that HD must have regional alignment and influence as an operational or strategic element to be useful. For example, the Moro rebellion demonstrates the importance of understanding regional ethnic alignments, loyalties, and purpose of violence. The Moro rebellion was not solely about local identities and local power struggles, but rather how those identities and power structures interacted or even disengaged with regional power brokers, religious movements, and aspects of East Asian geopolitics. The Huk rebellion, and to a lesser extent the Philippine-American War, can be viewed in the same light. The limited scope of this thesis precluded any analysis or conclusions on how great power conflict affects behavior but its relationship to the HD would be worthy of further study. 
2
Finally, the HD also lacks organizational modeling with which to help predict behavior.
As an illustration, during the Huk Rebellion the US was unable to distinguish between organizational behavior and a perceived communist insurgency. The US for the most part, had a myopic view on the Huk membership and motives until it realized, with Magsaysay's insight, that the Huks were not communist. Rather, the Huks were an organization acting to survive like any other. Only when the US connected structure and motive to organizational behavior did it begin to find the right strategy. In their book, Essence of Decision, Allison and Zelikow argue that behavior is not merely understood as a rational actor, making rational decisions. Instead, there are organizational reasons for behavior. Most organizations want to survive. To do so, 
2
3
Any attempt to incorporate the HD in an organization requires a long view of strategy.
Historically, the military establishment has lacked a long view not because such as view is unimportant but because the establishment is structured to provide rapid overturn of personnel and short assignments to ensure the long-term health of the force. As a result, the US military has adopted measures of performance rather than the measures of effectiveness the HD approach would prescribe. To be successful, an HD approach implies a need to develop appropriate assignments and incentives, build new definitions of success, and develop more qualitative indicators of success.
An HD approach implies a need for long-term presence in a country and region to develop a deep socio-cultural understanding. This goes well beyond country and region specific assignments and presence. Compiling information is one thing but HD also requires an organization to retain and utilize tacit knowledge. 
4
An HD mindset also implies strategic patience and an abandonment of the archetypal ideas of order, control. Most military strategists want to create order from chaos, or certainty from uncertainty. In HD, as in most areas of strategy, these ideas are illusory. Order is rarely a reality, controlling humans has practical and moral hazards, and success may mean avoiding a fight. These are hardly military ideals. In HD, it appears that any attempt to establish order and certainty simply places unattainable demands upon a complex situation. Instead, HD implies a comfort with uncertainty and an ability to operate well in disorder to achieve strategic advantage. 
5
Another implication of the HD concept is that it is as important to look forward as it is to look back. The HD must ask the questions: How will US policies affect the future? What are the second-and-third-order effects? There is no crystal ball for strategists, but HD must make an attempt at correlation and causation, without inserting endemic biases. If the US is to be present, and implement policies and action, it must also realize that actions and presence have an effect on the environment and people under examination. For example, the policies of the US, which included economic, military, and political aspects, all shaped the Philippines in positive and negative ways. After the Philippine-American War, the US implemented policies led to social rebellion in the 1920s and 1930s. During the Huk rebellion, the EDCOR plan, which resettled thousands of Christian Filipinos in the south, set the conditions for the Moro rebellion. Every action has a reaction and any attempt at an HD mindset must recognize that the US is not a disinterested third party, but an integral part of the system, which is under examination. The inherent risk in this implication is paralysis in action or decision-making, but for HD to have value this risk must be addressed and avoided.
Finally, HD implies a third dimension in military strategy. Conventional wisdom focuses on controlling time and space. The US typically wants to shorten the temporal domain, and control the spatial domain. The theoretical ideas of offense and defense are partial to a temporal and spatial focus of strategy; however, this dyad is insufficient to explain success or failure in the past. Much like the black hole observed by its effects on other bodies, there appears to be a third dimension adding tension to the historically dyadic structure. This thesis argues that the HD is the third pole. Adding HD to form a triad helps define and explain the constant tension that
45 Taruc, 37.  46  
For thoughts on strategic failure see, Daniel P. Bolger Why We Lost: A General's Inside Account of the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars. (New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,
2014).
2
For a more recent discussion see Michael Kofman and Matthew Rojansky, A Closer Look at Russia's "Hybrid War," Kennan Cable No. 7(Washington, DC:  The Kennan Institute of the Wilson Center, 2016).
USSOCOM, USSOCOM 2020: Forging the Tip of the Spear, Admiral William H. McCraven, 2013, http://www.defenseinnovationmarketplace.mil/resources/SOCOM2020Strategy.pdf (accessed 21 April 2016).
USSOCOM, Operating in the Human Domain, (MacDill AFB, Tampa, FL: version 1.0, 3 August 2015), 3.
See, Major C.E.Callwell, Small Wars Their Principles and Practice, (Watchmaker Publishing, 2010). See also,David Galula, Pacification in Algeria 1956
-1958
SOCOM OHD, 18.   
SOCOM OHD, 15.   
SOCOM OHD, 66.   
Luis H. Francia, A History of the Philippines: From Indio Bravos to Filipinos (New York, NY: Overlook Press,
2010) 25.
Jose V. Abueva, Focus on the Barrio (Quezon City, Philippines: Phoenix Press, 1959), 21.
Francia,
31.
Frank H. Golay, The Philippines: Public Policy and National Economic Development. (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1968) 14.
Francia,[28][29] 
Golay,[15][16] 
Golay, 16.   
CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/rp.html (accessed 14 April 2016).
Sturtevant, 28.   
James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed (New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 1998) 69-70.
Stanley Karnow, In Our  Image: America's Empire in the Philippines (New York, NY:, Random House, 1989), 52.
US Bureau of the Census, Census of the Philippine Islands, 1903, Volume II, "Literacy," 78. https://archive.org/details/ajb5834.0002.001.umich.edu (accessed
May 2016).9 Sturtevant,[32][33] 
Sturtevant, 33.   
Sturtevant, 35.   
Sturtevant,
36.
Francia, 111.   
Sturtevant, 37. See also, Uldarico S. Baclagon Lt Col, Philippine Campaigns (Manila, Philippines,  Graphic House, 1952), 37.   
Baclagon, 66. See alsoLinn, 8.   
Baclagon,[108][109][110][111][112] 
Francia, 142.   
Baclagon,[72]
[73]
Stathis N. Kalyvas, The Logic of Violence in Civil War (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2006). 365.
Kalyvas,[101][102] 
Kalyvas,  
39
Abueva, 30.   
McCoy and de Jesus,
 7 Kerkvliet,
6
See Luis Taruc, He Who Rides a Tiger(London, England: Praeger Inc, 1967).
US officers such as Col R.W. Volckmann, and Brig Gen Blackburn wrote about their time as USAFFE guerrillas. For a US account of the Japanese resistance in the Philippines see R.W. Volckmann, Col US Army, We Remained (New York, NY: W.W.Norton & Company, 1954).
Although less active militarily than their Huks counterparts, USAFFE guerrilla intelligence gathering work was nevertheless dangerous. For example, one force, the Cagayan-Apayao Force operating in Northern Luzon, was all but wiped out by the autumn of 1943. For details, see Bernard Norling, The Intrepid Guerrillas of North Luzon (Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1999).
The Hukbalahap was officially formed on 29 March 1942.
Some estimates of Hukbalahap forces are near 15,000 at their peak, and their supporters into the hundreds of thousands, if not millions.
Kerkvliet, 95.   
Quoted inKerkvliet, 115.   
Luis Taruc, 22. See alsoKerkvliet, 67.   
Kerkvliet, 72.   
Ernest Schein, "War Damage Compensation through Rehabilitation: The Philippine War Damage Commission," Law and Contemporary Problems, vol 16, no. 3 (Summer 1951): 519-542, See page 540. http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2499&context=lcp, (access on 17 April 2016)
Schein, 541.   
Abueva,[23][24][25] 
Greenberg,
41.
Greenberg,  
 53 Abueva, 26.   
A useful reflection on such approaches is contained in Napoleon Valeriano and Leland Bohannan, Counter-Guerrilla Operations: The Philippine Experience(New York, NY: Praeger, 2006).
Lembke, 68.   
Greenberg, 133.   
Lembke,
81.
Greenberg,133.   
Greenberg,[137][138] 
Greenberg, 138.   
Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 2nd ed., (New York: Longman, 1999), Chapter 3.
James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds (New York, NY: Anchor Books, 2005), Chapter 4.
The quest for continuing advantage is the central theme of Everett Dolman's, Pure Strategy: Power and Principle in the Space and Information Age. (London: Frank Cass, 2005).
Major Kaveri Crum
University of Kentucky ROTC program
Joint Specialized Undergraduate Navigator Training at Randolph AFB
San Antonio
130E Talon I, at Duke Fld
Florida. Major Crum
Hurlburt Fld Florida
Cannon AFB New Mexico
Maj Crum
MC-130W
AC-130W
Major Crum
Operations Enduring and Iraqi Freedom
Trident University
Air Force Fellow at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Dr. Arati Prabhakar
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Dr. Arati Prabhakar
1-2
The Huk Rebellion For centuries, our people had fought for national freedom and social justice.
The main fighting during the Huk Rebellion occurred from 1946 until 1954. To understand the Rebellion from a HD perspective, this chapter separates it into three different phases. The first phase, the "Repression of the Peasant," is from approximately 1902-1941.   During this period the Philippine government lost legitimacy, and its socio-cultural framework began to unravel. The second period, from 1941-1950, can be considered the "Alignment Phase."
During this period, lines were drawn across socio-political groups, primarily in Luzon, and elite preferences dictated behavior. The final period was from 1950-1954, and could be called the "Co-opt Phase." In this period, the US and the Philippine government began to understand the rebel movement and sought to allay peasant unrest through social, cultural, and economic reforms.
In a global context, the period from 1902-1954 brought changes that shaped geopolitics and the world order. Global markets became entangled, world wars redefined security arrangements, post-war alignments took shape, and communism spread. In the period from 1941-1954, China had fallen to communism, Russia was expanding, Korea was invaded, Germany was a battleground, and countless communist insurgencies were brewing. For the US, the Philippines were a critical Asian rampart against communism. The Philippines also gave the US a the government. 
37
38
39
40
Vicious fighting on both sides marked the internal battle for the Philippines, but the Huks appeared to have the people on their side. The Philippine government, in turn, repressed anyone thought to be supporting the Huks. Spurred on by government action, a number of people supported the Huks because they lived with them and shared in their sacrifices and gains, offered justice, and provided security. The Huks could talk with the people in person, while the US and Philippine government forces remained in Manila except to attack Huks or their supporters.
The identification by the US and the Philippine government of the Huks as antigovernment and communist undermined any chance at peace. Both not only mischaracterized the Huks motivations but also gravely underestimated their popularity. The Huks were the millions of people who provided security and justice to Luzon in the vacuum of an absentee government.
The security and socio-cultural framework had broken apart and the Huks provided a solution.
The election of 1949 was an important point for both sides. The election was between Jose Laurel, a collaborationist who was given amnesty by Roxas, and Elpidio Quirino, who continued Roxas' iron-fist policy. 
41
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
68
60
61 Golay,
[355]
[356]
63
64
65
66
67
68
In the wake of al-Qaeda's attacks on 11 September 2001 (9/11), policymakers in the US noticed the Philippines had become an increasingly unstable and dangerous country. In addition to operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the US opened up a "second front" of the Global War on Terror in Southeast Asia. Specifically, US decision makers focused on the violent Islamic extremist threat in the southern Philippines, which includes the islands of Mindanao, Sulu, and Palawan, among others. Considering the history of terror attacks in the Philippines and the events of 9/11, the "second front" was probably justified. However, incorporating the Philippines into a Global War on Terror was ahistorical at best. At worst, it fails to grasp the long struggle between Christians, Muslims, and a repressive and corrupt government. This chapter studies the unrest in the south of the Philippines from a broad historical and socio-cultural perspective and offers relevant insights about the nature and character of the conflict. This examination will also release of Islamic militants from prison. 
54
55
56
57
58
59
5
60
67
68
The more comprehensive approach took shape in a number of different initiatives. For Benigno Aquino III, a moderate candidate, was elected president in 2010. In his inaugural address he committed himself to the peace process with a desire to be "inclusive of the interest of all." 72 In light of this, the US military operations no longer appeared to be relegated to 
67
68
69
The Human Domain concept may offer the operational arena value by informing the development of a coherent strategy that recognizes limitations. There is a paradox in such a "bottom up" approach to strategy. While there is much to learn about local customs, ethnic rivalries, and socio-cultural behavior at the tactical level, there is also a risk to this approach.
Specifically, those at the tactical level may be unable to recognize operational and strategic limitations. Initially, the US had a tactical focus, which successfully reached out to locals and addressed their immediate needs such as health care, and clean water. But it did not achieve operational success, as it did not identify the systemic issues. The US may be capable of successfully conducting COIN, building partner capacity, and security assistance. These approaches by themselves, however, may not be the solutions to the deeper, systemic problems.
The US may not be able to solve the systemic problems at all. It was not until JSOTF-P met with regional and national leaders across all ranks of government, and the Philippine government began to change itself, that the operational began to take on a new, long-term, and robust approach. Knowledge about HD at the operational level may highlight limitations and provide a degree of self-assessment that otherwise would have gone unnoticed.
The HD may also assist in removing chauvinistic blinders and help create an adaptive organization. In response to 9/11, the US classified the Muslim insurgency as part of the global terrorist movement. This classification, however, was the result of a misunderstanding of realities in the Philippines. The US misidentified the ties between ASG and al-Qaeda because they conformed to basic assumptions about terror and violence. al-Qaeda may have helped ASG, but that does not necessarily equate to shared vision and rationale. US blindness kept military and policy makers from noticing linkages and fracture points that closely resembled those of the Huks and the communists. When the US made OEF-P about terrorism it effectively halted any cognitive flexibility that might elevate US presence to fulfill a long-term strategy aimed at systemic issues. Additionally, when vision is restored, the HD can help build an adaptive organization. An HD mindset requires planners to constantly reevaluate their assumptions, actions, and behaviors, as well as those behaviors and beliefs of the audience (enemy, neutrals, and adversary). With every military action or governmental behavior, the environment changes, and so too must the evaluation of the environment. The process of challenging assumptions, reevaluation, and changing methodology helps an organization become and remain adaptive to the environment.
Population-centric conflicts are known for their complexity. From the evidence here presented, the HD may provide strategic insights that help bring clarity in the moment when emotions are high and the war drums are beating. The US is able to reduce fog and friction in conventional wars with technical conventional assets such a satellites or airborne command and control. In the new security environment of transregional terror and low intensity conflict, however, the US must also develop clarity in the highly complex human dimension.
Seeing through the complexity of human conflict and developing sound strategy are not impossible. In the years leading up to and including US involvement in OEF-P, many authors such as Steven Rogers and Charles Frake sounded the alarm about misidentifying problems and developing myopic strategies for the Philippines. In 2004, for example, Rogers wrote that, " [The US has] failed to recognize…that terrorists did not create the conflict in the southern Philippines and do not control any of the combatants." 90 Charles Frake highlighted the difficulties in understanding these situations: "much of what is going on in the production of social and cultural worlds maybe hidden." He added that, "interpretation requires attributions of the identity of perpetrators and victims," and failing to accurately attribute identities has "fatal consequences." 
91
94
Obtaining such knowledge is not impossible, and in many cases it is already present. After 9/11, the US was once again blind, and its response lacked clarity in the moment. The resulting ineffective strategy missed opportunities and wasted valuable time.
In sum, there was terrorism and rebellion in the Philippines, but this does not tell the entire story. Using Rommel Banlaoi's observations as a guide, there are a number of ways to observe the Muslim rebellion. First, an observer may conclude the groups are criminals seeking 
90
91
92
93
94
The global security environment has changed and with it, the old ideas about security, relationships, geopolitics, and strategy changed. In response to democratization, trans-regional threats, and the gray zone, USSOCOM developed the OHD Concept. The OHD concept was described in Chapter 1 as a structure based on five elements: Physical, Psychological, Cultural, Social, and Informational. The five elements provide the framework from which to observe people to shape the environment, prevent conflict, and combat violence. The HD concept seeks to foster feasible options for coherent strategy, and relevant operations. This thesis has used a qualitative case-study analysis to determine the operational and strategic value of the HD framework. Specifically, the five elements of HD were used as a lens through which to view three case studies in the Philippines spanning over 100 years of US involvement. The remaining portions of this chapter will summarize important findings from each case study; highlight the limitations, implications, and value of HD; and provide recommendations.
Analysis of the Philippine-American War identified three insights into the value of the HD in the operational sphere. The insights included the ability to identify organizational structure of the adversary, the need for restraint on the scale and use of force, and the requirement to identify cleavages and alliances within the population and between the population and rebellious groups. US policy and the actions of US military forces produced mixed results due to differing uses within the HD concept. Gen Otis used an HD concept as focal point of operations during his tenure; while Gen MacArthur used such concepts merely as an aside. The mixed uses of the human analysis provided an opportunity to observe different reactions of the population to two separate operational approaches. Gen Otis restrained the use of force and dispersed his units throughout the rural areas. His actions increased risk to his dispersed units and mobile reserve but also provided knowledge and opportunities, both of which enabled him to see clearly and target the organizational weaknesses of the enemy. In contrast, Gen MacArthur increased the use of force, which closed communication links between him and the population. Without such HD links, Gen MacArthur was unable to measure the effectiveness of his actions and subsequently lost escalatory options in the future, thereby reducing his ability to compel the adversary. The lack of HD insights led Gen MacArthur to believe Filipinos were either rebels or supporters of the US.
HD in the strategic arena may help identify biases and implement proper strategy after the cessation of hostilities. Beginning with biases, the US began the Philippine-American War
The Huk Rebellion also revealed HD strategic value by providing policy makers an ability to see their own biases, re-think coercion, and manipulate the temporal domain. The particular bias here refers specifically to the environment. In 1950, the US certainly had urban (peasant) and political (communism) biases that informed their assumptions, but the biases also resulted in economic incentives and governmental reforms, which changed the environment. Put simply, the US had become a part of the environment. After 1950, national-level US and Philippine decision makers began to perceive their environment from a better cognitive vantage point. Only then were they able to see their previous actions as connected to violent rebel behavior. The HD requires users to assess themselves and the effects on the system they intend to influence.
The HD also provided strategic-level actors with the ability to be judicious in coercion by realizing the limits of power. After WWII, the US sent the Philippines rehabilitation funds, provided political support, and increased military aid. Despite employing these instruments of power, the Huk Rebellion could not be prevented or defeated. Once the US gained knowledge of HD, identified limitations of the use of power, and developed better options for the use of the instruments, the tide began to turn. Thus, an HD mindset may facilitate coercion in small conflicts, something needed in the new security environment.
The Moro rebellion, the subject of Chapter 5, highlighted two operational values derived from HD. These values include recognizing operational limitations and building an adaptive organization. First, HD raises cognitive interpretations of the environment above the tactical level (forest rather than trees). At the tactical level, COIN and FID are insufficient because they mainly offer tactical results and they are unable to identify operational limitations. At the outset of OEF-P, JSOTF-P was directed to provide tactical results such as fighting terrorists, digging wells, or providing dental care. These efforts were well-intentioned; their effects, however, were locally derived and insular. It was not until the US worked with national and regional level Filipino authorities and identified the underlying issues of abuses, corruption, and disaffection, that a productive change in the approach was possible. The HD thus provided the beginnings of an operational framework to address operational-level systemic problems.
Second, an HD mindset helps an organization become adaptive. From the American perspective, OEF-P was merely one theater in a campaign against global terrorism for the US.
But on the ground, OEF-P was a reaction to a century of growing disaffection, socio-cultural changes, and ethnic conflict in the southern Philippines. The response of the US was typical: a strategists and operational planners have faced, but rarely recognized. Identifying, labeling, and categorizing the tension between these three elements is out of the scope of this thesis, but one worthy of academic attention.
This thesis has spanned over 100 years of US involvement in the Philippines and concludes the HD concept has merit. An HD mindset can produce more synoptic strategies, better control of time, and more effective operations in the new security environment. The argument concludes with five recommendations.
First, the HD concept could be easily stretched beyond its means. Therefore, HD should not be bureaucratically integrated into joint planning cycles and processes. Spending hours trying to fit HD into a targeting cycle defeats the purpose of an HD mindset. The idea behind HD is to learn how to influence, gain strategic advantage, generate options, and manipulate time for advantage. The HD concept should not be used as a checklist to build culturally-aware target lists.
Second, the HD concept should be used at all levels of organization. The HD concept should be taught at the appropriate levels of leadership and Professional Military Education (PME). Before this is accomplished, however, the theoretical and practical application should be matured in SOCOM and provided to Joint Staff and the armed services. This thesis further recommends SOCOM generously fund master's and PhD-level studies in cultural and liberal arts for the purpose of HD development. Additionally, SOCOM should develop specific training across all members of the force in a region, language, and country of their choice. This training and education should not take place in a virtual world, but rather in class and in-country study.
Third, the HD concept is not a panacea or an emergency response mechanism for use when conventional approaches do not work. An HD mindset takes time to train, develop, and gain understanding about the environment. If one needs HD in an emergency, it is probably too late to be useful. Fourth, the HD concept will not solve all strategic problems. HD is a framework with which to understand ones' self and ones' enemy, regardless of the scale or intensity of conflict. Finding strategic advantage in today's security environment, characterized by fewer resources, smaller footprints, gray zone challenges, and the like, can be challenging. The HD concept can help address these challenges, add rigor to the process, and illuminate the unknown.
Armed Forces of the Philippines. Established in 1935.
Small boat used by early settlers to travel among the islands. Came to be known for the small size yet self-sufficient.
Spanish name given for a small village. 