# ID: 1f379e0f0ddb4970b74b334cb0e0c31b
# Title: Parameters: The US Army War College Quarterly. Volume 43, Number 4, Winter 2013-14
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Of course, in the absence of such an analysis, it would be virtually impossible to determine what expectations Moscow actually had during the thirties of the imminence of a European war, whether it would involve Russia and, if so, under what circumstances.
Neither is it possible to guess at, let alone analyze, Soviet war aims without such an evidentiary and analytical foundation.
Inasmuch as the Cold War, and possibly Operation Barbarossa, were triggered by Stalin's efforts to realize his war aims, these are not purely academic questions.
Unfortunately for the serious reader looking for evidence or answers to these questions, those things are not found here.
And that is everyone's loss.
O ne approaches works on military leaders written by their lifelong fans with a sense of dread.
Often, these works cannot escape the bounds of hero worship to provide commentary more useful than laudatory.
Colonel Scott Aiken has managed to avoid the pitfalls of his inspiration on the way to crafting a really fine piece of scholarship on General Francis Marion's leadership and campaigns.
This is a work of two narratives.
The first, and predominant one, covers the history of General Marion and his role commanding a partisan formation in the campaign to defeat the British in South Carolina.
The second argues the relevance of this history to contemporary issues of war.
Mastering the primary historical narrative, the work misses excellence for the relative weakness of its attention to the contemporary story.
I am at pains to remind readers the critiques and issues brought out in this review are, in part, the result of how deeply engaged with the This is not a book for novices to military affairs or the history of the American Revolution.
The first is true because the military content is referenced according to technical and professional standards.
The second is because the historical content is tightly concentrated in time, place, and type of activity.
For the right audience, however, the work is valuable.