# ID: 1f9a6d223c344f7a9530264d065edbeb
# Title: Chairman of The Joint Chiefs of Staff Strategy Essay Competition: Essays 2004
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2004.0
# Fulltext:
rofessional military education is vital to creating effective strategies and carrying out missions in challenging times. It fosters freedom of thought and encourages diverse perspectives essential to the long-term success of
Waging War and Keeping Peace with America's Military, which described an "incremental, little noticed, de facto" shift toward military prominence in international affairs whereby four-star commanders "simply filled a vacuum left by an indecisive White House, an atrophied State Department, and a distracted Congress." 
2
3
4
5
Perhaps the best way to fill this gap in the literature is to engage the civilians who work national security issues alongside the combatant commanders. Assistant secretaries of state and ambassadors normally direct the Nation's diplomacy and should be positioned to judge the effectiveness and appropriateness of military involvement therein. Therefore, this essay focuses on the international role-as policy executor and policy shaper-of the regional commanders vis-à-vis their Department of State counterparts. Why do these military officers enjoy such prominence on the world stage? Are they filling a post-Cold War vacuum, or does history suggest other reasons? Most importantly, is their prominent role proper? Do the combatant commanders somehow usurp civilian control, or do they fill a vital role that no one else can fill?
To answer these questions, this essay relies on both Priest's reporting and additional interviews of senior military officers who have served as regional commanders and national security advisers. To explore the civilian side of the civil-military relationship, it canvasses current and former under secretaries, assistant secretaries, and ambassadors. To discuss the implications for national security policymaking, it surveys recent literature on civil-military relations. Finally, it synthesizes the experience of the aforementioned policymakers and explores ways to improve the civil-military relationships at the core of the national security policy process. Even in a resource-constrained world, the major actors-the Departments of State and Defense-might be able to effect some incremental change and ensure that America gets the most possible bang for its foreign policy buck.
Priest's writings emphasize the political role of the combatant commanders. She describes the commanders of U.S. Central Command (CENTCOM), U.S. European Command (EUCOM), U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), and U.S. Southern Command (SOUTHCOM) as globetrotting emissaries of the world's sole superpower-for much of the world, the most visible face of American engagement. Citing interviews with 20 ambassadors, Priest notes that "no other U.S. official in the region spent more time trying to build relationships with nations where virtually none existed" than did General Anthony Zinni, USMC, CENTCOM commander in the late 1990s. 
6
7
Regarding the nature of the job, recent commanders agree with Priest's assertions that the role is largely political. General Joseph Ralston, USAF, Clark's successor as EUCOM commander and Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (SACEUR)-the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military chief-estimates that he spent about 70 percent of his time on political-military issues, despite having ongoing combat operations in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Macedonia and maritime interdiction operations in the Mediterranean. Believing his greatest impact was with decisionmakers throughout Europe, Ralston devoted up to 80 percent of his political-military time with various national ambassadors to NATO, heads of state, members of parliament, ministers of defense, and military chiefs of defense. Aware of his role as an international spokesman and mindful of press attention, Ralston worked hard to understand the needs of politicians, governments, and populations: "For example, when I went to Finland, I had to know the Finnish prime minister had a different position on NATO membership [than other Finnish ministers]. I had to know what the Minister of Foreign Affairs thought, what the Minister of Defense thought. . . . I didn't want to embarrass the government, but could be candid privately." 
8
You have to know what you want the region to look like down the road, and try to build programs toward that. Take Yemen in the aftermath of its civil war. . . . [Americans] wanted to write it off, but it was a major security problem. The Yemeni president complained he couldn't control his borders; I wanted to help shore up his coast guard, etc. Plus, I wanted to "get them pregnant"-get all the Gulf countries to participate in security issues like basing and overflight. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
All the CENTCOM commanders-like their EUCOM counterparts-have from the beginning been on the front lines of American military and diplomatic engagement. America has long vested considerable power in the hands of its most senior military officers, often to great effect. In the words of two noted historians:
The military high command is the point of contact between political and military aspirations and activities; because of this, the coalition commanders must function as superb artists. . . . The coalition PROCONSULS, PRETENDERS, OR PROFESSIONALS? soldier . . . who can do so successfully is one who has indeed proved his versatility. Defeating one's enemies while placating one's allies calls for the remarkable characteristics of the soldier-statesman. 
16
17
18
19
20
For every Congressional delegation that visited, I wrote a letter. I spent a lot of time on it-no boilerplate-outlining issues, what we were trying to accomplish. I talked to all of them, hosted Q&A [question and answer] sessions. It was a good dialogue; I'd taken an oath that if Congress asked my opinion, I'd give it to them, even if I disagreed with the administration. But I don't recall ever being out of step with
One would expect professionals such as Ralston and Zinni to defend the system that produced them and to justify their conduct as American public servants. Their comments, however, lead to important questions: What do their civilian counterparts think? Does The Mission exaggerate the problem? Do the officials charged with developing and executing foreign policy in the United States and abroad see teamwork and deference to civilian authority from the regional commanders, or do they sense an improper loss of power to the military? Does the current system work properly?
For a number of senior State Department officials-both political appointees and career Foreign Service officers-the answer is an unqualified yes. The system works to America's benefit. Lincoln Bloomfield, who as Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs must coordinate State-Defense interaction around the world, "could probably give 100 cases where the combatant commander has accomplished something we needed to get done. One, he's on the scene. Two, the power to get something done may have been in a foreign military rather than a foreign ministry." Bloomfield describes a "flow of information from State to embassies to commanders that is not as isolated as it once was . . . it's more likely civilians will know the [commanders'] needs and vice versa," and concludes that the regional commanders "are terrific. . . . It's hard work, running all day long, bouncing things off of everyone, accumulating ideas of just what our policy is." 
23
Elizabeth Jones, Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs, reports outstanding teamwork with Ralston and his successor, James Jones: "I'm always on the phone with the EUCOM commander, coordinating our approach to the region." 
24
Yes, someone could goof. But the system works wonderfully-the [regional commanders] are some of the finest America has to offer. When the [commander] and ambassador are on the same page, it's a very powerful combination. I'm a complete believer. 
25
26
The Ambassador highlights an "extremely important example . . . the process of completely changing Chile policy to be prodemocracy and anti-Pinochet. I got the fullest cooperation from Galvin- no mixed signals whatsoever." Gelbard acknowledges the problem with Admiral Blair but lays the blame on a lack of policy coordination in Washington rather than personality conflicts or power vacuums. In any case, the Indonesian example failed to shake his confidence in regional commanders: "I can't say if it's the exception that proves the rule, but the rules of engagement and the system between the [commander] and the ambassador are about right. I wouldn't change it." 
27
The foregoing discussion suggests that regional commanders do play a significant role in international affairs-a role welcomed and celebrated by the civilians who "by law and tradition" (to use Priest's phrase) direct American foreign policy. Without a doubt, because their role is so prominent, these military officers greatly influence the policy that they execute. To demonstrate effective policy coordination within DOD, Ralston emphasizes "good support from Secretary [Donald] Rumsfeld. I came back 19 times to tell the secretary he was making a mistake-all 19 times, the secretary did what I asked." 
28
29
One long-time observer of the civil-military relationship, Richard Kohn, resents that "the American military has grown in influence to the point of being able to impose its own perspective on many policies and decisions." 
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
If some of history's most effective statesmen benefited from freeflowing debate, it follows that current leaders would benefit as well. The American system is built on open discussion-and open debate must be more acceptable and beneficial than the "relentless, ruthless bureaucratic struggle" Kohn deplores. 
41
On balance, then, civil-military relations theory can, if reluctantly, accept an open debate among military and civilian security professionals. Speaking of the combatant commanders' role in that debate, former National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft states bluntly, "It's not a usurpation of civilian authority, not at all. The solution is certainly not to diminish the scope of the commanders' reach." 
42
Debate is, of course, two-sided; if the Nation is to enjoy the fullest benefit from an "unequal dialogue," it must prepare all the potential participants in the national security arena to contribute. Diplomats, soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines would clearly benefit from more meaningful exposure to one another throughout their careers. Recounting her travels with regional commander entourages, Priest jokes about foreign service officers who do not know the difference between corporals and colonels: "You have to teach State about the military; there's a total lack of knowledge. I'd ride with State Department guys who knew nothing." 
43
Contemporary crises are complex. They have military, diplomatic, economic, law enforcement, technological, and information dimensions." 
44
45
46
47
Echoing the Hart-Rudman report, almost all the practitioners consulted for this study emphasize a lack of adequate policy coordination and interagency focus on security issues. As described earlier, Ambassador Gelbard faults poor policy direction, not bureaucratic friction, for his conflict with Admiral Blair: "The fundamental issue is policy. There has to be policy engagement in [Washington] DC; in this case, there wasn't. I'd have happily taken instructions from DC to back off my hard-line policy-but I got none." 48 Under Secretary Grossman concurs with the observation, but sees few opportunities for change:
Why do we have confusion between State and Defense responsibilities? We're Americans-the whole system is designed for tension, for checks and balances. Is it fun for those who attend 16 deputies' meetings a week? No-but policy grows from that clash. We don't have a Politburo. 
49
50
51
53
54
55
56
58
Most commentators see the best solution as either a reordering of missions or creation of cross-functional groups to enhance policy and strategy coordination. Priest wants to see a State Department staffed for full direction of foreign policy and educated to integrate military engagement properly; she thinks the current secretary of defense wants to bring the military back to its core mission. In an ideal world, I would too. However, if you can't, do you train the military better to do those civilian things? If the choice is between a narrow-minded military being pushed into these roles or a broadly educated one, integrated with civilian oversight-I'd pick that one. 
59
61
62
There may be a simpler solution: a single, existing, cross-functional position that could integrate regional planning, consolidate budgets, and track most of the military assistance and development money flowing into a region. The Hart-Rudman report would "require the regional [commanders] to strengthen the process through which their political advisers [POLADs] involve ambassadors in planning" 63 -but that would be too small a step. The commanders should go even further, empowering and resourcing their POLADs to act as a clearinghouse and communication center between the command, ambassadors, deputy chiefs of mission, and deputy assistant secretaries in the regional bureaus. They could become a single point of contact for regional strategy and budget integration, smoothing a seam that Bloomfield identified: I've tried to make the State and Pentagon budget-building calendars fit, so that every conference for a regional commander's security plan is iterative-but State and DOD have been in different cocoons. I'd do a zero-based calendar-completely synchronize budgets so embassy and commander recommendations build on each other. 
64
To be effective, POLADs need support-and that support could simultaneously increase interdepartmental familiarity and understanding. In the field, POLADs should have a small military and civilian staff. In Washington, they need someone to represent the regional security perspective in mid-level interagency meetings. To facilitate the crossflow of information, a Washington point of contact should be provided for POLADs, and in order to ensure visible State-Defense coordination in Foggy Bottom, DOD could provide one-star deputy assistant secretaries to each of the regional bureaus.
Can this work? Bloomfield thinks so. He reports that "Secretary Powell and Deputy Secretary Armitage have clearly expressed their interest in POLADs. . . . I've tried to put as much energy into the position as possible, to make the POLAD a true pipeline." 
65
The regional combatant commanders undoubtedly cast a large shadow over American foreign policy-a shadow that some commentators fear or resent. However, their political role goes back far longer than many observers realize; commanders have been influencing policy significantly since the National Security Act created unified commands in 1947. According to a host of policy developers and practitioners, that influence has been overwhelmingly positive. By nature of their position, their access to international leaders both civilian and military, their resources, and the quality of the individuals who accede to the job, regional commanders fill a vital role for the Nation.
Does such prominence somehow skew the civil-military relationship? Some observers fear so and appear to prefer a situation wherein all military advice is given behind closed doors, away from public scrutiny. 
67
Of course, the nature of the national security bureaucracy leaves a lot of room for improvement-as one regional commander said, "we are just not set up right for engagement in the world." 
68
In any case, all those involved in national security policy should accept, without undue concern, the important role of the four-star regional commanders. Indeed, because the stakes are so high, and the commanders' experience is almost unmatched anywhere in the bureaucracy, the Nation should demand their visible, public participation in the policy debate. To paraphrase Madeleine Albright, what is the point of having this military if one cannot fully use its experience, energy, and brainpower? 2 Dana Priest, The Mission: Waging War and Keeping Peace with America's Military (New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 2004), 14.
3 Dana Priest, interview with author, April 16, 2004. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Avoiding a Napoleonic Ulcer: Bridging the Gap of Cultural Intelligence (Or, Have We Focused on the Wrong Transformation?)
George W. Smith, Jr.
Not a Frenchman then doubted that such rapid victories must have decided the fate of the Spaniards. We believed, and Europe believed it too, that we had only to march to Madrid to complete the subjection of Spain and to organize the country in the French manner, that is to say, to increase our means of conquest by all the resources of our vanquished enemies. The wars we had hitherto carried on had accustomed us to see in a nation only its military forces and to count for nothing the spirit which animates its citizens. 
1
3
The parallels of Napoleon's challenges in Spain with the challenges of contemporary coalition forces in Iraq are striking. While there is a danger in attempting to take historical parallels too far, some similarities are too close to ignore. Moreover, such similarities may reflect the failure to understand the local populace within campaign planning. That understanding forms the bedrock for any successful post-hostility occupation phase.
Thus, cultural intelligence preparation of the battlespace (IPB) with a focus on the post-hostilities landscape is perhaps more important than traditional intelligence preparation of the battlespace, which typically has monopolized the intelligence effort. Countless lessons from history resemble Napoleon's experiences with popular Spanish resistance and provide insight as to what should comprise the proper balance of effort within intelligence preparation for armed intervention. These lessons demonstrate that an inordinate focus on armies at the expense of a focus on the people has and will continue to make winning the peace more difficult than winning the war. Closing the cultural intelligence gap by striking an IPB balance within campaign planning may reduce surprises for an occupying force that historically have impeded the accomplishment of the campaign's stated political or grand strategic objectives.
The Spanish Resistance: A Historical Example I thought the system easier to change than it has proved in that country, with its corrupt minister, its feeble king, and its shameless, dissolute queen. 
4
5
The "ulcer of resistance," which flared up in varying degrees of intensity throughout the country, was most powerful in the territory of Navarre and surrounding northern provinces. 
6
7
John Tone, in The Fatal Knot, succinctly describes the macroconditions for guerrilla resistance in northern Spain:
The English blockade of Spain and Spanish America after 1796 had curtailed the option of emigrating to America, and the economic contraction caused by the blockade made work in Madrid and Ribera more difficult to find as well. What the French found in the Montaña in 1808, therefore, was densely populated, rugged country full of young men with no prospects. Thus, the availability of guerrillas was the result, in part, of a particular economic and demographic conjuncture in the Montaña. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
One of Navarre's most valuable privileges was its separate customs border. In the rest of Spain, the Bourbons had created a single, national market, and they had restricted the importation of finished manufactured goods and the exportation of raw materials in an attempt to encourage industrial development. Navarre, however, controlled its own borders and was exempt from these restrictions. 
14
15
The economic factor within the Spanish resistance assumed added significance due to the scattering of Spanish soldiers in the wake of
Napoleon's military juggernaut. Dispersed soldiers, no longer sustained by even their paltry military income, were left to roam the countryside focusing simply on survival. According to Charles Esdaile in The Peninsular War: A New History: "With the French imposing strict limits on movement and clamping down on many traditional aspects of street life, opportunities to find alternative sources of income were limited, and all the more so as industry was at a standstill and many señores [were] unable to pay their existing retainers and domestic servants, let alone take on fresh hands. In short, hunger and despair reigned on all sides." 
16
Napoleon also underestimated the influence of the Catholic Church on the Spanish people. The Church served to energize the notion of an ideological struggle. Ecclesiastical leaders of guerrilla bands were expert at intertwining a host of reasons to continue the struggle against the French. Sébastian Blaze, an officer in Napoleon's army, described the power of the Church:
The monks skillfully employed the influence which they still enjoyed over Spanish credulity . . . to inflame the populace and exacerbate the implacable hatred with which they already regarded us. . . . In this fashion they encouraged a naturally cruel and barbarous people to commit the most revolting crimes with a clear conscience. They accused us of being Jews, heretics, sorcerers. . . . As a result, just to be a Frenchman became a crime in the eyes of the country. 
17
18
19
Napoleon the statesman had set Napoleon the soldier an impossible task. Consequently, although the immediate military aims were more or less achieved, the long-term requirement of winning popular support for the new regime was hopelessly compromised. The lesson was there for the world to read: military conquest in itself cannot bring about political victory. 
20
There is nothing new about the failure to give conflict termination the proper priority. The history of warfare is generally one where the immediate needs of warfighting, tactics, and strategy are given priority over grand strategy. Conflict termination has generally been treated as a secondary priority, and the end of war has often been assumed to lead to a smooth transition to peace or been dealt with in terms of vague plans and ideological hopes.
-Anthony Cordesman 
21
Anthony Zinni, former commander of U.S. Central Command, remarked on the formulation of a coherent campaign design: "We need to talk about not how you win the peace as a separate part of the war, but you have to look at this thing from start to finish. It is not a phased conflict; there is not a fighting part and then another part. It is a nineinning game." 
22
In planning for Operation Iraqi Freedom, the coalition was unable to focus its intelligence efforts toward the strategically critical period between the end of large-scale combat and the wholesale transition to stability and support operations until those efforts were too late to be decisive. Planning for post-hostility operations was conducted almost blindly at the tactical and operational levels, with only scattered intelligence on the Iraqi people, what their likely reception of an occupying force might be, and where the coalition might continue to face resistance.
Planners did possess the macro-level detail of the ethnic and religious divisions and the historical tensions between those groups, specifically the Sunnis, Shias, and Kurds. But that cultural understanding did not have the fidelity to highlight, for example, that "more than 75 percent of Iraqis belong to one of 150 tribes, and that significant numbers of Iraqis subscribe to many of the medieval conventions of Islamic law, from unquestioning obedience to tribal elders to polygamy, revenge-killings, and blood money paid to the relatives of persons killed in feuds." 
23
Furthermore, little analysis was conducted on which segment of the Iraqi population was likely to experience the highest degree of disenfranchisement. Intelligence analysis oriented on the stabilization phase failed to account for the prospect of large segments of the Iraqi Republican Guard and Special Republican Guard and remnants of the Ba'athist security apparatus scattered throughout the middle part of the country with no employment and a perceived dim future within an occupied Iraq. In other words, insufficient intelligence focused on the people versus fielded forces and the regime's security apparatus in a post-hostilities scenario.
A broad cultural intelligence analysis, for example, could have drawn out the historical parallel between the Iraqi Sunni Triangle and the Spanish Navarrese Diamond-assuming, of course, that the analysis team was familiar with the cultural factors that contributed to Napoleon's Spanish Ulcer. With that parallel in mind and despite the full benefit of hindsight, few would argue with Anthony Cordesman's assessment in The Lessons of the Iraq War:
The Intelligence Community exaggerated the risk of a cohesive Ba'ath resistance in Baghdad, the Sunni Triangle, and Tikrit during the war, and was not prepared to deal with the rise of a much more scattered and marginal resistance by Ba'ath loyalists after the war. The intelligence effort was not capable of distinguishing which towns and areas were likely to be a source of continuing Ba'athist resistance and support. 
24
There remained a gap in campaign planning for the period between cessation of major combat operations and wholesale stabilization of the country, a gap that had strategic implications. That historical pitfall is at the root of the following passage from Joint Publication (JP) 5-00.1, Joint Doctrine for Campaign Planning:
Not only must intelligence analysts and planners develop an understanding of the adversary's capabilities and vulnerabilities, they must take into account the way that friendly forces and actions appear from the adversary's viewpoint. Otherwise, planners may fall into the trap of ascribing to the adversary particular attitudes, values, and reactions that "mirror image" U.S. actions in the same situation, or by assuming that the adversary will respond or act in a particular manner [emphasis added]. 
25
26
We must be cognizant of the changing roles and missions facing the Armed Forces of the United States and ensure that intelligence planning keeps pace with the full range of military operations. 
27
General Zinni described just such a chaotic environment in an address to the Armed Forces Staff College a decade ago:
The situations you're going to be faced with go far beyond what you're trained for in a very narrow military sense. They become cultural issues; issues of traumatized populations' welfare, food, shelter; issues of government; issues of cultural, ethnic, religious problems; historical issues; economic issues that you have to deal with, that aren't part of the METT-T [mission, enemy, troops, terrain and weather, time available] process, necessarily. And the rigid military thinking can get you in trouble. What you need to know isn't what our intel apparatus is geared to collect for you, and to analyze, and to present to you. 
28
1
If properly balanced, a black arrow entitled "People" would be in the center of this diagram opposite the existing black arrow entitled "Forces." This would draw attention to the reality that the civilian population will be the centerpiece of the post-hostilities environment. As currently depicted, this view of the battlespace does little to reinforce the requirements within JP 5-00.1, Joint Doctrine for Campaign Planning, which states that "campaign planners must plan for conflict termination from the outset of the planning process and update these plans as the campaign evolves" and that "emphasizing backward planning, decisionmakers should not take the first step toward hostilities or war without considering the last step." 
29
30
1
Our intelligence system is designed to support a Cold War kind of operation. We are "Order of Battle" oriented. We are there to IPB the battlefield. 
32
The U.S. armed forces must change with that world [a terribly changed and rapidly changing world] and must change in ways that are fundamental-a new human understanding of our environment would be of far more use than any number of brilliant machines. We have fallen in love with the wrong revolution. 
33
With such references to "backward campaign planning" and "achieving leverage," why then do we maintain such an imbalance in our intelligence preparation of the battlespace in the crafting of a holistic campaign design? Or to paraphrase General Zinni, "Why are we only planning for a three-inning ballgame?" One part of the answer may be that Western military forces are not political forces, and professional warfighters like the U.S. and British military tend to see peacemaking and nation building as a diversion from their main mission. It also seems fair to argue that conflict termination and the role of force in ensuring stable peacetime outcomes has always been a weakness in modern military thinking. Tactics and strategy, and military victory, have always had priority over grand strategy and winning the peace. 
34
35
36
37
38
Yet solving the "puzzle of the people" cannot be the sole domain of military intelligence officials, the small group of foreign or regional area officers, or even the competent but clearly undermanned and overtasked Special Forces, civil affairs, and translator units and detachments sprinkled throughout a large-scale campaign's area of operations. Rather, just as the U.S. defense establishment has increased overall efficiency and effectiveness by looking to all corners of the civilian business world within the military hardware acquisition process, so too must the joint force expand its horizons in the development of new intelligence doctrine. Since doctrine is a guide, the force must be guided in its intelligence activities by those who can shine the strongest beacon on historical and cultural issues. In looking "toward motivational and value similarities, the military should be looking for a few good anthropologists" 
39
The second step should be a culturally oriented addition to the intelligence series within joint doctrine. The scant references to postconflict intelligence focused on an indigenous population that are currently embedded within several joint publications, namely JP 2-01.3, Joint Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace, and JP 3-07, Joint Doctrine for Military Operations Other Than War, do not adequately address the myriad of unconventional intelligence challenges that are inevitable in the chaos of modern post-hostilities environments. Peters, a career Army intelligence officer, admonishes us: Military intelligence is perhaps more a prisoner of inherited Cold War structures than is any other branch. . . . Our intelligence networks need to regain a tactile human sense and to exploit information technologies without becoming enslaved by them. In most of our recent deployments, no one weapon system, no matter how expensive and technologically mature, has been as valuable as a single culturally competent foreign area officer. 
40
41
42
43
The IPB should address political, economic, linguistic, religious, demographic, ethnic, psychological, and legal factors. . . . The intelligence operation needs to determine the necessary and sufficient conditions that must exist for the conflict to terminate and the post-conflict efforts to succeed. 
44
Situational understanding requires thorough familiarity with all of the dynamics at work within the joint area of operations: political, economic, social, cultural, religious. The joint stability force commander must have an understanding of who will oppose stabilization efforts and what motivates them to do so. 
45
46
this concept links theater strategic means to grand strategic political endstates. It levies the requirement that intelligence analysis reach depths rarely explored within our current conventional intelligence mindset:
On-going human intelligence efforts identify potential cultural, religious, ethnic, racial, political, or economic attitudes that could jeopardize the post-hostility stability operation. The intelligence capabilities begin to focus on the unconventional threat posed by total spoilers. Human intelligence also focuses on the identity, motivation, and intentions of limited and greedy spoilers. 
47
What will win the global war on terrorism will be people that can cross the cultural divide. It's an idea often overlooked by people [who] want to build a new firebase or a new national training center for tanks. 
49
Proper intelligence preparation of the battlespace focused on the people and the unique challenges of a post-combat operational environment will continue to challenge the joint force in the 21 st century, just as it proved to be the Achilles' heel for Napoleon two centuries ago. If we are to apply Napoleon's maxim that "the moral is to the physical as three to one" within a truly holistic campaign design, then perhaps such a ratio should be applied in balancing the collective intelligence effort, with a focus on the people assuming paramount importance. That will require addressing intelligence challenges that are unconventional and uncomfortable for planners and commanders at all levels. Comprehensive backward planning with a balanced intelligence effort throughout the breadth and depth of the envisioned campaign will ensure that "forces and assets arrive at the right AVOIDING A NAPOLEONIC ULCER times and places to support the campaign and that sufficient resources will be available when needed in the later stages of the campaign." 
50
We will face a dangerous temptation to seek purely technological responses to behavioral challenges-especially given the expense of standing forces. Our cultural strong suit is the ability to balance and integrate the technological with the human, and we must continue to stress getting the balance right. 
51
If the current modus operandi of insurgents in Iraq is an indicator of the total disregard that future adversaries will have toward global societal norms, the joint force will, in many respects, be operating with one hand tied behind its back. The U.S. military can ill afford to have the other hand bound through the development of comprehensive campaign plans not grounded in solid cultural understanding of countries and regions within which it will likely operate. To do so risks adding yet another footnote to history highlighting an intelligence gap between combat and stability and support operations.
1 Gabriel H. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain (New York: New York University Press, 1965), 307. 
2
1
2
3
4
5
It is irrelevant that Chamberlain and Patton were gifted intellectuals; as military professionals, their intellect had no influence on doctrine or in catalyzing change, transformation, or a revolution in military affairs. While it is possible for exceptional combat leaders such as Chamberlain and Patton to employ their intellect in solving battlefield challenges, this is far different from the individual who uses his intellect to drive institutional change that results in transformation throughout the organization as a whole. Herein resides the point: only institutionalized military intellectualism can achieve successful transformation or, on rare occasion, revolutionize warfare; conversely, individual intellectualism that remains outside of an institutional context is largely impotent.
One can best define institutional intellectualism as system-sponsored critical thinking that focuses intellectual capital to effect transformational change and continual renewal within an organization. First, and of paramount significance, it operates within and as a function of the military system, meaning that institutional intellectualism resides (formally or informally) within the organization's official structure and that it is capable of influencing mainstream thought and processes. Yet thinkers working within the system will always encounter opposition to change from entrenched elements. This phenomenon offers an interesting paradox: the nature of the military system ideally produces and empowers the traditionalists, while simultaneously affording legitimacy and sanctuary to the intellectual progressives-in turn preventing their marginalization. Second, institutional intellectualism can only existand succeed-in an organizational climate that promotes free thinking and a critical exchange of ideas. Not only is such an environment a prerequisite for creating institutional intellectualism, but it is also indis- pensable for catalyzing change within a system and in overcoming inevitable resistance from ensconced traditionalists.
Third, institutional intellectualism achieves a synergistic effect that focuses intellectual energy in a highly disciplined, organized, and coordinated fashion. As a result, collective ideas are more effectively transformed into reality-and military capability. Moreover, individual efforts within an institutional context contribute to this intellectual synergy rather than remaining disconnected from the process. Lastly, institutional intellectualism is not military orthodoxy. For focused intellectual energy to push the envelope of convention, it must remain dynamic and be periodically infused with fresh perspective. This is best achieved by ensuring the system embraces new intellectual capital, while simultaneously replacing those veteran thinkers whose former ideas or theories now constitute established operating doctrine-or orthodoxy.
Man is a problem-solver. By nature, he applies intellectual energy to overcome current and anticipated challenges. The complex, fluid environment of war demands the institutionalization of this intellectual energy to effect the necessary organizational and doctrinal changes required to influence the nature and alter the character of armed combat. Simply illustrated, institutional intellectualism gives birth to theory and corresponding organizational-doctrinal change. New systems and doctrine in turn act as the primary determinant for successful transformation, and transformation will historically constitute one of two forms: it will be in response to a revolution in military affairs, or it will prove the catalyst for such a revolution itself. Moreover, in contrast to prevailing military beliefs, transformation remains primarily the product of intellectual energy and is rarely born of technology. 
6
7
8
Following the destruction of the Prussian army at Jena-Auerstädt in 1806, Carl von Clausewitz sardonically observed that "It was not just a case of a style [of warfare] that had outlived its usefulness but the most extreme poverty of imagination to which routine has ever led." 
10
A considerable percentage of soldiers were poorly trained, and many were well over the age of 40, as the Prussian state required up to 30 years of service before granting military exemption. More significantly, the soldiers lacked patriotic and military spirit because their interests were not one with those of the king; the fate of the nation in war had little influence on their day-to-day lives as disenfranchised subjects of the crown. Compounding these moral deficiencies, the Prussian army also suffered from poor administration and equipment; specifically, the troops lacked proper uniforms, and the weapons, field gear, and rations were the worst in Europe. Moreover, the military organization and tactical doctrine employed by the Prussians were obsolete as well. 
11
Acknowledging the need for change, Prussian King Frederick William III convened a military commission in 1807 to investigate the debacle at Jena-Auerstädt and propose reforms to the existing military structure. The king failed to recognize that Prussia's defeat lay beyond the sole realm of military concerns, but the individuals he appointed to the commission possessed far greater intellectual vision. 
12
13
Significantly, Scharnhorst chose the remaining members of the commission based on their intellectual contributions to the Militärische Gesellschaft and their recent performance in combat; in short, they were the best and brightest the Prussian army had to offer. 
14
15
The Military Reorganization Commission began by correcting straightforward organizational discrepancies. The army received improved uniforms and equipment, state-of-the-art weapons, and new tactical procedures (authored in part by Clausewitz). 
16
Prior to overhaul by the reorganization commission, the state had reserved admission to the Prussian officer corps almost exclusively to members of the aristocratic landed gentry, or Junker class. Commissions rested on the basis of political influence and patronage rather than actual merit or military potential. As a result, inconsistent talent, insularism, and professional stagnation had characterized the Prussian officer corps before 1807. Moreover, the Junkers discounted the value of formal education (believing that it made one "soft"-a thinker rather than a doer); as a result, the intellectual capacity of the officer corps remained limited as well.
The reformers transformed the officer corps first by persuading the king to grant eligibility to all elements of society. New officers, whether Junker or commoner, would receive appointment through a universal examination process blind to station or influence. This measure alone served to expand the talent pool from which candidates came, and it proved to be the principal foundation upon which the new Prussian officer corps would rest. Secondly, Scharnhorst, recognizing the value of education, supervised the creation of three military schools to provide basic instruction to all newly commissioned officers prior to assignment with the active force. Compulsory military education was also unprecedented in Prussian military tradition, yet it proved equally successful and ensured standardization of quality while promoting intellectual growth among the new officer corps. 
18
19
20
11
12
Having successfully addressed basic organizational deficiencies as well as implemented initiatives to transform the officer corps and the Prussian soldier, the commission members created the means to administer, train, and lead this new army with "institutionalized genius"-the general staff system. This measure proved the most unprecedented and intellectually revolutionary of all the reforms in the commission's efforts to counterbalance the French military revolution (as well as Napoleon's genius). Best described as "the intellectual center of the army," 
13
24
Selection to the general staff was competitive and entailed high standards. A system of examination selected only 150 candidates per year to attend the Kriegsakademie (war academy) founded by Scharnhorst in 1810. On graduation, each officer served with the general staff for a 2-year trial period; at the conclusion of this probationary assessment, only three or four officers received permanent assignment to the general staff. 
25
The achievements of the reorganization commission provide a convincing example of institutional intellectualism as an agent for military transformation. Working under a mandate from the army commander-in-chief (King Frederick William III), the reformers operated within and as a function of the military system. Moreover, they enjoyed a degree of intellectual freedom and engaged in a critical exchange of ideas that were remarkable for the time. This climate in turn allowed for the synergistic union of Prussia's leading military thinkers; their focused intellectual energy achieved a level of societal, political, and military reform that was truly transformational.
Concerted elements of the Junker class-both civil and military-remained convinced that organizational military reforms alone were sufficient to cure the ills of Jena-Auerstädt and opposed the commission's initiatives. 
26
One final observation is useful: the factor of time. Even institutional intellectualism takes years and possibly decades to reap the fruit of its transformational seeds. The Prussian reformers put sweeping sociopolitical-military changes in place between 1807 and 1812. As a result, the Prussian army performed significantly better in the campaigns of 1814 and 1815 against Napoleon. Yet the full return on their intellectual labor was not fully realized until the wars of 1866 and 1870, in which the Prussian army defeated Austria and France respectively and established the Prusso-German nation as the greatest power in Europe.
In 1933, Adolf Hitler witnessed a rather modest military demonstration that proved to be the harbinger of profound transformation within the German army and that eventually would usher in a revolution in military affairs. This exhibition introduced the militarily ambitious German Chancellor to the basic components of the newly created mechanized arm and included coordinated maneuvers by motorcycle, anti-tank, and armored reconnaissance units in cooperation with a platoon of light tanks. Hitler was so impressed by the demonstration that he announced enthusiastically to the assembled officers and political leaders: "That is what I need! That is what I want to have!" While it is doubtful that Hitler recognized the true military potential of this infant force, he did provide an important institutional impetus to its further development and incorporation in the operational doctrine of the German army. 
27
Unlike the Prussian Military Reorganization Commission, the thinkers most responsible for the creation of the German armor force (Panzerwaffe) and its revolutionary application to blitzkrieg had no formal organization. Instead, they achieved transformation through the collective effect of their individual actions, albeit working in an institutional context and within a system that encouraged innovation. The first of these individuals whose achievements warrant discussion is General Hans von Seeckt.
Seeckt, as head of the Army Command Troop Office, served as a clandestine chief of the general staff and led the German army between 1919 and 1926. A progressive thinker who recognized the need for military reform, Seeckt's first initiatives involved purging many traditionalist elements from the officer corps and undertaking a comprehensive analysis of lessons learned from World War I. Not only was he successful in creating "a very different officer corps from that which had existed before World War I, one whose cultural ethos emphasized intellectual as well as tactical and operational excellence," but also his investigation into the causes of Germany's defeat (conducted by over 500 officers working in specialized committees) yielded tangible results and provided the genesis for a new doctrine. 
28
29
Written under Seeckt's supervision, this regulation described in great detail combined arms operations emphasizing offensive action, "KNOWLEDGE MUST BECOME CAPABILITY" speed of maneuver, penetration and exploitation, and decentralized command and control. 
30
31
The leading German armor theorist during the formative years of Panzerwaffe was Lieutenant Ernst Volckheim. A tanker during World War I, Volckheim had the opportunity to observe firsthand the success of Allied armor in reversing 4 years of stalemate on the Western Front in 1918. Consequently, following the war, he began a concerted study of mechanized warfare, becoming Germany's leading authority during the 1920s. Volckheim was a prolific writer, authoring over two dozen articles on armored warfare between 1923 and 1927, as well as publishing an autobiographical account of the German tank corps during World War I and a theoretical work on armor technology, tactics, and doctrine that became a standard army text.
Convinced that future operations would entail armored spearheads to effect penetration (with the requirement to destroy enemy armor), Volckheim was the first theorist to discount the value of light tanks in favor of more heavily armored and gunned medium battle tanks. He also stressed the need to maintain a mobile armor reserve, believing this to be the best doctrinal solution for defeating an enemy tank penetration through friendly defenses. Additionally, Volckheim was the first German to advocate equipping all armored vehicles and supporting arms with radio gear, recognizing that wireless communications would enhance command and control functions and greatly increase the tempo of operations. 
32
Following World War I, two schools of thought emerged governing the employment of armor in battle. The majority view, advocated by the traditional officer corps of every major military power, recognized the tank as simply another supporting arm for the infantry; the minority school, championed by a small number of independent thinkers, envisioned the tank as the principal combat arm to be supported instead by the infantry (as well as the other traditional supporting arms). 
33
During the mid-1920s, these officers advocated the creation of independent mechanized units inherently capable of breaching or enveloping an enemy position and then achieving rapid penetration in depth. In this manner, with armored forces ranging throughout the enemy's vulnerable rear areas, victory would be inevitable, providing the mechanized formations maintained a rapid tempo of operations and retained the initiative. Moreover, they envisioned a totally mechanized force in which the supporting infantry, artillery, reconnaissance, engineer, and staff units would be motorized and capable of keeping pace with the tank formations. As Army Command Troop Office operations chief, Fritsch wrote in 1927 that "armored, quickly moving tanks most probably will become the operationally decisive offensive weapon. From an operational perspective this weapon will be most effective if concentrated in independent units like tank brigades." 
34
One can now clarify what will happen with tanks behind the enemy's main line of resistance after a successful breakthrough. Tanks can be used for attacks on the enemy's rear positions, against advancing reserves, as well as against command posts and artillery emplacements. For such tasks, present-day tanks are far more capable than older models. 
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
In the wake of the creation of the first three panzer divisions in 1935, Beck (by then a general and Fritsch's chief of staff) initiated a study to determine the feasibility of panzer corps and panzer armies. Subsequent field exercises and operational experience in the occupation of Austria in 1938 prompted the general staff to make ongoing improvements to the organization, training, and tactical procedures of the panzer divisions:
The result was a process of steady incremental improvement and innovation that amounted over the long term to systematic change, but without the risk of following false paths due to the misplaced enthusiasms of reformers or the troglodytic opposition of conservatives. 
43
44
The creation of Panzerwaffe offers another persuasive example of institutional intellectualism as an agent for military transformation. The collective efforts of several individuals-Seeckt, Volckheim, Fritsch, Blomberg, Beck, Lutz, and Vollard-Bockelberg-achieved organizational and doctrinal change within the system solely as a result of synergistic, focused intellectual energy. Seeckt set the conditions for transformation and sponsored progressive intellectual activity within an environment that encouraged a critical exchange of ideas; moreover, his endorsement assured that contemporary and follow-on reformers remained shielded within the system and never forfeited their institutional legitimacy. Of course they faced inevitable opposition from old school advocates; General Gerd von Rundstedt clearly expressed the opinion of the traditionalists when, at an exercise involving the new tank units, he declared, "All nonsense, all nonsense, my dear Guderian." 
45
Two final observations are worth reemphasizing: While the German achievements in France included a significant technological dimension, the revolution in military affairs was not born simply of new tank designs and ubiquitous radios; instead, it resulted from the correct (and decisive) application of technology through a transformational doctrine.
The doctrine was revolutionary, not the tank. 
46
The catalytic role of the Prussian Military Reorganization Commission and the architects of German armored doctrine in promoting transformation within their respective military organizations is apparent. One can garner several themes from these case studies that are relevant and applicable to current and future efforts by the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) to embrace transformation.
Intellectualism must work within an institutional context to succeed. Transformation is born of intellectual energy, but as demonstrated here, it can only thrive within an institutional framework and when wedded to the system. Organizational endorsement-as witnessed by King Frederick William III and Seeckt-provides legitimacy and intellectual freedom. The recent creation of the Office of Force Transformation under the direct purview of the Secretary of Defense offers a potential institutional framework for intellectualism to flourish and exercise influence within DOD. Similarly, the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, coupled with U.S. Joint Forces Command responsibility for the creation of joint doctrine, afford additional opportunities for institutional intellectualism to work within and for the system. Unfortunately, these organizations to date have been largely incapable of catalyzing significant and enduring institutional change because they remain culturally divorced from the mainstream of events within the Armed Forces. While the structure is in place, the intellectual capital that it houses is not integrated within the system in the manner achieved by Scharnhorst or Seeckt. Moreover, this structure fails to promote effective innovation, free thought, or a critical exchange of ideas within and throughout the organization as a whole; instead, these endeavors are confined to think tanks within the walls of academia-well outside the organizational and professional mainstream. The Office of Force Transformation eventually may correct these deficiencies; if not, substantive transformation will prove impossible until intellectual endeavor is institutionalized in a way Scharnhorst and Seeckt would recognize.
The best intellectual capital must be assigned to transformation duties. Furthermore, these individuals should be primarily military profes-
sionals with operational experience. Successful transformation requires critical thinkers demonstrating "agility of the mind." 
47
Technological achievement does not constitute transformation. As illustrated in both case studies, transformation is born almost exclusively of organizational, systemic, and/or doctrinal innovation; therefore, while there is frequently a technological component to transformation, technology is incapable of catalyzing transformational change or a revolution in military affairs until it is subordinated to effective ideas. Consequently, there is an intellectual danger in staffing the Office of Force Transformation, U.S. Joint Forces Command, or the training and doctrine community with technocrats rather than critical thinkers. Given the current euphoria surrounding modern military technology, it is logical to assume that technocrats hold great influence within these organizations-and that transformation efforts dominated by technocrats will not succeed regardless of how revolutionary their technological achievements may be.
Transformation takes time. Presently, a misconception pervades all levels of the American military establishment that transformation can be accomplished in short order. The Prussian Military Reorganization Commission required decades for its goals to be realized, while the creation of the Panzerwaffe and associated doctrine consumed nearly 20 years in catalyzing less ambitious transformation. The complexity and scope of the transformation process will dictate the time required to achieve the desired end state-but the duration is likely to be measured in years. Therefore, since experience dictates that military reform is a laborious, time-consuming process, it would be logical to conclude that transformation efforts within DOD will not reach maturation in less than several years.
Traditionalists will always oppose transformation because it "requires changing culture and attitude." 
48
Transformation turns intellectual vision into a military capability. Whether current efforts to transform constitute a response to a revolution in military affairs or a revolution itself, the driving force will-and must-remain institutional intellectualism; professional debate on intellectualism in the military must be focused on this salient issue. To do otherwise will lose sight of the most important aspect of intellectualism and its exclusive role as an agent for military transformation. Clausewitz reminds us in On War that "knowledge must become capability." 
49
War Against Global Terrorism: Winning the Hearts, Minds, and Souls of the Muslim World Ling Wee Lee T he United States has reached a critical juncture similar to the end of World War II, when the strategy of containment was developed to counter the rising tide of communism. Had the United States adopted a different strategy, such as a preventive war, the outcome would have been different. Emerging from the Cold War with a healthy economy, and as the only superpower with overwhelming military and technological advantages, America faces a very different threat-global terrorism waged by radical Islam against Western democracy, an open economy, and modernization. As before, the United States has strategic options to deal with the new challenge symbolized by the September 11 tragedy. What type of strategic approach will effectively neutralize this threat?
This essay argues that the backbone of any strategic approach to this threat should be winning the hearts, minds, and souls 1 of the international Muslim community through the promotion of a progressive Islamic culture and teaching. This strategy must include an information campaign waged in ways and at levels unprecedented in U.S. history.
In "New Century, Old Problems: The Global Insurgency within Islam and the Nature of the War on Terror," Grant Highland rightfully cautions against casting the problem too narrowly as a fringe or radical 57 Lieutenant Colonel Ling Wee Lee, Republic of Singapore Air Force, won third place with this essay, written while attending the Air War College. Previously, he was head of the Fighter Aircraft Branch at Tengah Air Base, Singapore. Currently, he is Commanding Officer, Air Logistics Squadron, Tengah Air Base. movement that can be discredited among the greater Muslim population. 
2
3
As a religion that spans 14 centuries and binds more than a billion people together with diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds in a common faith, Islam has four key characteristics, the understanding of which will be important in the subsequent discussion.
First, in the history of Islam, religion and politics have been closely related. In The Crisis of Islam, Bernard Lewis notes that, unlike early Christians who were persecuted and suffered under Roman rule until their religion was adopted after the conversion of the emperor Constantine, the first few generations of Muslims became at once a political and a religious community, with the Prophet as head of state. 
4
5
Second, besides the strong link between religion and politics, there are themes in Islam predisposing Muslims to identify themselves as belonging to a single community. In Islam-Continuity and Change in the Modern World, John Voll identifies these themes as the belief that "there is no god but the one God"; the common experience of Quran recitations; and the collective recognition of the Quran's authenticity and Muhammad's integrity as the Prophet. As such, there is a strong sense of unity within a community where moral and ethical values are guided by a common religion. 
6
7
8
9
10
This sense of common identity among Muslims worldwide suggests the strategic importance of an information campaign as the backbone to support the war against radical Islamic groups such as al Qaeda, and this campaign should be conducted in parallel with direct kinetic attacks on these groups. Its objective would be to convince Muslims worldwide that these fringe elements are the true enemies of Islam and that the United States and its allies, in its confrontation against them, are sincere in bringing about a brighter future for Islam.
Third, according to Voll, despite the common themes existing within the global community, Islam, like many other world religions, is not monolithic. There is great diversity in the interpretation and application of the common themes cited above. Within the Sunnis and Shi'ites, there are different approaches and schools of thought. One example is the interpretation of law based on the Quran. Even within the Sunnis alone, Voll describes four main schools of thought, all accepting Islam as the legal basis in a society. The spectrum ranges from the Hanafi school, which "gives emphasis to personal reasoning and free judgment in legal interpretation," to the Hanbali school, which "allows very little scope for individual reasoning or analogy." 
11
12
13
Fourth, historical evidence shows that Islam is not incompatible with the thinking associated with intellectual and scientific knowledge that advances human civilization. In the wake of radical and militant Islamic attacks on the West culminating in the September 11 tragedy, most Western analysts of international security affairs focus on the failure of modernity within the Islamic world and seem to ignore the glorious golden age of Islamic civilization between the 8 th and 13 th centuries. Contemporary lack of awareness about this period, even on the part of some Muslims, prompted Iftekhar Mahmood, a Muslim pharmaceutical scientist, to write Islam-Beyond Terrorists and Terrorism, listing the most influential Muslims who had contributed significantly in the areas of medicine, science, mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, history, and political science. These Muslims had "preserved the Greek, Persian, and Indian heritage and introduced new dimensions to the knowledge of Aristotle and Plato," during a time Europe was groping through the Dark Ages. 
14
15
Beliefs define behavior, actions, and reactions. For as long as the prevailing wisdom holds that Islam and progressive thinking are incompatible, the strategies and methods that can be found for working with progressive Islamic elements to fight against radical elements will be limited and weak. However, if prevailing wisdom were to accept and embrace the possibilities inherent in believing that Islam and progressive thinking can be compatible, whole new vistas of opportunities to collaborate and fight terrorism open up.
The four characteristics of Islam underscore a need for a new approach in countering terrorism. This new approach should have the following ingredients: religious reform, which must accompany, if not precede, political reform for the latter to be successful; an information campaign that must be coordinated with direct kinetic attacks on radical Islamic groups to convince Muslims worldwide of the vision of a brighter and more desirable future end-state for Islam; and the presence of religious reformists who may or may not be state actors outside the Middle East. Finally, implicit in this new approach is the need for conviction on the part of U.S. policymakers that such a religious reform to instill progressive thinking and modernity in Islam is achievable.
To describe the current malaise within the Muslim community, Lewis alludes to "a failure of modernity," citing the poor economic performances in terms of gross domestic products, industrial output, productivity, and job creation. For example, in 1999 the combined gross domestic product of all Arab countries was less than that of Spain alone. Other areas of underdevelopment include technology, education, and human development. 
16
First, Islam has stagnated as the rest of the world has evolved and been transformed. This stagnation can be measured by its receptivity to new ideas. Annual translation of books within the Arab world is about one-fifth that of Greece, and the accumulative total number of books translated since the 9 th century is almost the average that Spain translates in a year. 17 What is the cause of this stagnation?
Globalization has often been blamed as a relatively new phenomenon that causes many Muslims to retreat to the comfort of traditional Islamic practice and beliefs. However, it can also be seen from a wider timeline as just a geographical extension of the industrial revolution and the information revolution from the West. Economically, globalization takes advantage of cheap production and requires free trade and flow of products across national boundaries, hence creating supply at lower cost. Culturally, globalization exports foreign ideas with consumer goods to indigenous societies, thereby creating further demands for industry to sustain and grow.
Industrialization has been a painful experience for the Western world. In "'9/11' and After: A British View," Michael Howard contends that Western turmoil with modernity traces two centuries back to the Enlightenment period in Europe with "protest against the erosion of traditional values and authorities by the rationalism, the secularism, and the free-thinking that both underlay and were empowered by the American and French revolutions . . . creating general disorientation and alienation that was to be exploited by extreme forces on both the Left and Right." 
18
So the issue is not whether Islam is compatible with modernity. Instead, just as one's immune system is weaker as he undergoes a stressful experience and is therefore more susceptible to illness, it is about how the Muslim community can transit through this critical phase of inevitable social changes with an outcome that is less traumatic and explosive than the experience of the two world wars in the 20 th century. This is even more challenging if one considers that, given a late start, this tumultuous process has been time compressed in the case of newly independent Muslim-dominated nations in the third world.
This leads to issue two: for most Muslim nations, initial attempts to modernize and industrialize have been negative experiences. The first trial with industrial age modernity coincided with the Cold War period as developing nations gained independence from their past colonial masters. While there have been isolated cases of successes such as the flourishing economies of the four Tigers in East Asia, many new governments that embarked on modernization and industrialization programs soon faltered due to a number of reasons, such as corruption and lack of governance. Many Muslims soon became disillusioned and impatient with the process. Open American support of Israel as well as oppressive and corrupt regimes in the great power politics of the Cold War further fueled the anger against imported Western values and systems that were associated with modernization.
Because the Western model of modernization is secular in nature, the resurgence of Islamic fundamental values becomes an expression for the rejection of Western and irreligious ideas. Economic and political reforms have therefore failed in the absence of religious reform. According to Lewis, the ensuing Islamic revolutionary movement in Muslim countries, such as Iran, has several components: a sense of humiliation and frustration at the widening gap between the Muslim world and the rest; a sense of confidence and power made possible by the oil crisis of 1973; and a contempt for perceived Western decadence as Muslim visitors to Europe and United States "began to observe and describe what they saw as the moral degeneracy and consequent weakness of Western Civilization." 
19
This reorientation, in our medical analogy, is similar to a patient's rejection of medical treatment due to some negative experiences, even as she undergoes a stressful, high-risk, but necessary phase of treatment. The result of treatment rejection is the eventual flourishing of a cancerous growth that threatens the patient's life.
The third issue deals directly with the nature of this cancerous growth: too weak to counter the perceived threat of Western global dominance in military, economic, and cultural arenas, radical Islamic elements employ terrorism to make their voices heard. Lewis observes that in the eyes of radical Muslims, the Islamic world has taken a wrong turn as its rulers adopt infidel laws and customs. Thus, "the only solution is a return to the authentic Muslim way of life." While they "regard the West as the source of evil that is corroding Muslim society . . . their primary attack is directed against their own rulers and leaders." The Shah of Iran and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt were "both seen as symptoms of a deeper evil to be remedied by an inner cleansing." 
20
21
So how can one characterize the nature of the global war against radical Islamic terrorist elements? Highland urges policymakers to view this conflict as an insurgency problem as both the radical Islamic terrorists and the insurgency fighters share four similar key characteristics.
First, all insurgency fighters have the political goal of overturning the status quo. By capitalizing on the current crisis in Islam, groups seek to establish political legitimacy by advocating an alternative shariah rule. Grasping at the inextricable linkage between politics and Islam, they "struck a nerve within the Middle Eastern psyche and tapped into a deep reserve of antipathy and despair that has served to heighten [their] standing within the Muslim community." 
22
23
24
Third, insurgency fighters have the luxury of time on their side to wage a protracted conflict. Indeed, groups such as al Qaeda have been proven to be resilient and resistant to U.S.-led efforts to curb their ambitions. 
25
Fourth, most insurgency fighters rely on unconventional forces, tactics, and strategies. With complex organizational structures and the use of low-cost information technology, terrorist groups are nonstate actors who have the potential of unleashing devastating destruction using weapons of mass destruction. Moreover, with the possibility of striking anywhere and anytime, they are difficult to detect, deter, and predict. 
26
While short-term use of intelligence and military power to eliminate terrorist cells and rogue states that support these cells is an essential component of the overall strategy, the United States needs to expand and deepen other instruments of policy. For example, diplomacy plays an important role in the establishment of international legal frameworks and multilateral agreements on financial controls to limit the sources of terrorist funding as well as on cross-border law enforcement and sharing of intelligence to limit movements and deny safe havens. Close international cooperation with allies also can help to restore good governance in failed states through political reforms and economic assistance.
However, given the nature of insurgency warfare under discussion, these efforts would not be effective if they are not backed by an information campaign with an overarching objective of winning the hearts, minds, and souls of an international Muslim community through the promotion of a progressive Islamic culture and teaching. Current thinking in information warfare focuses on how best to exploit mass media and communication. For example, the "Radio Sawa" (Radio Together) has replaced the Voice of America's Arabic service with themes that appeal to Arab youths, and there are plans to launch a 24-hour
Arabic satellite news channel that will compete with al Jazeera. 
27
This central message should be the promotion of a moderate interpretation of the Quran in order to bring Islam out of the current crisis and restore its prominence in the world. As Howard points out, "if there is indeed 'a war against terrorism,' it has to be fought and won within the Islamic world. The role of the West must be to support and encourage those who are fighting that war, and we must take care that we do nothing to make their task more difficult." 
28
During the Cold War, the United States acted as a counterbalancing force in the European and Asia-Pacific theaters, supporting the weaker allies against the stronger adversary that sought world dominance. The same logic can be applied here in a broader sense, the weaker allies being moderate reformists in the Muslim world who may be nonstate actors and are too weak to speak up against their more radical counterparts. To convince these moderate reformists of American sincerity and commitment to this cause, this struggle should be waged as an information campaign with two thrusts: reforming Islamic education and establishing Iraq and Afghanistan as positive models of Islamic states.
The centerpiece of this information campaign should be to promote the idea that Islam can coexist in harmony with progressive thinking and modernization. Unlike Christianity, Islam did not undergo the equivalent of the Protestant Reformation, which resulted in the separation of church and state and also secured the continued flourishing of Renaissance art and science by freeing Western civilization from the shackles of Roman Catholicism. A similar Islamic Renaissance is long overdue. Besides financial assistance to moderate Islamic groups, this Renaissance can be initiated by supporting the establishment of centers of excellence for the study of Islam and the promotion of moderate interpretations of the Quran in the United States and other parts of the world. Prominent moderate Islamic scholars should be mobilized to denounce the militant teachings of radical Islamic elements and to develop accreditation standards for the madrasas. Accredited madrasas should incorporate syllabi and curriculum that provide adequate coverage on secular subjects such as science and mathematics while retaining emphasis on positive Islamic values such as integrity, honesty, tolerance of other faiths, and respect for human dignity.
Such reforms in Islamic education will lift the Muslim community from a vicious downward spiral in which Muslim parents seek refuge from the onslaught of globalization on their religious and cultural heritage by sending their children to madrasas that provide little skills and knowledge relevant in a modern economy. The combination of militant indoctrination and poor job prospects provides fertile ground for radical Islamic groups such as al Qaeda and Jemaah Islamiah to recruit terrorists from a growing disenchanted youth. If the United States continues to respond to terrorist acts by relying on hard-kill military actions alone, such actions will further reinforce the Muslim perception of self-vulnerability and Western dominance, in turn increasing the popularity of madrasas among Muslim parents.
Besides undertaking reforms in Islamic education as part of the information campaign, the United States should leverage the opportunities presented by the nation-building process in Iraq and Afghanistan to address the issue of Islam's role in state politics. Since the establishment of modern statehood in Muslim countries after World War II and the demise of colonial power, there has been a wide spectrum of attempts to position Islam and politics with varying degree of success. John Esposito chronicles this trend in The Oxford History of Islam. On one end of the spectrum, Muslim secularists such as the Shah of Iran, who advocated the Western norm of separation of religion from politics, failed to achieve legitimacy due to poor support from the masses. The difficulty in transplanting a Western political system to a Muslim society was to be expected given the symbiotic relationship between the political and religious aspects of Islam. On the other end of the spectrum, Muslim governments such as the Taliban regime in Afghanistan that embrace strict adherence to shariah and denounce democracy as incompatible with Islam also do not offer a satisfactory political solution, as they are unable to compete in the global economy. 
29
30
31
Democracy should not and cannot be a cure-all solution in the global war against radical Islamic terrorist elements. Instead, it is more important to derive a better understanding of the compatibility between democracy and Islam, which requires broad base participation and debate among eminent scholars and leaders within the world Muslim community to come to a consensus. The ultimate solution may not be a democratic government as perceived by the West but a more sustainable form of governance that tolerates collective participation of the masses. The U.S.-led nation-building team should devote much time, effort, and resources to this end because the development of a positive model of Islamic states that embraces values consistent with collective political participation would have long-lasting positive effects on the sustainability of democracy in Muslim countries. As a key component of an American information campaign against radical Islamic terrorist elements, it would send a strong message to Muslims worldwide that this war is targeted specifically against extreme terrorist groups and does not seek to impose secular democratic regimes on Muslim countries. Actions will speak louder than words alone.
This argument references Highland's essay, which characterizes the global war against radical Islamic terrorist elements as counterinsurgency warfare. Therefore, in the final analysis, it would be appropriate to draw a parallel between the Cold War and the current global war against radical Islamic terrorist elements, with relevant lessons learned from the Vietnam War.
One significant lesson learned during the Cold War was the need to recognize the importance of local circumstances and craft out appropriate strategies to deal with the threat accordingly. Applying this lesson to the current global war against radical Islamic terrorist elements, there is a need to recognize the different shades of Islam practiced throughout the world-from moderate to radical. While Muslims see one another as part of the same community and may be sympathetic to the plight of fellow Muslims, they may not agree on the interpretations and practices of Islam. The American obsession with the Middle East ignores the larger Muslim community in other parts of the world, where a more moderate interpretation of the Quran is practiced. Even within radical Islamic elements, not all agree with the tactics and methods used by al Qaeda to stop the encroachment of Western culture on Muslim communities.
Given the sense of identity within the global Muslim community, direct attack on Muslim countries risks alienating the moderate Muslims from supporting the United States and denouncing the terrorist tactics used by certain groups. This is analogous to medical treatments that have negative side effects and adversely affect benign cells that the body depends upon to combat viruses. While such treatments may sometimes be necessary, complementary therapies that minimize resulting adverse effects should be administered. Invasion and occupation of Iraq, for example, places governments of friendly democratic nations with large Muslim populations, such as those in Southeast Asia, in a difficult position with respect to their electorates. As such, there is a need to complement military actions with the promotion of progressive Islamic teaching to demonstrate that U.S. action is not targeting Islam and to allow moderate Islamic governments to garner internal support in terms of intelligence gathering to root out terrorist cells within their countries.
Another lesson learned during the Cold War is the importance of understanding the enemy and the nature of warfare that it wages. An effective medical intervention requires a good understanding of the health issues that we are dealing with (for example, identifying the virus strains and how they could mutate over time). Without a good appreciation of the Vietnamese heritage and determination during the Vietnam War, the United States failed to take into account their historical struggle against foreign occupation. It was a limited war to the Americans but a total war to the Vietcong and North Vietnamese. The American military efforts focused on destroying the communist insurgency forces without recognizing the will of the American people as its Achilles' heel. Even though the United States won all the major battles in the Vietnam War, including the famous Tet Offensive, it could not prevent the eventual communist takeover of South Vietnam.
Recent propaganda campaigns and hard kill attacks to eliminate Muslim terrorists do not address the two root causes of the problem: a perceived threat against Islam posed by the global export of Western culture and values; and a perceived unjustness in the subjugation of the Muslim world by the overbearing world dominance of Western powers. Osama bin Laden has been able to capitalize on these root causes by making references to the "humiliation and disgrace" that Islam has suffered for "more than 80 years" since the fall of the last great Muslim empire, the Ottoman sultanate. His call for jihad resonates among Muslims, whether they agree with his method or not, and allows terrorist groups and networks to recruit young and willing supporters from unregulated madrasas that preach and incite hatred against the West.
The use of direct hard-kill attacks alone to eliminate Muslim terrorists would have just the opposite effect of generating more of them. Even the removal of the entire al Qaeda organization might not be a permanent solution to the problem, since the existence of underlying conditions may spawn other terror organizations that are much worse. There are signs that the Department of Defense has begun to recognize this quandary. In a memorandum dated October 16, 2003, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld poses the following questions:
Today, we lack metrics to know if we are winning or losing the global war on terror. Are we capturing, killing or deterring and dissuading more terrorists every day than the madrasas and the radical clerics are recruiting, training and deploying against us? Does the United States need to fashion a broad, integrated plan to stop the next generation of terrorists? The United States is putting relatively little effort into a long-range plan, but we are putting a great deal of effort into trying to stop terrorists. The cost-benefit ratio is against us! Our cost is billions against the terrorists' cost of millions. 
32
The United States is specifically targeted by radical Islamic elements because it is the symbol of Western world dominance. The September 11 tragedy resulted in the formulation of the new Bush Doctrine that advocates the necessity of preemptive war, even if it has to be fought unilaterally without authorization from the United Nations. The subsequent war on Iraq reinforced an image of the United States widely held among allies and adversaries of an arrogant superpower that is insensitive to the concerns of other countries in the world. This degrades U.S. soft power and its ability to lead the rest of the world in the global war against radical Islamic terrorist elements. In contrast, the information campaign proposed by this essay will demonstrate the American willingness and resolve to tackle the root causes of the problem, enhance its image, and revitalize its soft power within the international community. In so doing, the United States will be in a better position to garner material, financial, and moral support from its allies toward nation-building efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan. By reducing its own cost of the war, domestic support for the war will in turn be more sustainable. Under such a scenario, the U.S. military, given limited resources and capabilities, will not overstretch and can better focus on deterrence and containment of other regional threats. 
12
11
  ESSAYS 2004   
Commander Steven W. Knott, USN, won second place with this essay, written while attending the U.S. Army War College. His most recent assignment was commanding officer of Helicopter Combat Support Squadron 8.
The 
Institute for National Strategic Studies (INSS)
National Defense University (NDU)
Department of Defense
NDU
INSS
The Publication Directorate of INSS publishes books, monographs, reports, and occasional papers on national security strategy, defense policy, and national military strategy through 
NDU Press
President of NDU
Joint Force Quarterly
Colonel Howard D. Belote
USAF
National War College
32 d Air Operations Squadron at Ramstein Air Base
Germany. Currently
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
A complete list of the entries by college in the 2004 competition follows: 