# ID: 203d359771c14a9bb83fdf6a273847a8
# Title: Strategic Studies Quarterly
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
the alliance.
But other options present themselves.
NATO and Russia could share early warning information about missile launches for tests or attacks.
The two parties could also exchange military personnel at their respective command centers to monitor the launches of any European missile defense system and reassure themselves of launch trajectories and objectives.
A third possibility would be a shared functionality in which Russian aerospace defense systems (established as a separate command within the Russian armed forces in 2011) would receive handoff data from the EPAA system to provide for missile intercept over Russian but not NATO territory.
Regardless the mechanics of NATO-Russian cooperation on missile defenses, it will require collaboration and sensitivity on both sides.
NATO-Russian cooperation on missile defense is a necessary condition for improved collaboration on nuclear nonproliferation.
Although Russian and US perspectives on the prevention of nuclear weapons spread are not identical, they are potentially convergent on some important issues.
Russia does not want to encourage nuclear weapons spread in general, but it takes a selective approach to dealing with miscreant potential or actual proliferators.
The United States, on the other hand, is more likely to oppose categorically the entry of any new states into the nuclear club and insists (correctly) on reversing the North Korean membership.
A second difference between the approaches to nonproliferation is that Russia distrusts the efficacy of economic sanctions and fears their blowback on its interests, as in Iran, more than does the United States.
A third difference between Russia and the United States (as well as between Russia and some leading EU and NATO members) is that Russia is more skeptical about the outcomes of multilateral military interventions, whether authorized by the United Nations or (even worse) undertaken by coalitions of the willing, especially if those coalitions are led by the United States and/or its allies.
The US and allied intervention in Iraq in 2003 to depose Saddam Hussein was illegitimate from Russia's perspective, as was NATO's air war against Serbia over Kosovo in 1999.
The US justification for Operation Iraqi Freedom-that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction that he might use or pass along to terrorists-was duly noted by Russian leaders, who are in principle wary of abridgments of sovereignty.