# ID: 205dce0d88ca4eac90a94bc13643f17a
# Title: COVID-19 and the information ecosystem: Lessons from Russian malign influence campaigns for the post-covid-19 world
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
The plague did not cause this, nor did it bring us here-it simply made the revelation.
Pandemic urgency and emergency ruthlessly stripped away the restless, seething heart that inevitably bursts with the recognition of a sacred vision betrayed; and assuredly, also, the unclothed, narcissistic ruling class that led us here.
 COVID-19 and 1918 H1N1 flu pandemics provides an opportunity for a disciplined examination of the conditions and the short-and long-term effects of a pandemic on the world and U.S. national security.
Taking into account the different geopolitical, epidemiological, and social contexts of these two periods, this comparison leads to several projections.
Because the underlying conditions for pandemic (e.g., population growth, urbanization, interconnected trade and travel) persist, future pandemics are inevitable; continued vigilance and preparation are necessary.
China and Russia will try to leverage the pandemic against the United States, but the United States has an opportunity to assume a leadership role in combatting the pandemic.
U.S. and global economic recovery is likely, although an increase in real wages and standard of living-typical after a pandemic-is not expected.
Current inequalities are likely to increase due to differential unemployment between service industries and manufacturing, on the one hand, and higher-paid, white collar industries where people can continue to work from home.
The politicization of the pandemic in some Western democracies is likely to be exacerbated by growing inequality along social divisions.
Therefore, the COVID-19 pandemic presents the danger of political instability and weakening Western democracies in competition against their autocratic rivals.