# ID: 207fbe54218949d08d4b2ec965268b52
# Title: The Advent of the Russian Special Operations Command
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
For what purpose did Russia establish its Special Operations Command? This monograph explores why the Russians established a Special Operations Command (KSO) with its own Special Operations Forces (SSO) distinct from other special operations elements such as Spetsnaz. After the Georgian War in 2008, the Russian perception of threats within the context of Russia's domestic politics, economic limitations and demography all led Russia to enact a campaign of military reform. Conventional forces became more capable by focusing on operational mobility, combined arms enablers, and reconnaissance. Concurrently, Russian SSO improved on Russia's historical experience with special operations by creating a force accountable to its national command authority and capable of operating independently, covertly or in support of conventional operations, as in Ukraine in 2014. Though improving Russia's indirect approach beyond its borders appears to be central to the creation of the KSO, other aspects also matter: emulation of the West, the need for an economy of force, a complement to conventional operations, and internal domestic competition among security services.
Since the early 21 st century, Western powers have become increasingly concerned about an aggressive and revanchist Russia. The Russian approach to warfare in the post-Soviet era has embraced an irregular form, particularly as Russian attempts to resist the American-led international order have grown. Recent overt and covert Russian interventions have reinforced notions of a dangerous and belligerent Russian foe. Perceptions of the modern Russian threat have centered on increased Russian capability resulting from their military reform. The preponderance of reform has been designed to shape the conventional military to be more effective at addressing Russia's security environment. Even so, Russia has cultivated a renewed appreciation for irregular forms of warfare. For that reason, Russia created its Special Operations Command during the course of military reforms beginning in 2008. This monograph explores the advent of the Russian Special Operations Command to inform Western efforts to counter Russian irregular expeditionary operations.
For what purpose did Russia establish its Special Operations Command? This is a fundamental question to understand the Russian approach to special operations. Moreover, answers to this question inform the ability to predict how and why Russia might employ its special operations capability. It may also offer suggestions on how to counter Russian irregular expeditionary efforts.
The likely answer to this question is that Russia created its Special Operations Command to build a high-end SOF-centric expeditionary capability beyond its borders, capable of direct action and unconventional warfare. The mobility, flexibility and covert capability of an independently operating Special Operations Force (SOF) enables Russia to increase its efforts to access and influence governments and people in its near abroad and beyond. Elite SOF also enables Russian efforts to destabilize less friendly governments and to undermine the Americanled order in select places across the globe.
To examine this subject, over the following four sections, this monograph addresses Russian military reform, the advent of Russian SOF within the context of that reform, and the deduced Russian approach to special operations. Russia's modern theory of special operations and its conception of SOF employment requires an understanding of the larger context of Russian military reforms, as well as the recent employment of the Russian military, and the capability gaps identified therefrom. Famously, irregular warfare featured prominently in Russia's intervention in Ukraine in 2014. While their actions in Ukraine remain an important example of Russian irregular warfare, the reform of Russian special operations capability developed in a larger security context. Fortunately for the study of this subject, Russia waged a military campaign on either side of its reform efforts -Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine in 2014. In light of the broader Russian security context and conventional military reforms, the reform of its special operations capability suggests that Russia has identified a need for an elite unit designed for both direct action and unconventional warfare. Consequently, they designed a force tailored to provide such options for Russian leadership.
The first section of this monograph considers how Russian leadership viewed the need for military reform writ large. This section explores the Russian perception of threats and how Russian leadership evaluated its security environment within the context of its domestic politics.
Consequent military reform addressed newfound threats and challenges particularly after the Russian War in Georgia in 2008. Even so, demographic limitations, economic trends and institutional resistance have constrained reform efforts. The second section will outline the substance of those conventional military reforms.
The third section explores the advent of the Russian Special Operations Command. This effort started from a historically understood use of the role for specialized military forces, evolved during the reform efforts targeting Spetsnaz elements, and accounted for non-military special operations elements. Further, the establishment of a Russian Special Operations Command straddles the campaigns in Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine in 2014. The use of SOF, or lack thereof, in these campaigns helps explain whether and how the Russian approach to special operations changed over the course of the last thirty years.
The fourth section analyzes the Russian use of special operations to determine how Russia conceives of its Special Operations Forces. The establishment of the Russian Special Operations Command may be a pivotal event that explains the modern Russian approach to special operations. This section provides insight into how Russia might be expected to employ its SOF. More importantly, it offers implications on how the United States may counter Russia's special operations efforts. Two primary considerations limit the scope of this monograph. First, internal Russian security deliberations are not always publicly available, particularly with regard to special operations. Much of the Russian deliberation occurred without public scrutiny and Russia only acknowledged in retrospect many of the military reforms that had been undertaken. 
1
Second, this study focuses on the Russian Special Operations Command and its constituent SOF. It will thus exclude some of the broader irregular forms of belligerent activity that Russia has undertaken across the globe, much of which may be considered special operations writ large. These belligerent behaviors include the Russian use of paramilitary private security contractors, foreign cyber campaigns, assassination efforts and international espionage. Though such subjects must inform efforts to counter Russian aggression, they fall outside the scope of this work.
Two terms in this monograph deserve particular scrutiny before more detailed usage. The first, Spetsnaz, comes from the Russian abbreviation for Voyska spetsialnovo naznacheniya, literally Troops of a Special Purpose. Spetsnaz serves as an umbrella term that includes elite soldiers across the security services. Their mandates and organization range from elite police elements, to elite light infantry, to clandestine elements working with indigenous forces. By contrast, Special Operations Forces (SOF), in the Russian equivalent is Sil Spetsialnykh Operatsiy, a literal translation. Abbreviated as SSO, these refer only to the soldiers assigned to the Komandovanie Sil Spetsialnykh Operatsiy, Special Operations Command or KSO (sometimes KSSO). They owe their origins to the military reforms from 2008-2013. Throughout this monograph, the term "SOF" will be used to refer to Special Operations Forces in the abstract, while "SSO" will be used to refer specifically to the Russian SOF organization. Additional terms relevant to this monograph's discussion of Special Operations may be found in Appendix 1.
Russia today looks much as it has throughout its history: illiberal, revanchist, autocratic, belonging neither to the West nor East, with an economy notable for its centralized management and inequality. 
2
3
4
3 Laqueur,
5
Russian perceptions of the international security environment, domestic priorities, and the Georgian War of 2008. 
6
Putin (Lincoln, NE: 2016), 191-198, 458-460. 6
Lastly, Moscow has historically preferred international multipolarity based on ad hoc relationships, coexisting competition and cooperation and an order not dominated by a single state. In sum, these historical preferences of the Russian government created a sense in the early 2000s of the need for redress by investment in its hard power apparatus; namely, military reform.
8
9
12
13
14
15
16
18
1
17
18
19
20
21
22
Russian demography also limits Russian military power. By some estimates, and discounting immigration, Russia's population is contracting by 20% each generation. 
23
However, the fact remains, that based on the size of Russia's annual conscript pool, Russia cannot maintain the size it prefers. Despite President Putin's decree in 2016 that the military must 
19
Sutyagin and Bronk,
130. 20
21
22 Laqueur, 224-225;
SIPRI Military Expenditure Database, 2018
23 Laqueur,
[136]
[137]
[211]
[212]
[213]
24
25
The evident need for reform compelled change despite economic, demographic and institutional resistance to military reform. First, the logic of military reform nested with foreign policy aims and a long-standing effort to reinvent the military conscription system. Second, the reform program charted a course for a smaller, more professional force. Lastly, the modern Russian military reflects these reformist efforts. By understanding the substance of these reforms and the modern Russian conventional capability, one can then understand where special operations fits into the Russian conception of conflict.
First, military reform reflected assertive 21st century Russian foreign policy and tapped into a long-standing disillusion with mass conscription and inefficient military spending. Russian leaders have sought a reduction in the size of the military since the late Soviet period. In the 1980s, this was an argument for a reduction in military spending. After the Soviet Union fell, this argument became more compelling and combined with a desire to reduce the expense that the system of mass mobilization of strategic reserves required. Such a system depended on the maintenance of excess personnel, materiel and infrastructure to absorb a rapid incorporation of millions of soldiers. 
26
27
28
29
30
27
28 Anton Lavrov, "Towards a Professional Army;" Renz, 70-71. 
29
30
31
32
33
34
Reforms sought to create a professional ever-ready Russian military capable of a full range of 
31
32 Anton Lavrov, "Towards a Professional Army;" Renz, 70-71. 
33
Hill and Gaddy,
[334]
[335]
[336]
[337]
[338]
Herspring,
327,
[330]
[331]
[332]
[333]
[334]
[335]
[336]
[337]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
35
36
37
38
2
35
36 Mark Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016 (New York, NY: Osprey, 2017), 27-28. Before reform, the Russians maintained 6 out of 24 divisions in a ready status -fully manned and operationally ready. The reorientation towards a brigade-based army created 40 combat arms brigades (only 15 of which were fully manned) and 45 support brigades.
37 Mark Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016 (New York, NY: Osprey, 2017), 25-27. 
38
39
Except for fully professional special forces, units would be mixed manned. 
40
General Shoigu oversaw a ban on purchasing foreign equipment to encourage investment in the indigenous defense industry. Pensions and pay continued to increase, tripling the average national salary by 2013. 
41
42
43
44
45
40 Hill and Gaddy,
[334]
[335]
[336]
[337]
[338]
Herspring,
327,
[330]
[331]
[332]
[333]
[334]
[335]
[336]
[337]
41
42
43
44
45
As a result of reform, Russia's Army transformed from a force designed for territorial defense to a force capable of expeditionary offensive operations against peer Western adversaries.
Russian forces are optimized for short-duration, high intensity, small-scale operations. The Russian military has become more capable of expeditionary operations as a result of reforms that emphasize three ideas: first, operational mobility; second, the incorporation of enablers for combined arms maneuver; third, the need for improved reconnaissance on the battlefield. 
46
Additionally, the Russian military will increase the size and lethality of Airborne forces after their proven mobility and effectiveness in Ukraine. Moreover, military lift can transport up to five motorized brigades (approximately 25,000 soldiers) in one lift. Additionally, the Russian military maintains pre-positioned stocks of heavy weapons and vehicles for a brigade-sized element at twenty one locations across its territory. Though the pre-positioned sites may contain legacy stock, they nevertheless provide Russia the ability to reinforce a particular military district or to absorb a wider mobilization of its populace. This logistics footprint enables the Russians to move 
46 Sutyagin,
[10]
[11]
47
48
49
50
Section III: KSO: The Development of Elite Russian SOF
The very "rules of war" have changed. The role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, in many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness. The focus of applied methods of conflict has altered in the direction of the broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures-applied in coordination with the protest potential of the population. All this is supplemented by military means of a concealed character, including carrying out actions of informational conflict and the actions of special operations forces. The open use of forces-often under the guise of peacekeeping and crisis regulation-is resorted to only at a certain stage, primarily for the achievement of final success in the conflict.
The modern Russian conception of warfare embraces an indirect approach to achieving its objectives. Russian SSO fits cleanly into this approach. Two facets explain how SSO became an important tool for achieving Russian objectives. First, SSO belongs to the historical legacy of 
50 Sutyagin,
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[100]
[101]
[102]
Second, the 2008 war in Georgia provided 21st century lessons for how SSO could fit into deliberate Russian campaign; as a shaping element before the onset of hostilities and as a supporting element during hostilities. With those two historical lessons as preface, the advent of an independent KSO extends from the reforms targeting Spetsnaz. After a secretive process, the resulting KSO created a force capable of operational success in Crimea in fewer than five years.
The creation and organization of the KSO thus warrants closer examination. So too does the employment of the SSO to Ukraine in 2014.
Soviet and Russian Spetsnaz forces stand astride the need for military reconnaissance and intelligence assets. Historically, they have been dedicated to reconnaissance, partisan warfare, disrupting enemy supply and communication lines, and targeting NATO nuclear forces in the field. 
51
52
53
Spetsnaz's role was expanded, perhaps wasted, in that later Afghan war as an effective reconnaissance and rapid-reaction light-infantry force. 
54
55
In the constellation of modern Russian security services, several security forces outside of the military are designed for special operations. These include a raft of forces designated as special purpose and designed for commando operations, often as internal security functions. This includes several police commando units within the Ministry of Internal Affairs that conduct counterterrorism missions and served in combat functions in Chechnya. Additionally, the Federal Security Service (FSB) and Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) maintain elements designed for special operations. 
56
54
55
56
57
58
Alpha is Russia's most well-known counterterrorism unit, dating from the 1970s-era preparation for the 1980 Moscow Olympics. It maintains a primarily domestic role as in the Dubrovka Theater raid in 2002 and the Beslan standoff in 2004, but was famously involved in the assassination raid of the Afghan president in 1979 that began the war in Afghanistan. Alpha's involvement in the political turmoil of the 1990s provides anecdotal insight into the Russian approach to its security services as competing clans that must be balanced. Alpha's refusal to storm the Russian Parliament and arrest Russian President Yeltsin in August 1991 accelerated the collapse of an attempted coup. President Yeltsin would then turn to Alpha in October 1993 to forcibly dissolve Parliament. 
59
Vympel is the other of the premier security forces belonging to the FSB. Vympel was established in 1981 within the KGB's element responsible for international espionage. As such, its focus was expeditionary missions abroad including hostage rescue, surveillance, assassination and sabotage. Because it refused President Yeltsin's order to seize the parliament in 1993, Vympel was demoted to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and renamed. Vympel, gutted, was returned to the FSB in the mid 1990s and placed alongside Alpha in its counterterrorism role. In keeping with its lineage, Vympel remains more dedicated to surveillance. However, Vympel is 
57
58
59
60
61
Nonetheless, to create such a capability, Russia established its KSO and SSO during the period of reform beginning with the War in Georgia.
The Need for SOF in the Georgian War (2008)   The Georgian War in 2008 provides insight into the envisioned roles for SOF: as a shaping force before the war and a supporting force during conventional operations. These acts include the covert shaping operations familiar to SOF as well as the reconnaissance activities to facilitate a limited ground war. Before the war itself, Russia executed a years-long campaign of covert influence. To provoke a Georgian response, in many ways retaliation for the 2008 independence of Kosovo, 62 Russia escalated tensions through its local proxy partners. During the subsequent ground war, the lack of a proficient SOF force in support of conventional operations showed in several ways. 
60
63
64
65
66
During the Russian invasion, several military deficiencies became apparent, many of which might be improved with a SOF partnership: reconnaissance, air-ground integration, Unconventional Warfare (UW) and counter-SOF efforts. The race for the South Ossetian capital, 
63
67
68
69
68
70
Russian operations in Georgia, resulting from success and failure, encouraged an appreciation for the benefits of SSO: speed, mobility, disruption, reconnaissance, coordination with local proxies, air-ground integration and the disruption of enemy SOF. Reform thus came to Spetsnaz much as it did to the conventional force.
The establishment of the KSO may be seen as an effort to tidy up the military and intelligence distinctions desirable after the Georgian war. In the resulting bureaucratic infighting, Spetsnaz became briefly, perhaps only nominally, subordinate to the Russian Military District commands while the GRU was delineated as an espionage force. 71 Spetsnaz units were cut significantly and their role was reduced to deep reconnaissance and direct action behind enemy lines. This began an evolution towards a purer reconnaissance role. General Makarov, then Chief of the General Staff, intended to remake Spetsnaz into an independent reconnaissance brigade for Army (or Navy) elements. 
72
70
71
72
such Spetsnaz detachments, a combat support detachment (armored vehicle company, mortar battery, Anti-Tank (AT) battery, UAV detachment, Electronic Warfare (EW) company) a special radio communication detachment and supply elements. Each Spetsnaz detachment would have three companies, a sniper group, and a special radio communication detachment. Each Spetsnaz company would contain three (possibly four) Spetsnaz groups of 14 soldiers. 
73
74
75
76
77
By contrast, the KSO is envisioned to assume responsibility for strategic reconnaissance and direct action that emanate from the Russian national leadership as well as unconventional 
73
74
75
76
77 Ibid.,
[8]
[9]
[10]
Galeotti,
Spetsnaz,
45.
78
Regardless of the waffling nature of Spetsnaz reforms, the establishment of the Special Operations Command, KSO, survived. General Gerasimov publicly acknowledged SSO in early 2013, declaring that the KSO would be designated for overseas operations ranging from peacekeeping to intervention. 
79
80
Nevertheless, some of the contours of KSO have been traced in open source reporting.
The idea of a Russian Special Operations Command may date from the 1990s, even as its origin owes to the reform era of 2008 onward. Colonel Vladimir Kvachkov, a former Spetsnaz brigade commander, lobbied for the creation of a distinct Special Operations Forces command explicitly to focus on operations outside of Russia. 
81
82
78
79
80
Galeotti,
Spetsnaz,
[42]
[43]
82
83
84
85
Institutional resistance from the GRU, among others, makes any such reorganization unlikely in the near term. An important distinction, Spetsnaz are, by and large, designed to be sustained by the military commands they support. SSO, on the other hand, operate independently, a fact which enables KSO to plan and control missions that require special political sensitivity. 
87
88
83
84
85
86 Nikosky, "Little, Green and Polite: The Creation of Russian Special Operations Forces," 129. 
87
control and given to the General Staff to become the headquarters of the KSO command. KSO absorbed an additional site, the Center for Special Designation, at Kubinka in 2013. 
89
3
Galeotti,
Spetsnaz,
43;
Marsh,
15. 90
91
92
91
92
93
95
96
97
93 Marsh,
17;
Galeotti,
Spetsnaz,
43. 94
95
96
97
98
99
100
98
99
101
102
104
101
102 Nikolsky, "Russian Special Operations Forces: Eight Years and Three Wars," 28-30. 
103
104
109
110
For what purpose did Russia establish its Special Operations Command? Improving a high-end SOF-centric expeditionary capability beyond its borders appears to be a confirmed, if insufficient, explanation for the advent of KSO. Rather, despite the many unknowns of KSO, there appear to be four notable features that define Russia's use of special operations: as an expeditionary force designed for discreet operations that blur Russian attribution; as an economy of force element that maximizes effects for minimal resourcing; as a force multiplier for 111 US Army, Threat Tactics Report: Russia Version 1. 1, 34-48.  conventional elements; and as a function of competition among security services. Each of these features is explored below.
Russian SSO enables the Russian preference for indirect methods to achieve its strategic objectives. Many serious inquiries have attempted to understand the modern Russian approach to warfare. Names for this indirect approach vary: "grey zone" operations, "hybrid warfare," "new generation warfare," or simply "competition short of conflict." Russia itself uses the term "indirect and asymmetric methods." According to these methods, the Russians employ covert and nonmilitary means in greater proportion than overt conventional means to blur the line between war and peace. Descriptions of this theory of warfare identify a core approach that emulates a perceived Western approach, methods which seek to act below a threshold that invites a conventional response. 
113
114
115
116
117
118
Thus, the expansion of an SSO capability matches well the contemporary Russian emphasis on strategic ambiguity based on stealth, surprise, and disinformation. 
120
121
Resulting social unrest can then be attributed to local forces and allow Russia a degree of deniability. These actions then expand options for a more overt use of military force. 
122
Next, SSO should be considered in the light of conventional military reform as an exploration of a way to economize forces. Neither Russian demography nor economic power augur well for Russian regional hegemony. As a result, indirect methods improve Russia's ability 119 AWG, 16-20. to pursue its objectives. Discrete special operation may annihilate a particular target as in a great raid, but the true strategic value comes from sustained application of economy-of-force operations designed to break the resolve of an enemy. 
123
124
Lastly, the dynamic of competing clans within domestic Russian politics appears to bear on the development of Russia's KSO. Competing views within the military about the role of the GRU clearly bore on the decision to alter the Spetsnaz chain of command to the operational commands and then back to the GRU. Similarly, resistance from the GRU and the VDV delayed the creation of the KSO and limited its scope to a singular SSO force. Interagency competition again marked the decision to staff the KSO with former FSB officials. Surely not far from the minds of Russian senior leadership is the role that Alpha and Vympel played (or refused to play) as assault elements in the political turmoil of the 1990s. Not surprisingly, the military chose to create a parallel capability for elite special operations that previously existed in the FSB and SVR. Internal deliberations about competition between the security services remain largely secretive, but can be inferred by the resulting development of the KSO.
Understanding these different characterizations of the Russian SSO leaves yet unanswered the options for countering the Russian influence resulting from their improved elite special operations capability at DA and UW. Each characterization deserves attention for the implications it suggests for how to counter it. First, SSO as a means to enable an indirect approach recommends a sustained effort to ensure Western access and influence. Second, SSO as an economy-of-force element reinforces the importance of attributing to Russia its overseas malfeasance. Third, insofar as SSO may complement conventional operations, Western planners must account for rear-guard actions. Lastly, the nature of competing clans across Russian security services suggests that SSO may not always neatly nest their efforts with larger Russian intentions.
To counter SSO as a means for Russia's indirect methods requires the West to pursue similar access and influence among contested populations. This access and influence must be achieved cognitively, socially and physically. Cognitively, in the minds of targeted populations, counter-Russian planners must craft narratives about Russian malevolence and foreign interference and encourage receptiveness to counter-Russian efforts. At a social level, messaging must be accompanied by efforts to build networks among receptive governments and populations to organize resistance to Russian interference. Physically, these ideas amount to the appropriation of resources to conduct information operations and reinforce a message of commitment to competing for the human terrain. Western SOF may be used to build networks, affirm commitment to vulnerable populations, and both identify and counteract discrete SSO operations.
Secondly, employing indirect methods through small SSO elements suggests a preference for economizing force to pursue objectives. The covert, clandestine or small nature of these actions enables Russia to deny attribution for its actions. To counter such SSO activities, SSO must be identified as the responsible party. Attributing SSO action to Russia is alone insufficient to crafting an effective response, but it is a necessary prerequisite to ensuring cognitive, social and physical access and influence. The response then must also be achieved across the same three spaces. Cognitively, populations must be mobilized at the individual level to be willing to resist.
Socially, government and popular networks must identify SSO efforts, build the capacity to resist SSO targeted attacks, and address popular grievances that Russian SSO may exploit. Physically, this may amount to the dedication of intelligence collection assets to suspected SSO operations, the dedication of an information apparatus to attribute SSO activity to Russia, or the employment of counter-Russian forces to assist foreign forces with their internal security.
Thirdly, the SSO as a complement to conventional operations increases the threat posed to a counter-Russian belligerent. Unlike the UW focus detailed above, the threat to conventional belligerents engaged in a war with Russia would be posed both by an elite UW and an elite DA capability. Thus, a weaker opponent's senior government or military officials might be targeted by SSO. So too, critical military or civilian infrastructure may be targeted. This is in addition to the prospect of SSO subversive and insurgent networks engaging in hostilities. In a conventional combat scenario, for both large and small opponents of Russia, the effectiveness of the SSO demands more attention be paid to the protection of critical physical and human infrastructure, including that of partnered nations. Additionally, counter-SOF kinetic targeting would be an important part of protecting the friendly-force rear area.
Lastly, internal Russian rivalry among competing clans suggests that SSO activity may not always be nested within larger Russian aims. An imperfect unity of effort or seeming contradiction of Russian foreign policy may naturally occur as a result of competing internal interests as well as the Russian view of simultaneous competition and cooperation. The Russian SSO belongs firmly to that tradition. As such, the primary implication of this occasionally mixed signal is twofold. First, it requires a dedicated effort to maintain a discreet line of communication with Russian leadership to clarify activities, though this must not come at the expense of a unified resolve to resist belligerent acts. Extending from this communication is a decision on whether to respond to a particular SSO act or choose to accept it as either an anomaly or an acceptable activity. The primary risk of such a decision is that Russia is expert at manipulating confusion to weaken its opponent's resolve and dilute a response.
In sum, the implications of the Russian KSO endorse many of the same activities that Gerasimov accused the West of conducting in the first place. Only now, Russia is much better prepared to respond in kind. This does not mean that the Western approach has been invalidated.
On the contrary, it must be reinforced. Efforts to counter SSO will require sustained cognitive, social and physical responses to guarantee access and influence to vulnerable populations and to resist SSO operations across the globe.
The purpose of this monograph was to determine how the establishment of the Russian Special Operations Command affected the approach to special operations. How did the Russian approach to special operations evolve as it began to establish its Special Operations Forces as a force distinct from its existing special purpose soldiers? Though Russia has long maintained some form of organization for special operations, the creation of a separate SOF force with its own command signals a self-identified need to resolve a previously deficient capability. Moreover, the new command intimates a respect for the contemporary utility of special operations and, more broadly, a theory for Special Operations Forces (SOF). This theory has been inferred from the campaigns in Georgia and in Ukraine.
The Russian perception of threats within the context of their domestic politics, economic limitations and demography all led them to enact a campaign of military reform. Russia maintains an interest in regional hegemony and a buffer zone on its borders. These interests are filtered through a domestic political scene characterized by competing political clans, including the security services. Moreover, reform remained constrained by demographic trends and economic vulnerability. These characteristics molded the development of KSO as an indirect way to pursue Russia's interests economically while appreciating the bureaucratic realities of domestic politics.
The campaign of military reform more broadly addressed newfound threats and challenges particularly after the Russian War in Georgia in 2008. As a result of the reforms, Russia's Armed Forces became a force capable of expeditionary offensive operations against peer adversaries. Forces have become more capable across the spectrum of conflict by focusing on operational mobility, the incorporation of enabling assets, and an improved reconnaissance capability. Concurrent to improvements in conventional capability, acknowledging the gaps therein, Russia acknowledged the need to develop better proficiency with special operations.
The creation of the Russian KSO addresses the gaps in conventional operations, particularly after the Georgian War in 2008. Russian SSO improved on Russia's historical experience with special operations by creating a force accountable to the military and capable of operating independently, covertly or in support of conventional operations. Unlike its Spetsnaz cousin, the SSO enables military options at the level of the Russian national command authority.
Russian SSO may be used as a shaping force in a covert or UW campaign as in Crimea in 2014, or as a supplement to more conventional operations. The use of SOF, or lack thereof, in these campaigns helps explain how the Russian approach to special operations evolved during the reforms.
Thus, we are able to deduce the purpose for which Russia established its Special Operations Command. Though improving Russia's indirect approach beyond its borders appears to be central to the creation of the KSO, it does not alone explain the existence of the KSO. The theory of Russian SSO may be characterized as an emulation of the West towards an elite expeditionary force that reduces attribution to the Russian government. However, it also may be
62  
62  
Christopher Marsh, Developments in Russian Special Operations: Russia's Spetsnaz, SOF and  Special Operations Forces Command (Ottawa, Ontario: Canadian Special Operations Forces Command,   
2016), 1-4.
Renz, Nalbandov,[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11]
[12]
[16]
Renz,[52]
[53]
Dale Herspring, "Military  Reform" in Putin's Russia: Past Imperfect, Future Uncertain, 6 th edition, edited by Stephen K. Wegren(Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2016), 324-325.    
Renz,[52]
[53]
Vladimir Putin, Presidential Decree 329, "Ukaz Prezidenta Rossisskoi Federatsii o shtatnoi  chislennosti Vooruzhennykh Sil Rossiiskoi Federatsii,' July 8, 2016, accessed December 11, 2018, http://publication.pravo.gov.ru/document/view/0001201607080015; Renz, 67, 70-71; Anton Lavrov, "Towards a Professional Army," Center for Analysis ofStrategy and Technology, 2015, accessed  December 11, 2018, http://cast.ru/products/articles/towards-a-professional-army.html.
Dmitri Trenin and Aleksei Malashenko, eds. Russia's Restless Frontier: The Chechnya Factor in Post-Soviet Russia (Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution Press, 2004), 103-164.
Sutyagin,
[16]
[51]
[53]
[62][63][64][65][66][69][70][71][72][73][74][75][76][77][78][79][80]. Maneuver brigades maintain an organic Electronic Warfare company that provides the capability to jam tactical enemy C2 networks as well as enemy Global Positioning System (GPS) signals for Precision Guided Munitions. Russian brigades now possess a UAV company to improve reconnaissance and EW capability. Combat engineers have improved Russian tactical mobility by increasing the bridging capability and mine clearance. Engineers also maintain extensive inflatable mock-ups to deceive an enemy force and improve maneuver formations' survivability. Lastly, each Military District received a Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Defense (CBRN) unit. In 2014, each of the eleven field armies received a well-equipped CBRN regiment for tasks ranging from reconnaissance, decontamination and enabling maneuver through smokescreens. Ostensibly a defensive precaution, the expansion of this capability suggests a reevaluation at very senior levels of the probability of the use of such weapons in a combat scenario. Alternatively, it may be a capability to enable more effective brinksmanship and high-stakes diplomacy with Western powers. The adoption of a standard Armata family of armored vehicles enables experimentation and adaptation.
Sutyagin,[43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][62][63][64][65][66][69][70][71][72][73][74][75][76][77][78][79][80] 
US Army, Threat Tactics Report: Russia Version 1.1 (2015), 7-17.   
Nikolsky, "Russian Special Operations Forces: Eight Years and Three Wars," 21-24.
Nikolsky, "Russian Special Operations Forces: Eight Years and Three Wars," 28-30.
Sutyagin and Bronk,[32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42]. Some estimates posit that Russia's mobilization to the destabilization of Ukraine required 90,000 troops, over 30% of the Russian Ground Forces. Sustaining the offensive throughout 2014 required rotations from units across Russia, notable for requiring such a wide mobilization. Aside from offering a testbed for combat operations (notably for artillery and Electronic Warfare units), such a mobilization appears to result from local manpower shortages for sustained operations. Moreover, Siberian units brought their organic vehicles and equipment, suggesting that prepositioned stocks were either employed or insufficient. Lastly, media reports surfaced of conscripted soldiers forced to sign enlistment contracts to allow them to be deployed to the Ukrainian combat theater, a mark of manpower shortages.
  110  Larrabee, Wilson and Gordon, 8-9.
Nikolsky, "Russian Special Operations Forces: Eight Years and Three Wars," 28-30.
James Kiras, Special Operations and Strategy: From World  War II to the War on Terrorism (New York, NY: Routledge, 2006), 58-82.
James Kiras, Special Operations and Strategy: From World  War II to the War on Terrorism (New York, NY: Routledge, 2006), 58-82.
AWG,
[16]
The author would like to thank 
Dr Scott Gorman
Additionally, 
Dr Christopher Marsh
Russia's approach to creating discord in eastern Ukraine required a different tack. There, overt military exercises of massed Russian troops on Russian territory were designed to intimidate Ukrainians and seek a psychological effect. 
107
106
107 Larrabee, Wilson and Gordon, 7-8. 
108
Russia's improved capability for SSO expeditionary operations below the threshold that invites a conventional response recommends a sustained effort to counter Russian influence.
Sustained counter-Russian efforts must seek the same kind of cognitive, social and physical access and influence that Russia pursues with its SSO. They also must now allocate resources to countering SSO. Even so, the KSO, despite its youth, will likely remain difficult to counter, rooted as it is in the modern Russian approach to competition short of conflict.
Appendix 1: Key Definitions Relevant to Special Operations Some of the most important terms for understanding Special Operations are described here by their definition within American doctrine. There is risk in mistaking Russian notions by applying the American military definition. Nevertheless, these definitions will be modified where appropriate to account for differing Russian conceptions.
Direct Action. Direct action entails short-duration strikes and other small-scale offensive actions conducted with specialized military capabilities to seize, destroy, capture, exploit, recover, or damage designated targets in hostile, denied, or diplomatically and/or politically sensitive environments. (JP 3-05, x) Hybrid Warfare -the use of political, social, criminal, and other non-kinetic means employed to overcome military limitations. (US Army, Threat Tactics Report: Russia Version 1.1, 1).
Irregular Warfare -A violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s). (JP 1, x) Special Operations -Operations requiring unique modes of employment, tactical techniques, equipment and training often conducted in hostile, denied, or politically sensitive environments and characterized by one or more of the following: time sensitive, clandestine, low visibility, conducted with and/or through indigenous forces, requiring regional expertise, and/or a high degree of risk (JP 3-05, ix) Special Operations Forces -term used generally to denote elements of various sizes that perform special operations. Used in the Russian sense, it refers exclusively to soldiers assigned to the Russian Special Operations Command. Special Reconnaissance. Special reconnaissance entails reconnaissance and surveillance actions normally conducted in a clandestine or covert manner to collect or verify information of strategic or operational significance, employing military capabilities not normally found in conventional forces. (JP 3-05, x) Unlike the American definition, the Russians include Direct Action as a feature of Special Reconnaissance.
Spetsnaz -Voyska spetsialnovo naznacheniya, literally Troops of a Special Purpose. Spetsnaz serves as an umbrella term that includes elite soldiers across the security services. Their mandates and organization range from elite police elements to elite light infantry to genuine special operations elements. Additionally, other elements maintain a "special" designation that does not necessarily indicate an affiliation with Special Operations. Forces of special purpose called OSNAZ, sily osobogo naznachenia, are technical intelligence gatherers subordinate to GRU. Some special units -spetsialnyedenote units such as engineers and CBRN elements that facilitate command and control or logistics. (Ramm, 3-4)   Unconventional Warfare -Activities conducted to enable a resistance movement or insurgency to coerce, disrupt, or overthrow a government or occupying power by operating through or with an underground, auxiliary, and guerrilla force in a denied area. (JP 3-05)  