# ID: 208ab77e504a4338872f994bda89894c
# Title: The US Army National Guard and Urban Warfare: Building a Needed Capability
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2001.0
# Fulltext:
The U.S. Army National Guard provides more than 50% of
The U.S. Army National Guard currently provides over 50% of the Army's combat maneuver brigades. Organized in a mix of Enhanced Separate Brigades (ESBs), lower priority divisional brigades, and non-enhanced separate brigades, the National Guard provides a potentially significant source of combat power. This combat power is maintained at a bargain cost; a typical National Guard unit is less than one-third the cost of a comparable active component unit. 
1
Currently, only the ESBs are assigned a measurable role in U.S. military contingency planning. Of the National Guard's forty-two maneuver brigades, six of the fifteen ESBs are currently apportioned to regional war plans. 2 Unapportioned units are classified as America's strategic reserve. As such, they provide the capability to respond to unforeseen military threats, execute state missions, and serve as a basis for unit rotations in a protracted campaign. 
3
Various studies have targeted this strategic reserve of almost thirty brigades as excessive. Both the 1994 Commission on Roles and Missions (CORM) and the 1997 National Defense Panel (NDP) called for significant reductions in the combat structure of the National Guard. 
4 5
6
Despite being smaller, the same question will be raised; how relevant are National Guard maneuver brigades to the national military strategy of the United States?
This question is debated extensively and little consensus seems to emerge. Reserve proponents contend the National Guard can and should provide the bulk of combat maneuver units, with the active component providing only the units required for rapid deployment contingencies. The lack of a major peer competitor is taken to mean there is little risk in an increased reliance on reserve combat units, which are far less expensive than comparable active forces. 
7
8
9
10
Century, large-scale urban warfare.
If US strategic and operational leaders come to the conclusion that urban warfare is too costly and destructive, the results at the tactical level will be devastating. Unfortunately, some in the defense intellectual community have already drawn that conclusion. Their prophecies of doom and gloom are invariably based on the historical precedent that highlights the carnage of Mogadishu or Grozny. What these analyst overlook is the timeless strategic importance of those ticks on the map...The strategic significance of such places will not go away simply because many in the defense establishment have determined that the urban environment is ill-suited to the emerging American way of war. If anything, it will increase as future enemies justifiably perceive the urban battlefield as a critical US vulnerability.
-Colonel Vincent J. Goulding, USMC
The possibility of the United States engaging in large-scale urban warfare is hotly debated within the defense community. As this paper will subsequently demonstrate, urban warfare is a subject fraught with both complexity and risks. While many differing views on the future of urban conflict exist, most would agree with an American strategy that seeks to avoid urban struggles. While avoiding urban struggles is desirable, many observers believe it is inevitable that the United States will be drawn into such a struggle. 
11
military in open terrain the likelihood of urban conflict increases with each and every year.
While it is beyond the scope of this paper to examine the full breadth of the urban warfare debate, it is safely assumed that in the future the United States will conduct some form of military operations on urbanized terrain. While the scale of those future operations is difficult to predict, it is likely that only large-scale urban warfare stands to demand an overwhelming commitment of U.S. ground forces. Whether the current force structure of the U.S. military is up to this task is uncertain.
While the National Guard is a large combat force, it is large for many of the wrong reasons. Its current force structure is overwhelmingly weighted towards a Cold War confrontation that no longer exists. When examined against the present threats of Iraq or Iran in the Middle East and Korea in the Far East, the U.S. Army possesses a significant excess of maneuver brigades. The commonly accepted two major theater war force sizing analysis, however, fails to address the potential for large-scale urban warfare. No Army or DoD force structure modeling system adequately incorporates the complex demands of urban warfare. If urban factors for Seoul, Korea were to be added to such an analysis, it is likely the U.S. Army would possess a smaller excess of combat force structure. Only an in depth study could determine the true size of this excess, but it is almost certain to be less than the 12-15 brigades currently discussed in General Accounting Office and Congressional Budget Office studies. 
12
13
While the Army possesses adequate numbers of combat forces, what it lacks are forces properly organized, equipped, and trained for urban warfare. Urban warfare is a unique operational environment and demands a very different approach to military operations. In the case of the National Guard, this same observation extends to the demands of homeland defense. Beyond the readily apparent need for chemical and biological response units and increasing demands for computer defense specialists, it is hard to determine the exact military capabilities required for homeland security. While the Hart-Rudman Commission called for the National Guard to reorganize for homeland security there was little specificity as to how that reorganization should occur. 
14
The U.S. Army therefore is faced with a three-fold challenge. First, it must build and sustain a force capable of executing the tasks laid out in the current national military strategy.
Second, it must adequately prepare for the potential occurrence of a large-scale urban conflict.
Lastly, it must possess the unique capabilities necessary to provide timely and effective domestic support to local, state, and federal authorities. All the while, the Army must continue to develop new warfighting capabilities necessary to ensure sustained dominance over future adversaries. It is also a near certainty that these tasks must be accomplished within an ever more constrained fiscal environment.
The Army National Guard will continue to play an important role in accomplishing each tasks described above. The primary focus of the National Guard, however, should be directed at the challenges of urban warfare and homeland defense. It is in these two vital areas that the U.S. Army is least prepared and the National Guard most able to contribute. Urban operations, either in foreign cities or within the continental borders, require resources the Army National
Guard is uniquely equipped to provide. Foremost, the National Guard can provide urban warfare forces in the quantities needed to ensure success and at a cost the Army can afford.
While active component combat units will always be required to sustain a high degree of proficiency in military operations on urban terrain (MOUT), they are simply too expensive to retain in the numbers sufficient for large-scale urban warfare. Specialization of the National Guard in urban operations will serve as a valuable augmentation to active component capabilities. In addition, an inherent quality of National Guard units is there reflection of the wide range of civilian skills found within the urban workplace. Guardsmen are not only soldiers, but also firemen, policemen, utility workers, city planners, and construction workers. These skills provide unique capabilities not only for urban combat, but represent an immediate capability for civil authorities to call upon in the event of a domestic emergency.
The final rationale for specializing the National Guard in urban warfare operations is to improve the training and readiness of its units for combat. Today, the Army expects National Guard combat units to train for three basic missions: deliberate attack, area defense, and conduct movement to contact. 
15
With very limited training opportunities, it is unrealistic to expect National Guard maneuver units to master more than the basic fundamentals, applied to a narrow range of terrain. The 1995 Commission on Roles and Missions highlighted the need for "terrain specialization" within the reserve components. 
16
Throughout history, accepted military wisdom has been to avoid fighting within the confines of an urban environment. While cities have always held great political and economic significance, enormous costs have been associated with their capture. As early as the 4th
Century B.C., Sun Tzu, the noted Chinese military philosopher, made the following observation on the difficulty of urban combat:
Thus, what is of supreme importance in war is to attack the enemy's strategy.... Next best is to disrupt his alliances.... Next best is to attack his army.... The worst policy is to attack cities. Attack cities only when there is no alternative. 
17
In contrast, opposing the Russian military was a tough, shrewd, and committed force of some 15,000 fighters. 
18
Russia eventually achieved very limited military objectives, but only after significant casualties and the virtual destruction of Grozny. Her military forces were exposed as woefully ill prepared for the hardships of urban warfare. The Chechens demonstrated how an aggressive and adaptable enemy could effectively neutralize the advantages of a modern military power. The Chechens were perfectly willing to see their capital destroyed if it served to achieve their political objectives. 
19
20
21
A city, even a relatively modest one, is the most demanding operational environment in which any organized military will ever fight. Despite advances in technology, cities reduce warfare to its most fundamental nature. In open terrain, military forces can acquire and engage targets at a range of many miles. In an urban environment, engagement ranges of mere meters or even feet are not uncommon. National intelligence systems, which spied so well on Iraqi forces in Desert Storm, cannot yet peer into buildings or into the bowels of a city's sewer system. Armored vehicles, while important to a successful fight in cities, are vulnerable to simple, hand-held anti-tank weapons in the constricted, three-dimensional urban battlefield. In the early stages of the battle for Grozny, the Russian military suffered tank and armored personnel carrier losses of over 80%. 
22
The most critical and expensive military resource in an urban conflict is people;
particularly the highly trained and cohesive combat teams found at the infantry squad and platoon levels. Casualty rates in these small units can be significant and a single high-rise building may require several hundred soldiers to clear and secure. Generally accepted force ratios are three to five times greater for urban operations than those required in more open terrain, or roughly a correlation of 9 to 1. 
23
Army light infantry division of 10,000 soldiers contains less than 4,000 soldiers actually trained and organized for fighting in the streets. In an American heavy division, the number of available street fighters is even less. 
24
25
What should we take away from this examination of urban warfare? First, while the urban environment may be considered a type of terrain, it is a form of terrain so complex it requires specialized efforts to master. Units organized and trained for operations in more open terrain are often ill suited for fighting in narrow city streets, in sewer systems, and high rise buildings.
Observers that see urban complexes as simply another type of terrain, to which units must rapidly adjust to are ill informed. Additionally, a city's populace will define the urban environment even more than do streets, sewers, and buildings. How the military interacts with this populace will complicate, even dominate planning for urban operations.
We should also maintain a healthy skepticism when we consider the potential role of technology. While technology may aid America's military in the conduct of urban operations, it
will not be the deciding factor, at least in the immediate future. Chechen rebels amply demonstrated the effectiveness of today's relatively low-tech weaponry. They also demonstrated how an adaptable enemy can both counter an opponent's technological advantages, as well as employ selected high-tech systems for their own benefit. 
27
The last and potentially most significant point to consider is the recognition of how resource intensive urban warfare can be. Fighting in cities demands significant numbers of well-trained soldiers. High casualty rates must be expected and leaders at all levels must be physically and mentally prepared for a protracted conflict. America may be able to conduct peacekeeping operations with relatively small forces, but should never expect to conduct highintensity urban combat with anything less than decisive combat power. While the emerging U.S. military vision of information dominance, decisive maneuver, and precision strike may significantly reduce the likelihood of attritional warfare; there may be times when only mass and street-to-street fighting skills will suffice. 
28
Providing combat forces of the necessary quality and quantity to augment the active component is a role the National Guard must be able to perform. While the size and training of combat forces represents only a single aspect of the military's total urban warfare capability, it is arguably the area which is the most difficult to create. While DoD must continue a broad range of programs to enhance the capability to fight in cities, special emphasis must be paid to the fundamental element of trained and ready soldiers. The creation of specialized urban warfare units in the National Guard will help address this pressing need.
Building effective urban warfare units in the National Guard will require the creation of maneuver brigades with unique organizational structures and training strategies. These organizations, while optimized for urban warfare, must also be effective in the execution of state and domestic missions, to include responding to WMD incidents. Once established, MOUT Brigade Combat Teams (MBCTs) must be supported by an innovative and effective training system. This training system should be designed to enhance the warfighting skills of National Guard units, but as this paper will point out, an effective training system will benefit all Army components, sister services, and a wide range of federal, state, and local agencies. This point is important, for the cost of transforming the National Guard will not be insubstantial. Only when the costs are considered from a total benefit standpoint do they appear feasible and acceptable.
MBCTs should be organized around the fundamental characteristics of combined arms integration at the lowest levels and with a high number of dismounted infantrymen. Ideally, to support both warfighting and domestic support missions, units should be easily deployable, modular in design, and self-sustaining for at least 72 hours. Weapons, information, and logistics systems within the MBCT should be optimized for urban warfare, to include a range of nonlethal weapon systems. The organizational design of the Army's new Interim Brigade Combat Team (IBCT) provides an excellent starting point for the creation of urban units. The IBCT combines desired qualities of combined arms integration; a high number of infantry soldiers, and greatly reduced sustainment requirements compared to existing heavy brigades. The IBCT, however, is designed to perform a wide range of missions. The MBCT, with a much narrower operational focus, should be organized and equipped accordingly.
Unlike the Army's current heavy brigades, the combat power of the IBCT is found not in the number of tanks, but rather in its dismounted infantrymen (FIGURE 
1
31
MBCT companies should be organized around the same mix of infantry, mobile direct fire gun systems, and mortars for indirect fire support (FIGURE 
2
Urban Warfare Infantry Company The most significant difference between the MBCT and IBCT rifle companies would be the number of organic armored vehicles. An IBCT company is equipped with four mobile gun systems and 16 infantry personnel carriers. While this high degree of armored mobility is needed for the multi-mission IBCT, it is not required or desirable for the MBCT. Within the city, dismounted infantry conducts the fight, closely supported by direct fire gun systems or tanks.
As the events in Grozny demonstrated, tanks and other armored vehicles moving in contested areas of the city without the protection and security of dismounted infantry are highly vulnerable. 
32
MBCTs would be reduced, as well as the annual costs to operate and maintain vehicle fleets.
MBCT infantry battalions must be organized differently than IBCT infantry battalions. This results not only from the demands of urban warfare, but also from the widely dispersed nature of National Guard units during times of peace. It is easy to imagine the training challenges presented when supporting units and habitual combat attachments, such as engineers, are located hundreds of miles distant from maneuver battalions. The goal should be to create battalions that can easily train together and can be easily deployed without significant augmentation.
Each MBCT infantry battalion would consist of three rifle companies, a Combat Support Company (CSC), and a Headquarters Company (HHC) (FIGURE 
3
Without this company headquarters, the span of effective command and control within the headquarters company would grow to an unmanageable level. The organic engineer platoon is added due to the high demand for engineering capabilities in both urban conflicts and domestic support missions. Within the IBCT, engineers are found only at the brigade level. Consideration should be given to the addition of a composite air troop to the squadron structure, possibly in substitution for one of the ground troops. While the RSTA squadron would contain UAVs, there are distinct advantages of light attack helicopters in an urban setting. The addition of lift aircraft would provide the means to move soldiers and equipment, to serve as a communications relay, and to evacuate casualties. While an air troop comprised of both observation and lift helicopters would impose an added logistical burden, there would be great value in the addition of aviation units specifically trained for urban operations. Organic aviation assets would also enhance the brigade's ability to conduct domestic support missions. As an alternative, it may be advantageous to create a small, multi-function aviation battalion within the MBCT.
Providing long-range indirect fires for the MBCT would be the mission of the Direct Support Artillery Battalion. To enhance the effectiveness of fires within an urban environment, the artillery battalion would be organized with both conventional cannon systems and heavy mortars (FIGURE 
6
The BSB would be responsible not only for the sustainment of the MBCT, but should also include a minimal capability for handling the demands of civilian refugees. This capability may comprise nothing more than a planning cell responsible for coordinating the support of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Ideally, however, there would be increased transportation, logistics, and medical assets to help meet these inevitable demands. Equipped to deal with WMD effects, particularly the treatment of chemically contaminated casualties, this same capability would be of great value in domestic support missions.
The MBCT would also contain a number of company-sized units within the organizational structure (FIGURE 
4
This organizational discussion is of necessity rather superficial and detailed studies would be needed to properly design effective urban warfare units. The overall goal, however, should be the creation of lethal, survivable, and easily sustainable combat units. Deployability of the force should also be an important consideration. Combined arms integration at the lowest levels is essential for success, both in training and on the battlefield. The proper degree of logistical and administrative support should be built into units to create modular, self-sufficient battalions and brigades.
The important question yet to be answered is that of dollars. Specifically, how much will it cost to create these specialized brigades? There are three principal options the Army could pursue, each with a different price tag and distinct considerations in terms of deployability, sustainability, and facilitation of the conversion process. The estimated costs for each option are admittedly rough approximations. There are simply too many variables in both the design of the MBCT and the actual projected cost of an IBCT to provide detailed cost estimates.
The least cost option would be to equip the MBCTs with combat vehicle systems readily available within the National Guard. Either the M1 tank or the M2 Bradley Infantry Fighting
Vehicle could serve in the mobile gun system role. Older M1s, equipped with the same 105mm cannon as the new mobile gun system, may actually be better suited for this mission than newer models. New tank rounds, specifically suited for the urban fight, are being developed for the 105mm, while no such rounds will exist for the newer 120mm equipped tanks. The ubiquitous M113 family of armored personnel carriers could serve as infantry and mortar carriers. An added advantage of this option is that conversion could be completed very quickly. The disadvantage is that both the M1 and M2 are more difficult to deploy and both lack maneuverability in urbanized terrain. They also require a high degree of logistical support, though only 36 heavy vehicles would be present within a MBCT. The most costly and time-consuming element of this option would be the large-scale redistribution of vehicles and the necessary retraining for selected personnel.
The middle cost option would be to purchase the same mobile gun systems and infantry carriers currently being developed for the IBCT. This option would achieve a degree of equipment standardization within the Army and would allow the National Guard to retire many of the Army's oldest M 1s and M2s. Light armored vehicles, or LAVs, are more maneuverable in urban terrain, are easily deployed aboard C-130 aircraft, and require less logistical support.
Depending on the number of armored vehicles within the MBCT the cost of conversion would be approximately $450 to $600 million per brigade. 
34
series armored personnel carriers were used for all other roles. The disadvantage of either of these options would be the long delay incurred before sufficient LAVs would be available for fielding to the National Guard. Production difficulties have already delayed the fielding of LAVs to the first two IBCTS. Mixing LAVs and M113 series vehicles would also go against the Army's stated desire to operate a single family of vehicles within units.
The most expensive option would be to convert National Guard brigades to the IBCT structure. While this option would theoretically create a more flexible organization and enhance standardization within the Army, there are significant disadvantages. An IBCT structure would be more expensive, somewhere along the lines of $200-300 million per brigade. 
35
The middle cost option is recommended for implementation. The advantages of discarding M1s and M2s are significant in terms of deployability, sustainability, and operating costs. While it would be desirable to field a single family of armored vehicles, the disadvantages of mixing LAVs and M113s within the MBCT would not be considered a war stopper. With this option, the twelve, post-ADRS, National Guard divisional brigades could be converted to MBCTs for less than $7 billion dollars. From this total should be subtracted the funds already identified as required to modernize, operate, and maintain the National Guard's rapidly aging fleet of combat vehicles. 
36
Building specialized MBCTs is only the first and arguably the easiest step in creating effective urban warfighting units. The far more difficult challenge is training these units to an acceptable level of proficiency. MOUT is a complex training task and with only 39 annual training days there are legitimate concerns whether Guard units would be able to achieve the desired level of proficiency. The same arguments are raised today concerning mounted combined arms warfare, currently the Guard's principal contribution to the Army. Organizing
and training specifically for MOUT offers several training advantages compared to existing, more broadly defined missions.
First, MOUT operations are centered on the proficiency of small units. While complex in many ways, fighting within cities is primarily a squad, platoon, and company fight. In contrast, mounted warfare focuses more heavily on the battalion and brigade levels of command and control and demands synchronization of a wider range of battlefield systems. The large-scale reduction of combat vehicles, while enhancing deployability, will also reduce annual operating and maintenance costs. These dollars can be better-spent funding quality training for small units.
Second, MOUT can be done within much smaller maneuver areas as compared to those required for mounted maneuver. Even a minimal investment in the creation of regional and The initial startup costs for the MOUT School are unknown, but are unlikely to be exorbitant.
There are a variety of active and reserve installations that could serve as a foundation for the school. Cadre should be carefully selected and sent to a variety of sister service, allied nation, and civilian law enforcement programs to master their craft.
conduct training the National Guard can produce combat ready units. While those units will almost certainly require some degree of post-mobilization training prior to deployment, they should nonetheless achieve a level of readiness that will effectively support the national military strategy. Even in a worse case analysis, if only limited improvements in combat readiness are achieved, National Guard units will be more deployable and better structured for urban warfare.
If ill-prepared to carry the fight to the streets, National Guard units would provide valuable combat power to help isolate cities, control civilian evacuees, handle prisoners of war, and perform a wide range of security tasks. This augmentation would enable active combat units to focus on the most essential combat tasks. Urban skills will also be valuable in support of homeland defense and domestic support missions. Urban warfare brigades, battalions, and companies will provide civil authorities what they need most, soldiers attuned to the urban environment and equipped with a high degree of embedded support systems.
It is inherently difficult to predict the future of warfare, yet every military must do so if it expects to remain effective and relevant. Armies do not change direction rapidly and military capabilities take many years to create. This fact is particularly true within the reserve components. What is not difficult to predict is that military operations will increasingly occur on urbanized terrain. The world is becoming more and more urbanized and by 2025 the vast majority of the world's population will live in cities. The preponderance of this growth will take place in the world's poorest regions, where cities already struggle to provide even the most basic social services. Such conditions are prime incubators of civil strife and even civil war.
Increased urbanization will not, in and of itself, guarantee America's involvement in a major urban struggle. Other factors will play a more dominant role. Recognizing the technological advantages the U.S. military possesses in open terrain, our enemies may very well chose to confront America in the complex environment of large cities. Our enemies may also choose to fight in cities to strike at a critical force projection vulnerability of the U.S. military, the need for large ports and airfields. Since ports and airfields are normally part of the urban environment, control of these cities will be essential for the large-scale introduction of U.S.
forces. Control will not be easy, as the Chechen Rebels demonstrated in the battle for Grozny, cities are great equalizers and technological advantages can amount to very little
The Army National Guard has a major role to play in meeting the challenges of urban warfare. Reorganizing combat brigades into specialized urban warfare units will fill a major weakness in the Army's current operational capabilities. This conversion will produce more relevant combat units that are also more employable, more easily sustained, and better postured for effective training. While optimized for urban warfare, these same units will also be more adaptable for the broad range of tasks required for homeland defense and domestic support. This conversion will not come about without the allocation of adequate resources. Beyond the acquisition of vehicles and weapons, the Army must commit the resources required to expand and improve the quality of urban training facilities, to develop more effective urban computer simulations, and lastly to create a highly trained urban warfare cadre that can produce subject matter expertise within units. Each of these actions will contribute significantly to increased combat readiness of not only the National Guard, but also the readiness of the active force, sister services, and a potentially wide range of federal, state, and local agencies. It will take the Army years to create these units and commitment to sustain them. The Army should begin this process immediately.
In closing, a word of caution is required. The proposals laid out in this paper represent only one element of the overall urban warfare challenge. There are many significant issues, from the need for new operational and tactical doctrines, to improving the training of the active component that must also be addressed. New urban weapon systems, sensors, and communications systems must be developed and fielded across all components. Particular attention must be paid to the development of wide area non-lethal weapons and advanced robotic systems. The Army National Guard can make a valuable contribution to urban warfare readiness, but without significant complementary efforts across DoD the U.S. military will not be prepared for large-scale urban combat.
WORD COUNT= 8825 32 lbid.  
35
36
40
13. 42
the Army's combat maneuver
The most pressing need is the expansion of MOUT training sites across the United States.
Existing MOUT training facilities are located almost exclusively at active military installations and are normally adequate for only small units. A General Accounting Office study, published in 2000, cited the inadequacy of training facilities as a principal reason for poor unit effectiveness in MOUT, particularly at battalion and brigade levels. 
38
All of the military services, both active and reserve, desperately need large-scale MOUT facilities. The largest Army MOUT sites consist of 30-33 building "villages." As an illustration, one of the Army's largest MOUT training sites is the JRTC Shugart-Gordon complex. This site covers an area considerably less than one square mile and contains only 33 buildings. The battlefield in Grozny covered an area of more than 100 square miles. 
40
Communications are seldom degraded and only small portions of larger units are actually required to operate within the city. These villages also fail to replicate the challenges of very high multi-story buildings. While it may be cost prohibitive to build very large MOUT sites with more than 100 buildings, the Army should make every effort to create regional sites that at a minimum, double the existing size of current facilities and add buildings in the 10 to 12 story range. This increase will allow for larger unit participation and will more adequately introduce the vertical element. Alternative proposals for the creation of large MOUT facilities have included the use of abandoned industrial areas and excess military bases identified for closure.
While these sites will increase the combat readiness of military units, they would also be 