# ID: 20c65e210dfe4bf6a9718de0cd2c3357
# Title: Revolutions in Russian Military Thought: Implications for US-Russian Defense Cooperation
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1993.0
# Fulltext:
In light of the growing spirit of partnership between the U.S. and Russian defense establishments--Russian military thought deserves a fresh look.  The author's intent is to use the adjective, Russian, quite liberally when it forms with a noun a concept that transcends all three historical periods--Czarist, Soviet, and post-Soviet (e.g., Russian military thought). The adjective, Russian, will also be used to modify nouns that properly belong--by virtue of the historic context--to either the Czarist or post-Soviet periods (e.g., Russian Minister of War,
or Russian President Yeltsin).
By contrast, the adjective, Soviet, will be used only to modify nouns belonging to the period from 1917 to 1991 (e.g.,
Regrettably, there may be occasional exceptions to this methodology.
x that ground forces will be completely different in force structure and manpower, capable of repulsing an aggression, but incapable of conducting large-scale offensive operations.
It will be a drastic restructuring of the ground forces in the Soviet Union and its allied countries.
The United States and its allies are interested in that development.
-Statement of Marshal Sergey F. Akhromeyev Before the House Armed Services Committee
July 29, 19901
During his historic testimony before the House Armed Services Committee (HASC) in July 1990, Marshal of the Soviet Union Sergey F. Akhromeyev attempted to explain how military doctrine in the USSR had taken on a benign, defensive character.
Accord to Akhromeyev, the Soviet leadership was convinced that "political means" to protect national security interests in the 1990s would predominate, while "military means" would decrease. To be sure, there would be some tension and turmoil resulting from this change; however, the Soviet armed forces and the Soviet system would survive. 2
In the past, Western analysts had observed how Soviet
High Commands, in one succession after another, had come to rely on the concept of offensive operations in depth as the fundamental basis for Soviet national security. Akhromeyev--distraught over all that had been lost in the revolutionary turmoil he had not foreseen--was found dead in his apartment, hanging by the work of his own hands.
Akhromeyev's successors in the new Russian armed forces will, no doubt, retain a significant nuclear and conventional capability well into the twenty-first century.
But how successfully will they cope with the changing strategic landscape? Are they any better prepared--in the cognitive sense--to deal with the new world order than was Akhromeyev? This may disappoint some readers.
Lastly, the study has little to add to the already extensive literature on U.S. arms control policy. To be sure, negotiations will continue in a number of important areas, such as nuclear non-proliferation.
It is the author's general belief, however, that treatymandated arms reductions--as conceived of in the past--have reached a temporary plateau, and that the importance of arms control to the changing U.S.-Russian relationship will diminish in proportion as the tenor of the relationship itself becomes less adversarial. 
Ibid., p. 5.
Examples of such discussions include those which took place at INF Treaty elimination facilities in the former Soviet 
Union (1988)
Seminar (1990)
Summit (1990)
(1989)
(1990)
(1991)
(1992)
A critic should never use the results of theory as laws and standards, but only--as the soldier does--as aids to judgment. . . .
In our reflections on the theory of the conduct of war, we said that it ought to train a commander's mind, or rather, to guide his education; theory is not meant to provide him with positive doctrines. . . Ultimately, it is guidance--not "positive doctrine"--that the modern day problem-solver needs the most.
In analyzing the development of Russian military thought since the nineteenth century, there are perhaps three major themes--really issues of conflict and change--that continue to influence the Russian military officer today (see Figure 
2
The chief components of the system--which were developed to their fullest extent during the Soviet period--are doctrine, science, military art, the principles of war, and the laws of armed conflict. Lenin also introduced the dialectical method of analysis into Russian military theory.
The reader may recall that the concept of dialectics is the old Hegelian analytical approach favored by Marxists to describe the process of change (see Figure 
3
4
It's important to note Figure 
4
For instance, the Russians do not apply the term, "doctrine," as Western military establishments do.
Russia is senior-level guidance which affects the entire process of national security decisionmaking, but with a focus at the national level.
To be sure, the traditional approach has been to regiment--and often codify--methods and procedures at the lower, tactical levels. However, the fact that the  well, but are generally more confident in ability of field officers and NCOs to improvise when "fog" and "friction" take effect.) For many years, the Soviets recognized that they indeed had an initiative problem in the lower pay grades; but they never did much to alter their overall approach.
Military art did mature significantly during the course of the war, and the Soviets believed that they had eventually developed the proper command relationships and geographic perspectives for their combat leaders (see Figure 
7
Finally, to achieve his intent, Ogarkov attempted to diminish the independence of the navy which, under Gorshkov, had been pursuing its own strategic agenda.
Ogarkov did make some significant progress toward improving Soviet conventional capabilities, but he stepped on a number of powerful military and political toes on the way.3
In the end, in 1984, due to his failure to compromise on budgets, arms control, and his own vision, he was removed as Chief of the General Staff and replaced by Sergey Akhromeyev.
The next "revolution," defense sufficiency (or reasonable sufficiency), is the last of the major changes in military thought to occur in the Soviet era (see Figure 
13
14
(See Figure 
14
French missiles be included in the prospective treaty.
Second, they offered to include in the negotiations their ground-to-ground "shorter-range" systems (ranges between 500 and 1000 kilometers), such as their SS-12s and SS-23s.  
The expression, "The Magician and the German," is a metaphor for the long-term struggle in Russian military theory between Slavophiles (or Nationalists) and Westernizers.
The term, "Magician," is borrowed from William C. Fuller, Jr., Strategy and Power in Russia 1600-1914 (New York: The Free Press, 1992), pp. 303-307.
Using the term "German" to signify the perspective of the Westernizers is this author's invention. According to one enduring, although apocryphal, piece of etymological trivia, pre-modern Russians used the same word for "German" as they used for "foreigner."
Today, the Russian word for German--n6mets--is closely associated with the word--nem6t'-which means to be incapable of speech.
The inability to speak (or to speak understandably)--from the primordial Russian's perspective--must have been a characteristic shared by quite a few foreigners.
Interview with Dr William C. Fuller, Jr., Strategy and Policy Department, Naval War College, Newport, RI: March 24, 1993.
While the Prussian military theorist's major work on war was indeed studied by Czarist military officers, it was the writings of Baron de Jomini--not those of Clausewitz--which exerted the greater Western influence on Russian military thought during the latter half of the nineteenth century.
This author has concluded through his survey of the literature on the subject that Clausewitz' treatises on the higher strata of military theory--such as the subordination of strategy to policy -were filtered into military thought much later by way of Lenin, who, in turn, received his education in Clausewitz though the writings of Engels.
By contrast, the notion that Clausewitz' teachings concerning the operational level of war may have come to the Soviets by way of the Germans during the Treaty of Rapallo period is subject to a great deal more speculation.
Clearly, military thought in Russia today bears some resemblance to the principles and concepts presented in On War. Nevertheless, as this chapter demonstrates, to conclude that contemporary Russian military thought is nothing more than warmed-over Clausewitz is severely short-sighted.
For a further discussion of the Miliutin reforms and of the debates between the Russian "nationalist" school and the "academics" (Magicians and Germans, respectively), see Walter Pintner, "Russian Military Thought: The Western Model and the Shadow of Suvorov," Peter Paret, ed., Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), pp. 354-375.
There is an interesting parallel here between the issue faced by the Nationalists in nineteenth century Czarist Russia and a similar one encountered by the Spartans during the Peloponnesian Wars in the fifth century B.C.
According to Thucydides, the Spartans were very concerned about the long-term societal implications of changing their traditional approach to war.
They, therefore, resisted the impulse to emulate the seafaring methods of their principal rivals, the Athenians.
In the end, they developed into a maritime power, defeated the Athenians decisively at sea, and changed their society forever.
Later factional fights occurred between old-style Nationalists, such as Sukhomlinov, the Minister of War, and a new group of Westernizers, called the Young Turks.
See 
There is some disagreement among scholars on the number of Soviet officers who actually trained in Germany.
Erickson's number (120) is probably the most reliable figure.
Clearly, Zhukov attended the German General Staff College; Tukhachevsky may not have.
Tukhachevsky made his first recorded trip to Germany in 1932, and then only as an observer.
In 1928, the Germans and the Soviets built an experimental chemical gas center at Volsk. See Erickson, p. 264.
12. Keller, p. 224.
Erickson, p. 159. Today, Lipetsk is the premier tactical aviation base in the Russian Federation and serves as a major center for the development of air force methods and procedures.
Keller, p. 205.
Erickson, pp. 247-264.
See the author's defense of the notion of linking MacKinder to Russian military thought in "Geopolitics: A Framework for Analyzing Soviet Regional Behavior," Global Affairs, 
Winter 1989, pp. 63-85.
In the past, Americans tended to discount the conceptual linkage between geopolitical theory and Russian military thought for several reasons.
First, we are an insular air/sea power; we have never suffered catastrophic destruction of population and property from invading land-powers as the Russians have.
Second, a good portion of early geopolitical theory was incorporated into Nazi lebensraum doctrine in the 1930's; consequently, the theory's potential as a tool for analyzing Moscow's military policy remained largely unrecognized as academics tended to distance themselves after WWII from concepts associated with Nazism.
A number of historians argue that the case for linking geopolitical theory with Russian military thought is flawed because modern technology has rendered Eurasian land power relationships anachronistic.
Although this criticism has its merits--particularly from the perspective of US strategic defense--it appears to have been a moot point vis-a-vis Soviet planners who, for many years, structured armed forces and set global priorities in accordance with traditional geopolitical principles (despite their declarations to the contrary). Geopolitical factors may have influenced the post-World War II development of the concepts of Theater of War (TV) and Theater of Military Operations (TVD).
The Soviets divided Eurasia into three Continental TVs (Far Eastern, Southern, and Western).
The Western TV was further divided into the Northwestern, Western, and Southwestern TVDs.
Clearly, throughout the Soviet period, military theorists--from their Eurasian land power orientation-continued to place control of the rimlands of Europe and Asia after national survival on their lists of priorities. See also Henry C. Bartlett and G. Paul Holman, "Force Planning for the Post-Cold War World: Can We Learn from Geopolitics?" Fundamentals of Force Planning, Vol I:
Concepts (Newport: Naval War College, 1990), pp. 27-39. 17.
Critics of this one point fail to grasp the sine qua non of Russia's historic geographical orientation:
it is a Eurasian land power that continues to be interested, first and foremost, in exerting its influence in contiguous regions, such as Europe and Asia.
Developing itself into a maritime power with overseas interests--while a desire--has generally been assigned a lower priority.
See William C. Green, "The Historic Russian Drive for a Warm Water Port: Anatomy of a Geopolitical Myth," Naval War College Review, Spring 1993, pp. 80-102, for an example of a critique of the geopolitical approach that--by fixating on a maritime perspective--comes to a wrong conclusion. 
The reader can come to his own conclusions as to whether or not Deep Operations was a by-product of Soviet-German cooperation in the 1920s.
Clearly, during this period, there is a resemblance between the concepts developed by Tukhachevsky and those espoused by Guderian in Germany.
Erickson, pp. 247-282.
Philip A. Bayer, The Evolution of the Soviet General 
Staff 1917
-1941 (Chicago:
Bayer, pp. 122-126.
The General Staff has always "assisted" the ruling authorities (such as the Central Committee of the Communist Party) in the development of military doctrine--probably even preparing initial drafts through the Minister of Defense.
The General Staff has often dominated the process.
Only rarely, such as during the preparation of the 1990 draft doctrine, were their concerns not fully addressed.
During the Second World War, the Lend Lease program was a technological windfall for the Soviets in many respects. Unspecified quantities of U.S. secret documents and advanced technology components from American industries were shipped to the U.S.S.R. through Great Falls and Alaska along with Lend Lease items.
For nearly four years, U.S. customs gave the Soviets carte blanche to ship unchecked items from the United States. See Keller, p. 252.
The U.S. Army never fully considered the operational level of war until the early 1980s when it created AirLand Battle Doctrine.
As noted earlier, the Russians had been writing and organizing at the operational level since before WWI.
The Soviets used the concept of a geographic strategic command or a strategic direction earlier in the war.
It is commonly accepted, 1rowever. that the first time the Soviets used a high command of forces (HCF) to control front and armies in a theater of military operations (TVD), per se, was during the Manchurian strategic offensive operation in August 1945.
For an in-depth treatment of the strategic operation and its effect on military thought, see David M. Glantz, The Great Patriotic War and the 
Maturation of Soviet Operational Art: 1941
-1945
(Fort Leavenworth: Soviet Army Studies Office, 1987)
28.
Two such cycles, experienced by all advanced industrial nations, are technology push and concept pull. The phenomenon of technology push takes place when the military professional is provided with fairly mature technological innovations and then changes his operational concepts and organization to optimize the new technology.
During concept pull cycles, the military professional is leading the effort by developing operational concepts and making organizational changes based primarily on technology projections.
For a further explanation of the two phenomena, see John E. LaSala, "Operationalizing the Military-Technical Revolution," Advanced Research Project, Naval War College, Newport, 1993.
The military theorist in Russia has tended to prefer concept pull to technology push.
The period of the conventional-technological revolution under Ogarkov--in which significant new operational concepts were implemented without realistic force capability--was characterized by concept pull. Given some of the rosy force capability projections of the latest draft of Russian military doctrine, the new Russian High Command may be hoping against hope that a concept-pull approach may be attained once again. The Nuclear Revolution, which was resisted by many of the rank and file, and the Gorbachev phase 
(1985)
(1986)
(1987)
(1988)
(1989)
(1990)
(1991)
The importance of the defense technocrat and relative impotence of the senior military during technology push phases in the former Soviet Union were underscored to the author during two sessions with officials in Moscow.
During the first, Mikoyan Chief Designer Belyakov, when asked to describe the military acquisition process, remarked, "The Air Force tells me what they want: I give them what they need."
Much later, when former Air Force Commander in Chief Shaposhnikov (now Commonwealth CINC) was asked the same question, he replied, "Well, of course I try to make recommendations; but I usually take what they give me."
Khrushchev was clearly motivated by a desire to shift state expenditures away from the military budget to non-defense programs, and the new "revolution" offered him a way.
Dale R. Herspring, The Soviet High 
Command, 1967
Command, -1989: :
The Soviets had experimented with various types of large shock formations during World War II.
The development of Western operational concepts, such as follow-on forces attack (FOFA) and the U.S. Army's AirLand Battle Doctrine, were influenced by the discovery, in the late 1970s, of the Soviet OMG and Ogarkov's re-emphasis on maneuver warfare.
Dominated by officers from the ground forces, the Soviet high command had always viewed conventional strike aviation as not much more than long-range artillery.
This had been the general view even though the Soviets had enjoyed some success with the independent air operation during the latter stages of WWII.
Rose E. Gottemoeller, Conflict and Consensus in the Soviet Armed Forces (Santa Monica:
The RAND Corporation, 1989), p. 11.
Herspring, pp. 212-214.
Figure 
13
Defense Sufficiency clearly came into its full development under Gorbachev and Yeltsin. The point here is that one should not attempt to confine the three "revolutions" into three distinct time periods.
See A.A. Kotenev, "On the Defeat of the Basmach Bands in Central Asia," Voyenno-Istoricheskiy Zhurnal 
(Military Historic Journal), February 1987, pp. 59-64.
As the Soviets were trying to extricate themselves from Afghanistan, they examined several earlier episodes dealing with Muslim para-military insurgencies in Central Asia, such as the Basmachi rebellion in the 1920s.
To successfully quell the earlier insurgency, (which took place principally in Turkmenistan), the Soviets relied on fixed garrisons, highly mobile ground units, and "flying operational groups" to locate the Basmachi bands and isolate them from their bases of supply.
Such tactics were emulated by the Soviets against the Mujahideen in Afghanistan by Spetsnaz and other mobile units. The Soviet tactics in Afghanistan were initially successful until the U.S. stepped up its technical assistance to the insurgents.
The Soviet Union later deployed the SS-20 to the Soviet Far East as well.
It should be noted that Gorbachev tried several times after this to back out of his commitment to on-site inspections.
Some commentators believe that the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program was the decisive pressure blow which cracked the Soviet system. This author does not fully agree. SDI clearly provided the Soviets with some motive and focus for arms control; however, the quagmire in Afghanistan and the SS-20 fiasco were immediate problems.
Both events showed the true "fabric" of the "emperor's new clothes" and shattered for ever the self-image of Soviet military and political power.
The author's intent here is not to fully analyze the May 1992 draft of Russian military doctrine but, rather, to briefly examine several of the salient issues surrounding the doctrinal debate in the light of the previous treatment of the three historic themes.
There are several excellent commentaries which provide much greater detail on the 1992 draft doctrine, such as Mary C. FitzGerald, "Russia's New Military Doctrine," Naval War College Review, Spring 1993, pp. 24-44, and Charles J. Dick, "Initial Thoughts on Russia's Draft Military Doctrine," Journal of Soviet Military Studies, December 1992, pp. 552-566. For an interpretation of force structure implications, see Susan Terranova, "Evolving Russian Military Doctrine: Force Structure and Capabilities," Advanced Research Project, Naval War College, March 1993. This author does not share Terranova's enthusiasm for using the 1992 draft as a reliable basis from which to make predictions concerning future Russian force structure.
The draft is significant--but principally as a snap shot of the debate about Russian military policy which, no doubt, will continue to evolve until the domestic situation stabilizes.
This is not to imply that there are only two polarized camps in the doctrinal debate.
In the new pluralism of Russian defense policymaking, there are several gradations of views on at least one side of every issue.
Susan Clark, "Changes in the Former Soviet Union," IDA Seminar Series, Institute for Defense Analyses, April 1993.
The Cold War is over! Russia is becoming a Westernstyled democracy.
-But a sudden coup could reverse the entire process. Now's the time to "put the genie back into the bottle": let's eliminate our dangerous nuclear and conventional arsenals and concentrate on the more likely threats.
-No!
We need to hedge our bets. We still need powerful nuclear and conventional forces--just in case Russia reverts back toward autocracy.
-Typical Conversation Overheard in the E-Ring of the Pentagon, 1992
For the immediate future, the debate among U.S. policy specialists regarding our evolving defense relationship with the Russian Federation will be framed by these two divergent Contrasting with the previous chapter, the purpose of this portion of the study is to examine U.S. concerns about defense--as they apply to the Russian Federation--and to begin to narrow down several of the fundamental choices we have before us. This chapter, however, is not only about such broad, fundamental approaches. Perhaps more importantly, it's also about how key policy questions in the months and years ahead might be framed.
The methodology suggested here is to narrow the broad range of options concerning our future defense relationship with the Russians into four subspectrums, called policy tracks. We'll approach this, first, by considering scenario building blocks (driving forces, predetermined elements, and critical uncertainties) for a crystal ball analysis of where Russia may be headed, and second, by looking broadly at U.S. interests and constraints in the years ahead.
Arguably, the U.S. and its allies will continue to have an interest in fostering the long-term integration of Russia into the international politico-economy.
The pace of such integration, however, by and large will be linked to the success of political and economic reforms inside Russia Demographics is an important predetermined element which also offers mixed blessings.
The near-zero growth rate of ethnic Russians will moderate the strain of the housing crisis and help keep costs associated with a social welfare state at a reasonable level.
Over the next several decades, Russia, however, will not be able to fuel economic growth by a natural expansion of the work force--as it has in the past.
Other predetermined elements include the growing inflation rate for consumer goods (roughly 2,500 percent in 1992), Russia's unpaid debt to foreign creditors ($10.5 billion), and the continued drop in economic performance (about 19 percent decline in gross domestic product from its 1991 level).3
In order to properly analyze emerging scenarios in the evolution of the Russian state, we must consider both internal and external critical uncertainties.
No doubt, the principal internal uncertainty is the speed with which the essential reforms will be made inside Russia, and whether or not those reforms can take root and transform the Russian economy during the current proto-democratic phase of post-Soviet politics.
Yeltsin's privatization program, for instance, got off to an enthusiastic start at the beginning of 1992. By year's end, however, reforms instituted at the national level had slowed down considerably, and Yeltsin's point man on reforms, Yegor Gaidar, had been replaced as prime minister. 4 Several questions, then, follow such developments: Can Yeltsin and pluralism in Russia survive long enough to pull the nation out of its economic morass, or will some other form of government be necessary? Clearly, Russia needs a new constitution, judicial system, and body of law. How will such institutions evolve, and how will they help shape Russia's style of government, system of political parties, and national security policy? These questions are far from being resolved.
Other internal critical uncertainties include the final form and substance of the new military doctrine discussed in Chapter Two, the outcome of civil wars in adjacent areas, such as the Caucasus and Moldova, and the consequences of the current independence movements of autonomous entities inside the Russian Federation, itself. Ideological struggles, while not over, are surpassed by ethnic and nationality conflicts.5
Unknowns, such as how Russian minorities will be treated outside Russia in the future and the outcome of ongoing disagreements between Commonwealth nations over the division of foreign debt and status of former Soviet military assets will also be important determinants.
The foreign assistance being sent from the West in the form of economic loans and grants, humanitarian goods, technology, and technical expertise supports Russia's reforms--if only on the margin. The uncertainty, here, is whether or not such assistance will be enough to make a difference, and how much longer the industrialized nations will be able to keep up the effort.
In the a4ea of Russian national security, the list of external critical uncertainties includes unknowns such as future threats from China and radical Islamic states, regional conflicts in Eurasia, and the pace of arms control focused on the U.S.-Russian nuclear balance, regional confidence-building measures, and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
While considering all of the building blocks discussed This scenario also holds that the relatively benign military dictatorship coming to power in Russia might eventually restore democracy, as was done in Argentina and Chile.
On the down side, however, a military regime coming to power under this scenario, as the one in Scenario One, would be dominated by traditionalist military thinkers.
As such, they would tend to delay reducing Russia's nuclear arsenal and large conscript-based forces.
The regime might also be predisposed, for organizational-cognitive reasons, to use military force to solve political problems.
The threshold point for the military taking over in the wake of a national crisis, however, is quite high, and would have to include elements such as the complete breakdown of the energy, food, or transportation systems, pogroms against Russian minorities living in non-Russian states, or nuclear weapons falling into the wrong hands.
A civilian-directed coup, backed up by the Russian military leadership, might have the greatest chance of being successful, however, and could be triggered at a much lower political threshold. There might even be an attempt to disguise Yeltsin's removal during the coup as some vague, constitutional procedure.
The principal objective of a civilian oligarchy coming to power under this scenario would be to minimize social disruptions by slowing down the current pace of economic reforms.
Under this scenario, stability and long-term planning would be the highest virtues.
The character and ultimate goals of the civilian oligarchy in this scenario would be similar to those of the Peronista-style military dictatorship in Scenario Two, except that, for organizational reasons, the civilian oligarchy might tend to be more conservative about the use of military force to solve political problems.
The final scenario considered here is clearly the most favorable in terms of U.S. interests. And as the descriptor indicates, it envisions Yeltsin plodding along against the odds toward eventual political and economic transformation.
Clearly, in the wake of the April 1993 referendum, Yeltsin has been given a mandate to effect change quickly as Russia's first democratically elected chief executive. Ironically, if he succeeds, it will be a result of his increased ability to accumulate personal power, aggressively hold dissenters at bay, and swiftly effect constitutional and economic changes by going over the heads of the parliament.
Clearly 
As pointed out earlier, our purpose is to suggest a methodology for framing the policy debate regarding our future defense relationship with Russia; the intent here is not to develop comprehensive policy guidance for every future risk.
Nevertheless, by framing the debate about strategic choices and developing four broad policy tracks, we can begin to sketch out some general defining characteristics and categories of approaches." Given the assumptions stated above, the four categories range from a relatively low-risk, resource-unconstrained spectrum (Track A) to one that is highrisk, resource-constrained (Track D).
Track A: Cold War Revisited
Track A (see Figure 
16
As such, it would be the most costly response to Scenario One above: a sudden coup by a group of highly reactionary Russian nationalists committed to re-building the nation's superpower status and prone to use military force.
Track A, however, should be considered an option of last resort, for it would be extremely costly. it would have to be made in (175, 
00 Troops,
[2]
[3]
16
In Track C (Figure 
18
In an era of diminishing defense budgets, U.S.
decisionmakers and defense planners must be willing to confront old assumptions about international risk and create bold new ranges of options to advance U.S. interests vis-a-vis the former Soviet Union. The choices will not be easy; but we do have other alternatives besides designing a reduced U.S. This study will examine some of the initiatives the new Administration may want to pursue later on in Chapter Five.
Clearly, President Clinton's new national security "team" has a "vision" of U.S.-Russian relations that differs qualitatively from that of its predecessor. Before looking at future options, however, it's important to examine in the following chapter some of the important work that has already been done.
1.
For a thorough treatment of the methodology for using driving forces, predetermined elements, and critical uncertainties, see Peter Swartz, "Creating Scenario Building Blocks," The Art of the Long View (New York: Doubleday, 1991), pp. 105-123 2.
Indeed, a number of political entities have already declared their secession from the Russian Federation.
For an excellent synopsis of the political status and intentions of the successor states to the Soviet Union (and those of several of the autonomous political regions located within the Russian Federation itself), see Morton H. Halperin et al, Self-Determination in the New World Order (Washington: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1982), pp. 148-157.
"Minimal'no Neobkhodimiykh Voyeniykh Razkhodov Rossiyskoy Federatsiy" ("Minimum Necessary Military Expenditures of the Russian Federation"), a white paper issued by the Russian Ministry of Defense, October 1992, Table 
2
See also U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Economic Survey of 
Russia 1992
(Washington: 1993)
Economic Survey of Russia 1992, p. 13. Only 13 to 15 percent of the targeted small business establishments, for instance, had been "privatized" by the end of 1992.
96 percent of all agriculture products were still being produced on stateowned or collective farms.
Heavy industries--except in reformminded cities such as St. Petersburg and Nizhniy Novgorod--were still untouched by privatization.
Interview with Dr. Paul Holman, National Security Affairs Department, Naval War College, Newport, RI: March 25, 1993.
For an analysis of the internal Soviet power struggle in the months leading up to the August 1992 putsch, see Bruce D. Slawter, "The Crisis in the Baltics and the Kremlin's Drift Toward Autocracy," Strategic Review, Spring 1991, pp. 70-77.
Ibid., p. 73.
For a treatment of military grievances, see Eugene B. Rumer, The End of a Monolith: The Politics of Military Reform in the Soviet Armed Forces (Santa Monica: The RAND Corporation), p. 13.
Slawter, p. 73.
In view of the potential for building a strategic partnership between the United States of America and the Russian Federation, the parties intend to accelerate defense cooperation between their military establishments including:
intensifying contacts at all levels;
expanding activities that encourage doctrinal and operational openness; establishing expanded exchange and liaison programs; and exchanging ideas on fostering proper civil-military relations in a democratic society... When the American inquired as to whether Soviet personnel performed the same ritual when they left their ports, the Soviet replied that no, they had no such custom. Later on, the American observed the Soviet officer leaning over the rail of his ship emptying all of the contents of his pockets into the water.
When the American asked him why he was doing this, the Soviet replied that he had serious doubts he would ever see America From 1989 onward, DoD has expanded its efforts to develop The second was to encourage the Soviets to convert their defense industries to civilian use (see Figure 
202
22
The U.S. Those who did not are cited in the accompanying narratives.
Interview with an anonymous DoD official with access to current policy issues.
Interview with an anonymous DoD official with access to current policy issues.
EUCOM, by comparison, has taken the lead in developing relations with the military establishments of East European nations such as Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia, and has developed the Contact Team concept for providing formal consultative advice to these new democracies. The Washington bureaucracy is still hesitant about letting EUCOM get too heavily involved in activities in the former Soviet states.
During the Cold War, our foreign policies largely focused on the relations among nations.
Our strategies sought a balance to keep the peace. Today our policies must also focus on relations within nations, on a nation's form of governance, on its economic structure, on its ethnic tolerance. . . . As long as there are reformers in the Russian Federation and the other states leading the journey toward democracy's horizon, our strategy must be to support them, and our place must be at their side ... official visits will, no doubt, continue--as they remain an essential part Figure 
28
Oftentimes, though, high-level exchanges turn out to be burdensome representational visits and create false expectations, especially if they are short on substance. with navy port visits.
* IJSMC Presentalo Team Visis Russi (Sep 93)
In addition, the USMC oRwha ,Na  however, may be the 0 Renwbi Commad Dlega ns its Rusi (TBD-93)   series of discussions on Figure 
33
The positive aspect of the new military contacts program is that it appears to reflect the new Administration's overall approach--which is to be less restrictive than the Bush Administration was of the types of activities the Services can pursue. The downside, however, is that the program still lacks overall focus.
The Administration clearly has a longterm vision of "winning the hearts and minds" of the Russian military professional; however, it seems to be pursuing a number of endeavors at the same time.
Clearly, DoD could do with some better direction than "more is better."
If the vision of the Clinton Administration is to persuade the Russian military toward "our way of thinking"--as it has often been said over the last several months--then one strategy might be to examine in more detail the field of Russian military thought, and then attempt to address, by U.S.
actions, the major themes or historic issues which continue to affect its development.
In Chapter Two, this study suggested that three themes, in particular, merited such investigation.
The Finally, all of the Services should eventually send officers to attend Russian war colleges in residence. Bringing Russian officers to schools in the U.S. under IMET will continue to be important. We should not forget, however, that assigning Americans to study and work in Russia can also influence evolving Russian viewpoints.
Coping with "Revolutions in Military Affairs"
In the future, we may be in a position to influence how the Russians exploit the new defense-related technologies--but only if we are willing to actively engage our counterparts as full partners.
In many respects, this is one of the most potentially fruitful areas for defense cooperation, but we must first realize that the Russians are extremely proud of their scientific and technical achievements.
As such, they will tend to eschew U.S. approaches that contain paternalistic overtones.
One important step for building a cooperative technical partnership would be for the U.S. to develop a coherent policy that allows DoD laboratories and acquisition organizations to 
x ABOUT THE AUTHOR ............................................ xi CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION .................................... 1 CHAPTER 2: REVOLUTIONS IN RUSSIAN MILITARY THOUGHT ......... 7 Themes of Conflict and Change ................... 8 Future OSD/DOD-Wide Contact Events .................. 99 28. Future Joint Staff/CINC Contact Events .............. 99 29. Future Multi-Service Contact Events ................ 100 30. Future U.S. Navy Contact Events .................... 100 31. Future U.S. Marine Corps Contact Events ............ 101 32. Future U.S. Air Force Contact Events ............... 101 33. Future U.S. Army Contact Events .................... 102 ix A NOTE ON USING THE ADJECTIVES "RUSSIAN" AND "SOVIET"
Lt Colonel Slawter is also a Command Pilot with over 3,000 hours of flying time.
Lt Colonel Slawter is also a Command Pilot with over 3,000 hours of flying time.
wake-up call that, together with the quagmire in Afghanistan, demonstrated the limitations of the U.S.S.R.'s unidimensional superpower status.
wake-up call that, together with the quagmire in Afghanistan, demonstrated the limitations of the U.S.S.R.'s unidimensional superpower status.
* Trfide•u &,SeawoifP~roducuion Continued problem with this alternative * Nuc~lear Underground Tesing Resumed is that a decision to adopt * U.S.
* * Soviet CGSMokeyev Visits VS (Sep 90) * USCINCEUR Galvin Visits USSR (Nov 90) objectives with those of * Joint S/iJ-8 Hosts Soviet General Sf Directorate of the various CINCs (see Operadonal & Stategic Analyses for Discussions Umn 91) F CJCS Powel Visits USSR with Service Vice Chiefs (ul 91) 0 CINC Far Eastern Mil District Kovtunov Visit PACOM (Sep 91) interagency process has * ClNC Cemmoetweolik Fercet Sheposhntkov Visit VS * Dirctor Defense Iniftexce Agency Clapper Vihit Russia Uld 92) * Sov~et
*ServiceffRepsMeetwhSoerGen StaffMewersatSochi
*ServiceffRepsMeetwhSoerGen StaffMewersatSochi
* VS * INCSA/Sy Ta Tab Place & Moscow (May 92) (INCSEA) regime in 1972. 0 Cb ofNavpoiK Vist Russia Jun 92) * US S4ws Vt& Severomoffk and Comduct Pusn t Sea Eaerse Since then, the navies from (PAS=) (Ou 92) the two nations have held 0e Axge Vi•t •ussia (Sep 92) routine conferences in the * US S s Vki Vadivostok/or Openig o/US Comlae (Sep 92) * Russians Deploy Frst Dafoyer 0 Plenan Gu to Wok w&h US former Soviet Union and the * US
* Seerdauy Ston
* Seerdauy Ston
ayJm 93. a Jul-Sep 93) addition, the * Riank Navy Wan* P•dae In BTOPS '
* R/
*0 0 Z• * Exgewetnr Academy Deegadox Vis A&r Force Insttue of Technology (Unm 93) program to include * Commmner. Ar Mobft Coad Vits Ruida (Ul-Sep 93) training and airlift 0 Rmla. rwo, wk A& Uxbmky (Aug 93) bases. Specific * ComadrPactfic Ak forces Vsis Rusi C4W 93) 0 * aFda Air Academy Ddeleaton Visis Air Command and Stff , and exchanges of *A Delegatio Maker Suter Bus Visit
between •Shyolkovo Research Cener Maker Shter Dut Vkk to U'm'* AMR (Nor 93) engineering schools and * * Rsiban Trainin (I.U Maker Skotr B&ne Vkki to Nwandoph AMR
dictatorship would be the one most likely to risk civil war and strong international condemnation by attempting to forcibly annex key territories in neighboring republics. The regime's motives for doing so would be to protect the rights of ethnic Russian minorities and reclaim access to areas, such as parts of the Baltic states and the Crimea, which it might consider to fall within Russia's strategic zone of influence.
The next scenario envisions a senior military officer (or group of officers), in true "man on a horse" fashion, assuming authority over the Russian state for relatively limited, benign objectives, such as the restoration of public order and to effect, by decree, the transformation of the economy.
While strongly nationalistic and pro-defense, the military dictatorship under this variant would be more risk adverse than the regime illustrated in the previous scenario.
The Russian military has little experience in running a large economy, and it realizes this. Any military autocracy installed by force, therefore, could lead to regionally-based warlordism--depending upon the reaction of the Russian population to its initial actions. But if it survives, a military dictatorship coming to power under this scenario could conceivably evolve along the lines of a South American Peronista model. 9 It would seek to enhance the long-term military power of Russia through advanced technologies and 11. It should be underscored here that the author does not mean to suggest that U.S. decisionmakers and force planners ought to focus solely on the U.S.-Russian military relationship.
On the contrary, they need to consider all potential adversaries. The U.S. forces in Tracks A, B, C, and D are of salient importance to the U.S.-Russian relationship and balance of power. Under any single track, the specific TRIAD mixes (strategic bombers, ICBMs, and SLBMs) would be determined by CINCSTRAT and the National Command Authorities after the specifics of START I and II had been fully analyzed.
Also, it is not by accident that the author excludes naval forces (except the Trident and Seawolf) from this presentation.
Naval forces other than SLBMs, in the context of the U.S.-Russian balance of power, are increasingly irrelevant.
The Russian Navy's "blue water" capability will diminish, and the notion of "horizontal escalation" by CVBGs against territorial Russia in the future will have little practical meaning--if, indeed, it ever had in the past.
For a description of some of the benefits that can be derived from such a relationship, see Fred Charles Ikle, "The Case for a Russian-American Defense Community," The National Interest, 
Winter 1991/92, pp.22-32.
1. Reuters, "In Clinton's Own Words: We Need Yeltsin," reported in The New York Times, April 2, 1993, p. A6.
Data for Figures 27 through 33 were extracted from a document entitled "Plan for Contacts Between the Armed Forces of the United States and the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation for 1993."
The document was agreed to "in principle" by both sides during the May 1993 U.S.-Russian Joint Staff Talks in Washington.
So far, peacekeeping units and other "volunteers" from the former Soviet states have performed quite poorly in places such as the former Yugoslavia and central Asia.
Interview with Dr. G. Paul Holman, Professor of National Security Affairs, Naval War College, Newport, RI: March 25, 1993.
DoD needs to be thinking about developing skills in other languages as well, such as Ukrainian, Georgian, and Uzbek. Developing and maintain skills in Russian, however, due to its common usage throughout the former Soviet states, will remain the best near-term investment.
For a detailed treatment of the state of the exploratory GPS talks, see Keith Payne et al, "Evolving U.S. Views on Defense: An Opportunity for Cooperation," Strategic Review, Winter 1993, pp. 61-72.
Joseph Wysocki, "Cooperative Missile Warning: The Potential Cornerstone of A New Defense Community," an unpublished essay written for the Naval War College, Newport, RI, 1993.
A delegation led by General-Colonel Anatoliy Malyukov, Russian Air Force Chief of Staff, visited several U.S. facilities for airspace management discussions in the spring of 1993.
As this study has demonstrated, military relations between the United States and Russia are growing rapidly, and Russian military thought, if examined critically, can indeed provide important insights on how to proceed.
Clearly, the rich and often troubled intellectual heritage of the Russian military professional deserves a fresh look.
As Chapter Two's conclusions suggested, one way of examining this heritage is to focus on major themes of conflict and change--issues that continue to affect the formulation of Russian military policy, even today. This study's focus then shifted to the U.S. perspective in Chapter Three as both scenarios and policy responses were   
Ltd., 1979
. Fuller, William C., Jr. Civil-Military Conflict in Imperial Russia, 1881
-1914
. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985
. 
Strategy and
Power in Russia, 1600-1914.
The Free Press, 1992. 