# ID: 20d37bd59c1b43c5b4ab8802fe5f3365
# Title: Proxy Warfare in Strategic Competition: State Motivations and Future Trends
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
Russia is already highly motivated to support proxy warfare, albeit in different ways in different regions.
Given current trends, we do not expect this to abate; however, the long-term effects of Russia's 2022 large-scale war in Ukraine on Russian motivation to support proxy warfare remain to be seen.
Russia's sense of vulnerability and desire to maintain its accustomed dominance have motivated support for VNSAs in its home region, as seen in the Donbas conflict from 2014 to early 2022 and in Georgia.
Russia also presents itself as an ideological competitor to the United States in other regions and as a defender of state sovereignty, which has helped to motivate (alongside geopolitical calculations) proxy support to governments, most notably in Syria.
Going forward, and particularly as long as the heightened tension in relations with the West persists, there are some indications that Russia may continue to seek out opportunities to support willing proxies in ways that advance its interests and undermine those of the United States.
That said, while proxy support is often affordable in comparison with direct military interventions, the costs involved can often become substantial.
Furthermore, it can be difficult for states to determine in advance which proxy support relationships will evolve to become highly costly in this manner, so the more relationships a state takes on, the higher the risk it may run of escalating costs.
Even before its 2022 large-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russia was a notably resource-constrained state facing pressure on its defense budget because of unfavorable demographic and economic trends.
3 While this could change depending on future trends in the price of its fossil fuel exports, unexpected success in modernizing its economy, or the lifting of ongoing international sanctions, there are reasons to question whether Russia could sustain or increase proxy support at or above the level it is currently providing.
The recent trend toward reliance on Russian PMCs may highlight how Russia might adapt to continue to provide proxy support despite these restrictions and also underlines the salience of these restrictions to begin with.