# ID: 20d37bd59c1b43c5b4ab8802fe5f3365
# Title: Proxy Warfare in Strategic Competition: State Motivations and Future Trends
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
By 1993, Yeltsin had a clearer vision for Russia's role in the post-Soviet regional order.
Russia saw itself as the leader of the post-Soviet era, including a role as the essential and undisputed kingmaker in disputes between, and within, other former Soviet republics.
The keys to this arrangement were two Russian-dominated organizations, the CIS and the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).
61 Officially, Russia portrayed itself as a neutral and impartial mediator respectful of the sovereignty of all the other members.
62 The reality that Moscow controlled military forces throughout most of the former USSR gave it leverage to dictate settlements to and demand concessions from these ostensible peers, and the frozen conflicts gave Yeltsin the opportunity to establish this precedent.
But Yeltsin also sweetened the deal by providing incentives such as transfers of military hardware to the newly independent governments.
63 Furthermore, disputes between different institutional constituencies about the frozen conflicts continued, even if these were less contentious than during the chaos of 1992-1993.
The separatist insurgencies in which Russia intervened during 1992-1993 differed greatly from one another.
In Transnistria, a separatist enclave dominated by ethnic Russians attempted to secede from newly independent Moldova, in part due to anxieties about possible unification with Romania.
The Russian military blocked the Moldovan attempt to establish control over the territory and retained it base there.
64 Militarily, the Moldavians were in a hopeless position because of the presence of the Russian 14th Army, and Yeltsin was largely able to dictate the terms of the ceasefire in July 1992.
This agreement established a formally neutral Joint Control Commission but also granted Russia the right to retain military forces in Transnistria.
65 While the Russian troop presence fell considerably by the end of the 1990s, this frozen conflict has remained frozen ever since.