# ID: 20d37bd59c1b43c5b4ab8802fe5f3365
# Title: Proxy Warfare in Strategic Competition: State Motivations and Future Trends
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
In the subsequent three chapters (Chapters 4-6), we analyze three major or regional powers' use of proxy warfare over time.
The three powers, Russia, China, and Iran, represent three of the seven countries that have most frequently used this instrument of foreign policy, and they are also each of substantive value for our research questions that focus on the potential for a resurgence in proxy warfare among major or regional powers.
Within each case, we assess why these countries used proxy warfare and why they stopped (in periods when they did not engage in such wars).
By examining each of these countries over time, we can attempt to isolate the consequences of specific changes (such as the Islamic Revolution in Iran) even as other factors remain constant.
In our concluding chapter, Chapter 7, we also compare the records of each of these powers.
Comparison across cases can help to identify potential motivations for proxy warfare that are common across different types of states and which are specific to a particular type of state.
Through this analysis, we attempt to understand whether these countries (and potentially others) might engage in more-aggressive use of proxy warfare in the future.
This qualitative analysis, however, is restricted solely to an examination of major powers; the motivations and future behavior of less powerful states may differ from those of the countries in these case studies.