# ID: 20d37bd59c1b43c5b4ab8802fe5f3365
# Title: Proxy Warfare in Strategic Competition: State Motivations and Future Trends
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
Certain dynamics between potential sponsors are closely associated with proxy wars.
A subset of our analyses addressed the conditions under which rivals intervene on opposing sides of civil wars.
The analysis suggests that such proxy wars are now more likely to materialize in regions where there is not a clear hegemonic power, as is the case in the Middle East.
Major powers are less likely to become involved in such wars as compared to the Cold War period.
The results also suggest that civil conflicts in regions with closer economic integration are less likely to see proxy support across the board.
The analysis ends in 2010, so additional research is required to account for any shifts in these patterns over the last decade.
U.S. and Russian support for opposing sides in Syria or the war in Ukraine may be harbingers of a reversal of some of the trends that this chapter identifies.
Starting in the 1920s, the USSR developed an initial proxy warfare capability, but it often bungled this capability in practice.
Initial successes in China and Spain degenerated into debacles because of strategic missteps.
After World War II and especially after the death of Stalin, the Soviet Union expanded its use of proxy warfare.
During the Khrushchev era, the USSR developed the ability to support proxies on a global scale and provide them with state-of-the-art military capabilities.
The emergence of independently minded Communist governments, such as the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Castro's Cuba, increasingly led the Soviet Union to support VNSAs to maintain leadership of the world Communist movement and to win such favors as permission to set up remote military bases.
1   1 Piero Gleijeses, "Moscow's Proxy?