# ID: 20d37bd59c1b43c5b4ab8802fe5f3365
# Title: Proxy Warfare in Strategic Competition: State Motivations and Future Trends
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
After the color revolutions in Ukraine and Georgia in 2003-2004, Vladimir Putin's Russia took a more assertive approach to governments in its "near abroad."
In 2008, Russia intervened on behalf of its South Ossetian proxies, establishing the precedent that a frozen conflict could turn into a pretext for Russian intervention.
72 The conflict in Donbas that followed the Russian annexation of Crimea demonstrated an ability to cultivate clandestine proxies.
The Donetsk and Luhansk separatists were suspected by many to be Russian agents, and, in any case, better-than-expected Ukrainian military performance against the separatists sparked a significant intervention by regular Russian military forces posing as volunteers.
73 The Russian intervention in the Syrian civil war demonstrated vastly improved abilities for force projection and, with them, greater capability to support proxies.
This included symbolic demonstrations of support, such as hosting Libyan warlord Khalifa Haftar on Russia's aircraft carrier en route to Syria, as well as supporting air campaigns in the Middle East.
74 Along with greater ability, Putin's Russia apparently sees reputational and practical advantages to its more-proactive support to proxies.
Simply returning to the power-projection game advertises Moscow's resurgence as a force to be reckoned with, while proxy support can also buy goodwill that translates into political, military, or economic benefits for Russia.
A phenomenon that has grown in prominence in recent years is the use of Russian PMCs.
75 While formally illegal, these groups are clearly tolerated and, in some cases, subsidized by the Russian state.
Although they seem to acquit themselves badly when entrusted with difficult military tasks, mercenaries offer a number of potential advantages.
First, their activities are largely self-financing, since the PMCs typically profit off of business opportunities in the countries in which they are 72 Michael Kofman, "The August War, Ten Years On: A Retrospective on the Russo-Georgian War," War on the Rocks, August 17, 2018.
73 Michael Kofman, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, and Jenny Oberholtzer, Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1498-A, 2017.
74  