# ID: 20d37bd59c1b43c5b4ab8802fe5f3365
# Title: Proxy Warfare in Strategic Competition: State Motivations and Future Trends
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
Political ideologies might push states to consider promoting specific types of regimes, democratic as well as nondemocratic, in their foreign policies.
29 Commitment to a particular political system could stem from strategic, regime-preserving instincts or normative beliefs in that system's benefits.
30 Some states holding ideological commitments to their form of government could promote or preserve it by establishing their preferred political system through aligned local actors or defending it when it is challenged abroad.
This view that proxy warfare is a means to actively promote a type of organizing regime was especially pronounced during the Cold War clash between communism and capitalism, but some in policy circles have also started to express fears that, with a rising China and an assertive Russia, interstate competition (and proxy wars that can be fueled by it) could divide along these lines.
31  Some states ascribe to norms of self-determination or humanitarian intervention, while others emphasize norms of sovereignty.
First, some states may be driven to support local armed actors for humanitarian reasons, such as, most recently, NATO's support for local Libyan armed groups in 2011.
Regarding norms of sovereignty, Chinese official documents often refer to a commitment to "non-interference" in the domestic politics of other nations, dating back to China's five principles of peaceful coexistence established in the 1950s.
32 Russian officials have also repeatedly espoused their opposition to interference into the internal politics of sovereign countries.
33  There is disagreement among China-and Russia-watchers about the degree to which these public statements reflect true normative commitments or are simply a way to insulate their own regimes from threats of externally imposed regime change.
34  A separate but important driver for supporting local actors is identity, specifically politicized ethnic or religious identity.
Scholars who examine state sponsorship of nonstate armed groups especially emphasize this argument, given the finding that ethnoreligious nonstate armed groups often receive (or believe they will receive) support from diasporas or regimes that share the same affiliations.
35 This hypothesis builds on scholarship examining the role of ethnic ties in determining when states militarily intervene.