# ID: 210b7fbe600948b5a8d0a1388d119918
# Title: Hybrid Warfare: An Umbrella for Terrorism in an Era of Great Power Competition?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Every age has its own kind of war, its own limiting conditions, and its own peculiar preconceptions.
-Clausewitz, On War Today's geostrategic environment is largely characterized by the phenomenon of great power competition (GPC). The creation of new regional and economic blocks like the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue or Shanghai Cooperation Organization reflects one manifestation of this global rivalry, with the great powers entering into alliances with other countries in a bid to gain dominance over various strategic spaces-including South Asia in general and Pakistan and Afghanistan in particular.
Concurrently, as warfare evolves into the so-called fifth generation, the character of war is transforming. 
1
2
Important regional and global players including great powers are employing these concepts as standalone arrangements or in combination with erstwhile conventional means. 
5
2 Colin S. Gray, Another Bloody Century: Future Warfare (Phoenix Press, May 1, 2007), 5.
3 "A comprehensive operational concept that is applied in interlaced, overlapping and integrated Electromagnetic Spectrum, Information Space and Cyber Space to enable the achievement of non-kinetic environment superiority," Martti Lehto and Gerhard Henselmann et al., "Non-Kinetic Warfare-The New Game Changer in the Battle Space," in March 2020 International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (Norfolk, Virginia, Old Dominion University, 2020), 316, https://www.researchgate.net/figure/ Non-kinetic-Warfare-Spectrum_fig1_339943524.
4 "A generic term encompassing all armed conflicts that are above the level of peaceful co-existence amongst states and below the threshold of war including militancy, insurgency, proxy war and terrorism employed as a means in an insurrectionist movement or undertaken independently," K.C. Dixit, "Sub-Conventional Warfare Requirements, Impact and Way Ahead," Journal of Defence Studies 4, no. 1 (January 2010): 120, https://idsa.in/system/files/jds_4_1_kcdixit.pdf.
5 Superesse Staff, "Fifth Generation Warfare-How We Have Already Entered an Ambiguous WWIII," Superesse Straps (blog), April 15, 2021, https://www.superessestraps.com/blogs/news/fifthgeneration-warfare-how-we-have-already-entered-an-ambiguous-wwiii.
Russian invasion of Crimea in 2014 is an example of a campaign combining conventional and sub-conventional means. The Crimean conflict started as an undercover military operation, blending obscurity, propaganda, and the surprise aspect at the operational level.
Russia's utilization of broadcasting means for psychological operations, as an element of a wider information campaign to enable the Crimean annexation, surprised both Ukraine and the West. 
6
7
8
9
7 Margarita Jaitner and Dr. Peter A. Mattsson et al., "Russian Information Warfare of 2014," in 2015 7th International Conference on Cyber Conflict (Tallinn: IEEE, 2015), https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ document/7158467. 8 Kofman and Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's 'Hybrid War'."
The United States' (U.S.) withdrawal from Afghanistan is likely to encourage China and Russia to step up their activities and influence in this region with a bigger economic and security footprint in Afghanistan to the detriment of broader U.S. geostrategic interests. 
11
13
14
Pakistan has been in the eye of the storm with a full-fledged hybrid war waged against it. The apprehension of a serving Indian naval officer while planning sabotage and terrorist activities against Pakistan was one example of the ongoing hybrid war in the region as declared by the President of Pakistan in his address to the participants of the National Workshop on Balochistan in July 2021 in Islamabad. 
15
16
How, in an era of great power rivalries, does the phenomenon of hybrid warfare provide global and regional players in South Asia an opportunity to unleash NSAs, using terrorism as one of their tools, as proxies to coerce adversaries in pursuit of achieving geopolitical objectives?
This section will primarily focus on spelling out the three phenomena of hybrid warfare, terrorism, and the GPC to subsequently answer the whys and hows of the question posed in this thesis. Academic studies on the subjects of hybrid warfare, terrorism, and the GPC are found in abundance and are enormously valuable to the research of this subject, but few draw together the distinct facets of hybrid warfare and GPC and the space for terrorism in between. Therefore, to elaborate a consistent use of hybrid warfare by great powers using terrorism as a tool, this thesis will combine and modify several conclusions of the authors in the fields of warfare, international affairs, and foreign relations.
For understanding the concept of hybrid warfare and how it interfaces with political ends, this thesis cites the writings of Frank G. Hoffman and Colin S Grey. 
17
18
19
Hoffman, who defines it as, "sophisticated campaigns that combine low level conventional and special operations, offensive cyber and space actions, and psychological operations that use social and traditional media to influence popular perception and international opinion." 20 Multiple authors explain the concept of hybrid warfare and how it integrates various methods of warfare comprising both conventional and sub-conventional maneuvers through acts of terrorism using coercion, violence, and criminal disorder.
Moreover, both states and NSAs can undertake hybrid wars, and the means by which they do so currently have altered; nevertheless, blending of traditional and unconventional practices remains an underlying principle to accomplish desired strategic aims as have been observed from primitive times of warfare. 
21
As the concept of hybrid warfare evolved, different proponents of the same commented that the purpose of multi-faceted activities at both tactical and operational levels under the garb of hybrid warfare was to achieve synergy of effects in kinetic and non-kinetic domains of warfare. 
22
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
32
The thought of blurring of lines between modes of war is shared by quite a few analysts. 
33
34
Academic circles acknowledge that the dogma of terrorism remains a reality even today and it still can overturn the global political order. 
36
37
38
39
40
Many authors have consensus that the hopes for a lasting peaceful international global order after the end of the Cold War were short-lived owing to geopolitical realities that were consequent of the efforts and attempts of other important powers, including China and Russia, to re-assert themselves on the world stage. This created an ideological wedge between the democratic political order of the West and the totalitarian China and Russia. 
41
42
however, it appears as if this was just a period of transition. 
43
44
45
Against this strategic backdrop, the U.S. as a global power will have reduced presence and influence in the region in the foreseeable future. In addition to this, the geopolitical environment for India, which is a regional player and aspires to become a global power, is not very conducive. The geostrategic interests of India are tangent to those of Russia, China, and Pakistan and are instead found to be more in line with U.S. interests, being its strategic partner. Therefore, the prospects of two opposing camps in the regionwith China, Russia, Pakistan, and Afghanistan on one side and the U.S. and India on the other-cannot be ruled out. This scenario in the region can up the ante of the GPC between the rival powers in the region with the aim of achieving geo-strategic dominance.
With hybrid warfare already in full swing in the region, both in kinetic and nonkinetic domains through NSAs (TTP, BLA) and information operations (revelations of the EU DisinfoLab), 48 the likelihood of using terror outfits of the kind of TTP against Pakistan, ISIS against the Taliban in Afghanistan, and by great powers and regional powers under the umbrella of hybrid warfare is a plausible possibility.
This thesis is designed to tie together the dimensions of hybrid warfare, terrorism, and GPC to identify their impact on the security environment of Afghanistan and Pakistan.
My analysis requires a study of the known competing interests of the great powers, the presence of terrorist entities, and the vulnerabilities of Pakistan and Afghanistan, to identify how hybrid warfare can facilitate the utilization of terrorism for achieving desired strategic ends.
After analyzing the steady buildup of hybrid war against Pakistan, and unfolding events in Afghanistan, I explore the case of powers waging hybrid warfare through terrorism as one of the tools to identify commonalities to ascertain better the relation between hybrid warfare and terrorism within an environment of GPC between Russian President Putin and Taliban leader Mullah Akhtar Mansour at one of the military bases in Tajikistan in September 2015. 
49
Beyond those explained in the literature review, sources will consist of a wide blend of academic articles and books, as well as publications such as the "Country Report on Terrorism" and articles from the Congressional Research Service. 
50
Following the introduction chapter, Chapter II of this thesis explores the phenomenon of hybrid warfare to find the suitable answers to the questions including what hybrid warfare is and why is it becoming the preferred choice of warfare in the present times. This chapter lays out the relevance of the major research question. Chapter III examines the correlation between hybrid warfare and terrorism. The focus of this chapter will be to dissect the overlapping of terrorism and hybrid warfare and how these two concepts interface in the end, ways, and means paradigm. Chapter IV is an in-depth look at how the ongoing GPC is shaping the security environment in Afghanistan and Pakistan while providing a conducive environment for the employment of hybrid warfare with terrorism as one of the tools to achieve desired strategic ends. Case studies of how different powers waged hybrid wars and used terrorist organizations are incorporated in this chapter to develop the arguments in a more objective manner. 
"Hybrid warfare" as a phenomenon of modern warfare started to emerge in the early 2000s as a buzzword in both academic and military circles to explain the changing character of warfare, 51 as this period was when scholars like Frank G. 55 Significant literature argues that hybrid warfare is an old concept and is a combination of different facets of warfare. Scholars like Michael Kofman and Matthew Rojansky, while explaining the term hybrid warfare, argued that, "the 'hybrid' aspect of the term simply denotes a combination of previously defined types of warfare, whether conventional, irregular, political or information." Kofman and Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's 'Hybrid War'," Kennan Cable, no. 7 (April 2015): 8. In addition, Alex Deep also suggests that, "the fundamental principle of utilizing a combination of conventional and irregular methods to achieve a political objective is consistent with older forms of conflict." "Hybrid War: Old Concept, New Techniques," Small Wars, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/hybrid-war-old-concept-new-techniques.
56 Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars.
57 Brigadier Ehsan Mehmood Khan, "Hybrid Warfare: A Conceptual Perspective," Hilal English Magazine, February 1, 2018, https://www.hilal.gov.pk/eng-article/detail/MjYz.html. be a combination of the third-, fourth-, and fifth-generation warfare in a few regions around the globe where interstate conventional war is still a reality. 
58
59
60
According to Brigadier Ehsan, when viewed from the vantage of "polemologyi.e., the study of human conflict and war-hybrid warfare emerges as the common expression that covers all other terms in a number of ways." 62 Hybrid warfare is the manifestation of an all-encompassing character of war, which embodies application of the entire range of accessible resources, ranging from kinetic to non-kinetic, to overcome another actor. 
63
64
62 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.
63 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.
64 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.
distinctively, "hybrid warfare" is a common phenomenon that signifies a spectrum of actions, across the complete range of their interface, by the belligerents that concludes with war and incorporates ways and methodologies that have impact beyond defined battle fields. 
65
66
67
• Preference of indirect strategy over overt direct military conflict
• Keeping the threat of use of conventional force alive in support of unconventional methods
Exploitation of social and religious fault lines within the society to weaken the target state from within
Use of media to favorably project own perspective
Involving the international community at an opportune time to achieve desired political objectives
The term "hybrid" often precedes words like "threats," "war," and "conflict," 68 which are often used interchangeably without specific defined meanings to capture the essence of the intertwined nature of challenges (ranging from terrorism, ethnic conflict, and religious fault lines) involving multiple actors (i.e., regular and irregular forces) with employment of traditional and nontraditional means (i.e., kinetic, political,   technological). 
69
70
Hybrid threats originate from a nonaggressive, pragmatic grand strategy that pursues strategic advantages while averting retaliation by manipulating the gray zone between peace and conflict. 71 Frank Hoffman is mostly credited with the coining of the term hybrid threats in relation to the idea of hybrid warfare. 
72
73
74
75
In hybrid conflict, belligerents avoid blatant application of the military instrument against opposing actors, preferring instead a mix of military pressure, exploitation of political and economic vulnerabilities, and application of technological resources and diplomatic influence to achieve strategic ends. . 
77
78
79
In a hybrid environment, hybrid conflict and hybrid war are expected to unfold gradually. 
83
Conflicting ideas, perceptions, and expressions are being applied to describe the phenomenon of hybrid warfare. Following diverse perspectives of different global and regional powers based on the confronted regional and geopolitical environments as well as the strategic regional and global objectives shows how hybrid warfare is seen in different regions across the globe in terms of achieving particular strategic ends-and conversely deterring the adversaries from achieving the same.
The U.S. DOD uses "hybrid" to explain the increasing complexity of conflict and perceives it to be more of a threat instead of a new form of warfare. 84 Amid this complexity, however, the U.S. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Special Operations Command do not share views on hybrid warfare. 
85
Special Operations Command and Army categorized the Russia-Georgia war as 83 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.
84 Davi M. D'Agostino, Hybrid Warfare, GAO-10-1036R (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office 2010), 14. 85 D'Agostino, GAO-10-1036R, 14.
conventional warfare, while the Air Force characterized it as a hybrid conflict. 
86
armed forces; however, consider that current and future adversaries are likely to use "hybrid warfare tactics, a blending of conventional and irregular approaches across the full spectrum of conflict." 
87
1
89
Russian intellectuals hold the U.S. as a source of hybrid warfare. Russia perceives itself to be a victim of hybrid warfare. Russian author Andrew Korybko maintains that the West as part of its hybrid campaign against Russia uses the phrase of hybrid warfare as part of its information narrative to malign Russia. 
90
93
Unrestricted warfare resonates with the Chinese perspective on hybrid warfare. A book titled Unrestricted Warfare and published in 1999 in China highlights how Chinese academia and politicians view the changing character of warfare. 
94
95
96
97
Therefore, the Chinese policy is a combination of economic initiatives and "non-linear operations." This policy paves the way for projects like China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which are propagated through information operations to increase the Chinese imprint in other countries. Simultaneously, the "salami-slicing" strategy allows progressive expansion of land territory by means of unusual practices to achieve control over disputed regions without provoking escalation. 
98
India claims to be the victim of hybrid warfare and contemplates that it has been a victim of Pakistan's hybrid onslaught. 
99
Indian Army officer Brigadier Anil Gupta (retired) states that, "Pakistan has been using hybrid threats against India since independence." 100 This Indian thought stems from the history of the militant freedom struggle in Indian-occupied Kashmir, which India perceives to be sponsored by Pakistan. 
101
India funds and backs sub-nationalist elements in Balochistan (BLA, Balochistan Liberation Front-BLF, etc.) and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) (Pashtun Tahafuz Movement-PTM) 103 to create unrest not just within the respective provinces but also in Karachi the 98 Miracola, Chinese Hybrid Warfare.
99 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.
100 Brigadier Anil Gupta (Retired), "Are We Prepared Against Hybrid Threats," Indian Defence Review (December 2, 2016), http://www.indiandefencereview.com/spotlights/are-we-prepared-againsthybrid-threats/.
101 Gupta, "Are We Prepared Against Hybrid Threats."
102 Gupta, "Are We Prepared Against Hybrid Threats."
103 "PTM Funding: The Role of RAW-NDS, Wealthy FATA Diaspora in the Gulf & Hostile Agencies," Global Village Space, April 30, 2019, https://www.globalvillagespace.com/ptm-funding-therole-of-raw-nds-wealthy-fata-diaspora-in-the-gulf-hostile-agencies/. 
Hybrid warfare, staying below the perceived threshold of war or direct overt application of military force, does offer strategic advantages despite being simpler, lower cost, and less risky than kinetic operations. 
109
110
111
There are two distinctive characteristics of hybrid warfare. First, it makes the line between war and peace time ambiguous. 
113
114
115
116
117
Due to rapid technological innovations and the upswing of asymmetric warfare, allout wars can be ineffectual even vis-à-vis powers that have comparatively limited means and influence. Victory might thus become an exceedingly challenging idea to achieve. 
121
The Pakistani policy makers that the use of a covert approach followed by the threat of an all-123 Bruce Ridel, "As India and China Clash, JFK's 'Forgotten Crisis' Is Back," Brookings Institute, June 17, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2020/06/17/as-india-and-china-clashjfks-forgotten-crisis-is-back/.
124 Muhammad Ayub Khan, "The Pakistan-American Alliance Stresses and Strains," Foreign Affairs, January 1964, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/asia/1964-01-01/pakistan-american-alliance.
125 
The conflict in erstwhile East Pakistan (present-day Bangladesh) in 1971 marked the transition of a crisis of socio-economic nature into a politico-military conflict. 
131
132
a.
According to former Indian Foreign Secretary, JN Dixit, "The Government of India decided on a two-track approach to resolve East Pakistan crisis. Firstly, to support the liberation struggle to exert pressure on the Pakistan Government to respect electoral verdict of 1970. Secondly, mobilize international public opinion through bilateral contacts and the 
India had very shrewdly adopted a policy of resentment against West Pakistan and appeasement to attract East Pakistan by manipulating the existing fissures that had emerged due to political and economic misgivings of East Pakistan. 
134
135
( warfare division did make sure to bring the unrest in East Pakistan under the international spotlight. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi herself reached out to the world to project the crisis of East Pakistan and stance of India. 
140
141
(1)
Established training and support bases for insurgents close to the border 146
(2) Organized insurgents into a coherent infrastructure with eleven sectors for command and control of Mukti Bahini while denying rise of any alternative setups 147
(3) Focused attacks on communication infrastructure, military organizations, and government apparatus to deny freedom of movement to the Pakistan Army while instigating massive reprisals against the civilian population 148
(4) Established no-go areas and safe zones in population centers and gradually enlarged areas under insurgents' control 149
(5) Occupied conventional-style lodgment areas and then requested international diplomatic recognition and intervention
After creating the ripe environment for a coup de grâce by utilizing all elements of national power, the Indian army worked with the Mukti Bahini to gain international credence under R2P and then launched the military prong that finally led to the dismemberment of Pakistan on 16 December 1971.
150
Hybrid warfare cannot be termed as a fresh commodity in the domain of warfare.
In recent years it has attracted a lot of scholarly attention. The concept of hybrid warfare is perceived by nations as per the dictates of their respective strategic needs. The concept is gaining more currency in geo-politics for achieving desired political objectives owing to the existing global order, which is not conducive to erstwhile conventional wars for the reasons highlighted earlier in this chapter. We are living through an age of war of narratives. Perceptions have become realities and hybrid warfare is all about managing perceptions.
In the context of the India-Pakistan equation in South Asia, hybrid warfare is not an alien phenomenon for either country. The study of conflict between two nations reflects manifestation of the concept of hybrid warfare in its true terms. Both nations employed non-conventional means including both kinetic (sub-conventional) and non-kinetic Hence, hybrid warfare had been in play historically, and South Asia is no exception.
Terrorism is not an end in itself, but a means to the end for great powers under the overarching phenomenon of hybrid warfare. 
151
Acts of violent terror on a geostrategic canvas constitute segments of hybrid threats, a concept that was also asserted by President Obama in 2014. 
156
158
159
160
161
According to Dr. Andrew Mumford, unless terrorism is not viewed through the prism of hybrid warfare the counterterrorist realization will remain blind-sided by the uncertain attributes of modern hybrid threats. 
162
Beyond terrorism's deep-rooted linkage to hybrid threats there exists another increasing phenomenon identified as "hybridization of terrorism," which refers to the growing danger from those terrorist groups who possess hybrid abilities. 
164
165
166
167
168
169
NSAs represent the intricate franchise of violence that exists next to the non-kinetic dimensions of hybrid warfare. 
170
171
There is an increasing trend of globally acknowledged de jure states having proper territorial boundaries and state structures but who fail to exercise state authority and lack governance capacities to enforce writ of the state. 
176
177
NSAs undertake governance affairs and experience the process of managing the affairs of statehood but do not enjoy authentic international recognition. 
178
179
180
181
183
Rather, the militias prefer introducing their own form of power structure. 
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
In case of a failure to take over the state, a hybrid actor starts to create various mechanisms to sustain its potential, authenticity, and influence, even with less integration. This process involves maintaining presence both inside and outside the framework of the state. 
191
192
193
Conventional perceptions of proxy warfare suggest that states use proxies to further their political aims in a cost-effective way, while reducing the risk of getting entangled in a major military conflict. According to Assaf Moghadam and Michel Wyss, states employ proxies to accomplish geo strategic ends, but the states envisage the proxies as an indirect, mainly military instrument to attain set objectives. 
194
195
196
197
198
Proxy wars are fundamental to a bond between a sponsor, which could be a state or NSA external to the equation of an ongoing conflict, and they are the conduit for arms, training, and financing from the sponsor. 200 Such activities are undertaken presumably for purposes of expanding political cum strategic interests, while concurrently curtailing risk. 
201
203
The relationship between sponsors and their proxies are environment specific and are mired in a host of questions concerning consent, stages of engagement, and the assessment of subsequent gain. 
204
205
206
207
The prevailing geopolitical setting of the region hosting these two countries provides a conducive platform for great powers to unleash the weapon of terrorism as part of the kinetic domain of hybrid warfare by employing NSAs to further political ends.
Pakistan and Afghanistan have largely been unsuccessful in effectively dealing with, or even recognizing, the different uncertainties and complexities of life faced by their between the privileged and deprived is further dividing an already polarized society. 
214
Stephen P. Cohen remarks that "Pakistan is one of the world's most ethnically and linguistically complex states." 215 Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), Balochistan, and Kashmir make Pakistan complete, but Pakistan has long struggled with the questions of ethnicity and nationalism. The federation attempts to hold Pakistan together against the pull of ethnic centrifugal forces. 
216
217
is the result of the reservations of marginalized ethnic entities.
Sectarian dissonance between the Sunnis and Shias continues to blemish the social fabric of Pakistani society. The external regional environment has much to do with the increasing sectarian divide in Pakistan; however, as both Iran and Saudi Arabia invested in their proxies within Pakistan to undermine each other. Unfortunately, Pakistan's society became the collateral damage of these regional proxies. 
218
219
A substantial section of Pakistani society finds itself socially and politically excluded. Landless laborers, tenants, and certain ethnic and sectarian groups feel neglected and hold the state and the elite responsible for their plight. 
221
in Pakistan is a pure manifestation of elite capture. The bureaucracy is structured in a way that it inevitably promotes an elite culture within the country's upper class, which raises questions in the minds of the masses about the state's intent and ability to deliver for the common people. 
222
225
On the eve of the coup against King Zahir Shah in 1973, The New York Times reported that Afghanistan had just "leaped into the sixteenth century." Nearly four decades later in 2010, British Defense Minister, Liam Fox, described Afghanistan as a "broken 13th-century country." 
226
Like Pakistan, Afghanistan also has a diverse ethnic society with strong religious influence. Moreover, lack of political stability within a predominantly tribal culture further compounds the Afghan quagmire. The following factors contribute to Afghanistan's ongoing vulnerability to terrorism and make it a likely battlefield of great power proxies under the umbrella of hybrid warfare:
Afghanistan, like many other developing nations, experiences the dilemma of developing harmony and solidarity at the national level in a diverse society. 
227
Religion still penetrates all facets of everyday social interactions in Afghan rural society; nothing is devoid of it. 
232
233
Even though the USSR withdrew from Afghanistan, the country remained marred The socio-political landscape of Afghanistan is a representation of a divided society where historically the role of the state has been marginalized. The perennial state of conflict that can be attributed to a lack of national unity on both internal (civil wars) and external fronts (foreign invasions) created a political and security vacuum in Afghanistan. This vacuum was filled by NSAs such as Al-Qaida and ISIS and turned Afghanistan into a safe haven for terrorists. Moreover, great powers have exploited Afghanistan's instability for their own proxies to outsmart strategic rivals. Thus, Afghanistan has been a playing field for proxies of both great powers and NSAs and with present uncertainty after the return of the Taliban is likely to be the same in the foreseeable future.
Hybrid warfare has provided a new lease on life to NSAs and proxies who thrive on terrorism. Threats in the hybrid environment are meant to achieve an asymmetrical strategic end and terrorism is one principal threat. 
239
240
241
242
247
Terrorism cannot be ignored in this era of renewed GPC; however, since these two phenomena are inter-connected. Terrorism associated with great powers is generally an element of larger undermining campaigns and proxy wars. Moreover, state-sponsored terrorism is nothing novel. In the Cold War, the former USSR sponsored different terrorist groups across different regions to destabilize pro-U.S. countries. 
248
The National Directorate of Security (NDS) gives extensive attention to the hybrid facets of the ongoing global competition. 
250
251
Therefore, the means of warfare with great powers have diversified beyond pure military 247 Hal Brands and Tim Nichols, "Special Operations Forces and Great-Power Competition in the 21st Century," American Enterprise Institute, August 4, 2020, https://www.aei.org/research-products/ report/special-operations-forces-and-great-power-competition-in-the-21st-century/.
248 dimensions and have engulfed domains across financial, information, and other civilian spheres-the likelihood of war being waged in our cities, streets, and living rooms is as high as in a far-away battleground. 
252
253
Present times are not likely to see great wars between great powers. It can be safely assumed that hybrid warfare will dominate a substantial duration of the existing phase of geopolitics characterized by GPC, because of three basic factors that put caution on blatant use of the military instrument: nuclear restraints on escalation, the latest competing stratagems, and the increased emergence of belligerents including NSAs across the conflict spectrum. 
254
255
256
Therefore, with the increased complexities of global geopolitics and the presence of multiple stake holders presently applying indirect strategies, there are strong indications that hybrid warfare will characterize GPC.
As Asia develops into the focal point of the emerging multipolar international order, the growing significance of South Asia has much to do with the increasing warmth of relations between U.S. and India with the aim to create a strategic alliance in the region. 
257
258
withdrawal from Afghanistan in terms of asserting their power potential and enhancing political impact. 
261
269
270
271
Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov in March 2019 stated that, "there was a shift in the center of global economic power to East from West where a liberal order marked by globalization was losing its attractiveness and is no more viewed as a perfect model for all." 273 Lavrov's point was that Asia will be the next frontier of GPC. Russian policy makers view this evolving geostrategic environment as an opportunity to reclaim regional and global preeminence." 274 Thus, Russia endeavors to challenge the U.S. sway globally by encouraging its traditional idea of protectionism, thereby undermining the opposing perspective offered by the U.S. and its allies in the form of the liberal world order. 
275
276
278
Similar to Russia, China's rise as a great power is centered on its strategy of defying American dominance. 
These great powers have identified their point men in South Asia to bring down their respective nemeses while using the tool of terrorism under the umbrella of hybrid warfare. 
289
Pakistan and Afghanistan provides an enabling environment for the threat of terrorism and allows the great powers to employ these NSAs as their proxies to undermine the strategic interests of rival powers. Following sub-sections will endeavor to identify the factors that make Pakistan and Afghanistan the ideal proxy fields of great powers. There have been events in the past where certain actions of the U.S. were construed as if the U.S. was putting in efforts to dismantle CPEC, creating discord in Balochistan. 
304
305
307
September in 2016 alone. 
308
309
And they leave 'their own people' without the slightest embarrassment." 
323
324
325
326
327
World leaders are willing to intervene differently from the past (indirect strategy), 329 and the divergent interests of the great powers are compelling enough to employ the services of NSAs under the umbrella of hybrid war to seek own objectives and undermine those of the adversarial power. 
330
It can be safely concluded that today's warfare does not limit belligerents to only state actors. Empirical evidence of the manifestation of hybrid warfare using terrorism as a tool in Pakistan and Afghanistan as mentioned in earlier parts of this thesis suggests that NSAs have become an added and permanent feature of battlefields. The present-day battlefield is not restricted to dedicated combat zones but rather has engulfed all spheres of life and has even incorporated the space domain. Instances of using forums like FATF for economic coercion and information campaigns as revealed by the EU DisinfoLab are the reflection of the enhanced spectrum of battlefields of which Pakistan has been a constant victim. 
331
The cost is low, and the dividends are huge. All elements of national power-which include political, economic, military, diplomacy, technology, and information-have become the tools of warfighting and keyboard warriors represent the new generation of soldiers.
War's nature remains violent, interactive, and fundamentally political, however.
332
This consistent nature of warfare, coupled with hesitant great powers avoiding direct confrontation, amplifies the role of indirect strategy through NSAs while using the tool of terrorism to knock down the adversary when and where needed. South Asia is no exception.
NSAs have been employed in Pakistan and Afghanistan by great powers to instill terror within these countries, as the primary goal of terrorism in a hybrid environment is to instill fear and terror, cause intimidation among the people, and weaken the will of an adversary to fight back. A terror-hit region loses the confidence of international investors, which slows down the economic activity. The loss of more than $100 billion to Pakistan's economy due to terrorism in the period 2005-2016 reflects the same phenomenon. 
333
Hybrid warfare allows plausible deniability and helps shields state actors from the responsibility of any action taken against the enemy state. The sponsored proxies, through
NSAs and under the garb of legitimate ideological struggle, strike terror and the relation of state and NSAs continues to flourish in this new age of warfare living through the era of GPC. Moreover, it is imperative to understand that the upswing of hybrid warfare cannot be construed as the culmination of conventional warfare; hybrid warfare represents a complex aspect for miliary and security planning in the present age, however. 
334
Furthermore, the prevailing geopolitical and geoeconomic considerations appear to be more conducive for hybrid warfare as the most preferred option for great powers around the globe in pursuance of strategic objectives, especially in reference to countries like Pakistan and Afghanistan. Direct confrontation and traditional wars in a globalized world with much interdependence do not seem to be a viable option. Hence, hybrid warfare allows a discreet path for seeking desired strategic dividends and the pattern adopted by great powers in Pakistan and Afghanistan using hybrid warfare as an umbrella for terrorism is likely to be replicated in different regions across the globe in the future.
333 Abheet Singh Sethi, Business Standard, July 6, 2015, https://www.business-standard.com/article/ specials/terrorism-has-cost-pakistan-100-billion-in-past-11-years-115070600193_1.html. 334 Hoffman, "Hybrid Warfare and Challenges."
https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8092&context=nwc-review. 35 Michael Evans, "From Kadesh to Kandahar," U.
https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8092&context=nwc-review. 35 Michael Evans, "From Kadesh to Kandahar," U.
36 Walter Laqueur and Christopher Wall, The Future of Terrorism (Thomas Dunne Books St. Martin's 40 Rohan Gunaratna et al., The Full Circle of Counterterrorism (Council of Councils, Singapore, September 01, 2021), https://www.cfr.org/councilofcouncils/global-memos/911-effect-and-transformationglobal-security.
58
58
For example, terrorist organizations like Al-Qaida and ISIS operate across different regions and utilize different military, economic, and technological means to accomplish their political objectives. 76 69 Patryk Pawlak et al., 75 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine. 76 Pawlak, Understanding Hybrid Threats.
90 Andrew Korybko., "Iranian Media: Trump Is on Course to Break Us," Oriental Review, 30 January, 2017, https://orientalreview.org/2017/01/30/iranian-media-tramp-is-on-course-to-break-us/. through
154  
154  
172  
172  
180 Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 10.  
180 Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 10.  
Hoffman, "Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars," 14 and Alex Deep, "Hybrid War: Old Concept, New Techniques," Small Wars Journal, February 3, 2015, https://smallwarsjournal.com/ jrnl/art/hybrid-war-old-concept-new-techniques.
Web Desk, Pakistan No Longer Under 'Do More' Pressure: Former U.S. Ambassador, The News International, December 13, 2021, https://www.thenews.com.pk/latest/916775-pakistan-no-longer-underdo-more-pressure-former-us-ambassador.
Molly K. McKew, "The Gerasimov Doctrine," Politico Magazine, September/October 2017, https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2017/09/05/gerasimov-doctrine-russia-foreign-policy-215538/.
Kofman and Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's 'Hybrid War'."    
Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, February 1999), 1-9.
Liang and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare.    
Liang and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare.    
Sergio Miracola, "Chinese Hybrid Warfare," Italian Institute for International Political Studies, December 21, 2018, https://www.ispionline.it/en/pubblicazione/chinese-hybrid-warfare-21853.
https://www.un.org/en/ga/sixth/76/pdfs/statements/int_terrorism/02mtg_pakistan.pdf, Statement by Ambassador Munir Akram, the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, on Agenda Item 111: "Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism" (6 October 2021).
Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.    
Ashok Swain, "India Must Remember That Balochistan Is Not Bangladesh," LSE South Asia Centre (blog), September 5, 2016, https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/southasia/2016/09/05/india-must-remember-thatbalochistan-is-not-bangladesh/.
  107 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English  
Magazine.108 Khan, Hybrid Warfare, Hilal English Magazine.
Pragnya Patnaik, "How R&AW Shaped India's Victory in the 1971 War," Times of India, December 19, 2021, https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/blogs/pragnya-speaks/how-raw-shaped-indiasvictory-in-the-1971-war/.
139Kak, India's Grand Strategy, CLAWS  
Journal. 140 Patnaik, How R&AW Shaped India's Victory,
Times of India.141 Patnaik, How R&AW Shaped India's Victory, Times of India.
Patnaik, How R&AW Shaped India's Victory, Times of India.
Braun, "Fighting 'Men in Jeans'."   
Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 7.    
Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 7.   
Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 12.   
Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 13.    
Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 13.    
Cambanis, Esfandiary, Ghaddar, Hanna, Lund, and Mansour, 13.   
Human Development Index, 2022, https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/hdi-bycountry.
225 Lynne O'Donnell, "Pakistani Pashtun Leader," Foreign Policy, March 2, 2022, https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/03/02/pakistan-politics-manzoor-pashteen-pashtun-
nationalism/. 226 Thomas Barfield, "Is Afghanistan 'Medieval'?" Foreign Policy, June 2, 2010, https://foreignpolicy.com/2010/06/02/is-afghanistan-medieval-2/.
Ghulam Mustafa and Adil Khan, "Afghanistan: A Study in Internal Conflict and National Cohesion," International Journal of Multicultural and Multireligious Understanding 2, no. 4 (August 2015): 31, https://ijmmu.com/index.php/ijmmu/article/view/18/18.
Mustafa and Khan, "Afghanistan: A Study in Internal Conflict and National Cohesion."
Afghanistan Demographics, accessed May 10, 2021, https://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/ afghanistan-population.
Mustafa and Khan, "Afghanistan: A Study in Internal Conflict and National Cohesion."
Mustafa and Khan, "Afghanistan: A Study in Internal Conflict and National Cohesion."
Mustafa and Khan, "Afghanistan: A Study in Internal Conflict and National Cohesion."
Mustafa and Khan, "Afghanistan: A Study in Internal Conflict and National Cohesion."
An area southwest of the border between Lithuania and Poland. Named for the Polish town of Suwałki, this choke point holds a lot of strategic and military significance after Poland and the Baltic states became members of NATO.
Nicole Gaouette, "Biden Says U.S. Faces Battle to 'Prove Democracy Works'," CNN, March 25, 2021, https://www.cnn.com/2021/03/25/politics/biden-autocracies-versus-democracies/index.html.
Gaouette, "Biden Says U.S. Faces Battle to 'Prove Democracy Works'."
Michael J. Boyle, "Counterterrorism in an Era of Great Power Politics," Orbis 66, no. 2 (2022), 184-200, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0030438722000072.
Eric Robinson, "The Missing, Irregular Half of Great Power Competition." Modern War Institute at West Point, September 8, 2020, https://mwi.usma.edu/the-missing-irregular-half-of-great-powercompetition/.
  251 Robinson, "The Missing, Irregular Half of Great Power Competition."   
U.S. Department of State, The United States and India: Deepening our Strategic Partnership, Fact Sheet (Washington, DC, July 27, 2021), https://www.state.gov/the-united-states-and-india-deepening-ourstrategic-partnership/.
  258  Stephen P. Cohen, "India-US Relations: Pakistan," Brookings Institute, June 4, 2016, https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/india-us-relations-
pakistan/. 259 Shahid Latif Bajwa, "U.S. Security Cooperation with India and Pakistan: a Comparative Study" (master's thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2013), 135, https://calhoun.nps.edu/
handle/10945/34621. 260 Syed Mohammad Ali, "The U.S.-China Strategic Rivalry and Its Implications for Pakistan," Stimson Institute, December 1, 2020, https://www.stimson.org/2020/the-u-s-china-strategic-rivalry-and-its-
implications-for-pakistan/. 261 Sabine Fischer and Angela Stanzel, "Afghanistan: The West Fails-A Win for China and Russia?" Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, September 22, 2021, https://www.
swp-berlin.org/10.18449/2021C50/. 262 Fischer and Stanzel, "Afghanistan: The West Fails-A Win for China and Russia?"
Alaphilippe, Adamczyk, Grégoire et al., Indian Chronicles: Deep Dive into a 15-Year Operation Targeting the EU and UN to Serve Indian Interests.
Mewett, "Understanding War's Enduring Nature Alongside Its Changing Character."
people. 
209
210
211
In this new cold war dubbed the GPC, instead of compelling an antagonist through use of force, hybrid warfare seeks to overcome an adversary by developing authenticity and persuading the populace. Hybrid wars are not fought for tactical triumphs in the Suwalki gap, but for influence in countries like Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
243
President Joe Biden declared in 2021 that it was no longer feasible for the U.S. to remain involved in costly forever wars, as in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
244
245
246
Major Gaurav Arya, a retired Indian Army officer, acknowledges India's sponsorship of Baloch militants and endeavors to destabilize Pakistan. 
311
313
314
315