# ID: 22f8b3559f5a4a5690791cbdefc348aa
# Title: Integration of Air and Sea Power in Regional Crisis Control
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1992.0
# Fulltext:
I began this study as an outgrowth
readiness groups into the region over the next six months. It was a period in which a great many new procedures and tactical approaches were ironed out --including, most importantly in my mind, our approach to the integration of air and sea power. The procedures that would eventually set in motion massive landbased air, carrier-based air, tomahawk missile, naval gunfire, and amphibious assault feints were Worked out "on the ground" (and "on the water") over the next several months. It was a demanding time.
In the early days of the operation, we were in place to seize and maintain control of the vertical ladder of escalation.
Specifically, we were in the region to prevent Saddam Hussein from moving any further south toward Saudi Arabia.
In essence, we were tasked to gain air and sea power in the region while the coalition formed, effectively curtailing Saddam Hussein's options for further offensive action.
The fundamental tool for doing this, in the early part of Desert Shield/Desert Storm, was a truly joint air and sea force of Navy Carrier Battle Groups, Navy-Marine Corps Amphibious Readiness Groups, and Air Force Fighter-Attack Wings. Much of the integration for the force was worked out from August of 1990 through December 1990, using a combination of some prior doctrine, many new concepts, and a great deal of creativity and common sense.
As land forces were gradually increased, our ability to conduct forceful offensive operations and move even further up the vertical ladder of escalation was enhanced, although the air and sea power in place fact are mine alone.
Finally, much of this study is speculative and reflective --although supported, I hope, by sound reasoning and fact. I further hope it will serve as a point of departure for minds better than my own to develop new and creative ways to integrate air and sea power. I do believe that if the United States is to maintain a preeminent position in the evolving global environment at the end of this century and beyond, we must change and adapt the way we use our forces in crisis.
To help in some small way in that process, if only as part of an ongoing debate, this book has been written.
Air power and sea power will be the most useful instruments of military force available to planners over the coming decade.
Because virtually all conflict during the next ten years will be regional in character.
In the context of regional crisis, control of the vertical ladder of escalation will be the concern of the political leadership and, therefore, the most critical task facing the military commander and planners. Our strategists must develop a coherent and usable concept for the integrated use of air and sea power, involving U.S. Navy, Marine
Corps, and Air Force assets. The powerful synergism that can be achieved by truly integrating ~ir and sea power has yet to be realized, although we learned much about it in the Persian Gulf war. U.S. warfighters and strategists must assess and improve all aspects of military performance in this critical area -integration of air and sea power in regional crisis control --in order to face effectively the geostrategic environment over the next decade.
Our military is shrinking, and although we will end up with a high quality end force, it will be a far smaller force than that with which we began this turbulent decade. Quantity has a quality all its own, as Lenin said, and we shall lack quantity, at least relative to today's force. The challenge, therefore, becomes the ability to use this smaller force in a high quality fashion --in a word, we must fight smarter.
That is what this study is all about. I believe we need new and creative ways to organize, structure, train, deploy, and employ our forces -especially the critical air and sea power mix that will be the greatest asset we have. We need a new conceptual approach to melding the principle air and sea forces --Navy Carrier Battle Groups, Navy-Marine Corps Amphibious Readiness Groups, and the developing Air Force Composite Wings. We need to provide the warfighting CINCs with immediately deployable strike packages composed of air and sea forces that have trained and operated together extensively.
In short, we need an air sea battle concept centered on an immediately deployable, highly capable, and fully integrated force --an Integrated Strike Force.
The essential change is the end of the bipolar construct that has dominated the international system for the past forty years.
Clearly, "The reunification of Germany, together with the enfeeblement and possible breakup on the Soviet Union, is one of the most abrupt realignments of political, military and economic power in modern history. ''I The international order will evolve from a bipolar structure into a truly multipolar system, with power diffusing toward Western Europe, Japan, and the United States. This will produce a more complex and challenging world, but will offer the United States a great many opportunities for creative diplomatic, economic, and military action in shaping the international system.
It is important to note, however, that within this multipolar system, only the United States will emerge as a "complete superpower" --with military, economic, political, and cultural influence felt throughout the world. because of our democratic political system, which seeks no foreign territory, which seeks not to subject anyone else. They look to us because we have an armed force second to none and we have the ability to use that armed force to deal with political problems that arise in a careful way. ''2
A second major shift in the international system will be a demand for increased democratization and nationalism, and attendant pressures to create new states for various ethnic groups, e.g. the Russian Republics, Croatia, Slovenia, Kurdistan, Baluchistan. Many of these new countries have been formed in the turmoil following the collapse of the soviet Union. This will create regional instability in a variety of areas, including Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union, much of Africa, and parts of Asia. Indeed, " . states are being pressed in different, unpredictable and potentially violent ways by ethnic, religious, or political groups seeking self-determination in the form of autonomous rights within existing states, their own separate countries, or reunification with homelands across their borders. ''3 The role of the United States here will be to encourage a responsible and peaceful move toward democratization, as well as to provide assistance and support where appropriate --while also working for regional stability.
A third major difference facing strategists in the next century will be the increasing influence and power of transnational actors. The United Nations may finally develop into a viable and relevant global force, buoyed by a string of successes in the late 20th century. Multinational corporations and financial institutions, both public and private, will begin to control access and continue to exert significant influence.
Other potential transnational actors to be reckoned with include global environmental organizations, human rights groups, major religions, some raw commodity cartels, liberation organizations, crime syndicates, and terrorist groups.
The United States should evaluate the many existing and evolving transnational groups and develop a strategy that takes their influence into account in shaping a world order that is responsive to U.S. interests, with particular emphasis on both the United Nations and ad hoc coalitions as necessary.
The increasingly interdependent global economy will be a fourth key element in the international environment of the 21st century.
In a world of increasingly sophisticated communications and information processing, many additional complexities will face strategic economic planners, including world trade issues, currency alignments, international arms trade, global flow of raw materials, and environmental concerns. This will be the most challenging aspect of shaping the international order for the United States, particularly in facing demanding competition in the trade arena.
A fifth potentially dramatic element of the evolving international order will be the diffusion of military power through the proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.
Strategists must work on a "two-track" approach here, attempting to curtail proliferation through treaty agreements while recognizing the eventual inevitability of advanced weapons in the hands of irresponsible states. Planners must focus on the development of a non-proliferation regime, while simultaneously working on solutions to potential attacks, including a limited ballistic missile defense system for the United States.
The evolving international system will be far more fluid than that faced by any practicing statesman or strategist serving today.
"Change is what makes us bold," said Napoleon. His words could serve as a touchstone for U.S. strategists as we move forward to the evolving international system of the next century.
In the course of this study, I will first examine the regional context of U.S. national security issues, focusing on eight regions: Europe, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, Central America and the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean littoral, Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa. I will also discuss the broad global security trends that emerge from the regional overview. This chapter will serve to illuminate areas in which the U.S. might logically expect some degree of political, economic, and military engagement. The bottom line is an attempt to identify the most likely future arenas of crisis --which appear to be the Persian Gulf/Mediterranean Middle East, Central America/Caribbean, and East Asia.
In the next chapter, I will begin by attempting to answer the deceptively simple question "What is a Crisis?" --a question to which there is more than meets the eye. Additionally, I will discuss the steps in a generalized vertical ladder of escalation, which lead from simple presence through permanent seizure of territory.
In a fourth chapter, I will then discuss air and sea power as historical concepts and what they currently mean to different institutions.
In particular, I will examine both Navy and Air Force concepts of the air/sea power mix, and offer a definition of both air and sea power for the purposes of this study. I will then discuss the utility of an Integrated Strike Force, notionally composed of a Navy Carrier Battle Group, an Amphibious Readiness Group, and an Air Force Composite Wing.
In the fifth chapter, I will discuss the actual integration of air and sea power, drawing on two powerful case studies: the Falklands/Malvinas War and Persian Gulf War, examining them from the perspective of the British and the U.S. respectively. They dramatically illustrate two poles of the air/sea experience. The Falklands/Malvinas was a conflict in which low-to-medium technology mix was used without significant basing available.
The Persian Gulf War, on the other hand, was a conflict with a high technology mix executed with significant basing available.
In this chapter, I will examine various techniques (and tactics) of integration.
I will look at general air-sea battle concepts in the sixth chapter, focusing on training, deployment/logistics, scouting, targeting, and striking at the level of operational art. I will also discuss command, control, and communications, as well as potential contributions of the Army and allied forces.
In the seventh chapter, I will deal with integrated air and sea power as a strategic option.
In this portion of the study, I will look at several scenarios suggested by analysis in the first and second chapters, attempting to lay out the means for deployment and employment of an integrated air/sea power mix in support of U.S. interests.
A final chapter will provide the conclusions of the study, as well as recommendations for some policy changes and subjects for further study. II.
In this chapter, we will divide the world into eight regions and examine U.S. security issues in Europe, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, Central America and the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean littoral, Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa.
After looking at general security concerns and U.S. interests in each region, we will use the analysis to support a broader discussion of the global security environment. This initial chapter servesto illuminate the most critical and likely arenas of crisis in which the United States may find itself involved over the coming decade.
As the President's National Security Strategy of the United States for 1992 opens, "It is Europe more than any other area that has held the key to the global balance in this century, and it is this continent more than any other that is experiencing fundamental change. ''I Three critical developments in Europe will deeply affect the regional security si£uation: the breakup of the former Soviet Union and the realignment of former Soviet republics into new political, economic, and security arrangements; the withdrawal of United States military forces in the post-Cold War era; and the gradual movement of the Western Europeans toward a more integrated political-economic system.
All of these shifts are creating doubts about the continuing viability of the venerable North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Obviously, the breakup and enfeeblement of the Soviet Union is the single most important event influencing regional security.
It is difficult to predict what will emerge from the ashes of the soviet empire. Independence for the Ukraine "instantly created a
European state of 52 million peoplewith more territory than
France and an army larger than Germany's. ' 
'2
Beyond the nuclear arsenal, there is an enormous chemical and biological stockpile ---to say nothing of 4 million troops, 7,000 combat aircraft, and well over 1,000 ships and submarines in a professional and well trained Navy. 3
Additionally, the opening of former Soviet borders may lead to a massive "brain drain" of thousands of scientists who design and build nuclear weapons. 4 Such "nuclear mercenaries" could bring a new level of danger to the proliferation problem. 5 Finally, many major weapons systems --MIG-31 fighters, T-72 tanks, intelligence systems, warships --can be purchased for hard cash. 6 Even the U.S. is buying Russian space and nuclear technology at bargain prices.
Initial speculation about the future of the Soviet Union centered around the creation of a loosely centralized confederation with limited coordination of defense and foreign policy. 
7
There is even some discussion of the U.S. military offering advice to the former Soviet Union's military "on how to reorganize shrinking Soviet forces, draft military budgets subject to legislative control, convert weapons factories into commercial businesses, and broaden exchanges on the command and control of nuclear weapons. ' 
'8
While the full implications of this critical shift in the European security situation cannot be fully analyzed as yet, it seems likely that a greatly reduced overall threat to U.S. national interests will exist on the mainland of Europe for the foreseeable future. This development should permit the final "green light" for a major withdrawal of U.S. forces from Europe, perhaps fully realized after a period of stabilization emerges.
The armed forces of recently united Germany and the other Western
Europeans will be more than sufficient should instability in Eastern Europe (or the Balkans) threaten European peace. Already there are strong indications that Germany intends to flex its considerably strengthened muscle in Europe --laying down new operational restrictions on allied forces in country and taking the lead in the Yugoslavian crisis. ~6
As U.S. forces leave Europe after a stay of some fifty years, it will truly be the end of an era.
The real concern will be stability in the republics.
As Jean Kirkpatrick recently commented, "The new world order will be forged not in the Persian
Gulf, but in the factories, fields, military forces, and political arenas of the former soviet Union. ''17 Her concern is the possibility of the rise of dangerous leaders in the potential chaos of the former Soviet Union. She likens conditions to those that permitted the rise of Hitler and Mussolini --" inflation, unemployment, scarcity, and disorder after an old empire had dissolved and an entrenched regime had died and before a new democracy had taken root. ' 
'18
The military has already held a semi-political assembly in Moscow in early 1992, and is pushing forward a "platform" of military officers as candidates in representative assemblies.
One key aspect of the evolving global security environment as it relates to Europe will be the ultimate shape of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
With the dissolution of the single opponent against whom the alliance has been focused for its fifty year history, planners are searching for a relevant mission for NATO. Many changes are in the wind, including an 80 percent cut in NATO's nuclear arsenal. 
19
A recent exercise, CERTAIN SHIELD 91, featured a mix of British, German, Dutch, and Belgian troops demonstrating airmobile operations across Germany. ~2 At a recent meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, "western foreign ministers called for European states to have the power to intervene in the internal conflicts of Eastern Europe, using the present strife in Yugoslavia and gathering conflicts in the former Soviet Union to illustrate their concern. ''23 U.S.
Secretary of Defense Richard Cheney has called for NATO to help newly democratic nations and guard against Iraq-style aggressors. ' 
'24
The specific role of the United States in the European theater is a subject of much discussion. Already, the U.S. is downsizing the number of troops stationed on the continent to well under 200,000 --as well as closing over 300 bases. 
25
. pull out all troops and atomic weapons out of Europe, deed NATO over the Europeans, and reclaim our freedom of action in deciding whether to go back in the event of war. ''26 Most observers believe that the U.S. troop presence will remain, at least as part of a NATO reaction force, for the foreseeable future.
One interesting European security development that will affect the overall international environment is the possibility of a joint French-German European force, based on an existing
Franco-German brigade. The force is tentatively described as "a
European corps" and would be a European Community defense force. 27
The response of the United States has been wary, and has centered around seeking assurances that " . NATO's position as the bulwark of Western security will not be undermined by French-German moves. ''2' Some observers have gone so far as to speculate that the French and German proposal " . . . is the first step in the alliance's eventual unraveling. ' 
'
The degree to which direct U.S. involvement will be required will be shaped by events in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe; as well as the shape of the evolving European community.
The chance of actual U.S. force deployment (beyond what remains in Europe as a "stabilizing force" and as part of a NATO reaction force) appears slim over the next several years, although dramatic alterations are possible.
From the perspective of air and sea power, the key issue is the withdrawal question. If U.S. forces are considerably downsized on the ground in Europe, as now appears likely, air and sea power will be a key ingredient in future U.S. participation in European security issues, even more so than in the past. U.S.
air and sea assets will be critical portion of the mix for any "rapid response" force of any substantive size and credibility.
As a sea power separated from Europe by the Atlantic Ocean, the United States will depend on her air and sea power to maintain a significant role in a restructured NATO alliance that features smaller forces, and world-wide deployability.
Without question, the Middle East and Mediterranean will be one of the most volatile global regions over the coming decade.
For our purposes, this region includes the nations of the Mediterranean littoral, with particular focus on the Eastern Mediterranean and the Mahgreb region of North Africa. We will discuss the Persian Gulf separately in the next section.
There is very little reason for optimism concerning this region, and the problems that have led to four major land wars in the past thirty years are unlikely to be resolved. Despite the U.S. orchestrated peace talks, the Palestinian question will continue to fester without any real solution on the horizon.
Syria and Israel will continue locked in a mini-Cold War. A spate of terrorist incidents and Israeli retaliatory strikes have begun an upward spiral of violence, which has included the killing of Shi'ite Muslim leader Sheik Abbas Musawi and a brief Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon. 
35
'37
How are U.S. interests engaged? Principally through our historic emotional and political ties to the state of Israel, which will continue to command an extraordinarily powerful lobbying force in Washington.
The region is also important for its proximity to the oil-rich Persian Gulf, as well as for the linkages to many of our European allies in Southern Europe and to Turkey. The Mediterranean itself is also an important sea lane of communication through which flows a great deal of U.S. and allied trade. Finally, U.S. prestige is engaged in the Peace process, as well as through our continuing support for Egypt, our most important Arab ally.
The United States will continue to work toward a peaceful solution to the seemingly intractable problems in the region, but the best that can be hoped for is merely to "keep the lid on." A worst case scenario would find renewed hostilities among the Israelis, Syrians, Jordanians, with outside involvement by Iraq, Iran, or other states possible.
Indeed, if defense expenditures are any example of regional trends, the likelihood of such conflict remains extraordinarily high.
The Israelis are increasing defense expenditures by 6 percent above their current $4. 
5
They may be able to spark U.S.
intervention (on a limited basis, a la Achille Lauro) in a variety of scenarios.
An interesting and potentially troubling source of future conflict may be water.  The Kuwaitis have recently called on the Gulf Cooperation Council to "bolster internal security and establish a Gulf strike force (of about i00,000 men) to deter any external aggression against them.,, 52
A key element of the security posture in this region will be the proliferation of advanced weapons. Hostile nations and huge oil revenues will lead to regional arms races for advanced jets, main battle tanks, cruise missiles, ballistic delivery systems, and high performance patrol boats ---to say nothing of • the Iraqi people to brutal repressions" --hardly a situation that inspires confidence in a lasting regional peace. ~8
In short, the Persian Gulf will continue to be a regional "hot button" which will crucially impact the international security environment. U.S. strategic concerns will be " . . Overall, this is a region in which integrated air and sea power will have a major impact in the future.
Poverty, exploding populations, environmental impoverishment, refugee movements, narcotic activity, and terrorist operations will mark the security environment of Central America and the Caribbean over the coming decades. On the other hand, the trend toward democratization must be counted as a positive step for the region. South of Mexico, the rest of Central America will continue to be a regional trouble spot with continuing implications for the United States, although direct involvement to the degree seen in the 1980s seems unlikely. Economic development, not military conflict will probably be the focus throughout the region.
The role of Cuba in the post Cold War environment has yet to be clarified. Its economic viability in the wake of economic collapse in the Soviet Union is questionable, and the winds of democratization and capitalism are blowing hard south from Miami.
Cuban-Americans are said to be packing for an expedient return following the expected overthrow of Castro. They may have a long wait. The Cuban security system is extensive and thorough, the populace not particularly restive, and Castro quite possibly the last pure Communist ideologue on the planet. He is also intelligent and versatile enough to give where he must to retain the power he has ruthlessly held for over thirty years. His ability to undertake adventures beyond his shores will undoubtedly be minimized for the foreseeable future, and his most important role may well be simply to be the "bad example" other Caribbean states point to in their movement toward market economies and capitalism. Interestingly, a Cuban defector recently said that Castro is trying to provoke the U.S. into a military attack as a means of rallying the country and holding on to power, e2 As outside aid from Russia winds down, Castro is "calling for Cubans to increase their resistance against the U.S. and to defend the island's Communist system. ''83
Russia is reviewing its entire relationship with Cuba, and direct aid will probably be reduced to virtually nothing over the next few years. 84 Some observers predict that Castro "will try to relieve his mounting economic pressures by opening up the emigration gates" in numbers that make the i00,000 who made the crossing during the 1980 Mariel boat lift "look like small potatoes. ''8~ The United States intends to maintain its base at Guantanamo Bay despite the Soviet pull-out, arguing that the base has a "regional mission" that goes well beyond Cuba. 86 With the withdrawal of Russian aid, Castro may try to take his country down the so-called "zero option" path, reflecting zero assistance from the outside world --a road that would require replacing automobiles with oxen-pulled carts, manual generation of electric power, and massive disturbances in the Cuban economy. All of this could lead to destabilization and a tendency to "lash out" at democratic regimes in the region, although most planners believe Castro will have his hands full at home. Perhaps the most difficult issue facing analysts in this region today is the direction that will be undertaken by China.
While the world's most populous country has undertaken a wide variety of economic reforms over the past five years, it has made little effort toward political reform. Indeed, the events in Tienamen Square in 1989 seem to demonstrate that a continuing policy against dramatic political reform is held by the ruling elite.
In late 1991, China put the People's Liberation Army on alert to be "ready for sudden events" and counseled them to "obey the party absolutely., The Chinese have also increased their Indonesia, the world's most populace Muslim country, has many internal conflicts and is perceived as a concern by other U.S.
allies in the region --Australia, Singapore, and Malaysia.
Overall, there is much to be concerned about in Southeast Asia. Potential internal turmoil in China, perhaps similar to that experienced in the former Soviet Union, appears possible.
Chinese foreign policy is difficult to predict, and their willingness to sell weapons to a variety of unstable regimes will be a source of conflict with the West. Vietnam's role is difficult is assess, although they may become more closely allied with the Chinese. The potential for some limited military involvement by the U.S. in the Philippines (evacuation, for example) is high. This is an area of the world in which the future is unusually difficult to assess, and direct U.S. military involvement is a possibility in a variety of plausible scenarios.
Given the U.S. experience in Vietnam, the commitment of large land forces to East Asia seems unlikely. Any U.S.
involvement will be centered around integrated air and sea power, particularly given the maritime nature of the theater. The possibility of evacuation operations from the Philippines, disaster response, and deterrent action against possible
Vietnamese activity all seem possible --and all would involve air and sea power as the major portion of U.S. military activity.
The key actor in the international security environment in this region of the world is Japan. While Japan continues to devote only one per cent of its gross national product to defense, it still as a result has the third largest defense budget in the world. The Japanese do not show signs (as a society) of becoming more comfortable with an increased miliary role (and nor does the thought of Japanese militarism sit will with many other countries neighbors throughout Asia). Yet there is a certain inevitability to the gradual reemergence of Japan as an even more significant military power. As a general rule, however, this would not be a regional question and is therefore excluded from the scope of our analysis here.
In summary, then, three major potential regional crisis arenas seem possible during the 1990s: the Persian Gulf/Mediterranean Middle East; Central America/Caribbean; and
East Asia. Overlaying all of them is the possibility of a resurgence by Russia, although this seems unlikely as an immediate security threat. In subsequent chapters, our analysis will focus on the integrated use of air and sea power in controlling such regional crises as these, with the goal being to terminate hostile and violent activityat the lowest possible level in the calculus. 
The Salvadorans Make Peace in a Negotiated Revolution," New York Times, 8 January 1992, p. E3.
Time Golden, "Central America's Road Ahead," New York Times, 8 January 1992, p. E3.
"Panama has had an epidemic of bombings," Security Intelligence, i0 February 1992, p. 5.
"Sandinista Army called region's smallest," Baltimore Sun, September 1991, p. 2.
"Nicaragua faces new civil war," Washington Times, i0 October 1991, p. i0.
Steve Levine, "Bhutto says Pakistan can build nuclear weapons," The Guardian ~U.K.), 2 September 1991, p. 8. i00.
Don Fesperman, ~ "Iraq's progress on nuclear arms rocked experts," Baltimore Sun, I0 November 1991, p. i. i01.
"The case against war," The Economist, 7 September 1991, p. 34.
Brahma Chelianey, "Clashes increase in bitter duel for Kashmir's future," 
The essence of managing regional crisis is maintaining control of the vertical ladder of escalation.
Air power and sea power are particularly useful in controlling escalation, because each can be used in a limited fashion initially, gradually increased in intensity, and finally used with devastating force if necessary. While both air power and sea power offer specific advantages and disadvantages, their integration offers the best means of maintaining positive control in what is naturally a chaotic warfighting environment. Each level of vertical escalation in a regional crisis represents a distinct level of violence --even though each crisis admittedly is a unique set of circumstances.
Each level in the gradually intensifying ladder of escalation in a regional crisis scenario is unique and presents a different opportunity for effectively using integrated air and sea power. Before examining each level in the vertical ladder of escalation, we must settle on a definition of a crisis itself.
A deceptively simple question.
One is reminded of the Supreme Court Justice describing pornography: "I can't define it, but I know it when I see it."
In the case of a crisis, much the same holds true in the real world --a crisis is, like beauty, in the eye of the beholder. For our purposes here, however, we need to establish a boundary to what can be described as a crisis as we seek to establish a coherent means for integrating air and sea power in controlling escalation in a crisis.
There already exists a "standard" Department of Defense definition of a crisis: "An incident or situation involving a threat to the United States, its territories, citizens, military forces, and possessions or interests that develops rapidly and creates a condition of such diplomatic, economic, political, or military importance that commitment of U.S. military forces and resources is contemplated to achieve national objectives. ''I This is an adequate, if extremely general, formulation.
Our perspective will be centered on the United States, and will be bounded by somewhat artificial levels of activity.
Again, this should not imply that an academic definition of what is quintessentially a "real world" issue is acceptable. It is merely a convenient means to bound the problem for study.
A crisis will be defined as:
i.
A sequence of events in a given country or geographic region (hereafter generally described as a "crisis arena") that has a significant impact on the United States through cultural, political, economic, or military means; o A premium will always be placed on maintaining relatively low casualties on our own side; but in regional crisis, decision makers will be influenced to an even greater degree by the need In most crisis situations, therefore, control of the crisis is the objective of planners.
Their most basic concern is to prevent an escalation of the crisis, which can lead to heightened threats to U.S. interests.
In order to control the vertical escalation of the crisis, planners have a range of tools at their disposal. These range from public diplomacy, at the lowest level of force, through political and economic means, and eventually to the application of military forces in a region.
It is with the application of military force we are concerned, and specifically with the use of integrated air and sea power in the crisis arena.
It is assumed at the outset in our analysis that planners have either rejected political and economic tools, already used them, or decided on the need for some military applications in addition.
An interesting way to look at controlling the vertical ladder of escalation is that it is part of what might be termed a sequential pattern of operations.
In general, the waging of war can be described as either cumulative or sequential. 3 In cumulative warfighting, the landing of continuous, powerful blows on the enemy without a great deal of regard to highly specific synchronization is the central objective.
This has been the general American approach to war, as exemplified by U.S. tendency to throw enormous quantities of men and material at a broad warfighting venue until the enemy is pummelled into unconditional surrender. 4
Sequential warfighting is quite different, and is far more suited to the relatively progressive cadence of escalation in a "typical" regional crisis.
The hallmarks of a regional crisis discussed above --politicized issues, relatively quick crisis generation, a premium on low casualties, specific political objectives, a high degree of command and control exercised by all actors --lead naturally to sequential operations.
As the name implies, sequential operations consist of selecting specific activities on the vertical ladder of escalation and proceeding upward (or downward) as circumstances warrant. Sequential operations can also include proceeding in a geographically sequential manner while remaining on a single rung of the vertical ladder Of escalation. An example of the first type of sequential operations is simply adding more direct use of firepower over time, i.e. beginning with demonstrations of force, then proceeding sequentially through light, medium, and heavy strike, and finally conducting an invasion to seize territory.
An example of the second type of sequential operations would be starting with medium strike operations on a small area in a single city and then proceeding to conduct further medium strike operations on an expanding geographic area, spreading the attack to larger areas of the city then on to other strategic centers in the crisis arena.
Sequential operations is a critically important concept for planners in the evolving international security environment.
First, sequencing permits the planner to exercise better control over the warfighting forces introduced into the crisis because the forces are part of a more deliberate and orderly application process.
Second, sequencing better supports the accomplishment of political objectives by allowing negotiations at various stages of the conflict. Third, sequencing will generally (although not always) permit lower levels of casualties and to loss of fewer prisoners of war, because the possibility of settling the conflict at an earlier stage of actual violence exists. Fourth, sequencing is a better operational approach for war termination, because it reduces the emotionalism and "all or nothing" attitudes that develop in cumulative styles of warfighting.
Sequential operations are not limited war, however.
Sequencing can lead very quickly to the application of extremely high levels of violence, as in the Persian Gulf War; or it can be part of relatively low levels of violence, as in shows of force with aircraft and ships in Southeast Asia in the 1950s.
Sequencing forces into a theater is a type of military operation, not a style of war.
Vietnam, some would say, was an example of sequencing that failed.
Given that it failed in that conflict, why then is the concept so important?
The reason sequencing failed in Vietnam was that the sequencing (in the sense used here of movement up and down the vertical ladder of escalation) was too widely spaced, permitting the enemy to react to each change in the sequence and retool their strategy.
The Gulf War was a situation in which sequencing was not relevant to the problem --because the enemy, Saddam Hussein, moved quickly to a determined "all or nothing" stance.
In the majority of regional crises over the next decade, I believe sequential warfighting (control of the vertical ladder of escalation) will be our most effective tool or response --particularly with integrated air and sea power. It
is particularly important because it may be possible to contain many crises at a lower level before they escalate to far higher levels of violence.
As an illustration of the concept of sequencing, the U.S. be repeated (at least on so grand a scale), which leads to the conclusion that vertical control of escalation can be a powerful tool for U.S. security policy in the future. This will be discussed in more depth in subsequent chapters.
The various steps on the vertical ladder of escalation have been discussed and debated by operators, analysts, and academics throughout the post-World War II period.
The most thorough and widely accepted "ladder" was developed by Herman Kahn, and includes 44 separate "steps" leading from "ostensible crisis" (step i) through "spasm or insensate war" (step 44). 6 His 44 steps are more politically oriented and also deal with larger scale warfare than we are concerned with in this study. For our purposes, an abbreviated ladder of vertical escalation might include eight discrete steps and four additional techniques.
More detailed divisions could be developed and analyzed, but the vast majority of uses of integrated air and sea power fall into this structure, which is discussed below: Examples of show of force are legion, and can be accomplished with air power, sea power, or a combination of the two. The arrival of a Carrier Battle Group in a crisis arena, even though operating in international waters, sends a strong signal.
Likewise, a squadron of attack aircraft suddenly appearing at a base in a nearby friendly country can quickly calm a volatile situation --even if the aircraft stay parked on the runway.
A recent example of a show of force calming a dangerous There are distinctions in international law between these instruments. A blockade is an act of war when declared or imposed an is, as such, a defacto declaration of war. A quarantine is not, nor is an embargo.
These fall more under the headings of sanctions or acts short of war. This may be one primary reason why we did not "blockade" Cuba in 1962 or declare a "blockade" of Iraq in August 1990, even There is an interesting mirror image of the blockade/embargo/quarantine situation, and that is when U.S.
forces have countered a blockade, embargo, quarantine, or act of maritime terrorism in an effort to control a regional crisis.
The Berlin airlift of 1948 delivered over 1.7 million tons of food, clothing, food, fuel, and medical supplies in an effort requiring over 300,000 sorties. ~7 This is a scenario in which U.S. forces may play a significant role over the coming decades.
There are dozens of strategic sea "choke points" around the world which can be controlled by the emplacement of land-based cruise missiles, the laying of mines and/or the operation of a handful of well-armed, high-speed gunboats. The use of diesel submarines in such a scenario is also possible. An example of countering an act of maritime terrorism was the international effort to clear the Red Sea of mines in 1984.
A third aspect of this rung in the vertical ladder of escalation is the option of conducting escort operations. This The destruction of oil platforms was quickly followed by the destruction of much of the Iranian naval order of battle shortly thereafter.
The next level of operations in the vertical ladder of escalation is the use of medium strike operations, defined as over i00 tons used within a ten day period. This level of strike operations begins to enter a very high level of violence, and will have a dramatic impact in the crisis arena. Again, both naval and air forces have been used in conducting a medium strike level of operations over the past two decades.
One example that comes to mind was the bombing of Cambodia during the latter stages of the war in Vietnam.  
Clearly, integrated sea and air power, which will be discussed in depth in the next chapter, are of great importance in controlling the vertical ladder of escalation.
A cursory glance at the attached appendix provides an overview of the use of military force in regional crises over the three decades from 1961-1991. Air and sea forces have been the "force of choice" in the vast majority.
The reason for their selection in regional crisis and their continuing applicability in the coming decades will be explored in the next chapter.
Appendix A: 
In order to best discuss the integration of air and sea power in regional crisis control, we must first define these two concepts. Both the U.S. Navy, the obvious "owner" of U.S. sea power; and the U.S. Air Force, the "owner" of U.S. air power, have their own specialized vocabularies. These concepts are central to the entire discussion of roles and missions that devolves from a study of the integration of fundamental tools of warfighting in achieving air and sea power.
In this chapter, we will examine both air and sea power, then discuss the Navy's concepts of air and sea power (including both Navy air power and Air Force air power). We will likewise discuss the U.S. Air Force's concept of air power, as well as Air Force ideas on sea power.
Finally, we will discuss the development of an integrated In addition to these principles of warfare, the U.S. Air Force identifies eight "tenets" of aerospace power that are worth mentioning.
They will be discussed later in examining the integration of air and sea power. 
The air commander must balance combat opportunity, necessity, effectiveness, and efficiency against the associated risk to friendly aerospace resources. Technologically sophisticated aerospace assets are not available in vast numbers and cannot be produced quickly.
Aerospace power is most effective when it is focused in purpose and not needlessly dispersed.
Aerospace power should be applied persistently. Destroye d targets can sometimes be rebuilt by resourceful enemies. Air commanders must plan for restrikes against important targets.
All of which brings us full circle to the question of "What is Air Power?" For our purposes, which involve studying the achievement of air and sea power in regional crisis control, we will define air power as follows:
Command of the air, established by the use of air, maritime, ground, and space systems, permitting unrestricted use of the air while denying it to the enemy.
Our focus will be predominantly on naval (both Navy and Marine Corps) and Air Force aircraft.
Our working assumption will be that Army aircraft are devoted to the major land battle and the establishment of absolute land power, which is beyond the scope of this study.
Any discussion of sea power in the modern context must begin (and some would say end as well) with Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer
Mahan.
At the turn of the century, in the bustling, expanding America of Theodore Roosevelt, Mahan was the chief prophet of sea power.
His influence in defining sea power and its importance to the historical prominence of maritime nations (primarily Great Britain and the United States) continues to be felt in American A formal definition for it is elusive, but the general concept was similar to our concept of sea power as applied to the globe --in other words, maritime superiority could be defined as the ability to establish sea power anywhere in the world when required.
The Joint Publication i, Joint Warfare of the Armed Forces, focuses on developing a joint campaign that "achieves sequenced and synchronized employment of all available land, sea, air, This is critically important, since the JFACC concept is at the heart of integrating air and sea power.
While not specifically addressing the overall integration of air and sea power, Joint Publication 26 does briefly discuss the coordination and integration of land-based and maritime air defense.
The publication calls for full integration of both land and sea-based air, and relies on the JFACC to effect the integration as part of the broader allocation of air assets throughout the theater.
While there has been a reasonable amount of discussion concerning certain aspects of integrating Navy and Air Force aircraft (with an emphasis on JFACC, compatible fuels and ammunition, and C2), there has been thus far no specific joint doctrine developed for specifically integrating air and sea power in their broad operational context for the purpose of regional crisis control.
Note that the two definitions developed here --of air and sea power --are roughly parallel. Perhaps this is because the fluid mediums they operate in are in many ways similar, n Both air and sea power result from the establishment of local domination through the physical presence of warfighting forces.
Both air and sea power rely on multiple systems operating from all conceivable venues to form an integrated warfighting system.
For example, air power relies on not only airborne assets; but space systems (for surveillance, communications, and targeting); naval platforms (for sea-based air power, transport of critical logistics, air intercept control); and land-based systems (for command and control, ground control, basing and logistics). Sea power relies not only on seaborne assets; but space systems (for surveillance, communications, and targeting); air power (for support in near-land operations, early warning, tanker support);
and land-based systems (for logistic support, bases, refueling depots).
Our broad hypothesis here is that the synergism of air and sea power, when properly integrated, sequenced, and synchronized, offers powerful offensive and defensive capabilities -particularly in regional conflict.
The most suitable way to do so is by developing a concept for an Integrated Strike Force, which will be discussed below. We will subsequently examine the actual execution of air/sea campaigns to establish air and sea power in regional crisis --in the Falklands and the Persian Gulf.
We will then proceed to a discussion of the application of integrated air and sea power in regional crisis at the strategic and operational art levels of warfare.
Before doing so, we need to discuss the basic concept of integrated air and sea power forces that we will call an Integrated Strike Force.
Based on our definitions, truly integrated air and sea power would establish command of the sea and air in a crisis arena.
It would provide a secure operating region in which further forces (follow-on land forces beyond the minimal Marine Corps capability) could be introduced (if necessary) and conduct large scale operations involving occupation of enemy territory.
Integrated air and sea power, when consolidated, would permit unhampered bombing of both a strategic (deep strike against enemy centers of gravity); and a tactical (on the battlefield) level.
It would permit complete blockade of all ports and dominance of the littoral of a region with access to the sea --meaning, for most countries, • the end of all significant imports and exports (over 90 per cent for many countries enter and leave by sea).
The vast majority of the world's nations (all save 19) depend on their accessto the oceans for much of their commerce.
What level of forces are required to establish air and sea
And what further level of force would be required to establish absoluteair and sea power?
The answer, of course, is that it depends on a wide variety of constraints: Availability of bases in the crisis arena, the geographic distance from the United States of the crisis arena, the level of enemy resistance (including size of opposing forces and their military capability), the geographic size of the crisis arena requiring application of U.S. military force, the length of time U.S.
forces will be required to maintain air and sea power, the missions involved after air and sea power are established, whether land forces will be inserted for assault and occupation (and the size of those forces), and political constraints. In other words, the level of forces needed to establish air and sea power in a region is very scenario dependent.
If that is the case, what can we conceptualize about capabilities required to establish air and sea power? One answer is to approach the question in the abstract and set up a single air and sea power strike force that can be used as a baseline in planning operations. This differs from the current approach, which is that each service has a variety of combat and support elements.
The Navy, of course, is built around the Battle Group, which almost always includes an aircraft carrier, a group of accompanying combatant ships, and a variety of logistic ships for fuel and supplies. The Marine Corps is centered around Marine Expeditionary Forces, Brigades, and Units (MEFs, MEBs, and MEUs).  
The concept of the ISF will be discussed in greater depth throughout the rest of this work, but in summary:
An Integrated Strike Force is organized, trained, and employed by the warfighting CINC using three building blocks: A Carrier Battle Group, an Amphibious Readiness Group, and a Eight key elements are central to integrating air and sea power in regional crisis.
The first element is the most fundamental, and consists of defining capabilities. The production of the Air Tasking Order (ATO) by a Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC) in the Persian Gulf was an integrating act that paid solid dividends in combat power, and will be discussed in depth later in the this chapter as we examine the Gulf War.
A fourth element of air and sea power integration is target processing.
The strike capabilities presented by integrated air and sea power, especially in a relatively low-threat regional crisis, provide a wide range of options. They include shore fire support from the sea by naval gunfire, Tomahawk cruise missile strikes against tactical and strategic targets, air strikes against a wide variety of targets, and amphibious assaults.
Target selection must be undertaken with a solid appreciation for the first three elements of air and sea power integration discussed above --capabilities, economy of force, and C2.
Target selection, particularly in regional crisis, must be undertaken in a carefully prioritized method that uses integrated forces based on warfighting requirements to accomplish the stated objective --not on service desires, domestic political impact, or any other basis.
Clauswitz referred to as the hub of all power and activity. In addition to target selection, target lists and associated strike plans must be generated. Together, this targeting process is perhaps the single most important element of integrated air and sea power.
A fifth key element in integrating air and sea power is logistics, particularly the degree of basing available in the crisis arena.
The forces available, their combat power and endurance, and the military options for their use are directly tied to the logistic apparatus available both in theater and along lines of communications to the United States. The U.S. may or may not have logistic support in the crisis arena in the regional context, e.g. basing rights, overflight rights, prestaged equipment, prepared bases. The real problems in integrating forces can occur when a lack of logistic support -typically a lack of bases in the region --precludes full employment of integrated air and sea forces.
When bases are available, as in the Gulf War, air and sea power is far more quickly integrated and effective; cQnversely, when no bases are available, integration is far more difficult and creative solutions (typically the seizure of bases) must be sought, as in the Falklands.
The sixth integrating factor is the degree of sea and air control in the crisis arena. The first and primary requirement of air and sea forces is to establish integrated control of the skies and oceans in the crisis arena.
As in Desert Shield/Desert Storm, "the first order of business [was] fighting for and gaining air superiority and maritime superiority as preconditions for further operations. ''I Often, the United States will find itself quickly exercising indisputable control of the air and sea. This will permit follow-on actions and support rapid accomplishment of many military missions --as in the Gulf War~ On the other hand, there will be occasions when even with absolute air and sea control, the U.S. will be unable to impose its will quickly on the enemy --Vietnam being the classic case.
A third alternative is that air and sea control can be disputed successfully by the enemy for some period of time, as in the Falklands.
In each case, the degree of air and sea control is critical to accomplishment of military missions in regional crisis.
The sequencing of forces into a crisis arena is the seventh key element of integrated air and sea power. The eighth element of air and sea power integration is conflict termination. Too often, planning takes an operation through every aspect of warfighting and dismisses conflict termination as something "for the politicians and state department people."
We are not concerned here with the political aspects of conflict termination --those are indeed best left to politicians and diplomats.
From the perspective of integrated air and sea power, however, conflict termination is a demanding task that often includes special operational considerations.
Battle damage assessment, close-out operations, monitoring of cease fire situations, continuing reconnaissance, and force withdrawal are all aspects of air and sea operations that must be performed in an integrated manner.
They are made more difficult because constraints are often placed on operators as a conflict approaches a conclusion (e.g. don't fire on retreating armies, accept all surrenders, redouble efforts to avoid any collateral damage). Performed correctly, war termination operations are among the most demanding and require the highest degree of integration to be successfully completed.
In any given crisis, there will be other factors that enter into play as air and seapower are deployed and integrated.
These factors may be political, geographical, operational, economic, or cultural, and will vary from crisis-to-crisis. The eight elements suggested here are constants that arise in any crisis, and form a backdrop to the complex business of integrating air and sea power in regional crisis. In summary, the key elements for integrating air and sea forces in regional crises --understanding capabilities, using economy of force, developing effective command and control, selecting proper targets, acquiring logistic support and bases, sequencing forces into the crisis arena, acquiring air and sea control, and conducting intelligent conflict termination --are virtual constants in the equation.
While not an all-inclusive "checklist" for integrating air and sea power, these eight elements form the basis for effective planning and creative execution.
In examining the Falklands/Malvinas War and the Gulf War, each of these eight elements will be analyzed for lessons in the integration of air and sea power in future regional crises.
Why Examine Air and Sea Power in the Falklands?
"What difference between Ardent, crippled and burning from exocet strikes, still fighting, and Sir Richard Grenville's Revenge all those centuries ago?" -Admiral Sir Sandy Woodward, RN One Hundred Days
The War in the Falklands/Malvinas Islands illustrates several prominent trends in the international security environment and is an excellent case to study in discussing the integration of air and sea power in regional crisis control.
First, the Falklands/Malvinas was a war fought between two second tier powers colliding over regional issues --essentially a resource conflict over territory, although Argentinean nationalism and domestic problems also played a role. In this regard, it echoes such conflicts as Iran versus Iraq, Israel versus Syria/Jordan/Egypt, and India versus Pakistan.
It is a plausible model for many potential conflicts that lie ahead.
Second, the Falklands was a war of distant intervention requiring the application of force over a considerable distance.
As such, the Falklands War resembled the Gulf War and Vietnam from the perspective of the United States. Although Britain was not a regional power in a purely geographic sense, she had longstanding concerns and commitments (notably to the Falklanders) in the region which were challenged by the Argentineans. This is a situation facing the United States in several crucial parts of the globe, notably the Middle East (Israel, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States), Central America/Caribbean (many democratic governments throughout the region), and East Asia (Japan, South Korea). Third, the Falklands war was short, sharp, and dramatic.
While some conflicts in the modern era may continue to be long wars of attrition (e.g. Iran versus Iraq), most will be short, violent wars fought with specific war aims quickly achieved (or not). This is a reflection of higher levels of weapon lethality, the impact of mass communication and instantaneous diffusion of information, the availability of negotiating fora, and the gradual decrease of human tolerance of violence in increasingly informed societies.
In other words, outcomes, while violent, will generally occur quickly. Fourth, the Falklands/Malvinas War was a conflict of maneuver with a high degree of reliance attached to the air and sea forces involved. The conflict turned in large measure on the British ability to establish air and sea power in a designated region --the crisis arena.
On the second of April in 1982, the ruling military junta in Argentina seized the Islas Malvinas, a small group of islands roughly 500 miles from the coast of South America. The  On the other hand, the British surface-to-air missiles on combatants were not particularly effective against the sea-skimming Exocet missile. 9
On balance, the British were able to maintain a minimal level of air power over the task force and eventually carried the day, albeit with significant losses.
Likewise, from the perspective of projecting power to the shore, the British forces were spread thin and required to integrate their air and sea power effectively.
There is simply no substitute for adequate numbers in warfighting, particularly as a hedge against losses, the unexpected and other hazards of warfare. ~° Capabilities were limited, and resources were therefore optimized throughout the operation. The Harriers doubled as close air support and strike aircraft, while helicopters acted as transports to the shore for commandos, and army troops. Surface ships performed naval gunfire support and supported amphibious assaults.
Perhaps the major capability lacking was that of airborne early warning.
The Royal Navy possessed no E-2 equivalents and as a result had no early warning of raid generation other than that from coast watching submarines and a small commando group.
They also had no airborne fighter control, all of it having to be coordinated from surface ships. A large deck carrier could have provided the badly needed airborne early warning that was ultimately jury rigged in task force helicopters. ~i
The crux of the issue from the British perspective was really not capabilities so much as it was vulnerabilities. The British possessed sufficient capability in the abstract; but the Argentineans had the means to attack certain key aspects of the British force.
Had the Argentineans been able to exploit the British vulnerabilities successfully --by attriting the Harrier force, sinking either of the British Carriers, or using their naval assets effectively --they could have turned back the British.
While they made an attempt to exploit the vulnerabilities of the British, they just missed being effective.
Overall, the British after-action reports and memoirs indicate they were keenly aware of the capabilities (and hence the significant vulnerabilities) of their military forces. Their plans were well-defined to ensure optimization of warfighting opportunities offered by integrating their sea and air forces.
Economy of Force. Throughout Operation Corporate, the British Task Force effectively integrated air and sea power in an economical fashion.
The best example of this was in the immediate area around the Falklands. By establishing sea power within 500 nautical miles of the arena of crisis, the British were able to maximize the performance of their extremely weak air arm.
Had the Argentines been able to challenge the British naval forces, thus eliminating the air defense structure, they would have been able to overwhelm the Task Force with air assets.
Because the British were free to focus the efforts of all their naval forces on helping their air forces maintain tenuous air power in the region, they were able to prevail in the conflict.
Conversely, had the British been unable to establish air power, they would have been unable to conduct landings and defeat the Argentine ground forces on the islands. By economically integrating their air and sea power, they were able to increase their warfighting potential in the crisis arena dramatically. 12
The British use of the principle of economy of force was also evident in their selection of two relatively simple objectives for their limited air power: Protecting the fleet from Argentine air attack; and providing support for troops ashore.
By selecting target sets to attack with integrated air and sea power that were within the grasp of their limited resource base, they achieved economy of force in the conflict.
They also demonstrated economy of force in integrating air strikes with amphibious assaults. As Admiral Woodward commented, "Our plans were now simple enough. We would strike hard at Port Stanley Airfield with the Vulcan raid from Ascension first and then, at dawn, use the Sea Harriers against Port Stanley,Airfield and again at the same time as we hit the strip at Goose Green."
The air strikes served to convince the Argentineans that the
Argentinean attention away from special forces landings and the eventual landing on the "back side" of the island. 13
Command and Control.
The key command and control challenge facing the British forces in their efforts to integrate air and sea power was the complete lack of an airborne early warning system.
While they were able to use a system of picket ships (with air search radar) and helicopters for communications relay, The British were creative in developing command and control "work arounds" adapted to the environment and the tactical situation.
As an example, the air war was directed during the landings by a Type 22 air defense frigate, which carried new radar systems. The British developed a combined tactical picture using two sea-borne radars and were able to direct missiles against the Argentineans as they entered the Falklands sound and vector Harriers on them as they exited.
In terms of integrated air and sea power, command and control was an overall area strength for the British, with the exception of airborne early warning and ship-to-shore communications. 18
Target Processing.
During the Falklands campaign, the British were unable to establish absolute air power. They did a reasonably good job of target selection in optimizing their limited air assets, particularly with regard to amphibious landing sites and tactical bombing attacks. The lack of landbased air precluded any sort of a strategic-level campaign, and target selection was essentially a tactical exercise.
In general, the British target selections for air power and The first three targets (naval, air, and strike assets) were selected to establish air and sea power in the crisis arena and most critically to protect the fleet. Subsequent target sets were selected to prepare the battlefield and support the land campaign.
Once targets were selected, attacks were carried out effectively.
Target lists were prioritized and assigned to both organic (Harriers) and out-of-theater (Vulcans) aircraft.
Overall target processing was a successful element of integrated air and sea power in the Falklands campaign.
Loqistics. In many ways, the Falklands was a war that turned on logistics. Although the British were able to overcome the problem (principally through the simple fact that the war was of short duration), a longer conflict would have been problematic for them from this perspective.
Sea and Air Control.
As discussed above, the British found themselves in a fairly precarious position upon arrival in the islands. Contrary to the estimates in Whitehall, the Argentine Air Force was reasonably capable, generally well-handled, and bravely piloted. Most significantly, the British did not enjoy airborne early warning. They also suffered from a lack of sufficient number of Harriers to effect a true airborne perimeter defense of the Task Force, and thus relied on a defense-in-depth that integrated air and sea forces with reasonable effectiveness.
The lack of airborne early warning also required the positioning of air defense ships on radar picket duty, where a number were effectively attacked by Argentine aircraft. Given their handicaps, the British were not able to establish absolute air power, although they did develop the minimal level of air power necessary to complete their mission.
They were able to establish absolute sea power in the South Atlantic, and this permitted them to undertake further operations despite their inability to establish absolute air power.  The arrival of the Task Force and subsequent efforts to establish absolute air power followed, although the British were unable to accomplish this objective fully. Like the Falklands, the War in the Persian Gulf serves as an archetype of one potential variant of future regional conflicts.
First, it initially involved conflict between two regional states over resources, a classic type of dispute that will be increasingly common over the next decade as populations increase, arms proliferate, and resources dwindle. Second, the conflict quickly involved major powers --in this case because of the high strategic value of the hydrocarbon resources at stake, the extremely blatant aggression undertaken by an obviously dangerous leader, the potential for proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the historic interest in the region by several major powers. Third, the conflict was a proving ground for many new variants of advanced weapons systems: Stealth aircraft, land-attack cruise missiles, "smart" munitions, night vision devices, area-defense antiair weapons systems (Patriot ashore and Aegis at sea), data-link command and control, and advanced tankkiller systems were all used with good effect. Fourth, and most importantly from a U.S. perspective, the Gulf War was a classic study in the application of integrated air and sea power in an escalated fashion to attempt to control a regional crisis. While the final outcome required the application of land power as well, the initial two phases of the campaign --a blockade followed by devastating air assault --form the essence of integrated air and sea power. In these four important ways, the Gulf War stands as a reasonable case study of future regional conflict.
On the other hand, the War in the Gulf was atypical in several crucial aspects, which makes it an interesting counterpoint to the Falklands crisis. First, bases were available to the United States in a region in which they are normally not available. The availability of bases made possible the ultimate use of major land power in deciding the outcome of the conflict, as well as facilitating the use of air power in the second phase of the war. Second, the circumstances surrounding the initial outbreak of hostilities were so clearly in violation of all norms of international law that it was possible for the Bush administration to form a global coalition against Iraq. It is unlikely that this will be the "normal" situation in regional conflict.
As a general rule, there will be two sides to most conflicts and the chances of lining up virtually the entire world in a coalition against one side is unlikely, although not impossible. 2~ One foreseeable activity that a nation could undertake that would incite the formation of a similar coalition would be developing nuclear weapons and threatening to use them --a pattern of behavior in which North Korea may persist. 27
Third, the region is unique in its lack of challenging topography, presenting an ideal locale for the application of integrated air and sea power (as well as providing high mobility to landpower).
To some degree, the additional complication presented by a more "typical" region --mountains, rivers, vegetation, and more disruptive and less predictable weather -must be considered in analysis.
Overall, the War in the Gulf is a valuable case study for future regional conflict, particularly in situations where an escalatory approach to the conflict using integrated air and sea power is pursued. The aspects of the conflict that are less "typical" --availability of bases, ease of coalition formation, and lack of challenging terrain --must be considered in weighing the lessons of the conflict, but do not obviate the value of studying the Gulf War.
The chain of events leading up to the Gulf War is beyond the scope of this study. 
Arabia in September and October.
In late September, the U.N.
Security Council reemphasized that only the special sanctions committee of the U.N. could authorize food and aid shipments to Finally, there was an initially low appreciation on the part of some Air Force planners as to the capability of Tomahawk, particularly with respect to the high accuracy of the missile.
Later, as Air Force planners gained respect for the missile's capabilities, they failed to appreciate the length of time required to produce targeting missions.
Overall, however, the difficulties were ironed out by the top commanders and a gradually improved understanding of sister service capabilities resulted in a successful air-sea battle plan.
Economy of Force. Forces were used in the Gulf with little attention to economy of force, mainly because the level of resources was so high that an effort to maintain economy of force was less critical than it might otherwise have been. While certain assets were limited (e.g. F-II7 stealth fighters, AWACS, and Tomahawk missiles), there was such a preponderance of more conventional weapons and support systems (e.g. fighters, bombers, tankers), that the U.S. ability to demonstrated economy of force measures in the campaign was never seriously stressed.
Additionally, the long lead time permitted by Iraq allowed the coalition to build-up sufficient forces to overcome the need to exercise tight restraint over offensive resources.
One interesting aspect of economy of force is the need for effective battle damage assessment. "Overall, the coalition air force always found itself badly limited in its ability to assess the effect of its strikes. ''3° The high-tech videos, while dramatic, really only showed that the bomb had hit --not the actual damage wrought on the installation. There were too few RF-4s for strike reconnaissance or BDA, and much of the work was eventually done by Navy F-14s with TARPS pods. Satellites were also used, but were limited by timing, which opened the door to deception schemes by the Iraqis.
Some electronic BDA was available from electronically equipped aircraft.
Even with many capable platforms, the on-scene commanders found it difficult to develop accurate BDA, and this resulted in some resource misallocation. Again, however, the unique situation in the Gulf War meant that this was not a great concern given the preponderance of available resources to continue waging war. control over virtually all airplanes in the enemy's airspace. ''3~
The plan was the daily ATO, and it was a difficult effort to develop it, adapt it for tri-service use, and disseminate it to all the squadrons, both ashore and afloat.
While the plan was ultimately very successful, it "carried a heavy burden of inflexibility. ''n The turn-around cycle of about 48 hours was particularly had for the Navy, which had to receive hard-copy frags on board the carriers, convert them into strike plans, and launch --because of the lack of CAFMs. This is being corrected, but throughout the war, the Navy had a difficult time.
Additionally, the ATO concept is very powerful for dealing with fixed targets in an area over which complete air power is established, but it does not allow sufficient quick response to attack mobile targets, lay out really threat-responsive combat air patrols, and take full advantage of real-time intelligence.
There are ways to adapt the ATO to doing all of these things (establishing "kill boxes," providing "lanes" for strike aircraft and building CAP areas around them), but it can prove cumbersome.
One way to look at the initial controversy over the ATO concept is to say that the navy (and the marines) were more willing "to accept inefficiency as the cost of operational flexibility. "3~ In Desert Storm, given the initial success to almost completely prostrating the Iraqi air defense system, the ATO system was the best choice, and the navy/marine aircraft were adapted to it, although some aircraft were given permission to operate outside its purview (most helicopters, some A-10s and USMC AV-8Bs and some CV aircraft flying Suppression of Enemy Air Defense [SEAD] packages).
In the future, the ATO approach may • not always be the best choice --many regional crises will require greater flexibility and "cockpit decision-making" (backed up with real-time C2) than an ATO will permit. This is a strong argument for the Integrated Strike Force concept, which will organize and train a joint Navy-Air Force-Marine team that can react with flexibility or execute a highly structure ATO as the situation dictates.
The ATO is well adapted to will defined and predictable targets; while more flexible operations are necessary for mobile and unpredictable targets.
Both have a role and our C2 systems must be ready to use both approaches in future warfighting situations.
In general, however, the C2 was effective. This was primarily due to two factors: First, sufficient time was available to work through difficulties; and second, because the Target processing was an overall strength for the operation, and the enormity of the available assets (well over 2,000 aircraft) helped ease the choices for planners.
In general, the logistic efforts undertaken in the Gulf were a success.
Over 600,000 U.S. troops, thousands of aircraft, tanks, combat vehicles, support equipment, millions of tons of supplies, and hundreds of ships were moved into the crisis arena over a relatively brief period. The perception of success surrounding the logistical effort, however, must be tempered by the realization that Hussein permitted an unhampered build up to occur.
Had the extensive period for the deployment not been available, the resulting tactical situation might have been far worse.
In essence, the logistics train was stressed by distance, but not particularly by time.
Additional difficulties included problems activating some ready reserve force ships on time and the mix of ships in the" ready reserves was not optimal for the operation. Airlift did not initially move a full predicted capacity. And no second crisis emerged to fully stress the system. Nonetheless, the overall logistics effort was a success that permitted relatively rapid integration of air and sea power in the crisis.
One of the most important logistic challenges during the war from the perspective of air-sea power was airborne tanking for Navy aircraft operating from carriers at sea. The "long pole in the tent" for complete use of CV aircraft over Iraq and even Kuwait was aerial tanking, a responsibility of the Air Force.
The CVs were moved into the Gulf as a means of easing the shortage of tanker availability and putting more Navy aircraft over the beach as "available sorties" for the JFACC. This was the key determinant-factor in utilizing USN aircraft in the air campaign. 3s Many difficulties were encountered in the refueling problem, but were eventually solved with additional assets, practice, and enhanced command and control attention to the problem.
Sea and Air Control. Key factors that permitted the success of this element of the air-sea integration process were:
i)
The existence and immediate availability of a superb series of on-shore logistic bases, including 20 major air bases, numerous support depots, outstanding port facilities, and ramp space for over 3,000 aircraft --and most importantly coupled with host nation willingness to permit their use.
2) The willingness of Iraq to acquiesce in the build-up process, choosing to allow forces to flow unimpeded into the region (although their options were limited as the build-up moved toward fruition, they could have challenged the process on the ground early in the crisis, rolling over thin U.S. and Saudi ground defenses and attacking the building air armada "on the flight line").
Availability of fuel due to the nature of the petroleum industry in the region, although this is somewhat of an oversimplification.
3) Presence of a sophisticated maritime prepositioning capability in nearby Diego Garcia.
Despite a failure by the Iraqis to stress the sequencing process, it was, along with logistics and air/sea control, a key element of coalition success in Desert Shield/Desert Storm.
When actual hostilities commenced, forces were sequenced in combat in a very efficient manner, beginning with B-52G Air Launched Cruise Missile attacks, F-II7 stealth fighter strikes, and ship-launched Tomahawk missile launches against command and control sites. 36 The extensive air campaign followed, employing Air Force, Navy, and Marine (and coalition) aircraft against a wide variety of targets in Iraq and Kuwait. Land forces followed in a highly mobile attack against the Iraqi Army, with amphibious forces conducting an effective feint against the Kuwaiti coast.
The superb sequencing of forces, both in deployment/preparation and in actual combat was highly successful.
Conflict Termination. While somewhat controversial (in that Saddam Hussein remains in power), the conflict termination at the battlefield level in the Gulf War was conducted efficiently from an air-sea power perspective.
Respective air and sea forces immediately disengaged from warfighting and went into a ready posture.
Their presence in theater over the next several months was a stabilizing influence that permitted both the initial enforcement of the surrender, as well as the continuing enforcement of sanctions against the Iraqi regime.
In both the Falklands and the Gulf War, air and sea power were reasonably well integrated to accomplish mission objectives.
In both cases, initial problems with defining capabilities and applying them to warfighting scenarios were overcome, as were problems with command and control.
Target selection in both cases was conducted well, and logistics, although challenging, were assured by domination of air and sea lanes to the crisis arena.
The sequencing of forces was intelligently conducted, and conflicts were terminated using the ability of air and sea power forces to ensure agreements were honored and the situation stabilized.
The broad lessons of the two wars for integrating air and sea power in regional crisis include the following:
Early and accurate assessments of combat capabilities and vulnerabilities must be made by planners. Of critical importance, air and sea power forces must physically train and operate together, learning the culture of each other's equipment, operational modus operandi, and organizations.
Forces must be economically employed.
Particularly in an era of dwindling defense resources, forces must be used judiciously in order to assure no wasteful dual-targeting or excessive use of surveillance, tanking, and other support resources.
A related aspect of economy of force is ensuring "blue on blue" friendly fire incidents are reduced to zero --or as close to that goal as training, integration, and identification technology will permit.
A "zero defect" mentality must be applied in this aspect of warfighting.
Command and Control must be seamless, compatible, and reflect a unified command structure. The Joint Force Air
Component Commander concept must be employed to intelligently use air power, and sea power must be integrated early into the problem.
Carrier air power must be used in a seamless C2 scheme that incorporates land-based air power and sea power.
Logistic efforts will fail unless virtually total air and sea power is established. The British came close to failure in the Falklands through their inability to completely dominate the crisis arena in the air.
command of air and sea.
permissive evolution.
The coalition succeeded due to its Logistic resupply is not always a
The key to crisis control is sequencing forces The right mix of air and sea power must be quickly and continuously applied in crisis control --as was demonstrated by the British in their early seizure of sea control and their continuing contest to get air control over the crisis arena. 37 This process was particularly smooth in the Gulf War, largely due to the permissive character of the Iraqi regime, which generally chose to allow the build-up to proceed without attack.
Target selection is driven by the need to first establish air and sea control. Without absolute air and sea control, proper sequencing of forces, logistics, and C2 nodes will be vulnerable.
If sequencing, logistics, and C2 are under active and successful attack --often the case in situations where air and sea control are not established first --the likelihood of successful crisis resolution is minimal. After air and sea control are established, the air-sea battle plan can take alternate approaches, attacking operational forces in the field, power and water grids, enemy C2 or logistics, or some combination.
Conflict termination must permit either continued air and sea control or immediate re-seizure of air and sea control. Like a reflash watch posted on a fire, the sine qua non of immedia£e quenching of a resurgent enemy is air and sea control. It is critical to maintain air and sea control (as is the case in both Iraq for the U.S. and the Falklands for the British today). 
Clearly, integrated air and sea power will have a key role in meeting future U.S. security requirement, particularly in regional crisis control.
After examining the evolving global security environment, the current and predicted force structure of the U.S. military establishment, and the historical perspective afforded by examining the Falklands and Gulf Wars, an Air-Sea Battle concept begins to take shape.
The intention in this study is not to develop specific, detailed tactical doctrine.
Nor is it to describe air-sea battle concepts that would pertain in a global war.
It is rather to discuss the integrated use of air and sea power in regional crisis control, the most likely scenario facing the U.S. military for the near-to-mid term period of 10-20 years. The focus in this chapter will be at the operational level of war, defined by joint doctrine as "the level of war at which campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, and sustained to accomplish Air and sea forces under discussion will include U.S.
Navy, U.S. Air Force, and U.S. Marine Corps, the primary components of air-sea battle. The use of U.S. Army and allied forces will also be briefly discussed.
In particular, we will focus on the five keys to war:
Training, Deployment, Scouting, Targeting, and Striking. For our purposes here, Training includes all preparations leading to the constitution of a force-in-being, prepared to conduct prompt and sustained combat operations. Deployment is the logistics support and ultimate movement to a crisis arena and the positioning of forces within that arena.
Scouting includes the actions undertaken to ascertain the identity of all air, surface, and subsurface contacts within a specified geographic portion of the crisis arena. Scouting also includes battle damage assessment, which is scouting conducted after force has been applied to a target.
Targeting is the bringing to bear of combat elements capable of applying lethal force to specific structures, geographic areas, and concentrations of men and material.
Striking is actually concentrating firepower [attacking] on targets.
In each of these five key areas, we will discuss integrated air and sea power in regional crisis.
The real essence of integrating air and sea power is the conduct of efficient training. Obviously, a great deal of training occurs at a single-service level. This is where pilots learn to fly, surface warfare officers learn to shoot Tomahawk missiles, marines to fire machine guns and so forth. These basic building blocks are assumed to be conducted well by the individual services, meaning that each single-service command -a squadron of F-15s, an Arleigh Burke destroyer, a marine battalion --is a combat capable element, assembled, equipped, motivated, and ready to fight.
It is at the next level of integration that our discussion begins.
Currently, within each service, there is an assembly of combat capable elements into larger groups.
In the Navy, there are Carrier Battle Groups; in the Air Force, tactical (and soon, composite) wings; and in the Marine Corps, Marine Expeditionary Units.
In assembling these larger groups, each service conducts further training and assessment. This is the part of the current training sequence that would benefit the most from the integration of air and sea power.
In a previous chapter, we discussed the Integrated Strike  The notional training discussed here could easily be tailored for a wide variety of concepts involving joint forces.
The spectrum ranges from the idea of standing ISF "building A fifth consideration in the deployment phase of integrated sea and air power is the positioning of assets in the crisis arena after arrival.
Generally, the first U.S. assets to arrive in the crisis arena will be aircraft flown from other forward bases or the United States. Naturally, their positioning will be entirely scenario dependent, but if forward bases are available in the crisis arena, these aircraft can be flown and landed in the region almost immediately. If there are not bases available, as is frequently the case, the first assets to establish a significant presence will probably be U.S. Navy ships. Again depending on the scenario, this might be a Carrier Battle Group, a Surface Action Group, and Amphibious Readiness Group, or some combination.
Naturally, the first requirement for any forces arriving'in the crisis arena is self-defense.
Lebanon in 1984, an unprepared force is a target waiting for a strike.
If aircraft are landed in the crisis arena, they must be in a secure airfield, with substantial defensive capability available.
If Navy ships are the first in the arena, they should be at the highest state of alert, with the right mix of ships to provide defensive capability.
The integration of the forces can occur in a variety of ways.
If the initial force package moved into the crisis arena is an Integrated Strike Force (ISF), the basic structure of the command will be in place and basically ready to operate. The land-based air power component will move into an air base either in the crisis arena (if one is available); or to the nearest U.S.
Even in an era of dwindling overseas bases, many regions of the world will have available bases. The sea-based air and naval component of the ISF will be positioned in the littoral area.
A defensive perimeter will be set up around both the landbased air and the sea-based force using organicassets of the ISF. Army forces could be added to the ISF at the discretion of the warfighting CINC to provide additional defense around the land-based forces. Naturally, the sooner in the process that the requirement for Army forces is identified, the better. Ideally, if an ISF contingency would require Army forces, they would be assigned as early as possible in the training cycle prior to deployment.
The dangers of significant Army forces arriving "in theater" after hostilities commence are obvious.
ISF should be able to handle most regional crises without the addition of Army troops, so the number of instances where this occurs should be minimal.
Another option, of course, would be for the Marines associated with the ISF to provide perimeter defense where required for the air force composite wing. This would denigrate the combat power of the Marines, however.
The warfighting CINC responsible for the crisis arena will provide for air and sea ports, lines of communication, transit and overflight rights, and reception and onward movement arrangements --with assistance as allocated by the NCA from other CINCs. This is in accordance with joint doctrine, and is a logical approach. The ISF is generally not equipped to handle all those logistic concerns without outside assistance.
The key to positioning forces is to ensure they are effectively positioned to i) maintain a secure defensive posture against all possible threats; 2) permit effective combat operations against postulated targets in the crisis arena; 3) are able to train, rehearse, and practice operations as required from the selected location; 4) are in a politically acceptable posture from the perspective of the host government (if there is one) and any allied forces also deployed; 5) have adequate and secure communications with other U.S. and allied forces in the region, including competent logistic support. If these constraints are met, the force will be able to quickly move into subsequent phases of the operation: Scouting, targeting, and striking.
Scouting is the sum of actions undertaken to ascertain the identity of all air, surface, and subsurface contacts within a specified geographic portion of the crisis arena. Scouting also includes battle damage assessment, which is scouting conducted after force has been applied to a target. Scouting is immediately conducted upon arrival in the vicinity of the crisis arena.
The key to effective scouting is using sensors in an integrated fashion.
In an increasingly technologically oriented world, overhead sensors (satellites) will provide an increasing percentage of all scouting conducted for integrated air and sea forces, although they will never fully replace other sources.
The key to effective use of overhead sensors is fusing their data with information collected by all the other means of scouting. Perhaps the key issue of scouting is data fusion. In modern battle, there will always be information saturation.
The key to effective scouting is sorting out the valid from the invalid or not relevant. This can only occur in a well-equipped and staffed fusion center, which should be located in the unit with the best overall communications suite and staff support complex. This could be afloat in an Aircraft Carrier, amphibious warfare ship, or command ship; or it might be ashore if an effective forward base in the crisis arena was available and suitably defended.
Within the fusion center, access to overhead data is the top priority; followed, in order, by access to data link information, airborne early warning radar, airborne electronic and communication information, and airborne reconnaissance.
An integrated scouting commander should be assigned by the strike force commander, with assets provided to his command. The scouting commander could be either a Naval officer or an Air Force officer, depending on the geography and assets involved in the scouting scenario. He would normally be an 0-6 with sufficient staff support to undertake the complex scouting problem in the designated fusion center.
Dissemination of scouting information is a frequent collapse point in integrated air and sea operations.
It is difficult to "get the word out" to widely spaced units with a variety of means for injecting data into their combat systems.
The best means of providing scouting information is via a suitable data link, either HF or UHF depending on the scenario. The data link provides a "real time" picture that can be displayed and continuously updated of the scouting results. Secondary dissemination can occur via other communications circuits, including hard copy messages, verbal updates on various circuits, and teletype circuits. Each of these is a distant second to an effective and well managed primary "real time" data link between the units of the integrated air and sea forces.
Scouting is the most difficult of all warfighting operations, because it involves the sorting out of vast Each ISF would then have 3-5 targeteers to assist in target selection at all levels of combat.
In addition to synchronizing forces in proper order, the strike commander must as well integrate his forces. This is conducted in the development of the daily Strike Plans, which build from the TAP and TPL. The Strike Plan actually assigns targets to strike assets. It also lays out secondary strike concepts as a follow-on in the event of further hostilities.
Ordnance selection for strikes is a key element in the decision-makers calculus in regional crisis, principally due to its effect on limiting collateral damage.  The daily Strike Plan is the planning document for commanders to prepare specific missions, brief air crew, load ordnance, and transmit further guidance --such as the ATO, the Landing Plan, the Naval Gunfire Plan, and so forth.
It is not our intent in this discussion to lay out a detailed plan for controlling an Integrated Strike Force, which should be developed by doctrine agreed upon by the services, the warfighting CINCS, and the JCS staff. However, several observations about command, control, and communication (C3) that are germane to regional crisis control and integrated air and sea power might be worthwhile.
First of all, the basic guiding principle for the ISF should be the broad concepts currently under development for Joint Task Forces. Additionally, however, the early integration of the ISF permits better and more integrated C3 for an ISF, and the concepts outlined below could easily be added to current joint doctrine by use of an appendix to appropriate publications dealing with the Integrated Strike Force concept.
As an Integrated Strike Force "works up" along the lines discussed in this study, much of the C3 will be resolved by the forces.
Each ISF should mold the basic tactical doctrine to its particular strengths and weaknesses, intelligence forecasts, and probable area of operations. This is not to say that doctrine should be discarded --rather, it should serve as a basic building block to be tailored to the specifications of the ISF.
A generalized concept that would be useful would be to force integration by actually assigning senior officers in the ISF to direct the various warfighting phases discussed above:
Deployment, Scouting, and Targeting/Striking. The choice of officer would be dependent on the desires of the ISF Commander, the background of the officers, their platform, and so forth.  "Ensure access to foreign markets, energy, mineral resources, the oceans and space." -Protect regional stability: "Maintain stable regional military balances to deter those powers that might seek regional dominance, promote diplomatic solutions to regional disputes, combat threats to democratic institutions from aggression, coercion, insurgencles, subversion, terrorism, and illicit drug trafficking."
This set of strategic interests obviously presents a wide range of challenges for the Department of Defense, and the interests identified above represent only a portion of the total requirements for the use of military power. Indeed, many of the tasks that the Department of Defense will be expected to undertake will emerge from uncertainty and vulnerabilities that are not apparent today.
In order to meet the challenges articulated in the National Security Strategy, the Department of Defense develops a broad strategic approach that is described in the National Military Strategy. The key, however, is that doing so will mean that the ISFs will form the central core of naval and air "forces in being" for the United States.
In other words, to dedicate sufficient Carrier Battle Groups and Amphibious Readiness Groups to forming two ISFs, the Navy and Marine Corps will not be able to support other commitments on a routine basis. This would be acceptable so long as the ISFs would also fulfill traditional CVBG and ARG commitments in the Mediterranean and Indian Oceans.
In other words, the ISFs would conduct routine deployments if U.S. defense policy continued to require such routine forward deployments (which seems likely for the foreseeable future). The Air Force would also be able to support the ISF concept, but not without dedicating a significant percentage of their available assets to the concept. As is the case for the Navy and Marine Corps, this is acceptable if planners recognize that the Composite Wings would form a significant part of the core air power response. For all three services, the ISFs would be the key response forces for regional crisis. The real "value added" over the current system is the joint trainingj workups, and standing levels of interoperability available under the ISF concept.
Looking out over the coming decades, there is every reason to believe that the United States will want to continue a policy of forward deployments. Particularly as overseas bases close and permanent overseas presence declines, the military will become more oriented toward rotating forward deployment and expeditionary response. The Integrated Strike Force concept fits well with this approach by providing available integrated air and sea power that can be rapidly moved forward into crisis. U.S.
Army or allied units can quickly be attached to the ISF, either coming in behind the ISF as a "filler" behind the initial wedge or being integrated early in the work up process for a given deployment, exercise, or operation. The ISF concept will provide a better integrated, trained, and cohesive crisis response force; and a more impressive presence force for the time it is on station.
In order to best illustrate the idea of integrated sea and air power, three hypothetical crises will be discussed.   Forward Presence.
The quick response of a forward-deployed ISF would be available if a rotational sequence was maintained to keep one ISF in each "side of the world" for a majority of the year.
For example, an ISF could be periodically deployed to the Mediterranean, taking the place of the Navy Carrier Battle Group.
Another ISF could operate in the Eastern Pacific, centered on Guam or Hawaii; or in the Central Pacific, centered around Guam.
An ISF could likewise operate in the Indian, with some basing out of Diego Garcia --although "reach" for many of the air force aircraft would be a problem. Finally, an ISF could deploy to the Persian Gulf, with the composite wing operating out of bases in Oman, UAE, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, or Kuwait --assuming permission from the regional states.
In each of the three scenarios examined here, immediate response was an important ingredient in U.S. reaction. While surge forces could have been mobilized, their time "on top" would be long --up to 20 days to the Persian Gulf and i0 days to the Eastern Mediterranean, even at top speeds, for the sea component. While air forces could be overhead many locations in a matter of hours, the lack of bases in many scenarios limits their capabilities when working in isolation.
Surge Force.
If the defense draw down precluded maintaining a level of forces sufficient to support such forward presence, the ISF could operate as a surge force centered on the east and west coasts of the United States. This would be less desirable, but again would be better than simply building forces up "from scratch" for each mission.
In the three scenarios examined here, however, it is clear that forward deployed forces would be far Frankly, it will often be difficult to obtain overseas bases that can support an entire Composite Wing.
In such situations, the Composite Wing would move to the best base available, perhaps grouping some assets further forward at smaller available bases.
In other scenarios, the scene of action might be considerably inland from the littoral of a continent, precluding the effective use of the CVBG or the ARG, and placing a premium on the inland placement of the Composite Wing at a secure base. The IsF commander and warfighting CINC would work to apply the correct assets in each situation.
In each case, the ISF is capable of integrating air and sea power to control the vertical ladder of escalation, preventing unnecessary bloodshed.
In the Philippines, the ISF possessed sufficient firepower and manpower to control a chaotic situation, suppress any counterattack, and accomplish its mission with vertical lift, airborne early warning, vertical envelopment, naval gunfire, and air strikes.
In the Iran-Iraq scenario, the ISF was able to undertake a reasonable level of response, challenge the immediate tactical threat (closure of the Strait of Hormuz), and provide a solid center of military power around which further forces, if needed, could form.
In the Syrian-Israeli peacekeeping scenario, the ISF could use its air and sea power to monitor the situation, provide early warning, suppress further violence on the part of the belligerent, and insert sufficient land power to accomplish the mission. For all three scenarios, the key was controlling the vertical ladder of escalation at a key point in the crisis to prevent further escalation.
Integrated air and sea power will be at the heart of U.S.
military power over the coming decades.
Throughout the course of this study, I have examined potential regional security concerns for the United States, identifying possible crisis arenas in which air and sea power will be at a premium in controlling the vertical ladder of escalation. Air and sea power, when properly integrated, have a synergistic effect that produces a greater striking power than either alone can effect. Two historical uses of integrated air and sea power in the Falklands/Malvinas War and the Persian Gulf War have helped shape concept for integrating air and sea power in an optimal fashion for the U.S. military --
the Integrated Strike Force. The ISF concept is a new way to organize, train, deploy, and employ U.S. forces, and would have particular utility in regional crisis response.
The Integrated Strike Force is a melding of a Navy Carrier Battle Group, a Navy-Marine Corps Amphibious Readiness Group, and an Air Force Composite Wing as a means of organizing, training, deploying, and employing integrated air and sea power. In this final section, several broad conclusions emerge, as well as making a series of recommendations that could serve as a basis for further discussion, study, experimentation, and implementation of integrated air and sea power in regional crisis control.
conclusions At the broadest level, twelve major conclusions emerge from the work in this study:
o Most uses of U.S. military power for the foreseeable future will occur in regional crisis. This is the result of the dissolution of the former Soviet Union, the end of a bipolar global security construct, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and advanced weapons of warfare, population growth and political instability in the developing world, and conflict over scarcer natural resources.
o Three potential regional crisis arenas, in descending order of likely use of U.S. military power: Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean Middle East; Latin America/Caribbean; and East Asia.
In the Persian Gulf, the presence of over 65 percent of the world's oil and two unstable and aggressive regimes (Iraq, Iran) will continue to produce crisis. Given our position of leadership and the needs of Western societies for oil, the U.S. can expect to be involved militarily in this region. The Mediterranean Middle East, with the seemingly intractable Arab-Israeli conflict, expanding populations, conflict over water, and an upward spiral of arms procurement will likewise be a potential crisis arena.
Our ties with Israel and Egypt, as well as prestige invested in the peace process and the potential involvement of NATO ally Turkey will act to draw the U.S. into crises here. Latin America, with its proximity to the U.S., drug problems, and political instability will also be a region of concern. The U.S. will be involved through business and economic concerns, treaty obligations (RIO pact), and ethnic linkages to the hispanic population in the United States. o Control of vertical escalation is the key to regional crisis control. Many regional crises can be contained by the rapid application of military forces before the crisis expands.
This should not be taken as advocating immediate resort to military force. As a general rule, political and economic measures must first be attempted. Some crises, however, clearly can be contained early in the crisis cycle, particularly if a large segment of military power can be applied in a concerted effort.
The Integrated Strike Force provides that option.
o Air and sea power must be integrated to be effective in regional crisis control. When air and sea power operate At a minimum, however, joint doctrine and certain technical aspects of the UCP will need to be revised if the ISF concept is adopted. That is a major project and it should be gradually accomplished over the years that this concept (or a similar one) is considered, modified, and eventually instituted. Such changes will be evolutionary in character, and justifiably so. The purpose of this study is not to make specific recommendations on the eventual size of that overall force --which should be driven by interests, vulnerabilities, and threats, not by structural concerns. The function of this study is rather to suggest a new way to organize portions if our current forces --the base force --to be more efficient, more expeditionary, more joint, and more tactically effective. But if the ISF concept is eventually adopted in some form, it will be prudent to examine the answers to questions like these:
--What force structure would be necessary to support the ISF concept if it is eventually adopted? While the concept as outlined here can be supported with the currently envisioned base force of 1992, will we eventually want to alter the shape and mix of our forces to more efficiently support the concept? I think the answer will be yes, and we will want a higher proportion of expeditionary forces in our inventory --but that is a decision that will unfold with time.
--Will an ISF concept allow for a smaller structure because we can fight smarter and moreefficiently? Until we have fully tested the concept, we won't know for sure.
If it does, which seems logical, where could cuts be made most efficiently?
And finally, with the ISF concept, how will our overseas commitments be affected? I have suggested several patterns for overseas deployments based on a notional force of two ISFs, one per coast "on call." Are we prepared to accept the greatly reduced overseas presence that would entail, especially in the potentially turbulent Mediterranean and Persian Gulf? This is at the heart of our force size and structure decisions, and the answer will depend on events in the years ahead.
All of this is a new conceptual approach to structuring, organizing, training, deploying, and employing air and sea power to contain regional crisis. The Integrated Strike Force is but one of countless new ideas that should be considered in the quest to find better, more efficient ways to conduct truly interoperable military missions. I have focused here on air and sea power because I believe they represent the most likely use of military power over the next two decades. There may well be situations where land power is the most critical element of the security process. Even so, air and sea power will be vital to the effective use of that land power. I therefore believe we will achieve our best return on investment with military resources to focus on achieving a better integrated air and sea power force. General Powell said in 1991 that all he knew for sure about his first two years as Chairman was that he had seen twelve crises and he knew he'd see a thirteenth as well. In a way, he was echoing the Greek philosopher who said only the dead have seen the end of war. My hope is that by learning to fight better, we shall fight less. I do not believe in my lifetime we shall cease to fight, but I do believe we can learn to fight better. I hope the ideas discussed above spark further debate and eventually lead to a U.S. military that can fight better -especially through integrating air and sea power.
Change is what makes us bold, said Napoleon; and today, more than ever, change is a process in acceleration. We must move on with new ideas and new ways of doing business if our nation is to remain free and safe in a changing world.
Gray, Colin, Op.Cit., p. 51.
Gray, Colin, Op.Cit., p. 51.
Marine Corps Amphibious Readiness Group, and an Air Force composite air wing, that can most effectively and quickly establish air and sea power in a regional crisis.
Marine Corps Amphibious Readiness Group, and an Air Force composite air wing, that can most effectively and quickly establish air and sea power in a regional crisis.
An ISF begins a cycle when units are assigned together, six months prior to the "in chop" date of the ISF to CINCPAC and
assets, and the population of Baghdad effectively held hostage by the threat of Iranian air attack, the Iraqis are forced to appeal to the United Nations for assistance. The Composite Wing was flown to Diego Garcia as base negotiations with the Saudis, He was to hold casualties to a minimum, operate in such a manner to reduce the chances of losing prisoners, and avoid collateral damage to civilians throughout the region. Iranian and Libyan assistance was given to Syria due to its status as a "front line" state against Israel. southern Lebanon, northern Israel, and southwest Syria --as agreed to by the belligerent and other states in the region. o An additional two squadron equivalents of fighter-bombers added to Composite Wing in Incirlik to round out battlefield
Proposed 
Joint Doctrine for Integrated Strike Forces VII. Integrated Air and Sea Power as Strategic Option (38 pages) -Potential Arenas of Crisis -Demonstration = Deterrence -Strategic Deployment of Integrated Air
Sea Power VIII
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
A quick look at an integrated strike force concept:  Eventuaily, some of the composite squadrons may be located abroad on U.S. bases.
From the perspective of controlling regional crisis as part of an integrated strike package discussed here, an idealized composition might include some combination of the following:
1-2 Squadrons F-16 Fighter/Bomber They included supply ships, troop transports, oilers, supply and support vessels, and a number of ships "taken up from trade" for the crisis --including, most notably, the 67,000 ton luxury cruise liner QE2.
Over 170 aircraft were deployed, most attached to ships in the task force. Some were transported south and operated from shore bases.
Several Royal Air Force long range bombing raids were conducted from bases at Ascension Island. Joint Warfare of the u.s. Armed Forces, Joint Publication i, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, December 1991, p. 66.
Synchronization of forces in the theater of operations is integration, and is thus not treated as a separate element upon which the success of integrated air and sea power turns.
A variety of works have been used to draft this brief summary of the Falklands War.
The 