# ID: 2395cf0cd0984d19b9eb11b7859dd85d
# Title: Coping with Change: Operational Art and Force XXI
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1995.0
# Fulltext:
The strategic environment defines the conditions under which a nation conducts its international relations. Following World War Two, the strategic environment found the United States the leader of the free world. During the period known as the Cold War, these responsibilities required the defense of the free world from the communist/socialist movement led by the Soviet Union. This bipolar environment pitted the east against the west in the struggle for political, economic, and military influence in regions throughout of the world.
The U.S. Army's June 1993 version of Field Manual (FM) 100-5. Operations defines strategy as, "the art and science of employing the armed forces and other elements of national power during peace, conflict, and war to secure national objectives." 1 In the Cold War strategic environment, the U.S. adopted the strategy of containing Soviet expansion around the world. To support this national strategy, the U.S. Army developed many different military strategies designed to maximize U.S. Army capabilities against perceived Soviet weaknesses. U.S. Army doctrine translated these strategies into executable operational concepts. The army called its last Cold War doctrine Airland Battle.
Airland Battle described the synchronization of army and air force combat power in time and space to defeat the numerically superior forces of the Warsaw Pact. It drove the development of the U.S. Army's modernization program that resulted in the 1980s fielding of the Abrams main battle tank, the Apache attack helicopter, the Blackhawk Utility helicopter, the Bradley infantry fighting vehicle, and the Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS). These weapon systems provided a qualitative edge over their Warsaw Pact counterparts (means), while the Airland Battle doctrine provided guidance for their employment in a manner that maximized their capabilities (ways).
Operation Desert Shield/Storm demonstrated the cumulative effects of this combination of means and ways to achieve military objectives. During the short Gulf War, the U.S. Army, fighting as part of a larger coalition, employed its Airland Battle doctrine against enemy forces roughly replicating Warsaw Pact forces. The Gulf War validated the U.S. Army's warfighting doctrine and related concepts based on mechanized warfare derived from Cold War concepts. The same year Desert Shield began, however, also marked the end of the Cold War.
The end of the Cold War drastically changed the U.S. strategic environment. In less than one year the bipolar state of tension that dominated American thinking for forty-five years ceased to exist. An environment of uncertainty and confusion replaced the Cold War setting. U.S. leaders used terms such as fluid and dynamic to describe this new strategic environment, an environment that seemed to continually erupt in small scale conflicts as factions once kept in check by Cold War influences now fought for control of nations.
In reaction to this new environment, the international role of the U.S. changed from defender to champion of democracy. Its national security strategy changed from containment of communism to promotion of democracy. This new security strategy resulted in an increase in the direct involvement of U.S. forces in the growing numbers of internal struggles occurring around the globe. In many cases, the U.S. has become involved simply to alleviate the suffering experienced by innocent people arising from internal conflicts. The U.S. has deployed troops to places like northern Iraq, southern Turkey, Haiti, Somalia, Rwanda, and the former Yugoslavia. Throughout all these operations, the U.S. Army continued to use strategy, doctrine, and equipment developed for the Cold War.
The army did this for two reasons. First, the army continued to succeed using its Cold War methods and equipment. The second reason involved time. It takes in excess of five years to implement new doctrinal concepts within the army. During that time, 50 percent of the army's leadership will complete institutional training, return to units, and implement new doctrinal concepts. Add the time required to develop the new doctrine and the figure increases to 7-9 years. For example, the army published its first operational manual to address the new strategic environment in June 1993, three years after the end of the Cold War.
Knowing this, General (GEN) Gordon R. Sullivan, the Army Chief of Staff from 1991 to 1995, began the Force XXI initiative with the goal of developing a method for ensuring the army's success into the next century. He designed the initiative to force the U.S. Army to develop doctrinal concepts applicable to conditions 15-20 years into the future. To accomplish this, GEN Sullivan revived the Louisiana Maneuvers concept, realigned the army's school system, and increased the use of computer modeling and simulations. GEN Sullivan's vision for the future army relied heavily on the development and application of new technology as the means to maintain the U.S. Army's superiority in the next century. GEN Sullivan often referred to Michael Howard's speech, "Military   Science in an Age of Peace" when discussing his vision. 
2
Therein lies the purpose of this monograph: Did GEN Sullivan's vision create the very conditions he hoped to avoid? What is the best way to move the U.S. Army into the next century? How will the army apply its military power to win future conflicts? How does the U.S. Army define this application of military power? How does it continue to leverage its capabilities against its opposition to achieve success? This implied goal of ensuring the army can employ its combat power in a manner that maximizes its effectiveness provides the focus for the primary research question. What is the role of operational art in the Force XXI initiative?
In contrast to this focus, the strategic objective of Force XXI is to "transform the force from an Industrial Age Army to a knowledge-and capabilities-based, Power Projection Army ... by leveraging information technology." 3 This implies that information technology provides some advantage or inherit power that will allow the U.S.
Army to dominate enemy forces on future battlefields. To succeed, Force XXI needs to fulfill three requirements: it must set the conditions that allow the technologies to multiply warfighting capabilities, incorporate those technologies into systems capable of influencing events on the battlefield, and develop concepts for applying the technologies to achieve desired results.
Currently, however, Force XXI only develops the conditions that allow technologies to improve army capabilities. The technologies are still under development, slowing the creation of systems that maximize the technologies' potential. Finally, without fully matured systems the army cannot fully develop modes of employment for the new technologies. Time might correct the last two problems, but the current practice of infusing Force XXI's technology into current operating concepts might inhibit their solution.
These three requirements combine to produce the leverage that GEN Sullivan envisioned for the army's future success, leverage that provides the U.S. Army a marked advantage on the battlefield of the future. This translates to a dominant force capable of quickly and decisively achieving the nation's security objectives.
The idea of leverage is essential to both Force XXI and this study. Therefore, it is important to develop some background concerning this concept. Leverage entails the application of military force to accomplish national objectives in such a manner that the force applied achieves the greatest possible results. Operational art represents the current construct for this concept of leverage.
The July 1995 final draft of FM 101-5-1 Operational Terms and Graphics defines operational art as "the employment of military forces to attain strategic and/or operational objectives.... Operational art translates the joint force commander's strategy into operational design, and, ultimately, tactical action, by integrating the key activities at all levels of war." 4 This definition describes operational art as a concept that facilitates translation to an executable form, in this case doctrine. For example, during the Cold War, the army's Airland Battle doctrine provided the framework for conducting operational art. By its definition, operational art clearly provides Force XXI with a point of leverage for success in the next century.
Assuming the validity of the relationship between operational art and Force XXI's concept of leverage allows the development of the primary research question: What is the role of operational art in the Force XXI initiative? The purpose of this monograph is to analyze the impact of Force XXI's concepts on operational art to validate and/or provide possible alternatives to the current Force XXI initiative. To accomplish this, the author will use case studies of earlier historic incidents or periods requiring nations to make drastic changes within their armies. These case studies will include examples of both successes and failures by these armies in subsequent wars following the significant changes. The study uses the strategic environment, the Force XXI initiative, and institutional change theory as the basis for analyzing how the U.S. Army copes with change.
The U.S. Army's leadership recognized that the end of the Cold War changed the strategic environment; they failed to realize the true nature ofthat change. The end of the Cold War changed the strategic environment into the most dangerous environment for U.S. Army operations: an age of peace. Michael Howard describes this environment as one "when most people do not seriously think that there will be a great war again." 5 Some might argue that Michael Howard's description no longer holds true in the lone superpower post-Cold War world. Regardless, Howard notes that eras of peace do not necessarily equate to peaceful periods. He allows for increases in internal strife, revolts, and violence during ages of peace. Howard warns that the study of this internalization of violence can so occupy a nation's military that it no longer devotes the resources to maintain their main occupation: preparing for another great international conflict. 6 Howard's statement concerning the internalization of conflict describes the current state of international affairs. Third World nations that relied on external ties and support made possible by the Cold War competition to maintain internal control began to erupt in violence. These internal conflicts produced second order effects on neighboring countries in the form of refugees and spillover violence. In the current geopolitical system of international affairs, nations increasingly intervene in these internal conflicts once they escalate to large scale fighting or mass migrations of people. Moreover, nations intervene based more on traditional ties of history, ethnicity, politics, and religion rather than with regard to Cold War alliances. Nations can use these traditional factors more readily now because of the change in the strategic environment.
During the Cold War period nations tended to make decisions based on the needs of their alliances balanced against their own interests. Nations made compromises for the good of their alliances. With the end of the Cold War, the international setting allowed nations to act more unilaterally based on their own interests. This produced situations that found Cold War allies on opposing sides after they intervened in conflicts that resulted from internal failures within nations.
The former Yugoslavia serves as an example of this multinational involvement in local conflicts. What began as a localized conflict expanded to involve nations from around the world. It began with the United Nations sending peacekeeping forces to the region in an attempt to end the conflict. Failure of the UN. effort to end or mitigate the violence resulted in international support for the combatant factions developing along historic, political, ethnic, and religious lines. Western nations, Russia, newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, and Turkey and other Islamic nations began aligning themselves with opposing sides in the conflict. The Balkans conflict grew to involve two to three dozen nations; most of these nations remained neutral, but some took sides and covertly supported one of the three principal belligerents.
At least for now, diplomacy has brought peace to the region. Still, the underlying causes of the conflict remain and the international community's support is divided among the opposing factions. This type of situation, where nations commit to multinational operations under conditions of impartiality while simultaneously covertly supporting one or more of the warring factions based on older traditional alliances and enemies, defines the new strategic environment. It produces a complex, multipolar geopolitical-military system full of uncertainty and danger.
In addition, vestiges of the Cold War still remain in this new strategic environment.
These vestiges continue to provide the primary measuring stick for the U.S. Army and the conceptual foundation for the Force XXI initiative. Force XXI uses the concept of two Major Regional Conflicts (MRC) based on Cold War force models and constructs for its basic foundation. This brings the purpose of the monograph to the forefront again. Does an analysis based on Cold War models and constructs provide the correct basis for success in the future? Do other alternatives exist?
Force XXFs use of these Cold War models and constructs coupled with future technologies establishes the environment in which the initiative will conduct its operations. The initiative's success is linked to this particular strategic environment.
Force XXI begins the development of this strategic environment by describing the possible threats and levels of conflict of the future. This description focuses the initiative's design on given situations and specified threats, threats that consist of modern heavy forces in a medium to high intensity conflict. Using this future, the Force XXI initiative applies current U.S. Army force structures and operational methods combined with new technologies to move into "third wave warfare." 7 By doing this, Force XXI limits its application to a narrow band of possibilities described within the document that may or may not meet the strategic environment. The reliance on a specific future state makes this assumed future strategic environment an integral part of the U.S. Army's future success.
The U.S. Army needed to develop a new future state because of the end of the Cold War. The end ofthat struggle produced changes within the world's military structures.
Entering an age of peace allowed both sides of the Cold War [Warsaw Pact and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)] to reduce the size of their military forces. This presented the leaders of the U.S. military with the problem of a new, often violent, international setting requiring increased involvement of U.S. forces and a reduction in the forces available to accomplish those missions. All these changes presented great challenges for the U.S. Army and forced a review of its operational methods. These same operational methods that the army recognizes as outdated (but not antiquated) provide the basis for Force XXFs operational methods.
These two events (Force XXI development and the review of the army's operational methods) resulted in parallel, generally uncoordinated efforts to modernize how the U.S.
Army fights. One (Force XXI) occurred from a conscious decision to improve the army's capability while the other evolved from reactions to the strategic situation.
The end of the Cold War created an unstable environment that drove the army into the region M. Mitchell Waldrop calls the edge of chaos. 
8
9
10
Complex adaptive systems combine the interaction between their independent agents and reactions to external stimuli (environment) to undergo spontaneous self organization.
Self organization involves conscious and unconscious acts to achieve desired results.
Systems and individuals exhibit this trait when they organize their actions to provide paths or procedures that overcome obstacles to their desired end state. These systems adapt to the stimuli of their environment, trying to maximize the benefits for the system.
In essence, complex adaptive systems learn from their environment. In Waldrop's construct, only complex adaptive systems can survive in today's world.
The inability to adapt to change causes the remaining systems to eventually fail and die.
In 1991, the U.S. Army's leadership faced the same problem: adapt or accept the possibility of failing in the future. Under Waldrop's chaos theory this decision to adapt to new conditions becomes an act of survival. This decision to adapt resulted in the 1993 revision of FM 100-5. Operations and eventually produced the Force XXI initiative.
The 1993 version of FM 100-5. Operations addresses many major issues arising from the end of the Cold War. It contains information pertaining to a power projection army with an expanded mission that includes a new category of missions called Operations Other Than War (OOTW). OOTW incorporates operations from many established security missions and includes: military operations in support of national domestic objectives, low intensity conflict, foreign assistance, and support to the UN.
Yet the manual only provides fixes to the challenges facing the army at the time of its writing. GEN Sullivan wanted more; he wanted the U.S. Army to prepare for 15-20 years into the future. He wanted to take technologies under development and make the army conceptualize their application on the battlefield. GEN Sullivan did not want the U.S.
Army learning to fight the last war better; he wanted it ready to fight the next war now. This provided the goal that dominated the development of the Force XXI initiative.
Force XXI represents the U.S. Army senior leadership's vision for the future. Its purpose is to maintain the army's qualitative edge on the next and subsequent battlefields.
To accomplish this, it proposes fundamental changes to doctrine, organizations, and training. Moreover, it includes all echelons of the military-industrial complex from the foxhole to the industrial base. Force XXI authors also recognize that this change must occur within a volatile and dynamic international setting. 11 "America's Army, trained and ready, a strategic force, serving the nation at home and abroad, capable of decisive victory ... into the 21st century. It is a journey ... not a destination" serves as the Force XXI initiative's vision statement. 12 This vision incorporates six components that provide a trained and ready force. These components are: quality people, training, force mix, doctrine, modern equipment, and leader development. This arrangement of components producing Force XXI constitutes a model. For lack of a better name, it becomes the army's trained and ready model. It receives its stimulus from three sources: change, continuity, and growth. 
13
1
8
This represents GEN Sullivan's vision for the future army outlined in the Force XXI publication. The primary agent tasked with achieving this vision is the commander of The document lists five types of threats to U.S. military forces likely to exist in the future.
These five categories (phenomena, non-nation, internal security forces, armormechanized based, and complex adaptive) also include a description of the conflict conditions or level of violence associated with each category. 
23
24
25
The first requires the sharing of knowledge concerning battlefield conditions. This is an evolution of the current principle of situational awareness. The second deals with the quality of the army's soldiers derived from a combination of education and training. 
26
27
Force XXI describes technology as the lever for successful future army operations. This implies the use of a mechanical model utilizing a lever, force, and body of resistance. The Force XXI initiative, however, does not provide a graphical representation of this model. This study provides such a mechanical model using the concepts of ends, way, and means as a foundation. These three elements readily explain national and military operations. For this reason, the study calls this the operational/ strategic construct. The elements of this operational/strategic construct provide the framework necessary to analyze the role of technology and operational art in the Force XXI initiative.
Ends provide the criterion for a successful operation by setting the national political conditions that must exist to conclude an operation. Militarily, this element of the operational/strategic construct begins by using these national political ends to ascertain a definition or description of the military operational goal(s). To accomplish this, the Joint Staff develops military end states that support national policy objectives by establishing attainable subordinate objectives which in turn set the military conditions required for the realization of the national political end state.
After the military translates national political goals into military end states, it develops operational plans (ways) to achieve those ends. Military plans exist at all levels of organization within the military and at all three levels of war (strategic, operational, and tactical). Strategic planning sets the conditions for the application of force to achieve strategic policy (national political) goals. FM 100-5. Operations states "strategic perspectives are worldwide and long-range. Strategy is concerned with national or, in specific cases, alliance or coalition objectives." 
28
3
2
Technology represents the major difference between the two systems. In the military construct it resides in means as a tool for the system to use. In the organizational construct the process relies on technology to transform raw materials to a finished product. In many instances, automated technology is the entire process for the organizational model.
Neither of these constructs, however, provides the necessary means for analyzing Force XXI. The strategic/operational construct does not use or possesses the capability to incorporate the idea of technology producing extraordinary effects on the process. The organizational model does possess the ability to portray the effects of technology in the process, but it cannot be readily adapted to the concept of warfare. These two systems provide the theoretical foundation for building a system for analyzing Force XXI. The next step is to establish a historical baseline for analyzing the Force XXI initiative in order to further develop the analytical model.
The The period between World Wars I and II greatly resembled the current international setting. Recognized international powers had been allies during the First World War and generally remained civil in their postwar relations. Technological advances drastically changed the nature of armies and warfare. Finally, nations attempted to use an international body (League of Nations) to mediate international disputes. During this period, militaries around the world began to study the last war and prepare for future conflict.
How these nations dealt with this age of peace would profoundly affect their performance when war came again to Europe. It made them, winners or losers. In They also remembered the German's attack through the low countries. To counter this, France modernized its armed forces with tanks, airplanes, and weapons equal or better than those fielded by other nations. These efforts produced a powerful French Army considered by most nations as the best in Europe. Yet the French remained defensive in their primary approach to war. They intended to destroy enemy armies along their seemingly impregnable frontier. By adapting technology, they perfected the ways and means for fighting the last war better. Unfortunately for the French, they incorrectly assumed their most likely opponent would also fight the last war.
The allies placed extreme restrictions on the size and equipment of the German Army following World War I. However, this did not prevent them from preparing and training for war. Like the French, the Germans took their WWI experiences and applied them to their vision of the next war. They recognized trench warfare's role in modern battle and its devastating effects against frontal attacks. The Germans wanted to avoid trench warfare by maneuvering around and enveloping defenses. 
34
The U.S. Army experience during the interwar era resembled that of the German Army. Following the war, the U.S. reverted to its traditional view of a small peacetime professional army coupled with leanings toward isolationism. These self-imposed policies placed the same type of restrictions on the U.S. Army that the Treaty of Versailles placed on the German Army. Although the U.S. Army did modernize, small capital outlays prevented fielding of equipment equal to that found in European armies.
One of the lessons the U.S. army that it needed to increase the number of graduates in the army, so the army increased the numbers attending each class. In addition, the curriculum changed to a two year course, one year focused on division level tactics and the second on the corps level. 
35
As the U.S. reverted back to its traditional views of international relationships, so did Britain. World War I served to validate the British concept of a small army for empire maintenance backed by a strong navy to protect the British Isles. Moreover, WWI
showed Britain the importance of maintaining strong continental alliances (France and Russia) which would provide the preponderance of manpower comprising the land force in a major war.
In keeping with these beliefs, Britain fielded a small but modern army. The British Army existed to maintain the empire, and in the case of a major war, to delay enemy forces (in conjunction with a major continental power) until the empire could mobilize.
To safeguard the home islands, Britain built a powerful fleet and a strong air force.
Building a strong air force demonstrated the vision of British leadership. They saw that technology provided new means to attack the Great Britain from the air. To counter this threat, the British developed very capable defensive fighters (defensive because of their limited range).
As for the army, British innovations in armored warfare began during WWI.
Following the war, British officers began to improve on the tactics of armored warfare developed during the war. They laid the foundation for high tempo maneuver warfare involving tanks and motorized infantry to conduct penetrations and envelopments of defensive positions. Unfortunately these tactics required a much more robust and expensive British Army than funding would allow. In the end these innovators lost to those supporting the traditional view of warfare.
Unlike the other major participants in WWI, postwar events mitigated the influence of Russia's experiences on their view of future war. Russia, defeated both internally and externally, would draw upon the experiences of their civil war, World War I, and earlier wars to formulate their approach to warfighting. Of all the nations of the world, Russia would best predict the conditions of her next major war. Not only would the newly founded Soviet Union's military leadership better predict the character of their next major war, they would also develop the plan required to achieve victory. Based on past experiences, the Soviet Union's leaders developed a Machiavellian (ends justify the means) outlook toward warfighting. Soviet military operations centered on the objective of the war. Soviet strategy and tactics did whatever required to achieve the desired end state. Using this outlook, the Soviets intended to trade territory to exhaust the invaders until the Soviet Army could counterattack and destroy the invading army. 
36
Each of these symbolizes part of the political-military strategic model.
Force represents the sum of the military's potential derived from resources (material and soldiers) and organizations. In other words, it provides the means. The fulcrum represents the application of these means; the ways. To succeed, the system must overcome resistance, thus achieving the desired goal or end state. Finally, the inseparable relationship between these three components (ends, ways, and means) in both the analytical and strategic construct provides the lever or link that allows the system to function.
The construct works by turning the potential energy of the means into kinetic energy that unbalances the enemy. Unbalancing the enemy requires defeating or incapacitating its ability to continue the war. Carl von Clausewitz describes this concept as defeating the enemy center of gravity. The center of gravity provides each nation the ability to conduct operations on the field of battle. It is "the hub of all power and movement, on which everything depends. That is the point against which all our energies should be directed." 
37
6
destruction. Yet they failed to create or train a force capable of completing these tasks.
The Maginot Line was incomplete in France and did not include the border shared with the Low Countries. As for the counterattack, the French Army did not establish a strong, cohesive, mobile force capable of exploiting successes gained by the defense.
During the fall of 1940, the German Army outfought and out-thought the French.
France and its allies probably could probably have survived failure in one of these areas, but not both. Using the Force XXI analytical war construct, the French (and their allies) inability to coordinate a coherent plan for defense or offense moved the fulcrum (ways) to the far left (low synchronization). To win, the defensive battle needed to destroy or defeat the main German attack to unbalance the German war plan. In this case technology failed to increase the effects of the French war plan. It merely provided the fulcrum for the lever without improving the French chances of success (see figure 
7
Germany could not recover from the endless assaults sent against from it from the land and air.
Soviet military operations sought the total destruction of Germany. The Soviet Army penetrated, enveloped, encircled, captured and destroyed whole German armies enroute to Berlin. Soviet operations were at the far right of the synchronization scale. Additionally, the inability of the Germans to recover from losses increased the negative effects of battles and engagements.
Meanwhile in the west, the allies attacked Germany on a broad front, maintaining constant pressure to prevent the German Army from establishing strong defensive positions. The allies also executed a strategic bombing campaign designed to destroy the war production and sustainment capability of Germany. In the south the allies moved from southern France into southwestern Germany. All three fronts (east, west, and south) aimed at the heart of Germany with the destruction of the German Army as the intermediate objective.
The western allies, like the Soviets, operated with the fulcrum to the right of the lever. These forces also faced a German Army that conducted synchronized combat operations. This made advances in the western theater a slow, contested fight similar to that in the east.
World War II served as an example in which all major participants conducted war using the operational art. In the Pacific, U.S.-led forces conducted a campaign of island hopping in the face of a Japanese campaign of static defense designed to wear down the attacker. The Japanese established a defense in depth by using the island chains located in the Pacific to force the allies to expend their energies assaulting, reducing, and capturing these islands. Japan used a strategy of exhaustion with the aim of winning territorial, diplomatic, and economic concessions from the allies. In the end, the ability of nations to generate forces and combat power while absorbing their enemy's blows decided the war in all theaters. Both sides executed plans designed to synchronize battles, engagements, and major operations to achieve their strategic end state. Operations was the first step in a process that would eventually produce the army's Airland Battle doctrine. The 1976 version revitalized the army's intellectual approach toward a difficult problem (fighting outnumbered and winning) and produced a start toward accomplishing the desired results. From its conception, the controversial nature of the manual created ripples of intellectual discussions within the army that quickly turned into tidal waves.
This intellectual debate was one of the goals GEN Depuy wanted to achieve in his drive to prepare the army for its next war. He wanted commanders to think about options available in order to teach them flexibility rather than reliance on rote, schoolhouse solutions. The manual was designed to be prescriptive rather than descriptive. His vision served the army well. To answer the first question requires defining revolutionary change in warfare. One existing definition states that to effect a revolutionary change in warfare requires four distinct events. 
38
39
Still, information technology represents a tool to assist the army in the synchronization of its efforts to obtain a stated goal. Yet information technology in itself does not synchronize the actions of the U.S. Army. Information technology is equivalent to giving a writer a better pen. The pen doesn't make him a better writer, it just makes it easier to write. In the case of Force XXI, information technology is designed to make military decisions both easier and faster.
Moreover, Force XXI and its information technology support the distributive battlefield that will increase the problem of synchronization. The distributive battlefield, with its battles and engagements separated in time and space, requires extraordinary efforts to synchronize the effects of actions to achieve the desired end state. Force XXI capabilities provide the potential to strike at the enemy center of gravity at a much early point in time then the current force. In its extreme, Force XXI produces multiple, asymmetric, simultaneous engagements throughout the battlefield. Yet Force XXI does not address this increase in means with a corresponding change in its ways.
Finally, what happens if the transition into the information age does not result in a revolution in military warfare? Force XXI success resides in technology bestowing a decided edge to the U.S. Army in conflicts with its potential enemies. What happens if the enemy decides not to or does not possess the capability to fight a high technology war? How do technology and Force XXI assist the military commander in synchronizing operations to achieve results in that type of environment? Simply stated, Force XXI fails to address these problems.
These questions support the true leverage of Force XXI that must derive from the application of combat power against an adversary to achieve results. In other words, Force XXI's lever is the operational art. Technology might make some components of Regardless, new technologies still must compliment military practices to achieve results.
Technology can and does serve as a force multiplier on the battlefield, but so do other factors such as position, firepower, and leadership. In fact, any element on the battlefield that provides one force an advantage over its opponent increases (multiplies) its chances for success. Yet these conditions only apply for a given situation or battle; armies must reestablish these conditions for every battle. None of these individual battles will end the war and obtain the desired end state unless a battle results in a decisive victory (decisive to the degree that further battles are unnecessary).
In both of these cases (sequenced and decisive battles), technology only increases the downward force on the lever (figure 
9
8
Endnotes:
'U.S. Army, FM 100-5. Operations. June 1993. (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1993), glossary -8.
2 Michael Howard, the imminent British historian, presented this speech when he accepted the Chesney Memorial Gold Medal award on October 3, 1973. In his speech he discussed the impact of an age of peace on the military. He believed that whatever doctrine militaries develop during an age of peace will not work. Professor Howard sees everyone starting wrong with the advantage going to the side that (1) is the least wrong and (2) adapts most quickly to the conflict. His views led to the U.S. Army's view of getting its (doctrine) about right. department of the Army, Force XXI. America's Army of the 21st Century: Meeting the 21st Century Challenge. (Washington DC: Department of the Army, 1995) 
U.S. Army. FM 101-5-1. TFinal Draff) Operational Terms and Graphics. (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, July 1995), 1-200.
Michael Howard, "Military Science in an Age of Peace," Journal of Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies, vol 119, (March 1974), 3-9, reproduced at the United States Command and General Staff College by special permission, 1.
Ibid., 2. department of the Army, Army Focus. Force XXI. (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1994), 12.
application offeree against the opponent. Under these conditions technology becomes a tool for the dissemination of information required by the commander to make decisions.
Another important consideration resides in the enemy's actions. Wars entail the armed struggle between two (or more) peoples, each seeking victory. Each side therefore attempts to unbalance its opponent's center of gravity. This produces the final construct that depicts the role of operational art and technology as shown in figure 
10
12