# ID: 23a1ac40ef3941878e001b36fa3941f3
# Title: Policy Options for Electromagnetic Spectrum Management in Support of Multi-Domain Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The electromagnetic spectrum provides the US Army the capability to communicate across vast distances with voice, data, and video, navigate using global positioning system (GPS) satellites and gain intelligence of enemy activity, etc. The US Army's electromagnetic spectrum use continues to increase while electronic warfare capabilities to defend the electromagnetic spectrum decreased. The research question purposed is how does the US Army control a contested electromagnetic spectrum to enable operational maneuver? The initial hypothesis posits the US Army develops a policy for electronic warfare which seeks to control the entirety of the electromagnetic spectrum. The policy is comprised of both materiel and non-materiel capabilitybased approaches which are necessary to dominate the electromagnetic spectrum in future warfare.
Electronic warfare is intended to shut the ear, stop the voice, close the eyes and freeze the nervous system. Deaf, dumb, and paralyzed soldiers do not live long in battle.
-Niel Munro, The Quick and the Dead My initial interest in electronic warfare began as a young officer during a deployment to Afghanistan in 2013. It was there that I became familiar with numerous in-theatre electronic warfare systems specifically designed to counter radio-controlled improvised explosive devices (RCIED) and enemy radio communications. While these systems were adequate and operated as designed, their use frequently degraded radio communications making command and control of dismounted and mounted operations challenging from a command and control, fires, and intelligence perspective. The challenge to devise ways to manage the symbiotic relationship between protecting the force with electronic warfare systems while simultaneously fighting the enemy is a challenge without a simple solution. It is fair to say; initially, I had a myopic view of electronic warfare as it affected our limited area of operations. It was only after my assignment to the Army's Asymmetric Warfare Group (AWG) as a senior Captain, my aperture expanded to gain a holistic awareness of how vital control of the electromagnetic spectrum is to the Army.
The purpose of this monograph is to inform and educate fellow military professionals about the electromagnetic spectrum, which represents a vital component of multi-domain operations (MDO). Given electronic warfare is not a new concept, this work is proactively forward-leaning to highlight the increasingly complex competition between the civilian sector, the military, and the adversary. This work is not an attempt to delve into the specific tools or methods of electronic warfare but focuses on the deconfliction to minimize electromagnetic interference, which enables communication via electronic warfare.
The research question to support this endeavor is how does the Army control a contested electromagnetic spectrum to enable operational maneuver? The initial hypothesis associated with the research question centered posits that the Army develops a policy for electronic warfare which seeks to control the entirety of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Electronic warfare (EW) represents an under-appreciated and often misunderstood capability within the Army. At the height of the Cold War, the Army maintained robust groundbased electronic warfare capabilities as required to execute Air Land Battle. The 1991 Gulf War represented the apex of electronic warfare and the point of departure for understanding the role electronic warfare plays in future conflict. The Gulf War represents the apex because prior to Desert Storm, Russia was the primary threat and pacing nation for US capability development.
During the Gulf War, the advent of the Global Positioning System (GPS) and precision-guided munitions represented only seven percent of all weapons employed by the United States but destroyed eighty percent of important targets.
1
During the same period, Russia and China invested heavily in modernizing electronic warfare capabilities to disrupt or disintegrate American command and control capabilities. The Russians adopted radio-electronic combat (REC) to destroy "thirty percent by jamming and thirty percent by destructive fires." 
2
3
In 2014, it took three minutes for the Russian Army to destroy two Ukrainian armored battalions, thus rendering the Ukrainian brigade ineffective. The Russians' utilized electronic warfare to direction find (DF) signals then utilized a civilian small-unmanned aircraft system (s-UAS) to observe the presence of a Ukrainian command post. Once observed, the Russians employed traditional electronic warfare systems to jam Ukrainian C2 frequencies reducing the Ukrainian ability to coordinate with adjacent units, fixing the Ukrainians in place. With the Ukrainian's fixed in place, the Russians employed an overwhelming lethal bombardment of rocket and cannon artillery to destroy the Ukrainian position. 
6
As the Army learned during insurgencies in Iraq and Afghanistan, the EMS is no longer for either military or civilian purposes alone. The increased civilian use of the EMS poses an asymmetrical threat by providing high-tech and low-cost alternatives to conventional military capabilities. Remote-controlled improvised explosive devices (RC-IED) is only one example to illustrate the capability of asymmetric threats posed by civilian technology on military operations.
Successful control of the EMS denies an adversary's use of the EMS while preserving its availability for friendly use through the use of electronic warfare. 
7
To achieve victory we must as far as possible make the enemy blind and deaf by sealing his eyes and ears, and drive his commanders to distraction by creating confusion in their minds.
-Mao Tse-Tung
The professional body of knowledge on electronic warfare illustrates the competition for control of the finite resource of the electromagnetic spectrum. The civilian sector, the military, and an adversary comprise the three primary groups competing for space within the electromagnetic spectrum. Particular emphasis is given to the civilian sector to emphasize the interconnectedness between the three groups to highlight the second and third-order effects of electronic warfare on the civilian population.
Gillian Pye and M.J. Warren focus on the civilian sector and critical civilian infrastructure and the vital role of global positioning system (GPS) and wireless technology fulfills in modern society. Critical infrastructure is defined as systems or capabilities which are indispensable to normal societal day-to-day living expectations and that their failure, incapacitation, or destruction would arbitrarily have a debilitating impact on the entire economic security, social stability, and physical security aspects of a nation. 
8
Tegg Westbrook focuses on the GPS network writing that GPS is not only used to aid navigation in vehicles, it supports critical infrastructure by synchronizing a wide range of computer-based systems, including law enforcement, emergency services, transportation, communications, electrical power grids, and financial transactions, amongst many others. 
9
Marc J. O'Connor provides the final facet of the civilian use of the EMS focusing on wireless technology. The wireless technology is a primary means to connect communication devices to the internet. Technological developments in the final decade of the twentieth century provided access to the internet and then wireless technology (WiFi) on 802.1x frequency for data, streaming high-quality videos, and radio-controlled devices to name a few. 
10
After developing an understanding of the civilian government's use of the EMS is it possible to explore the impact of interference on the critical infrastructure. Marc J. O'Connor emphasizes the critical infrastructure (SCADA, Air Traffic Control, Emergency Services) which all utilize wireless and GPS technology. Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems monitor infrastructure parameters, such as temperature, flow rate and system alarms. A natural gas pipeline employs SCADA network to operate valves and monitor pipeline pressure.
Air traffic control requires wireless communications between aircraft and controllers.
Interruptions in communications can delay and degrade airport operations since they enter a "failsafe" condition, suspending activity. Lastly, emergency services rely upon wireless communication in the form of a Land Mobile Radio (LMR) for tactical communications in order to coordinate services and inform emergency responders. This includes ground and air-based security forces, pre-hospital care, marine security, and fire department communication.
11
The Foreign Military Studies Office analysis on The Russian Way of War highlights the 2008 Russo-Georgia War as the stimulus and renewed focus in the development of advanced electronic warfare equipment due to the loss of five aircraft in the first days of the conflict. In addition to advanced electronic warfare systems, the Russians also implemented organizational and personnel changes to optimize the technology. Most notably, the Russians had dedicated electronic warfare companies, battalions, and brigades. In contrast to the Army and Marine Corps who have relatively few electronic warfare systems, the Russians have an abundance of groundbased electronic warfare systems capable of operating at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels. Russian electronic warfare capabilities include wide-area cellular communications jamming, GPS location spoofing, reconnaissance, and communication satellite jamming, and disrupting early waring aircraft such as the E-3 Sentry (AWACS). affected over 1,000 civilian aircraft, hundreds of fishing vessels, cell phone services, and car navigation services. In September 2017, Norwegian airliners had to navigate with the help of radio signals due to the loss of GPS when the entered the East Finnmark airspace due to ongoing Russian military exercises. 
14
Beginning with the publication of the Department of Defense Electromagnetic spectrum Strategy in 2013, the electronic warfare across DoD is undergoing a renaissance and renewed focus in electronic warfare post operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The demand for more and timely information at every echelon is driving an increase in DoD's need for spectrum.
Increasingly lower echelons, including individual soldiers, require situational awareness information resulting in more spectrum-enabled network links. The growth in the complexity of modern military systems has similarly led to an increase in spectrum requirements. 
15
14
15 Department of Defense, "Electromagnetic Spectrum Strategy 2013: A Call to Action," accessed on November 10, 2019, https://dodcio.defense.gov/Portals/0/Documents/Spectrum/ESS.pdf.
variance in terrain. Ground electronic warfare capabilities were traditionally used to intercept and to jam radios and artillery radars. More recent uses include jamming RCIEDs in Iraq and Afghanistan with mounted and dismounted systems. 
16
Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, electronic warfare was thrust to the forefront with renewed purpose in preparing for near-peer combat operations. The first of four problems in the emerging operational environment that MDO seeks to address particular to electronic warfare was that "adversaries are contesting all domains, the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS), and the information environment and US dominance is not assured." 17 As a concept, "the central idea of MDO is the rapid and continuous integration of all domains of warfare to deter and prevail as we compete short of armed conflict. If deterrence fails, Army formations,[...], penetrate and disintegrate enemy anti-access and area denial systems; exploit the resulting freedom of maneuver to defeat enemy systems, formations, and objectives and to achieve our own strategic objectives; and consolidate gains to force a return to competition on terms more favorable to the U.S., our allies and partners." 18 Convergence is a central tenant of MDO, defined as the rapid and continuous integration of capabilities in all domains, the EMS, and the information environment that optimizes effects to overmatch the enemy through cross-domain synergy and multiple forms of attack. 
19
21
The modern world in the information age depends on the electromagnetic spectrum in common uses such as radio stations, television remotes, cellular phone text messages, television, microwave ovens, and medical x-rays. Electromagnetic radiation is depicted on the electromagnetic spectrum in accordance with their increasing wavelength from very long radio waves measured in meters on one end to microwaves, infrared light waves, visible light rays, ultra-violet rays, x-rays, and the very short gamma rays measured in nanometers on the opposite end of radio waves. If electromagnetic energy is visualized as ocean waves, the length of an electromagnetic wave is the distance between one wave peak to the next peak, or from on wave trough to the next trough. The actual wavelength of electromagnetic waves varies from hundreds of kilometers one end of the electromagnetic spectrum to billionths of a single meter (nanometers) and even less on the other end. Most of the electromagnetic energy used by the military has wavelengths from a few tens of meters to a few thousandths of a meter. 
22
Lastly, because the electromagnetic spectrum is a limited resource, electronic communication involves trade-offs between accuracy, transmission speed, and quality.
Bandwidth is the space on the spectrum and is measured in Hertz (Hz), one Hz equals one cycle per second. 
24
Within the larger electromagnetic spectrum, the Army capabilities reside within the federally controlled spectrum for intelligence, communication, positioning navigation and timing (PNT), sensing, and command and control (C2). 
25
23
24 Ibid., 62.
25 US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-13.1, Electronic Warfare (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 1-1.
guidance. 
26
33
34
32
33 Ibid., 65.
34 Ibid., 67.
To conclude, electromagnetic radiation serves an important dual role in modern everyday life in the information age but also serves as a vital link to military operations specifically within the radio frequency bands in the electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagnetic spectrum is a finite resource with multiple competing interests between civilians (government, commercial, and private) and competing militaries. Both groups seek uninterrupted access, more data, and faster transmissions to gain a competitive advantage for business or military advantage over competitors.
Electronic warfare is military action involving the use of electromagnetic and directed energy to control the electromagnetic spectrum or to attack the enemy.
-JP 3-13, Electronic Warfare
The Army employs advanced information and communications technology to integrate and synchronize intelligence, fires, protection, and command and control capabilities to decisively defeat or destroy adversaries. The effective integration and synchronization of these capabilities is the purpose of the Army's electronic warfare to deny the electromagnetic spectrum to the adversary while retaining its use to our own. Electronic warfare is the capability that represents a set of measures and actions for the detection and jamming of electronic systems for the control of forces and weapons, as well as for the electronic protection of one's electronic systems against technical reconnaissance, jamming, and interference. Electronic warfare comprises three distinct roles Electronic Attack (EA), Electronic Protection (EP), and Electronic Warfare Support (EWS). Electronic Attack (EA) involves the "use of electromagnetic energy or directed energy to attack personnel, facilities, or equipment with the intent of degrading, neutralizing, or destroying enemy combat capability." 
35
Active sensors, radars, transmit, and receive electromagnetic energy and are the eyes and ears of the Army and are capable of detecting targets at hundreds of miles in range. The main disadvantage of active sensors is they are active sensors and so emits radio wave energy, much 
35
36 Ibid., 2.
37 Ibid., 3. like a searchlight emits visible light, which allows the enemy to locate the radar and counterattack.
Passive sensors are sensitive receivers and do not emit any energy. The main advantage of passive systems is they are difficult to detect, disrupt, or destroy. The disadvantage of passive sensors is they rely on the enemy stimulus to work. If the enemy minimizes their signals or even suppresses them entirely, the passive receiver does not detect a signal. However, given the proliferation of modern information technology in the form of radars and radios on the modern battlefield, adversaries are capable of minimizing their signature but less likely to suppress them entirely for a prolonged period.
Ultimately, Electronic Warfare Support (EWS) with active and passive sensors assist the commander in navigating the two critical dilemmas of dispersion and mass on the battlefield. Dispersion ensures survival from the adversary's advanced long-range weaponry. The only way to overcome the adversary is to combine forces and mass firepower at the critical time to win. While dispersion increase survivability in an electromagnetic degraded environment control of even well-organized forces degrades because the information is difficult to gather, orders are hard to communicate, and there is so little time to respond to fast, overwhelming and destructive fires.
The greatest danger to technology intensive C3I networks is enemy electronic combat operations, which can destroy headquarters, jam communications, blind sensors, deceive intelligence analysts, slow decision-making and even cause a very swift collapse of the C3I networks, bought so expensively in peacetime.
-Niel Munro, The Quick and the Dead
Step 1: Develop a Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework utilized to follow Richard Kugler's policy options for single goals aligns with the framework of chapter one's literature review. The Army, the civilian sector and the adversary's use of the EMS comprise the three competing interests for bandwidth within the EMS. Figure 
5
The nature of the problem derives from the imperative to synchronize the dispersion and mass of geographically separated units in time and space. Desynchronization of dispersion and mass and provides an adversary the opportunity to overwhelm and destroy in detail small isolated forces while avoiding the strength of the main force. In adherence to this imperative, the Army leverages information technology utilizing the EMS to send and receive real-time information to enable fires and maneuver. An adversary denying, degrading, or destroying the means to communicate through the use of electronic warfare desynchronizes the unit's ability to mass and disperse.
To contextualize the problem in a real-world scenario, picture a forward-positioned infantry unit in open terrain and outnumbered by enemy forces. Suddenly the infantry unit finds itself with no radio, sensors, electronics, or GPS. With communications jammed, disabled, and rendered useless, the infantry unit finds itself isolated and vulnerable to lethal air and ground attacks. At this point, the infantry unit relies solely on organic weapon systems and is unable to request artillery support, aviation assets, or request reinforcement from an adjacent unit. While this may represent a worst-case scenario, it is not too far outside the realm of possibility given adversaries' current capabilities.  Fast forward, to the present day in the United States, according to the Wireless Association, there were 198 million smartphones in the United States in 2016 and mobile traffic is expected to increase by 1,500% by 2020. 
38
39
Figure 
7
Military systems are disadvantaged because military radios are constrained in capability due to the requirement to be portable (size and weight considerations), utilize omni-directional antennas, and be able to operate in austere areas without civilian communication infrastructure. To make more room within the EMS the military divides each frequency into quarters to deconflict radio traffic between echelons and increase the number of radios able to operate. The bottom line is a limit exists where the EMS physically cannot support that number of radios, regardless if the military is frequency hopping or not. The Army's research and development efforts are ongoing to create new waveforms and algorithms designed to operate within a contested EMS. Concerning our main potential adversaries of Russia and China, electronic warfare represents a vital interest with both investing in modernizing electronic warfare capabilities to disrupt or disintegrate American command and control capabilities. The multiple US conflicts the past decades provided both Russia and China an invaluable opportunity as an outside observer to learn the US strengths and identify capability gaps which to exploit. In response, both Russia and 
45
46
China invested in the modernization and integration of ground-based electronic warfare systems. 
47
49
50
The goal, given a brief understanding of the competing interests within the conceptual framework is to emphasize maximum control of the entire electromagnetic spectrum with electronic warfare. The basis for this goal follows a report from the Congressional Research Service (CRS) published in 2007 stating, "DoD now emphasizes maximum control of the entire electromagnetic spectrum, including the capability to disrupt all current and future 
47
48
49
50
51
52
In Iraq and Afghanistan, the Army enjoyed overmatch in the spectrum without substantial investment in the modernization of electronic warfare capabilities due to the threat's inability to contest US capabilities in the EMS. 
53
54
55
Two options for the Army to attain the prescribed goal for maximum control of the entire electromagnetic spectrum is to pursue options for full and limited control of the EMS. Full control spans the entirety of the EMS from ELF to gamma rays on the higher end of the spectrum.
Limited control narrows the focus to communications areas between VHF and UHF frequencies within the bands of 3-30 GHz where the majority of military operational radio communication exists.
Step 2: Performing the Analysis
The three subject areas to conduct the analysis were chosen from a provided list of twenty-five subject areas. The subject areas for analysis include; theory of action and consequence; expected effectiveness, benefits and losses; and the level of effort and resource requirements. The three subject areas chosen were most applicable to the problem, and the goal, and serves as a mechanism to explore the tradeoffs between options, the level of effectiveness for the option, and what are the required resources. Subsequently, each subject area is expanded upon in detail for each of the two purposed options.
The theory of actions and consequences is a cause and effect analysis that evaluates the outcome and then assesses the impact of those actions. The first option for full control of the EMS represents a complex cause and effect relationship that requires multiple changes that are challenging to overcome in the short term. The option is complex due to the number of competing interests and existing regulatory control of the EMS domestically and internationally. To exercise full control requires reform to existing domestic and international law regarding the regulation of the EMS. Within the United States, spectrum management is divided among two agencies: the FCC for the private and state and local governments, and the NTIA for federal government users.
Internationally, the United Nations International Telecommunications Union (ITU) manages radio regulation through bilateral and multilateral agreements which the Department of State is the lead department for international spectrum use. The modification to existing EMS policies is a multi-level negotiation to achieve domestic and international consensus. Ultimately, option one is difficult to realize because the Army or even DoD is not the lead department for the negotiation of such policies to enable maximum control of the EMS.
The second option for limited control represents a complicated cause and effect relationship because it operates within existing domestic and international agreements and limits the range of required electronic warfare capabilities. The cause and effect relationship for the second option remains complicated because domestic and international EMS management does not always align. A system approved for use by the Army is subject to approval by the host country and may generate electromagnetic interference (EMI) when operating as a coalition member.
The second area of analysis builds upon the cause and effect relationship of the first area of analysis to determine the effectiveness, benefits, and losses. The first option of total control is appealing due to the expected benefit but is disproportional considering the holistic cost-benefit.
The rationale for full control implies that if the Army controls EMS for its use then by result can deny its use by the adversary. Developing capabilities across the EMS ensures the breadth of coverage but may lack sufficient depth in any one particular area to ensure effectiveness.
Additionally, the pursuit of control of the entirety of the EMS is unrealistic because only a portion of the EMS is used for communications purposes. The option of developing capabilities across the EMS outside of communication purposes introduces additional requirements that are already marginally succeeding. For that reasoning, the expected gains to control the breadth of the EMS does not exceed the anticipated losses in depth of the primary communication bands.
The second option for limited control of the EMS ensures depth focused on the primary communication bands (UHF, VHF) within the EMS. Focusing efforts toward limited control within the UHF and VHF parameters provides the highest degree of effectiveness to achieve the goal. Focusing control to the UHF and VHF communication bands affords the Army a predictive funding estimate and ability to consistently fund other priorities. Inherently, the negative consequence is the acceptance that the Army is not effective outside areas of limited control. The impact of the negative consequence is overcome by the reduced likelihood and severity of not developing capabilities outside those regions. The civilian sector, the Army, and our adversaries all compete for communication dominance in the UHF and VHF regions of the EMS.
The level of effort, resource requirements, and costs is the third method for analysis between total control and limited control of the EMS. The first option for total control of the EMS is a significant endeavor in terms of resource requirements and cost. The endeavor is significant due to the nature of the EMS from ranging from ELF on the lower end to gamma rays on the higher end. The next step for the Army is to then develop technology and capabilities to control those emissions across the spectrum. Currently, the EMS is loosely compartmentalized across the Joint Force with the US Navy utilizing low-frequency bands on nuclear-armed submarines to communicate with national command authority and the US Air Force utilizing extremely highfrequency bands to communicate with US satellite constellations. The compartmentalization of the radio spectrum maximizes capabilities and shares the cost burden of developing technology to serve their respective services. To pursue total control of the EMS, the Army would incur significant additional costs once shared by other services at the detriment of other capabilities and programs. The costs associated with total control of the EMS are not easily bearable to the Army and too expensive to contemplate. Total control of the EMS is loosely associated with only one of six of the 2018 modernization efforts. The option for total control of the EMS potentially risks the disruption of the remaining five priorities. The five remaining programs focus on mobility and lethality are vital interests to land warfare which is the core mission of the Army.
The second option for limited control of the EMS represents a significant level of effort, resources requirements, and costs associated. The significant level of effort required derives from the requirement to change the operating paradigm of the Army is in jeopardy, short of a moment of crisis. The option for limited control of the EMS is starting anew due to the decades of the divestiture of electronic warfare capabilities as a cost-saving measure to fund emergent high priority requirements. To overcome obsolete equipment and lost expertise the Army faces significant resource requirements and costs. The long-term costs and resource requirements for limited control of the EMS are bearable for the Army in terms of investment in technology, personnel, and training.
The recommendation based upon the analysis is for the Army to pursue capabilities to enable limited control of the electromagnetic environment. Currently, limited control of the electromagnetic spectrum exceeds current capabilities because of the human in the loop interaction. Current electromagnetic spectrum operations rely on human interaction to allocate and deconflict the electromagnetic spectrum and for the end-user to adhere to the set control measures. 
56
8
8
8
The introduction of artificial intelligence and machine learning to electromagnetic spectrum management provides a capability to increase situational awareness and rapidly adapt to changes within the electromagnetic spectrum. Machine learning is an application of artificial intelligence that provides systems the ability to learn and improve from experience without being explicitly programmed automatically. Spectrum management is the operational, engineering, and administrative procedures to plan, coordinate, and manage the use of the electromagnetic spectrum and enables signal and electronic warfare operations. 
57
9
Prior to initiating this endeavor, the research question postulated how does the Army control a contested electromagnetic spectrum to enable operational maneuver? The hypothesis stated that the Army develops a policy for electronic warfare that seeks to control the entirety of the electromagnetic spectrum. The policy comprises both materiel and non-materiel capabilitybased approaches which are necessary to dominate the electromagnetic spectrum in future warfare.
To pursue those aims, the research methodology utilized Richard Kugler's two-step methodology for analyzing policy options for a single goal. The single goal sought maximum control of the entire electromagnetic spectrum, including the capability to disrupt all current and future communication systems, sensors, and weapons systems. The two options analyzed were full or partial control of the electromagnetic spectrum. The subject areas for analyzed included; theory of action and consequence; expected effectiveness, benefits, and losses; and the level of effort and resource requirements. The four subject areas of analysis are most applicable to the research question and hypothesis.
Through the course of research and analysis, the initial hypothesis proved only partially correct. Ultimately, the Army is best served to pursue limited control of the electromagnetic with full control infeasible due to interest, costs, and infeasibility to control the entirety of the electromagnetic spectrum all the time. Secondly, the recommendation focused on non-materiel solutions with the utilization of artificial intelligence and machine learning to enable electromagnetic spectrum operations. The focus on non-materiel solutions is vital because it seeks to fuse traditional electromagnetic spectrum operations, intelligence, and electronic warfare to prevent electromagnetic interference. Ultimately, artificial intelligence and machine learning applied to the electromagnetic spectrum operations provides a capability for the Army to enhanced situational awareness to enable periods of overmatch in the conduct of multi-domain operations.
The area not addressed in this endeavor is the materiel aspects of electronic warfare equipment required to support multi-domain operations. Currently, the Army is equipped with only residual ground-based electronic warfare equipment repurposed for the C-IED threats during operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. Comparatively, the Army's electronic warfare equipment is outnumbered and outmatch by adversaries such as Russia and China. Despite a short-term disadvantage a long-term opportunity exists, if acted upon in the near term. To seize the advantage, the Army potentially achieves a generational leap by fielding advanced electronic warfare systems instead of incremental improvements of legacy systems. If the Army pursues this option, the adversarial systems would instantly become obsolete in relation to the capability of US electronic warfare systems.
To conclude, the keystone to conduct multi-domain operations across the range of military operations in large-scale combat operations is electromagnetic spectrum operations enabled through the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Larry M. Wortzel, "The Chinese People's Liberation Army and Information Warfare," Strategic Studies Institute (2014): 13, accessed September 15,
2019, http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep11757.2 Ibid., 13.
Ibid., 12.    
Tegg Westbrook, "The Global Positioning System and Military Jamming: The Geographies of Electronic Warfare," Journal of Strategic Security, 12, No. 2, (2019): 1, accessed September 15, 2019, https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26696257.
Gillian Pye and M.J. Warren, "An Emergent Security Risk: Critical Infrastructures and Information Warfare" Journal of Information Warfare 8, no. 3 (2009): 2, accessed September 20, 2019, https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2308/26486764.
MG Patricia Frost, CPT Clifton McClung, LTC Christopher Walls, ed. LTC Daniel Huynh, "Tactical Considerations to Fight and Win in the Electromagnetic Spectrum," The Cyber Defense Review 3, no.1 (Spring 2018): 15, accessed September 21, 2019, https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26427371.
B van Nierkerk and M. Maharaj, "The Future Roles of Electronic Warfare in the Information Warfare Spectrum," Journal of Information Warfare
8, no. 3 (2009): 2, accessed September 2, 2019, https://jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26486763.
Pye and Warren, "An Emergent Security Risk: Critical Infrastructures and Information Warfare," 2.
Westbrook, "The Global  Positioning System and Military Jamming: The Geographies of Electronic Warfare," 1.
Marc J. O'Connor, "Electronic Warfare for the Fourth Generation Practitioner," Small Wars Journal: 6, accessed on November 29, 2019, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/electronic-warfarefourth-generation-practitioner.
11 O'Connor, "Electronic Warfare and the Fourth Generation Practitioner," 7.
US Department of the Army, "2019 Army Modernization Strategy: Investing in the Future," accessed on November 10, 2019, https://www.army.mil/e2/downloads/rv7/2019_army_modernization_strategy_final.pdf.
Munro, The Quick and the Dead, 2.   
Foremost, to Brenna and our boys Nate Jr. and Liam for their continued love and support throughout the many hours invested completing this endeavor. v
Amplitude Modulation EA