# ID: 244441a8a4e84a91ba86f952e942960e
# Title: The Home Front and War in the Twentieth Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1982.0
# Fulltext:
* Leila Rupp made it very clear that she does not think war is good for people.
Not many would argue with that even within the cloisters of a military school.
That position established, she embarked on a broad-scale comparison of the effect of World War H on women in Germany, Britain, Japan, Russia, and the United States.
In addition to national and racial differences, she recognized that class, age, and type of employment qualified consideration of the feminine experience.
Generally, she does not think that women's contributions during this war changed male attitudes enough to foster a revolution in traditional roles although she does admit that, at least in Germany and Japan, women made real gains.
In wartime, stereotypes limited the efficient use of women in the United States and much more drastically in Germany and Japan.
She also noted that the endeavor of the Germans and Japanese to foster the concept of the master race led to the official encouragement of reproduction which, incidentially, was not reflected in the birth rate, and of rape by their soldiers of foreign, hence inferior in their view, women.
Whatever the gain, and she does not think there was much, it certainly was not worth the terrible cost of a war.
Of course, nations, as she realizes, do not fight wars with the goal of improving the status of women.
Nevertheless, any sensitive student of war can not help but sympathize with those women whom she mentions who deplore the horrors of war.