# ID: 244441a8a4e84a91ba86f952e942960e
# Title: The Home Front and War in the Twentieth Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1982.0
# Fulltext:
Historians are only beginning to come to grips with many of these questions in a systematic way.
Arthur Marwick, Harvard Sitkoff, and Leila Rupp will deal with these questions this morning.
They are themselves questioning much of the conventional wisdom on what war created or how much change war caused.
I see another problem in this scholarly effort.
iWo of our speakers this morning come at the problem from the continuity of the study of particular groups in American society, and one of our speakers comes at it directly from the standpoint of assessing war's effect.
The results are, I think, rather interesting, and I think will stimulate you to consider one of the major questions in dealing with war and the social history of any society.
counted on his resume some eleven books authored or edited, many of them centered on the question of the effects of war and the social history of society at war.
Three of his books alone have focused on Britain, war and social change; another of his works has examined women at war from 1914 to 1918.
But I think for our session this morning, he is probably best known for his War and Social Change in the Twentieth Century: A Comparative Study of Britain, France, Germany, Russia and the United States.
He will speak to us this morning on "Total War and Social Change in Great Britain and Other European Countries."