# ID: 248fa6bba35a4a398f07d66d82c3031f
# Title: Revised Spectrum of Conflict for a Hybrid World
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The twenty first century with its inherent complexities has redefined our collective understanding of conflict. It has also engendered a reevaluation of systems and operational constructs to test for relevance in the modern era. The general validity and utility of the current accepted models of the Spectrum of Conflict is one such construct subject to necessary review. The Spectrum of Conflict is a recognized conceptual planning tool with varied interpretations and as such has associated cognitive dissonance as to the relevant accepted categories and their associated parameters. As a result, the doctrinal viewpoint of the overall spectrum requires more in-depth study, analysis and codification. A 'Hybrid Model' is proposed and attempts to fill the gap in the current literature and ultimately aid in redefining the spectrum of conflict to highlight the current twenty first century and beyond conflict paradigm. This new understanding ensures full situational awareness and a unified standard for joint operations and inter-agency planning and preparation. It will subsequently facilitate an enhanced application of lethal/non-lethal responses in order to ultimately bring the identified environment/theater of disruption and conflict back to a level of stability.
15.
The human interest in trying to understand the nature of conflict, its root causes, progression, intensity, relevance, validity and ultimate predictability has transcended time and has taken on immense significance in the modern era. The human race over that time has steadily progressed to its present-day understanding in areas of science, art, philosophy and social interaction. In tandem with this cognitive and interpersonal development, has been the corresponding development of the ability to engage in conflict with the utilization of a more efficient and effective understanding of coordinated violence. Throughout recorded history there are detailed accounts of individuals, tribes, kingdoms and nations involved in conflict. Their motivations, weaponry and tactical and operational actions, have been observed and recorded for posterity. On analysis, the reasons for conflict have ranged from the classic defensive and offensive actions in pursuit of limited objectives, to grand strategic designs seeking greater influence and power. The ultimate aim however, has been the defeat of the identified foe, whether by annihilation, subjugation and/or subordination. What has also been evident throughout, is that conflict and by extension war, are seemingly inevitable at some level. The study of conflict in general and warfare in particular, therefore takes on increased significance.
Particularly, as it relates to the understanding of their frequency, varied constructs and dynamic interplay. This understanding, is perceived as being necessary in order to enhance general situational awareness and more importantly reinforce the mindset that if conflict itself is inevitable then he who is best prepared for it, is best prepared to ultimately win.
War and warfare are often conflated but have different meanings. As defined by the philosopher of war Baron Carl Von Clausewitz, in his famous treatise "war is an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will"0 F 1 Whilst warfare is the actual "practice of war in a particular time; space and context."1 F 2 This conflation has caused some dissonance and it has subsequently been posited that "war's fundamental nature is largely enduring, but it is not immutable. The essential elements are always present, but can and will be altered by ongoing social and technological changes."2 F 3 This position runs seemingly counter to the edicts of Clausewitz who also posited that war in itself is immutable but the nature of warfare changes in concert with the zeitgeist of the age.3 F 4 Conceptual foundations, culture, experience and overarching interests, tend to have a significant impact on which position is supported.
1 Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 87.
The Spectrum of Conflict also referred to as the Continuum of Conflict, has been conceptualized in many forms throughout recorded history as philosophy, doctrinal edict, graphical representation or formulae. At the base level, in the study of conflict, the spectrum of conflict serves as a useful tool. It is a tool that provides planners, academics and practitioners alike with a visual representation of the categories of major conflict, their occurrence probability and the correlated level of violence associated with them. A simple graphical representation with its interplay of words and shapes has by apparent acclamation and continued use gained utility. This perceived utility is seemingly because it displays in graphic form the inherent complexity and intensity of the categorized acts of violence. This representation fosters greater understanding and subsequently becomes a part of the baseline thought process for further discussion, deliberation, planning and preparation prior to the utilization of the elements of state power.
A spectrum has been defined as that which is "used to classify something, or suggest that it can be classified, in terms of its position on a scale between two extreme or opposite points."4 F 5 A conflict is defined as "a prolonged armed struggle or an incompatibility between two or more opinions, principles, or interests."5 F 6 The military doctrinal definition of the spectrum of conflict states that "conflict can take a wide range of forms constituting a spectrum which reflects the magnitude of violence involved."6 F 7
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) further outlined that: International relations are characterized by complex interactions ranging from stable peace to high-intensity conflict. These characteristics overlap and merge and can be visualized as a spectrum. Conflict can now be seen as a blurring of the distinctions between adversaries and the way they use force to achieve political goals, generating a spectrum of conflict in which the level of violence increases from stable peace to high intensity conflict.7 F 8
These definitions are a deliberate effort to simplify and contextualize this interrelationship between conflict and its associated intensity in order to provide a foundation for further discourse. The relationship and overarching concept can then be defined as the range of situations of friction or actual violence going from one extreme to the opposite. This research focuses in detail on the emergence of new categories of warfare and the definition and re-categorization of previously acknowledged operational constructs.
Cyber Warfare: Cyber warfare involves the actions by a nation-state or international organization to attack and attempt to damage another nation's computers or information networks through, for example, computer viruses or denial-of-service 
7
8
attacks.8 F 
9
where the primary purpose is to achieve objectives in or through cyberspace. There are three types of cyberspace operations: Department of Defense Information Network Operations, Offensive cyberspace operations, and Defensive cyberspace operations.9 F 10 Gray Zone Warfare/Conflicts: Gray zone warfare/conflicts are defined as the "deliberate multi-dimensional activities by a state actor just below the threshold of aggressive use of military forces. In such conflicts, adversaries employ an integrated suite of national and subnational instruments of power in an ambiguous war to gain specified strategic objectives without crossing the threshold of overt conflict. Adversaries may employ proxy forces to increase the level of military power being used without losing deniability."1 0 F 11 High Intensity Law Enforcement Operations (HILEO): High Intensity Law Enforcement Operations (HILEO) a new concept crafted by the author, to describe a new 
9
10
11
Hybrid Warfare: Hybrid warfare is defined as "the challenge presented by the increasing complexity of armed conflict, where adversaries may combine types of warfare plus nonmilitary means in order to neutralize conventional military power."1 1F 12
Instruments of National Power and the Range of Military Operations: The ability of a government to advance its national interests is dependent on the effectiveness of that government in employing the instruments of national power to achieve determined national strategic objectives. The appropriate government entity coordinates these instruments of national power (diplomatic, informational, military and economic). They are the tools by which a state applies its sources of power, including its culture, human potential, industry, science and technology, academic institutions, geography and national will. The military instrument of national power can be used in a wide variety of ways that vary in purpose, scale, risk, and combat intensity. These various ways can be understood to occur across a continuum of conflict ranging from peace to war. Mindful that the operational level of warfare connects the tactical to the strategic, and operations and campaigns are themselves scalable, governments utilize the construct of the range of military operations to provide insight into the various broad usages of military power from a strategic perspective.1 2F 
13
13
14
15
5F 16
The intent of narrative warfare is predictable influence and subsequent dominance over adversaries and competitors.1 6F 
17
Traditional Warfare: Traditional warfare is characterized as a violent struggle for domination between nation-states or coalitions and alliances of nation-states. With the increasingly rare case of formally declared war, traditional warfare typically involves force-on-force military operations in which adversaries employ a variety of conventional forces and special operations forces against each other in all physical domains as well as the information environment (which includes cyberspace).1 9 F 20 Warfare: is not constant and continues to change and be transformed by society, diplomacy, politics, and technology. There are two basic forms of warfare-traditional and irregular. The forms of warfare are applied not in terms of an "either/or" choice, but in various combinations to suit a combatant's strategy and capabilities.2 0F 21
The purpose of this study was to assess the general validity and utility of the current accepted model of the Spectrum of Conflict. On initial analysis it was believed that the spectrum of conflict should not be just a parking lot or veritable product bin for concepts that carry no meaning. Rather it should provide an accurate reflection of the various relevant categories of modern-day conflict and their dynamic inter play. The twenty first century with its inherent complexities has redefined our collective understanding of conflict and has caused some cognitive dissonance as to the relevant categories and their associated parameters. As a result, the doctrinal viewpoint of the overall spectrum requires more in-depth study, analysis and codification. This new understanding will ensure full situational awareness, a unified standard for joint forces and interagency planning and preparation. Also, for the correct application of lethal/nonlethal responses, in order to ultimately bring the identified environment/theater of conflict back to a level of stability.
This study proposes a new model that attempts to fill the perceived gap in the current literature and ultimately aids in redefining the spectrum of conflict to highlight the current twenty first century and beyond conflict paradigm. It is not a tautological exercise but rather a proposal for a radical shift in how aspects of conflict and warfare are perceived and prepared for and their subsequent implications.
The primary research question posited was: Is the current Spectrum of Conflict model an accurate representation of twenty first century warfare and its associated levels of intensity and dynamic inter relationships? In order to successfully articulate a response to the primary question two secondary questions were also formulated:
1. What are the emerging types of conflict that are not represented on the current model but because of their current and predicted probability of occurrence and intensity warrant inclusion on the spectrum? and, 2. What is an optimal representation of the spectrum of conflict?
The following assumptions were made during the conduct of this research:
1. The Spectrum of Conflict is critical to the understanding of modern-day conflict and in particular to the profession of arms; and 2. All major global military powers have interpretations of the spectrum of conflict that help to further their own national interests as they relate to the classification of certain conflicts and their relationship to legal and ethical based considerations. However, not all major powers and/or cultures view conflict in the same binary manner as some nation states have a more multidimensional and progressive interpretation.
The researcher was limited by the time available to conduct the study and the ability to incorporate all the material on the subject area, in particular the significant material from historical sources. The researcher was also limited in access to more current military based information for a balanced view from countries such as the Russian Federation and the Peoples' Republic of China.
The researcher sought to assess the feasibility and general validity of the current accepted spectrum of conflict model and also propose the use of a new model that will incorporate some of the elements outlined previously. The researcher did not seek to redefine conflict in general, but rather how it is viewed, as an aid for understanding and planning in relation to the proposed model.
The Spectrum of Conflict is a global planning tool with varied interpretations and as such has associated cognitive dissonance. A common understanding of the spectrum facilitates greater situational awareness, a unified standard for planning and preparation and a more effective application of lethal/non-lethal responses, in order to ultimately bring the identified environment/theater of conflict back to a level of stability. The researcher also sought to introduce new terminology into the collective military lexicon and ultimately provide a useful planning tool for joint forces and interagency planning.
This chapter established a foundation for the study particularly as it related to a clear definition of the spectrum/continuum of conflict, its doctrinal significance and its utilization as a planning tool for both military and inter-agency-based planners. The chapter also served to highlight that the current global landscape is a virtual matrix of domestic, regional and international conflict-based events of varying intensities and complexities that involve the protracted use of military personnel and materiel. Chapter 2 outlines that these events and activities are not transient in nature and as a result the overall spectrum required a more in-depth study, analysis and codification. and iron. Within that continuum "conflict can take a wide range of forms constituting a spectrum which reflects the magnitude of violence involved."2 2F 23 This spectrum of conflict then provides a focal point for possible understanding of the machinations of state craft and the elements of state power and how they interact and in a significant number of instances across recorded history have led to conflict and war.
This desire for common understanding has spawned theories, a plethora of scholarly articles, doctrinal edicts, representational diagrams and graphs of varying types and quality. A simple diagram-based representation with its interplay of words and shapes provides a snapshot capable of displaying the inherent complexity and intensity of the categorized acts of violence.2 3 F 24 This representation fosters greater understanding and subsequently becomes a part of the baseline thought process for further discussion, deliberation, planning and preparation prior to the utilization of state power. Although multiple diagrammatic interpretations of the spectrum exist, most models follow the classic easy to follow line graph representation with x and y axes of level of intensity 23 HQDN, MCDP 1, Warfighting, 2-6.
24 "A well-designed diagrammatic representation is better than a sentential representation, to support reasoning and problem solving. Diagrammatic representation has been found to help both the perceptual and conceptual processes in problem solving. In terms of the perceptual process, the diagrammatic representation helps people identify and recognize relevant items, because it groups all relevant information, thus avoiding a prolonged search for elements required for problem solving. In terms of conceptual process, the diagrammatic representation helps people generate and test hypotheses, because it provides a large number of perceptual inference cues, which are extremely easy for humans to use. versus probability of occurrence. Pursuant to the foregoing, the James D. Watkins' United States Naval Institute Proceedings model (see figure 
1
Source: James D. Watkins, "The Maritime Strategy," Proceedings, no. 112 (January 1986): 8, accessed 10 August 2019, https://www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings /1986/january-supplement/maritime-strategy-0.
An analysis of the suitability of the spectrum would presuppose that the relevant academics, political representatives and practitioners are acutely aware of all the developments in the field, not so as argued by Dr. Frank G. Hoffman. Dr. Hoffman is a United States Marine Corps' veteran who holds a PhD. in War Studies from King's College London, and is currently a Distinguished Research Fellow at the National Defense University in Washington, DC. Dr. Hoffman has researched and written extensively on conflict, strategy, doctrine and defense policy, in particular the unique nature and complexity of twenty first century conflict; he is regarded as a global leader in the analysis of modern warfare and the subsequent implications for the spectrum/continuum of conflict. In his article for the PRISM, "Examining Complex Forms of Conflict," he posited that the national security community as a whole had a responsibility to be able to respond to numerous challenges across the full spectrum of conflict however, that response was contingent of the general acceptance of a well understood taxonomy describing the elements that constitute the continuum of conflict.
He added that the community in general lacks this taxonomy despite its engagement in a spate of conflicts globally. As a result of this perceived conceptual challenge as to what exactly is war and how the different categories relate to each other, the United States and the Western powers collectively were falling behind in the overall preparation for the future.2 4 F 
25
The opinions posited however still seem to run contrary to the foundational perspectives that have transcended time that war is indeed war and the essence of it The data presented in figure 
3
In reality war is ongoing and there will always be developments and innovation in warfare. As a result, there should be a concerted effort to ensure "the avoidance of the impact of short-term issues from swamping a sense of perspective on long-term continuities."3 1F 32 However, we must be mindful that a new century has dawned with increased globalization, observed power shifts and attendant technological, socioeconomic and conflict-based innovations. As a result, there now has to be a reassessment of what exactly constitutes the spectrum of conflict. This is necessary in order to assist governments and forces in the development of suitable strategies and subsequent capacities. It will also require a rethinking of the appropriate balance between specialization and adaptation of means in order to counter the full warfare range likely to 
30
31 "Most contemporary armed conflicts involve a combination of regular armies, militias and armed civilians. Fighting rarely occurs on well-defined battlefields and is often intermittent with a wide range of intensities and brief ceasefires. The number of forcibly dis placed people worldwide at the start of 2018 was 68.5 million, including more than 25 million refugees. Protracted displacement crises continued in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic (CAR), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen." Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), SIPRI Yearbook 2019 (Sweden: Oxford University Press, 2019), accessed 8 February 2020, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2019-08/yb19_summary_eng_1.pdf.
be employed in combination by future adversaries."3 2F 33 This holistic effort will be needed by states in order to ultimately protect their citizens and their respective national interests.
At the forefront of planning for any military based action is the efficient execution of the plan and its ultimate end with a return to peace and stability. Stability is regarded as a "set of conditions in which a local populace regards its governance institutions as legitimate and its living situation as acceptable and predictable. Actions to maintain or reestablish stability first aim to lessen the level of violence. These actions also aim to enable the functioning of governmental, economic, and societal institutions. These actions encourage the general adherence to local laws, rules, and norms of behavior."3 3F 
34
A stable environment ultimately provides the desired environment where the citizens/inhabitants of a particular region "can conduct the activities of their daily lives without fear of systematic of large-scale violence"3 4F 35 This confidence and the conduct of the aforementioned daily activities subsequently generate the necessary economic activity via which all nations are dependent on for sustainment and growth. An environment of stability however, does not exist only with the absence of violent behavior as it may be 
33
34
35
Stability also encompasses those operational endeavors necessary to maintain it i.e. traditional law enforcement, classic military aid to the civil authorities or internal security type military operations (to include public health related operations such as escort, containment and quarantine enforcement) and humanitarian and disaster relief operations.
It is said that "history doesn't repeat itself but it rhymes"3 5F 36 unfortunately in the year 2020 as it related to pandemics, the rhyming of history was unfortunately the case.
The lethality and pervasiveness of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) or COVID-19 pandemic, unfortunately bore similar traits to the 1918 'Spanish Flu' pandemic; particularly in the areas of infection rates and lethality.3 6F 37 36 John A. Nagl, Knife Fights: A Memoir of Modern War in Theory and Practice (New York: Penguin, 2014), 62.
37 "In December2019, a pathogenic HCoV, 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), was recognized in Wuhan, China, and has caused serious illness and death. The emergence of yet another outbreak of human disease caused by a pathogen from a viral family formerly thought to be relatively benign underscores the perpetual challenge of emerging infectious diseases and the importance of sustained preparedness. Catharine I. Paules, Hilary D. Marston, and Anthony S. Fauci, "Coronavirus Infections-More Than Just the Common Cold, Viewpoint," Journal of the American Medical Association (23 January 2020), accessed 3 April 2020, https://jamanetwork.com/journals /jama/fullarticle/2759815.
The global response to COVID-19 has been a significant, dynamic and groundbreaking study into crisis response, crisis management and the role of different agents of society. "While the trajectory of the outbreak was impossible to predict, effective response required prompt action from the standpoint of classic public health strategies to the timely development and implementation of effective countermeasures."3 7 F 38 The pandemic response has been conducted globally primarily under a stability operations framework, where the military and security mechanisms, have all responded in aid of their respective governments in a unified effort to try and protect vulnerable populations whilst attempting to help control the spread of the virus. Primarily involved in sustainment related activities (health, logistics, protection and transportation) militaries globally have shown the efficacy of the mission set under the stability framework.3 8 F 
39
There is no one prescribed manner in which to respond to a crisis under the stability operations framework as each operation or crisis has its own unique traits and peculiarities. Depending on the nature of the crises or threat it may require a blend of operational activities and mission sets. However, what is most important is that the 
38
39 "A whole of government approach guides the development, integration and coordination of all instruments of national power and integrates the collaborative efforts of the government departments and agencies to achieve unity of effort towards a shared goal." HQDA, ADP 3-07, Stability, 1-3. frameworks and mechanisms for shared understanding are present, that ensure unity of effort in order to return the designated area back to stability.
A broader category intrinsically linked with stability operations are peace operations. Peace operations are a unique type of construct in that they utilize the tools and skillsets that range the spectrum ostensibly not to prolong conflict but rather to pause or cease it all together. Peace operations are dynamic and are reflective of the "contemporary security environment where many threats occur at a point on the conflict spectrum where the armed conflict and law enforcement paradigms intersect and often overlap."3 9F 
40
40
Types of peace operations include Peacekeeping, Peace enforcement, Peacemaking, Peace building and conflict prevention.4 0 F 41
The scarred memories of the effects of total war in particular the significant loss of life forced the global polity in 1945, to collectively pause and reflect. Despite organizational failures with past attempts, in the aftermath of WWII it was finally realized that the global good could not be left to individual or national based selfregulation. There had to be a more coordinated approach to global dialogue that could possibly ameliorate disputes, contain conflicts and if necessary enforce the peace for humanity's greater good.4 1 F 42 After introspection and analysis, it was mooted that a collective global effort akin to what had just occurred to combat the evil axis powers would also help to prevent the world from reliving the horrors of the century's two global conflicts. It was envisioned that this would be accomplished by the establishment of an impartial collective entity with a single-minded focus and vision for stable global cooperation.
With the ratification of the United Nation's Charter in 1945, the global polity was provided with a supranational entity where all nations were given a voice on the 41 HQDA, ADP 3-07, Stability. 
42
That voice and presence has been translated post 1945 into the ability to fully integrate all aspects of national power, which has been instrumental in providing a meaningful restraint on the spread of war and strife. Since its first official mission in 1948 the UN has strived to impartially navigate the fault lines of global conflict in order to restrain selfish desires and also pacify the cultivation and spread of hostile intent.4 3F 44
The efficacy of this global oversight initiative was tested in the Indo-Pacific theatre just five years post 1945 when conflict broke out on the Korean peninsula. The Korean War was active for three years and at its pause it remained territorially the same as its beginning. However, what had been lost were thousands of lives of combatants and non-combatants alike, in addition to the reliving yet again of the horrors of war. A positive outcome however, was that it also highlighted the increasing role of the global community of nations in collective conflict management. This was embodied by the 43 "In 1945, representatives of 50 countries met in San Francisco at the United Nations Conference on International Organization to draw up the United Nations Charter. The Charter was signed on 26 June 1945 by the representatives of the 50 countries. Poland, which was not represented at the Conference, signed it later and became one of the original 51 Member States. The United Nations officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, when the Charter was ratified." United Nations, "History of the United Nations," United Nations, accessed 29 February 2020, https://www.un.org/en/sections /history/history-united-nations/index.html. 
44
The UN's recorded efforts have been in order to collectively contain where possible violent belligerent action by coercion or enforcement.4 5F 46 The overall success rate of the aforementioned operations is subject to significant variables that were not discussed in this study. However, despite the often disregard shown to peace operations by theorists and practitioners alike, the continued relevance of this category to modern day conflict warrants their inclusion in any discussion of the spectrum of conflict.
Narrative Warfare "What the population thinks, says and how it acts (behavior) is more important than how many tanks and airplanes they have."4 6F 
47
45
46 "Enforcement operations have their legal basis in Chapter VII of the UN Charter and are authorized by the United Nations' Security Council. They are actions of a military nature that can be conceptually subdivided into two broad categories: enforcement operations which can be characterized as sustained full-scale combat operations to maintain or restore international peace and security, and peace enforcement operations while potentially involving combat will not amount to full-scale warfare on a sustained basis against a state. Terry D. Gill and Dieter Fleck, eds., The Handbook of the International Law of Military Operations (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010), 81.
place in multi-threat environments, ranging from heavily kinetic to subliminal fearinducing strategies, in which state actors and non-state actors compete to extend their influence."4 7F 48 It is in the aforementioned realm of non-kinetic subliminal influence-based activities that narrative warfare exists. A narrative is a crafted story that gives meaning to a set of facts, events or associated information expressed as but not necessarily the truth.
The concept of narrative led operations which later morphed into narrative warfare, at its base level is the war for information and influence over a targeted audience. "This form of warfare is all about influence, but it is not information warfare; rather it is warfare over the meaning of the information."4 8F 49
In the twenty first century with the shrinking of the global commons and the rise of interconnectivity via the digital domain, the war of influence over the narrative has achieved a more robust presence. In a war of influence, the object is to use all available means to target and subsequently trigger predictable behavior that will result in favorable reaction for the protagonist's side or version of events.4 9F 50 States, non-state actors and individuals attempt to influence audiences to align with their perspective by employing specific influence-based tactics. At a minimum, as a result of the narrative/influencebased activities the target audiences that are not fully aligned to the directed view are 48 Ajit Maan, Narrative Warfare (Washington, DC: Narrative Strategies Ink, 2018), 9.
49 Ibid., 10. 
50
Narrative warfare seeks to link the cognitive realm to the physical realm by the direct impact of a particular crafted 'story' on the action or inaction of the target audience. The advantage gained from the utilization of a successful narrative can if required be acted upon in the physical realm by the use of lethal or non-lethal effects.5 1 F 52
The narrative can therefore be categorized as the ways, the use of social or traditional media and inter personal interaction to deliver narrative based content as the means, with the ends being the facilitation of a distinct positional advantage by an opposing force.5 2 F 53 Despite the passage of time and its associated improvements war has remained largely a human endeavor and narratives are generally acknowledged as the way people understand any endeavor.5 3F 54 The essence of narrative warfare is about putting the narrative at the heart of the operational planning process and letting it inform the planning of both the kinetic and non-kinetic activities, in order to support the strategic intent articulated in the strategic narrative.5 4F 55 A well-crafted narrative strategy is therefore 
51
52 "The aim of narrative warfare is to influence selected actors' behavior through influencing their understanding, will and capability by creating effects in both the psychological and the physical domain through mutually supportive employment of all our means-both kinetic and non-kinetic, based on the strategic narrative. Nissen, "Narrative Led Operations: Put the Narrative First." 
53
54
55
High Intensity Law Enforcement Operations (HILEO)
The concept of HILEO outlines a new categorization of law enforcement-based operations that are defined as being significantly above the intensity and scope of traditional law enforcement. These operations require a whole of government approach, particularly the continued involvement of paramilitary or traditional military forces in order to successfully counter the identified threat and return the environment to stability.
Although not yet categorized as a full branch of warfare HILEO are multi domain-based operations that can be conducted in a domestic, regional or international based theatre of operations. The operations can be conducted in partnership with traditional law enforcement and /or police elements or independently under special legal frameworks that facilitate the utilization of these forces in specially designated geographic (terrestrial/maritime) areas for a set time period. These operations are not Internal Security or stability-based operations in these operations the military/para-military arm of the state in question or other regional or international partners assume the primary role in combatting designated extreme quasi-criminal/ paramilitary threats but under strictly law enforcement-based parameters and as a part of a distinct whole of government approach.
Another kind of war within the context of a "clash of civilizations" is being waged in various parts of the Americas, Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and elsewhere around the world. Some of the main protagonists are those who have come to be designated as first-, second-, and third-generation street gangs, as well as their various possible allies such as traditional Transnational Criminal Organizations (TCOs).5 6F 57 HILEO operations exist within the abovementioned environments that are highly volatile but have not yet crossed the threshold to a full breakdown of state-based control.
So therefore, whilst the Law of Armed Conflict parameters will provide overarching regulatory behavior domestic and or regional juris-prudence will be paramount as the desired end result is a return to normalcy by the effective utilization of the jurisdictional criminal justice system.
The British Army's deployment in Northern Ireland (one of the four countries of the United Kingdom) from 1969 to 2007 has been previously categorized as a constabulary or Internal Security operation.5 7 F 58 This operation was conducted in response to the threat to the state posed by the activities of the self-styled Irish Republican Army 57 Max G. Manwaring, A Contemporary Challenge to State Sovereignty: Gangs  and Other Illicit Transnational Criminal Organizations in Central America, El Salvador,  Mexico, Jamaica, and Brazil (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2012), viii, accessed 20 October 2019, www.StrategicStudiesInstitute.army.mil.
58 "Northern Ireland shall consist of the parliamentary counties of Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry and Tyrone, and the parliamentary boroughs of Belfast and Londonderry, and Southern Ireland shall consist of so much of Ireland as is not comprised within the said parliamentary counties and boroughs. Self-government was however revoked in 1973." Her Majesty's Government, Government of Ireland Act 1920, accessed 16 February 2020, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1920/67/pdfs /ukpga_19200067_en.pdf.
and Ulster Defence Association. However, the conflict or the 'Troubles' as it was popularly known, was viewed externally largely as a prolonged counterinsurgency campaign. On further analysis this operation based on the aforementioned definition could also be categorized as a prime example of HILEO.
The issues relating to the question of governance in particular the right for unified local representation had plagued the Irish isles for decades. Throughout the early twentieth century there had been numerous incidences of violence in Northern Ireland directed at British and local government officials and then more significantly between factions wanting a united free Ireland and those wanting a maintenance of the status quo.
By the late 1960's Northern Ireland's local government had urged the government of the United Kingdom to deploy military personnel to the country after sustained violence had surpassed the capabilities of the local police to contain.
The British Armed Forces were later deployed to quell the disturbances and Operation Banner as it became known was launched and subsequently lasted from August 1969 to July 2007. Throughout the life of the operation the British Armed Forces conducted operations across the low to mid-range area of the spectrum of conflict in support of the Royal Ulster Constabulary. Originally viewed by the population as being a stability force to keep the peace this perception changed in the early 1970s as the military force actively engaged in more dynamic operations against the identified threats. These operations were of a hybrid nature encompassing in some instances counter-insurgency and counter terrorism activities primarily against the activities of the Irish Republican Army and Ulster Defence Association and also various other splinter groups. Most operations however, were primarily focused on the conduct of general stability and peace operations ostensibly in support of the local government and citizenry.
Operation Banner became the lengthiest continuous campaign in British military history.5 8 F 59 It resulted in the deaths of "One Thousand Four Hundred and Forty-One (1,441) soldiers, seven hundred and twenty-two (722) of them attributed directly to attacks by threat forces."5 9 F 60 The Troubles' officially ended with the signing of a constitutional agreement in 1998 however, the military based operation did not officially end until almost a decade later.6 0 F 61
The most significant identified utilization of HILEO in the modern era have been those conducted to counter extreme elements of transnational organized crime and third generational gangs, sometimes referred to as "non-state criminal paramilitary complexes."6 1F 
62
62
Source: Chris Dalby and Camilo Carranza, "Insight Crime's 2018 Homicide Round-Up," InSight Crime, 22 January 2019, accessed 1 January 2020, https://www.insightcrime.org /news/analysis/insight-crime-2018-homicide-roundup/.
The Mexican state's protracted and robust use of the military in the identified counter drug and counter cartel/organized crime efforts provides a clear example of HILEO. Mexico's descent into its current state of instability and violence is not a recent manifestation as it has developed with the aid of various enablers over a protracted period of time. This instability is a result of a lethal combination of criminal based intent with insurgent like tactics directed at the government and governance structures within the country. This "combination of crime and insurgency however has a long tradition in Mexico"6 3F 64 this can be traced back to the late nineteenth, early twentieth century where government and the cartels largely ended in 1977 as the Mexican government made the decision to crack down on organized crime and corruption."6 5 F 66 The government was forced over a period to critically review its dealings with the cartels fueled largely by a more robust counter-drug and anti-corruption stance, helped in part by external diplomatic pressures.
Despite the more progressive and law enforcement stance the connections and relationships were not severed overnight; however, as government co-operation with the cartels decreased, they adopted quasi-insurgent tactics and started to go head to head against the state as part of a robust survival mechanism.6 6F 67 This insurgent type behavior developed throughout the late twentieth century as the cartels became bolder in their actions, the local police became outmanned and outgunned as the cartels procured "heavy weapons such as grenade launchers, AK-47 assault rifles, 50-caliber machine guns, sniper rifles, rocket-propelled grenades, improvised explosive devices, and anti-tank weapons.
They ambushed military convoys, intimidated local officials and where intimidation didn't work assassinations were conducted."6 7 F 68 In response to the clear threat to governance and stability the Mexican government employed a multi-prong whole of government approach to counter the identified threat, this involved policy measures aimed at countering corruption and the quasi state structures illicitly built over time by 
66
Lying of the southern coast of Cuba and astride the major sea lines of communications in the Caribbean Sea is the archipelagic state of Jamaica. An independent English speaking, nation state since 1962 with a population of approximately three million people, Jamaica is a paradox of democratic buoyancy, oversized sociocultural global influence, socio-economic instability and significant and prolonged crime and violence. That last attribute particularly its intentional homicide rate, has unfortunately confined the nation state statistically within the notorious realms of being a violent locale. The incidents of criminal violence in the Caribbean and Latin American region are among the highest in the world.6 9F 
70
69
The military had intermittently since independence and from the late 1990s on a more continuous basis, assisted the police with domestic law enforcement activities. This assistance however, was strictly under the legal framework of Military Assistance to the Civil Power where civil police retained legal primacy and the military provided enhanced security in order to allow the police to conduct their duties unhindered.7 4 F 75 This legislation was officially referred to as;
The Law Reform (Zones of Special Operations/ZOSO) (Special Security and Community Development Measures) Act'.
[is] an act to provide for special measures for upholding and preserving the Rule of Law, public order, citizen security and public safety within certain geographically-defined areas of Jamaica, or, in short, zones of special operations. It allows the Prime Minister, on the advice of the National Security Council, to declare any high-crime area of Jamaica a zone for special security operations and community development measures. . . . According to the memorandum of objects and reasons, the bill seeks to balance the need for security and giving the members of the Jamaica Constabulary Force and the Jamaica Defence Force certain essential powers that are required to address serious crimes, whilst upholding the rule of law and protecting the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens.7 5F 76 
74
The Horn of Africa, is the easternmost extension of land from the African continent that abuts the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. Shaped like a proverbial rhinoceros' horn the area is home to the countries of Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia.7 7F 78 The area in recent recorded history has been plagued by strife whether by conflict or famine. Of the four primary countries in the region Somalia's recent history /The%20Law%20Reform%20(Zones%20of%20Special%20Operations)%20(Special%20 Security%20and%20Community%20Development%20Measures)%20Act,%202017.pdf. 
77
78
The world at large has often not paid much attention to the region and international efforts in the 1990s to stop bloodshed and create stability ended in a highly publicized peace enforcement mission failure. Afflicted by severe poverty, Somalia was subsequently left to its own devices by the international community barring the United Nations and other international non-governmental organizations focused on trying to help the local populace regain some semblance of stability. That international neglect changed however, when in 2005, the world started to witness a series of hijackings for ransom of large marine vessels off Somalia's coast and in the Gulf of Aden.7 
9 F 80
The Somalia situation then became a wicked problem that marine operators at first tried to solve via insurance-based contingencies however, that proved unsuccessful.
The issue was complex as there was no effective central government to lobby, to sanction or competent actor with which to interact with, Somali pirates had in fact brought back the hey days of piracy. "The nature and purpose of piracy in the past and piracy today are indistinguishable. The casual factors remain the same: large sea spaces that defy easy application of legal restraint, favorable geography, weak or compliant states that provide sanctuary, corrupt officials and political leaders who can benefit from and protect piracy, conflict and economic disruption that open markets for stolen goods, and the promise of reward from the proceeds extracted from the sales of rich cargoes or the ransoms paid for seafarers' lives."8 1 F 82 Somalia therefore provided an ideal environment geographically, culturally, socially and politically for piracy to flourish as illustrated over the period 2003 to 2010 in figure 
6
81
85 "Operation Atalanta was launched on 8 December 2008 and is conducted in accordance with United Nations Security Council's resolutions. The Operation was extended by the European Council until December 2020with the following objectives: Protect vessels of the World Food Programme (WFP) and other vulnerable shipping. Deter, prevent and represses piracy and armed robbery at sea. Monitor fishing activities off the coast of Somalia. Support other EU missions and international organizations working to strengthen maritime security and capacity in the region." Union European Naval Force, "EU NAVFOR for Somalia," European Union Naval Force, accessed 20 October 2019, https://eunavfor.eu/.
Although the pirates adjusted to the presence of the task forces in the region by deploying to other areas, with stronger cooperation between task forces, shipping companies and other stakeholders the incidences of piracy dropped significantly, moving from a reported high of one hundred and seventy-six ( 
176
This is defined as "the deliberate multi-dimensional activities by a state actor just below the threshold of aggressive use of military forces. In such conflicts, adversaries employ an integrated suite of national and subnational instruments of power in an ambiguous war to gain specified strategic objectives without crossing the threshold of overt conflict. Adversaries may employ proxy forces to increase the level of military power being used without losing deniability."8 6F 87 86 Union European Naval Force, "EU NAVFOR for Somalia." 
87
The scarred memories of the effects of total war in particular, the significant loss of life forced global powers post 1945, to collectively pause and reflect. Total war was undesirable in the new age of ideological and strategic nuclear standoff. It was also from a capitalist and trade-based perspective, unprofitable and as a result there was a drive by the great powers to limit their involvement in an all-out conflict. Conflict or war by proxy then became a suitable alternative and gained popularity globally, as allies of the world's main players fought bloody small wars and conducted a plethora of deniable military based operations. The rise of deniable operations also saw the corresponding rise of intelligence-based operations, as intelligence agencies of western and eastern powers played out the great game on the global stage. Gray zone conflict therefore reflects the maneuver in between the virtual seams of recognized international law and the subsequent employment of nontraditional tools of statecraft to achieve gradual but decisive results in the no-man's land between peace and war. The result is a pattern of state rivalry that can substitute for traditional military aggression.8 7F 
88
Additionally, the rise of global peer pressure via global institutions such as the United Nations and other entities compelled global actors to comply with generally agreed upon international law and other global best practices. However, with the end of the Cold War and its associated encumbrances a new age beckoned. This new age was personified by 
88
In this new modern reality change was far reaching and permeated global systems and traversed geographic expanses. During this period, gray zone warfare once the realm of global power players, agents of espionage and cold war protagonists also underwent change and became a free market. In this new paradigm non-state actors, criminal organizations and computer hacktivists all jostled, cajoled and tried to punch above their weight in order to influence global geo-politics and earn a profit. Operations within the gray zone also became an appetizing option for those who aspired to expand their influence and reach but were unable to do so before because of a power deficit.
Post 9/11 the global exemplars for gray zone operations have been the Russian Federation (Russia) and The Peoples' Republic of China (China). "For China, Russia, Iran, and others, operating in the gray zone allowed them to dampen the relative power differences between them and others. Gray zone strategies became a form of asymmetric tool, a sort of multi-instrument insurgency."8 8F 
89
89
90
A key aspect of a nation's power is their ability to defend the nation's strategic interests whether at home or abroad, with the means at their disposal. IW is one such way that is characterized as a violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s). In irregular warfare, a less powerful adversary seeks to disrupt or negate the military capabilities and advantages of a more powerful military force, which usually serves that nation's established government.9 0 F 91 IW favors indirect and asymmetric approaches, though it may employ the full range of military and other capabilities, in order to erode an adversary's power, influence, and supposed fishing fleet of ships in the Western pacific that operates as a shadow maritime militia. In both cases these forces allow Moscow and Beijing to pursue key national objectives while simultaneously denying responsibility. Even if improbable, these denials can complicate efforts to attribute their involvement and organize a response." Vayl S. Oxford, "Countering Threat Networks to Deter, Compete and Win: Competition below Armed Conflict with Revisionist Powers," Joint Force Quarterly, no. 95 (4th Quarter 2019): 79. 
91
will. "Irregular warfare may be between states, between state and non-state actors, or between non-state actors with no state involvement."9 1F
92
94
The foregoing further refines the understanding that irregular warfare in the modern era is focused not on the grand revolutions and rebellions of the recent past, but primarily on the significant subsets of terrorism and insurgency. Both directed against a particular state government or by extension a type of governance (i.e. western based democracy) as the target for subversion and usurpation; whilst being mindful of the factors of time and space, legitimacy and support.9 4 F
95
Much of the confusion associated with terrorism and irregular warfare stems from the use of either value-laden or emotive language. The term 'freedom fighter' suggest heroism whilst 'terrorist' conveys cowardice, whilst the term 'guerilla' still evokes the romance and adventure of rebellion. There is also little agreement on what to call these types of violence: political violence, terrorism, irregular warfare, insurgency, military operations other than war (MOOTW), lowintensity conflict (LIC), peoples' war, revolutionary warfare, guerilla warfare, amongst others. Terrorism and insurgency are still viewed at best as a nuisance by many military professionals or a form of dirty war at worst. The line between combatants and non-combatants is unclear, objectives unclear, and the timeline for 'victory' unknown.9 5 F 96 Irregular warfare by its lineage, construct, adaptability and associated levels of violence validates its inclusion in any discussion surrounding the spectrum of conflict.
Warfare in the modern era is a multi-domain construct with traditional command and control and hierarchical foundations. These foundations have been significantly reinforced and upgraded by a significant cyber framework with numerous networks, systems and sensors. Cyberspace operations and by extension cyber warfare are now an active component in the discussions regarding the composition of a revamped spectrum of conflict.
"Cyberspace is a global domain within the information environment consisting of the interdependent networks of information technology infrastructures and resident data, including the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and embedded processors and controllers. Cyberspace enables integration across physical domains by moving data along transmission paths through links and nodes in cyberspace and the electromagnetic spectrum. Cyberspace operations are the employment of cyberspace capabilities where the primary purpose is to achieve objectives in or through cyberspace"9 6 F 97 96 Ibid., 187.
97 HQDA, FM 3-12, Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations, 1-3.
Cyberspace is critical to modern day military operations as it enables and enhances the ability of military commanders to perform mission command.9 7F 98 However, what makes the cyberspace domain truly unique is that whilst it "coexists with the other domains, it is a separate domain. and pervades the land, air, maritime, and space domains through the electromagnetic spectrum and wired networks," thereby making them the true enablers of multi-domain operations.9 8 F 99 As a result, the impact of cyber based disturbances and possible conflict has emerged as a significant area of concern for policy makers, academics and security practitioners alike.
Source: Frank G. Hoffman, "Examining Complex Forms of Conflict: Gray Zone and Hybrid Challenges," PRISM 7, no. 4 (November 2018): 38, accessed 20 October 2019, https://cco.ndu.edu/Portals/96/Documents/prism/prism7_4/181204_Hoffman_PDF.pdf?v 98 Ibid., 1-4. 
99
Cyberspace is critical not only to the effective conduct of security-based operations but access to its networks may also be considered as an intrinsic human right.9 9 F 100 This may require some reordering of Maslow's hierarchy however, it also underscores the importance of the domain. Attacking the cyber domain and digitally connected infrastructure once required significant kinetic campaigns however, these same systems can now be impacted by cyber personas that are geographically distant from affected networks. As the global polity is seemingly more concerned in synching its collective electronic systems, lives and consciousness to the internet of things, they are increasingly vulnerable to disruption.
The issue however arises when it comes to actually trying to define what the rules are in cyberspace. Firstly, there exists the still unresolved debate over whether cyberspace constitutes a fundamentally new domain that requires fundamentally new laws to govern it or the existing global norms and common law practices should suffice. The Euro-Atlantic alliance led by the United States believes, that "activities in cyberspace require no new legislation, and existing legal obligations should suffice. However, a significant number of other states under an opposing alliance led by Russia and China, believe that 100 The Internet is 'a global pool of information and services, accessible locally through individual computer stations that are each part of a global system of interconnected computer networks." Stephen Tully, "A Human Right to Access the Internet? Problems and Prospects," Human Rights Law Review 14, no. 2 (May 2014): 175, doi:10.1093/hrlr/ngu011, accessed 20 October 2019, https://academic-oupcom.er.lib.k-state.edu/hrlr/article/14/2/175/615750. new international legal instruments are essential in order to govern information security overall, including those expressed through the evolving domain of cyberspace."1 00F 101 Further to the aforementioned legal framework considerations, was the question of what exactly condones legal action in cyberspace. Also, for a domain that is transnational in nature whose jurisdiction ultimately applies over actions therein? Governments have largely pursued their own cyberspace strategies which has led to the militarization and weaponization of a domain that was hoped to be developed for the collective benefit of all humanity. In fact, the architecture and offerings of the Internet developed without much steering by governments, much less operations by militaries; that made talk of "cyberwar" exaggerated, except in very limited instances, today that is no longer true. States and their militaries see the value not only of controlling networks for surveillance or to deny access to adversaries, but also of subtle propaganda campaigns launched through a small number of wildly popular worldwide social platforms such as Facebook and Twitter. This form of hybrid conflict -launched by states without state insignia, on privately built and publicly used services -offers a genuine challenge to those who steward the network and the private companies whose platforms are targeted.1 02 F 103 conducted. The relationship between space and cyberspace is unique in that many space operations depend on cyberspace, and a critical portion of cyberspace can only be provided via space operations.1 05F 106 Space is no longer however, only the domain of the tri-polar powers as other global powers such as the United Kingdom, France, India and the European Union also have significant stakes in the space domain. The reach of those combined powers however, may soon pale in comparison to the private sector as companies such as SpaceX and Virgin Galactic. These entities have invested billions of dollars in research and development and fully intend to commercialize space exploration, utilization and management, further complicating and crowding this important domain.
It started out well enough with the agreement and ratification in the 1960s of the; the Outer Space Treaty (OST) also known as the International Agreement on Peaceful uses of Outer Space is officially called the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and other Celestial bodies. Signed in Washington D.C., London and Moscow on January 27,1967 it has served as the principal international legal mechanism and source of international political sentiment for keeping space demilitarized. The intent was to prevent participating countries from putting nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction in orbit and that human uses of the moon and other celestial bodies would be for peaceful nonmilitary related purposes.1 06F
107
As a result, world powers have relied on general goodwill and the spirit of partnership to abide by the treaty's provisions. With continued progress however, there have been cracks in the veneer of cooperation, as the original treaty and subsequent liability amendments strain to deal with the increased space-based activity. This provides further credence to the belief that in the age of great power competition general goodwill is a high priced and fleeting commodity when juxtaposed against positional domain advantage. It must be understood that "the space enterprise is no longer simply an enabler and force enhancer . . . it is an essential military capability and a key component of joint warfare," it therefore, should be regarded as a key component of any revised spectrum.1 07 F 108 Hybrid Warfare It has been posited that "the term hybrid warfare has no consistent definition and is used primarily by Western based analysts, military professionals and academics in a variety of ways. Some use the term to refer to the utilization of a state engaged in conflict of irregular tactics, or to describe the range of irregular and conventional tactics used in the same battlespace; yet others use it specifically to describe the type of New Generation Warfare articulated by the Russian Federation's General Staff."1 0 8F 109 However, the most concise definition has been that hybrid warfare can best be described as "the challenge presented by the increasing complexity of armed conflict, where adversaries may combine types of warfare plus nonmilitary means to neutralize conventional military power."1 
09F 110
110
111
114
8
The knock-on effect of this cognitive dissonance surrounding hybrid warfare, has resulted in the concept being relegated into theoretical spaces but not in the active discussions regarding the spectrum of conflict. Rather, the acceptance of hybrid threats and the general undertaking to utilize existing capabilities to combat them continues to be posited. All done while ignoring the unique perspectives and capabilities that will be required to deal with an effective proponent of hybrid warfare.
The Russian annexation of the Crimea and other operations in its near abroad are utilized as prime examples of hybrid warfare. The Russian view on warfare in the modern era and their recent military activities will be discussed later in this chapter. However, "the term hybrid warfare is not simply a reaction to the annexation of Crimea. It is a more sophisticated and enduring attempt to understand and articulate the ever-changing character of warfare. It is important because if understood correctly and included in revised understanding of the spectrum of conflict, it will allow for the development of a future force able to deter and defeat potential adversaries who seek new ways to win.1 17 F 118
Often associated with the concept of total war, "large-scale combat operations are at the far right of the conflict continuum. Historically, battlefields in large-scale combat 
117
118
operations have been more chaotic, intense, lethal and highly destructive. Their conditions include complexity, chaos, fear, violence, fatigue, and uncertainty."1 18F
119
LSCO has been often utilized as a method to describe success in war as it usually by agreed convention ends in somewhat of a definitive point with a declared winner, in most cases. However, the clear-cut winner takes all at the end of a large-scale conflict These erstwhile allied partners, superpowers united for a common cause against the declared evil of the then axis forces, were now undeclared enemies and caught up in a burgeoning space and nuclear arms race. The Korean War 1950 to 1953 was significant as it marked the Cold War's first significant clash of democratic versus communist ideologies and also had further significance as it marked the first major conflict of the nuclear age where the use of nuclear weapons to break the stalemate was actively considered, but it would not be the last. 125 "In January 1956, Life magazine published an article that purportedly explained how the Eisenhower administration had ended the Korean War. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles revealed that he had conveyed an 'unmistakable warning' to Beijing that the United States would use nuclear weapons against China if rapid progress toward a negotiated settlement was not made. He asserted that it was 'a pretty fair considerations throughout the period later highlighted that "by the mid-1950s, the lack of success in disarmament negotiations and the growing awareness of the dangers of nuclear warfare had produced a change in approach to arms control . . . new arms control theorists intended to work within the prevailing system of nuclear deterrence rather than try to abolish it."1 25 F 126 The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the premise of mutually assured destruction, sparked a bi-polar realization that hostile intent could not be countered in the post 1945 nuclear age in the same conventional manner.
During twelve days in October 1962 the world held its collective breath as it came very close during the Cuban Missile Crisis to a true nuclear based conflict. "As the superpowers edged back from the nuclear abyss after the crisis, both realized more than ever before that they had a mutual interest in effective crisis management."1 26 F
127
The Chinese way of war has always been touted as worthy of emulation primarily from a historical perspective. The writings of Confucius and Sunzi (Sun Tzu) have transcended time and space and facilitated a global insight into the essence of the Chinese warrior culture and methodology. In fact, Some authors pointing to the Confucian tradition and certain passages in Sunzi's Art of War, have argued that China's traditional grand strategy has emphasized defense over offense and displayed a preference for nonviolent solutions to security problems. Sunzi, after all tells us that the acme of military excellence is to subdue the enemy without fighting, while the Mencius, one of the core texts of the Confucian canon, maintains that the truly virtuous ruler, by means of his transforming influence, can bring his enemies to submit voluntarily without recourse to physical coercion.1 31 F 132
This strategic concept of non-violent solutions was however strongly tested as by the mid-twentieth century China was engaged in multiple conflicts at home and abroad. China at this point was a recently declared ally of the DPRK, and were by all indications seemingly content in conjunction with the USSR, in providing localized sustainment support and ideological mentorship for their ally and neighbor. However, with the ever-advancing multinational forces in close proximity to China's south western land border and seemingly poised to cross the Yalu river, China's Peoples' Liberation Army (PLA) entered the Korean conflict in force in October 1950 in support of the DPRK.
The Korean War was a complex conflict with significant socio-political layers. It was the first real ideological based conflict of the Cold War that pitted west against east, it also involved the nascent construct that was the United Nations. Which was ostensibly established just a few years earlier as an impartial collective entity for global cooperation.
However, by December 1950 that cooperation was nowhere in sight and the UN multinational force (US Eighth Army) at all echelons, was consistently harried, overrun and outfought all across the peninsula by the PLA and DPRK forces.
Although the conflict would end with an armistice and the UN forces seemingly with the upper hand, the conflict tested the new PLA on a significant level. Although they were not able to mass modern materiel on the frontline, they were able to match their strategic and tactical acumen against their erstwhile WWII allies. Chinese divisions out maneuvered and, in some cases, overran Eight Army formations and if not for the heroic inspirational deeds of key Eight Army leaders and formations, in tandem with air power, the war may have had a different outcome. Post the Korean conflict China generally retreated within its boundaries and underwent a period of internal socio-economic and cultural turmoil. Whilst dealing with its own troubles, China kept an eye on the West and mapped out its own patient strategies that would result in its subsequent economic and military rise and regional dominance as the one true China.
The re-emergence of China began in the latter decades of the twentieth century and continued to the present day. Unencumbered by major conflict and internally stable under the Communist Party's unmoving leadership, China's modern age took a profitable turn. The term BRICS was first prominently used in a Goldman Sachs report from 2003, which speculated that by 2050 the economies of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa would be wealthier than most of the then current major economic powers.1 32 F 
133
China became very visible very quickly and their global posture switched from developmental and cultural assistance and outreach to commercial and security joint 133 Holly A. Bell, "Status of the BRICS an Analysis of Growth Factors," International Research Journal of Finance and Economics, no. 69 (2011): 19, accessed 20 October 2019, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2340210. ventures whereby economic benefits and political goodwill redounded to the benefit of China.
However, dealing with a prosperous and powerful China, is by no means a novelty in world history. China's increasing wealth and military power have been accompanied by an extension of its influence with other countries and within international organizations. Its combination of authoritarian government, strong national development and economic power may help developing countries negate the pressures they feel from leading western governments to follow a particular model. International alignments may change: as countries within Asia become increasingly entwined with China's economy, the balance of political influence will incline towards China.1 33 F 134 Intertwined with this economic rise was a militaristic outlook built on centuries of military tradition and an extremely long-term strategic outlook. This was built on a distinct understanding of global affairs and the nature of strategic competition. China believed that strategic competition was a natural state of affairs with each country within the global commons able to chart the course of its own path with partners friends instead of foes. They based this on a realist-based position where throughout "history competition rather than cooperation has dominated international relation."1 34F 135 However, it is understood that with that competition comes distress regarding positional advantage and influence however, the Chinese also believe that it presents a further opportunity for cooperation. As noted by "Hedley Bull cooperation is in a dialectical relationship with discord. Therefore, to understand cooperation one must also understand the frequent absence of or failure of it and it is for this possibility of failure that China has also prepared for.1 
35 F 136
The book proposes tactics for developing countries, in particular China, to compensate for their military inferiority vis--vis the United States during a high-tech war.1 38 F 
139
139
Source: Frank G. Hoffman, "Examining Complex Forms of Conflict: Gray Zone and Hybrid Challenges," Prism 7, no. 4 (November 2018): 34, accessed 20 October 2019, https://cco.ndu.edu/Portals/96/Documents/prism/prism7_4/181204_Hoffman_PDF.pdf?v er=2018-12-04-161237-307Accessed 19 October 2019.
In the last decade China has managed to maintain its long-term strategic outlook by seamlessly matching its resurgent military capabilities with a comprehensive narrative of economic prosperity and shared partnerships with countries across the globe. It has also avoided peer to peer conflict with the United States and western Europe by effectively conducting non-attributable operations in the gray zone and attributable localized hybrid primarily maritime based operations in its South China Sea area of direct influence. All whilst building its conventional forces and power projection capabilities in preparation for possible large-scale combat operations and refining its full nuclear capabilities.
Russian Federation's view on warfare and the spectrum of conflict With a long history reaching back to the twelfth century the Russian Federation, formerly known as the USSR, has had a long and eventful history. Spanning across two continents it has played a significant role in geo-politics from the age of kings and empires to the present day. Its revolutionary upheaval during World War 1 changed its socio-political trajectory for good. This was further reinforced during WW II when after a brief flirtation with an Axis alliance, became a part of the alliance of united nations dedicated to the defeat of Nazi Germany and the Axis partners. WW II would have a scarring and long-lasting effect on the Russian landscape its people and psyche.
However, Russia managed to end the war in a position of geo-strategic significance, with a significant stake in the reconfiguration of post war global affairs.
Global alliances forged by fire however, were quickly discarded in the post war 'peace' as global powers scrambled for relevance and influence in the new bi polar paradigm of the Cold War. This Cold War kept ostensibly frigid by the possession of nuclear weapons on both sides of the divide, pitted the USSR and their 'Eastern' allies against the United States and their 'Western' own.1 39 F 140 Once allied partners united for a common cause against declared Nazi aggression, these two superpowers became undeclared enemies and thereafter caught up in a burgeoning space and nuclear arms race. There were numerous instances during the Cold War that had the potential of launching the world back into the throes of another global conflagration however, the concept of mutually assured destruction and communication kept war temperatures at freezing point. By the 1990s the USSR was on its proverbial last legs primarily as a result of socio-economic factors and by 1991 the USSR was no more. The Russian Federation re-emerged form the ashes of the USSR but the Russian bear taunted by economic and societal upheaval particular a devastating 1998 economic crash, turned inward and hibernated.
By the year 2000 at the dawn of the new century, Russia had recovered from the 1998 financial crash that had caused it to devaluate the ruble and to default on its foreign debt commitment.1 40F 141 It was also able to stabilize and gain greater control over its internal socio-political structures via globally accepted methodologies and others that were not as well defined. The stabilization was generally welcomed as the country had experienced a chaotic political and economic decade after the collapse of the Soviet Union.1 41F 142 With its increased internal and economic strength and cohesion, Russia's early twenty-first century recovery helped to also stabilize its socio-economic, cultural, defense and foreign policies. The Russian bear had seemingly awoken from its malaise induced slumber and was surveying its place in the world.
Since the mid-2000s Russia's defense budget has steadily increased with its increased stability and relative prosperity. Although "the fall in world oil prices in 2014-2016, led to an economic recession in the Russian economy, Russian leaders continued with their distinct positions in foreign policy."1 42 F 143 They subsequently reinforced those positions with definitive foreign-policy actions, by pushing its territorial and influence claims in Central Asia, Southern Europe and the Balkans. This has led to military and diplomatic adventures in its near abroad and subsequent geo-strategic tensions over the fate of Ukraine, Belarus, and Georgia.1 43 F 144
Russia's re-emergence on the global stage and competition in a new tri-polar world order has undergone significant analysis. However, what has undergone even more analysis are its views on conflict and how it operates in the realist Clausewitzian mold as it being an extension of its own policy initiatives. Russia reportedly views itself as great power from its emergence in the twelfth century to the modern era and as such undertakes to extend its influence within and without its borders. Its actions in Chechnya, Georgia, Ukraine, the Crimea and Syria over the last decade have seemingly been in lockstep with its New Generation warfare sometimes referred to as the Gerasimov doctrine or Russian Hybrid warfare. Western powers scrambling for a meaningful response.
In the last decade Russia has managed to seamlessly match its resurgent military capabilities with a comprehensive narrative of a parental state for all ethnic Russian and Slavic peoples, within its near abroad or immediate geographic sphere of influence. It has also avoided peer to peer conflict with the United States and western Europe by effectively conducting non-attributable operations in the gray zone and attributable localized hybrid operations in the near abroad. All whilst rebuilding its conventional forces in preparation for possible large-scale combat operations and refining its full nuclear and power projection capabilities.
United States' view on warfare and the spectrum of conflict It is noted that many actors have become skilled at operating below the threshold of military conflict-challenging the United States, our allies, and our partners with hostile actions cloaked in deniability . Our task is to ensure that American military superiority endures, and in combination with other elements of national power, is ready to protect Americans against sophisticated challenges to our national security.1 4 9F 150
In 1776 an idea broke free from a centuries old foreign based institution and took flight. In its early history that idea, the United States, mindful of malcontent regarding its audacious enterprise, focused on consolidating gains continentally and subsequently within the western hemisphere; forever minded of the socio-politic dangers that lay across vast oceans to its east and west.
The US steadily began to assert themselves on the international stage in the 19th century with the Western Hemisphere declared as within their distinct area of influence that should be free of foreign interference. This was articulated most succinctly by President James Munroe in what came to be known as the Monroe Doctrine. Where the US essentially declared to the world that any interference in the western hemisphere may be considered a hostile act against the US.1 
50 F 151
151
The US aware of the constant machinations of European power had to expand its economy and develop its professional military construct and strategic outlook on war, 155 "These three ingredients of Jomini's art of War-the principle of concentration, the strategic value of the central position and interior lines and the close relationship between logistics and combat were to be borrowed by Mahan to form the framework of his own system of naval strategy." Crowl, "Alfred Thayer Mahan: The Naval Historian," 457. 
156
The United States entered the twentieth century prosperous and growing ever more diverse, with a firm eye of its own affairs and not those of the distant lands of Europe, World War I at its commencement in 1914 sought in the fields of battle to settle decades old continental disagreements amongst kings and courtiers. It was believed at that time somewhat optimistically, to have been the war to end all wars and so a generation of young idealistic men enthusiastically went off to war filled with ritualistic fervor and hopes for medals and glory. Their hopes however, were quickly tempered and then discarded as "the war's political objects-were forgotten, political restraints were overwhelmed and politics were reduced to a mere justification of bigger battles, longer casualty lists and overflowing human misery."1 56 F 
157
It would be there that the American strategic mindset would be exposed to the harsh realities of large-scale combat and would begin to sow the cognitive seeds that would germinate during the inter-war years and bloom during WW II.
WW II was another catastrophic event that deeply impacted the viewpoints of survivors as to the true cost of total war. However, the US emerged from the ashes of the conflict as a global superpower with significant power, influence and now military strength and prowess. WW II had also however, facilitated a significant cognitive revolution within the American armed forces as to the concepts of combined arms, 
157
Operation Desert Shield, which later became Operation Desert Storm saw the deployment, coordination and utilization of hundreds of thousands of coalition military personnel to the region in order to enforce the UN Security Council resolution to combat Iraq's hostile actions. Utilizing new doctrinal precepts and new systems, the coalition under US leadership, integrated men and women from various countries in the conduct of a multi-domain Air Land battle concept of operations that focused on defeating the enemy and returning the region to stability. This facilitated the complete and ordered destruction of the combat capability of the Iraqi forces in theatre as the "U.S. military turned the fourth-largest army in the world into the second largest army in Iraq in a mere one hundred hours of ground combat."1 57 F 
158
The United States also exercised significant restraint by not trying to take on Iraq on its own. This was not because of the ability to not so do, as the United States at that moment at the end of the Cold War was emerging as the sole global superpower of note. The United States however, showed a deep understanding of the socio-political zeitgeist and demonstrated the effective utilization of all elements of national power by seeking the backing of the UN for diplomacy, sanctions and then subsequently resolutions for action, via the efforts of a broad-based coalition. 
158
Post Op Desert Storm there seemed to be a building contentment and relief within the American defense establishment, that LSCOs had resurfaced and were here to stay.
There would be no more Vietnams or thinking about minor threat profiles or warfare components as it was not worth it and they would not be able to do it anyway; hubris had returned. However, the words of Gen Krulak seemed prescient when he had reminded the US defense establishment in 1997 that "our enemies will not allow us to fight the Son of Desert Storm, but will try to draw us into the stepchild of Chechnya."1 58 F
159
In the aftermath of the dastardly events of 9/11 the American strategic mindset shifted to the Global War on Terror in order to deal with the Chechnyan stepchild that had presented itself; with its associated sub components of counter terrorism, counter insurgency and stability operations. This led to almost twenty years of counter insurgency and stability operations and a further loss of focus on the full spectrum. There however was a slow realization that whilst the US was busy in Afghanistan and Iraq, Russia and China were also carrying out their own strategic objectives. Further, their untracked capacities had grown exponentially over a ten-year period to being near peer competitors and then by the end of the decade potentially peer competitors.
The 2017 National Security Strategy of the United States of America strived to address that failing. It outlined that a contest for great power between nation states was not a unique concept with numerous instances, their antecedents and results codified throughout history. It outlined that the US government operating from a conceptual position of 'principled realism' identified that the activities of the Russian Federation, Peoples' Republic of China and Violent Extremist Organizations pose the greatest threat to the US, its allies and interests.1 59 F 160 It added that the US military needed significant investment in order to maintain a full spectrum force and superiority against identified adversaries.1 60 F 161 However, in spite of this articulation there was and still has not been any unified concept of what a holistic US based spectrum of conflict looks like. Figure 
10
Within the US' armed forces the perception of the spectrum is generally service or organization based. Even at the joint level it is kept intentionally vague focusing primarily on the range of military operations that may be conducted.1 61 F 
162
160
161 Button et al.,
"Russia's Near Abroad,
[143]
[144]
[145]
[146]
[147]
[148]
[149]
[150]
[151]
[152]
[153]
[154]
[155]
[156]
[157]
[158]
Source: Frank Hoffman, "Heuristic Construct for Conflict," PRISM 7, no. 2 (2018): 6, accessed 16 October 2019, https://cco.ndu.edu/Portals/96/Documents/prism /prism7_4/181204_Hoffman_PDF.pdf?ver=2018-12-04-161237-307.
In the last decade the US has been involved in small scale conflicts of varying categorizations and intensities on multiple fronts. It has subsequently started the processes to fully extricate its forces from identified areas and pivot to focus on the peer threat and large-scale combat operations. It has been able to respond to crises globally however, the current atmosphere of competition (benign or active), serves to remind the establishment that it needs to be prepared not just for the emerging but the conceptual as well. These activities often conducted within the gray areas of the spectrum of conflict, provide a complex problem set and environment within which the US must utilize all aspects of its national power and in concert with its allies, maintain a full spectrum capability in order to not only counter the perceived threats but also facilitate an enduring stability and associated mutual prosperity. Military forces therefore conduct broad operations under the ambit of various articles of international law and best practices to include, the Law of the Sea and various other international counter terrorism based legislation.1 68F 169 This is contrast to domestic action conducted under the ambit of state's interest. In essence by adhering to the principles of the Law of Armed Conflict but leaving the spectrum deliberately ambiguous a state 
167
168
169 "The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea lays down a comprehensive regime of law and order in the world's oceans and seas establishing rules governing all uses of the oceans and their resources. It enshrines the notion that all problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be addressed as a whole. United Nations Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, United Nations' Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, accessed 20 October 2019, https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_convention. htm.
creates more legal leeway for their maneuver.1 6 9F 170 Thirdly, there is also the traditionalists view that "war is war and the nature remains the same regardless of how it is categorized."1 70F 171
In general, on observation, most western based models follow the general methodology of this study's base line model (see figure 
19 below
Source: James D. Watkins, "The Maritime Strategy," Proceedings, no. 112 (January 1986): 8, accessed 10 August 2019, https://www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings /1986/january-supplement/maritime-strategy-0.
170 "The law of armed conflict is the "that part of international law that regulates the conduct of armed hostilities. It is also called the law of armed conflict. The law of armed conflict is also referred to as the law of war (LOW) or international humanitarian law (IHL)." United States Army Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School, Law of Armed Conflict Deskbook, 5th ed. (Charlottesville, VA: Judge Advocate General's Legal Center, 2015), accessed 20 October 2019, https://www.loc.gov /rr/frd/Military_Law/pdf/LOAC-Deskbook-2015.pdf.
However, most of the models do not show a general interaction between the categories leaving a perception that they are unique separate and siloed entities with no dynamic interplay. Further, that the same types of warfare/conflicts that were being dealt with in the immediate post WW II era and late twentieth century are still holistically relevant in the present day. This failure to conceptually launch, can be attributed to a noted cognitive reluctance by military professionals to deal with the blended matters at Figure 
20
The data presented in chapter 2 of the study on the current and significantly emerging forms of conflict/warfare highlight the types of warfare that fit the question profile. These types have primarily emerged as significant offshoots from the limited war category. The main categories of warfare highlighted in chapter 2 can be identified in two groups the constants (codified forms agreed throughout the literature as 'valid' forms of warfare) and the persistent emergent (emerging and current concepts of warfare that have been acknowledged as valid forms but still require general scholarly acceptance as to how to deal with them) with the addition of outliers. In the case of the study the constants are identified as irregular warfare, large scale combat operations and nuclear warfare.
Separate from this but within the constants 'sphere of influence, is the category of stability which is the desired end state of all conflict-based operations.
In consideration for the lack of incorporation of the aforementioned persistent emergent modes of warfare and the outlier of HILEO, in current models, the purpose of the study remains valid, as they are neither up to date nor of the desired level of conceptual utility. This study therefore proposed a 'Hybrid Model' that attempted to fill the perceived gap in the current literature and ultimately aid in redefining the spectrum of conflict to highlight the current twenty first century and beyond conflict paradigm.
What are the emerging types of conflict that are not represented on the current model but because of their current and predicted probability of occurrence and intensity warrant inclusion on the spectrum?
All major global military powers have interpretations of the spectrum of conflict that help to further their own national interests as they relate to the classification of certain conflicts and their relationship to legal and ethical based considerations. However, not all major powers and/or cultures view conflict in the same binary manner as some nation states have a more multi-dimensional and progressive interpretation. However, as outlined there are certain categories of conflict that have persisted and evolved over the latter decades of the twentieth century into the twenty first.
Securitization theory was subsequently utilized to assess the types of conflict and their merit for inclusion.1 71 F
172
warfare, cyber warfare and space warfare are concepts that are already in conceptual existence and practical application. They are however, normally subsumed under other categories, such as show of force, use of force or low intensity conflict/limited war, or referred to by other nomenclature. The evidence for their inclusion in the spectrum was outlined in preceding chapters. Particularly as it relates to the activities of the tri-polar powers over the last decade in these specific areas. Their inclusion as new independent categories on the spectrum, is therefore validated.
HILEO is a new concept crafted by the author, to describe an area of the spectrum for high intensity law enforcement. Within this construct, multi domain-based operations can be conducted in a domestic, regional or international based theatre of operations.
Further, these operations can be conducted in partnership with traditional law enforcement and /or police elements or independently under special legal frameworks that facilitate the utilization of these forces in specially designated geographic (terrestrial/maritime) areas for a set time period. This category although linked with stability is not focused on traditional stability-based or deliberate internal security-based operations. Rather, in these operations the military/para-military arm of the state in question or other regional or international partners assume the primary role in combatting designated extreme threat, manifested in various forms such as organized quasi-criminal/ paramilitary or piracy threats. These activities are however, conducted under strictly law enforcement-based parameters, with specific legislative provisions as a part of a distinct whole of government approach. Although the terminology and conceptual grouping is new, the activities subsumed therein are not. As indicated in the literature review nations across the globe are conducting operations within these aforementioned parameters at an increasing level. Therefore, in keeping with the securitization process its inclusion as a holistic grouping for the designated terrestrial and maritime operations is therefore validated and included on the spectrum.
What is an optimal representation of the spectrum of conflict?
The research has noted that the optimal representation for the spectrum of The validation of the categories was previously discussed in this chapter and the literature review. However, as a result of the foregoing the methodology for assessing the intensity and as a result the position of a particular type of conflict along the spectrum comes in to question. Precisely, where on the spectrum to place a particular conflict as it depends on several factors. Among them are policy objectives, available military means, national will, and density of fighting forces or combat power on the battlefield. In general, the greater this density, the more intense the conflict. Each conflict is not uniformly intense. As a result, we may witness relatively intense actions within a military operation other than war or relatively quiet sectors or phases in a major regional conflict or general war.1 7 4F
175
The Pursuant to the research design, the completion of the Terminology of Intensity Model (see table 
3
176
As a result of the above-mentioned results from the Terminology of Intensity Levels model, the following can therefore be discerned. Stability's associated intensity levels are 1-2. Gray zone conflict's associated intensity levels are 1-4, HILEO 's associated intensity level is 3. Irregular warfare's associated intensity is 3-4, Hybrid warfare's associated intensity level is 3-5. LSCO and Nuclear Warfare's associated intensity levels are 5, with nuclear warfare being an extreme intensity outlier. Narrative, Cyber and Space however, are associated with all levels as they are all encompassing and do double duty as both domains for operation as well as categories of warfare.
Pursuant to the research model, matching of the levels of intensity with the operational planning phases was completed (see table 
4
Irregular warfare straddles the midpoint of probability and violence intensity levels.
Hybrid warfare as per data collected in chapter 2, can exist as a singular entity, as well as synergizing means for other defined categories in order to create desired effects. This gives credence to the supposition that hybrid warfare is the face of modern conflict. Gray zone has a high occurrence rate that places it in tandem with stability and similarly is present throughout other categories of the spectrum in a quasi-symbiotic relationship. It is mostly focused on non-attributable operations rising in intensity and scope pursuant to the protagonist state/entity's declared interests. However, at the higher end of the spectrum as violence intensifies, enhanced sensors and interagency support mechanisms make the possibility of non-detectable, non-attributional activities less probable. The research also showed that that there had to be a reassessment of what exactly from primarily a western based perspective constitutes the spectrum of conflict, as there were just too many identified gaps that had a deleterious effect on shared understanding.
The revised spectrum was therefore necessary in order to assist government entities, (interagency and the joint force) in the development of suitable strategies and subsequent capacities. It would also assist in reassessing the appropriate balance between specialization and adaptation of means in order to counter the full warfare range likely to be employed in combination by future adversaries.1 76F
177
In relation to the emerging categories of conflict and their possible inclusion on the spectrum, various categories were identified and subsequently the securitization theory was utilized in order to validate their inclusion. The types identified were Stability, LSCO, Nuclear warfare, Narrative warfare, Cyber warfare, Space warfare, Gray Zone conflict, Hybrid warfare and HILEO. All of the aforementioned with the exception of HILEO were existing categories that stood independently or were normally subsumed under other broader categories for planning and reporting processes. HILEO was crafted by the author but was also comprised of pre-existing elements.
In search for what was an optimal representation of the spectrum of conflict, the research identified a seeming disconnect in how most examples of the spectrum were presented. Observed models presented a non-existent or even passive interplay between categories along the continuum, which in reality is not an accurate reflection of the dynamism and zeitgeist associated with modern-day conflict. The Spectrum of Conflict is not a siloed construct, rather it is critical to the understanding of modern-day conflict and in particular to the profession of arms. War is a fundamental unchanging human endeavor that violently pits opposing forces against each other as a result of "fear, honor and the pursuit of interest."1 77 F 178 Within this construct combatants of opposing forces play a high stakes cognitive chess game along the spectrum, each searching for an advantage that will enhance their own probabilities of success.
Although war is constant and unchanging, warfare is evolving. That evolution subsequently heightens its unpredictability and the ability to isolate particular characteristics and quantify success. Joint force and interagency planners, should therefore abandon the seeming binary based choice between pure peace and conventional war with a sprinkling of conjecture in between; adopted in most iterations of the 'conflict continuum.' The choice that faces all of us is no longer either one of preparing for longterm stability operations or high intensity conflict but rather a myriad of challenges. We should therefore consider a more hybrid view as a better focal point for considering alternative joint force postures.1 78F
179
The Hybrid model is not intended to be just another diagram or model, to sit on a shelf pending doctrinal review; as it seeks to also stir the conceptual debate regarding what is and what isn't when it comes to conflict categorization. In the current era and for the foreseeable future there will only be a joint fight with sister services, multinational and interagency partners. If every service, partner or agency turned up for joint planning with a different conceptual understanding of the operating environment, the threat and the interrelationships, then there would not be a coordinated effort, which leads to unnecessary complexity and unfortunate loss.
This study subsequently crafted a 'Hybrid Model,' of a line graph baseline construct with the categories correlated between the variables of probability of occurrence and level of intensity. This model was proposed in an attempt to fill the identified gap in the current literature and ultimately aid in redefining the spectrum of conflict to highlight the current twenty first century and beyond conflict paradigm.
Twenty first century governance and national interest management are noted as challenging for governments across the globe. This challenge is in part due to the nature of modern-day wicked problems and the associated complexity involved with the holistic incorporation of all elements of national power in order to solve them.1 79 F
180
In attempting to discern the appropriate construct for the spectrum, it is noted that, there may not be a general desire to accept a more defined and uniformed outlook on the spectrum and by extension the definition of conflict. This reluctance to ascribe to uniformity may be in the best interest of some major global powers for it to remain broad and conceptual. However, the need for understanding and cooperation persists in the face of ever more dynamic and persistent threats. The hybrid model is not posited as a proverbial silver bullet that will immediately enhance the mental acuity of all planners and policy makers, that view its lines. Nor will it make a multi domain battlespace benign for a combatant. It can however, aid in general situational understanding and provide a conceptual basis for further planning, cooperation and partnerships.
It is therefore recommended that the hybrid model be considered for utilization in the joint planning processes. Its unique construct, particularly the correlation and integration with the operational planning phases, provides planners, policy makers and practitioners alike from the joint force and interagency, with an enhanced start point for visualization and shared understanding. This conceptual enhancement will help to inform subsequent decisions regarding, planning and preparation for conflict, to include sustainment and the full integration of the elements of national power. It also provides a baseline for contingency planning and most importantly designing a holistic plan in order to recover from hostilities and return the impacted area to stability.
It is suggested that further research be conducted on the spectrum of conflict in general and the Hybrid model in particular. This is in order to further assist policy makers and practitioners alike with their understanding of modern-day conflict. This may involve a more quantitative look at the categories, possibly regarding their validity for incorporation (casualty figures, personnel and materiel involved), to their frequency of occurrence and positioning in relation to the other categories. Ultimately, it is believed that this further effort will assist in the continued development of a whole of government approach to confronting the wicked conflict related problems of our time. It will also allow states to prepare for conflict in one of its forms and if unable to avoid it, pursue the necessary alliances, that will ensure that their particular interests and overall stability are maintained.
3 (September 2000): 284, accessed 19 October 2019, https://bi-gale-com.er.lib.kstate.edu/essentials/article/GALE%7CA99576748?u=ksu.
68  
68  
76  
76  
Source: Created by author.
Lexico, "Spectrum," Lexico, accessed 20  October 2019, https://www.lexico.com /en/definition/spectrum.
Lexico, "Conflict," Lexico, accessed 20  October 2019, https://www.lexico.com /en/definition/conflict.
Sean Monaghan, "Countering Hybrid Warfare: So, What for the Future Joint Force?" Prism 8, no. 2 (October 2019): 87.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, xi.
Paul Cobaugh, Strategy to Oppose Russian Narrative Warfare," Medium, 25 April 2018, accessed 20 October 2019, https://medium.com/@paulcobaugh /a-five-point-strategy-to-oppose-russian-narrative-warfare-56e0006aab2a.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-14, Space Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Services, 2017), GL-10.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-07, Stability (Washington, DC: Government Printing Service,
2019), 1. 20 Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, x. 21 Ibid.
Frank G. Hoffman, "Examining Complex Forms of Conflict," Prism 7, no. 4  (November 2018): 30, accessed 20 October 2019, https://cco.ndu.edu/Portals/96 /Documents/prism/prism7_4/181204_Hoffman_PDF.pdf?ver=2018-12-04-161237-307.
Paul Scharre, "Spectrum of What?" Military Review (November-December 2012): 73-79, accessed 19 October 2019, https://www.armyupress.army.mil/Portals/7 /military-review/Archives/English/MilitaryReview_20121231_art012.pdf.
Kenneth Watkin, Fighting at  the Legal Boundaries: Controlling the Use of Force in Contemporary Conflict (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 7.
H. R. McMaster, "The Pipe Dream of Easy War," New York Times, 21 July 2013, accessed 1 January 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/21/opinion/sunday /the-pipe-dream-of-easy-war.html.
Erin Duffin, "Number of State-Based Conflicts Worldwide from 2002-2018, by Region Diagram," Statista.com, 19 July 2019, accessed 19 October 2019, https://www.statista.com/statistics/298151/number-of-state-based-conflicts-worldwideby-region/.
Watkin, Fighting at the Legal Boundaries, 7.   
Thomas Elkjer Nissen, "Narrative Led Operations: Put the Narrative First," Small Wars Journal, 17 October 2012, accessed 19 October 2019, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/narrative-led-operations-put-the-narrative-first.
Nissen, "Narrative-Led Operations: Put the Narrative First."
Watkin, Fighting at the Legal Boundary, 6.   
and socio-economic conditions.7 1F 72 Yet as displayed in figure4, even in a recorded high violence region such as Latin America and the Caribbean, Jamaica in 2018 was in the top three countries for intentional homicides. 72 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Latin American and the Caribbean Region of the World Bank, "Crime, Violence, and Development: Trends, Costs, and Policy Options in the Caribbean" (Report No. 37820, World Bank, March 2007), accessed 16 February 2020, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en /537301468231536879/pdf/378200LAC0Crim1white0cover01PUBLIC1.pdf.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, x.
James D. Kiras, "Irregular Warfare: Terrorism and Insurgency," in Strategy: In the Contemporary World, 3rd ed., ed. John Baylis, James J. Wirtz, and Colin S. Gray(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 189.   
Ibid., viii.    
Bert Chapman, Space Warfare and Defense: A Historical Encyclopedia and Research Guide (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2008).
Department of the Air Force, "Military Space Policy," 4.
Andrew Radin, Hybrid  Warfare in the Baltics: Threats and Potential Responses (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 5, accessed 19 October 2019, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR1500/RR1577/RAND_ RR1577.pdf.
Joseph J. Collins, "Afghanistan: Winning A Three Block War," The Journal of Conflict Studies 24, no. 2 (Winter 2004): 61, accessed 19 October 2019, https://journals.lib.unb.ca/index.php/jcs/article/view/204/361.
British Ministry of Defence, Land Warfare Development Centre, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP), Land Operations (Bristol, UK: British Ministry of Defence Crown, March 2017), accessed 20 October 2019, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk /government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/605298/Army_Field_Manual_ _AFM__A5_Master_ADP_Interactive_Gov_Web.pdf.
Monaghan, "Countering Hybrid Warfare,[82][83][84][85][86][87][88][89][90][91][92][93]
[94]
Rudyard Kipling, "The Ballad of East and West," Kipling Society, accessed 19 October 2019, http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_eastwest.htm.
HQDA, FM 3-0, Operations, 1-2.
John Baylis and Mark Smith, "The Control of Weapons of Mass Destruction," in Strategy in the Contemporary World, 3rd ed., ed. John Baylis, James Wirtz, Colin S. Gray, and Eliot Cohen (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 228.
Ibid.   
Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, February 1999).
Robin Hingham and David A. Graff, ed., A Military History of China (Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2012), 19.
Ibid., 1.
Chris Elder and Robert Ayson, "China's Rise and New Zealand's Interests: A Policy Primer for 2030" (Discussion Paper No.11, Centre for Strategic Studies, New Zealand Victoria University of Wellington, 2012), accessed 20 October 2019, https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/30678440.pdf.
Mark Boyer and John Rourke, International Politics on the World Stage (Boston, MA: McGraw Hill, 2002).
Robert Keohane, "International Institutions: Two Approaches," in International Theory: Critical Investigations, ed. James Der Derian (New York: New York University Press, 1995), 279-307.
M. Taylor Fravel, "China's New Military Strategy: 'Winning Informationized Local Wars'," China Brief 15, no. 13 (July 2015): 3-7, accessed 19 October 2019, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2626925.
Ibid.   
Command and General Staff College, USSR History Timeline-29 August 1949  Soviet Union Tested Atomic Bomb.   
Button et al., "Russia's Near Abroad,[143][144][145][146][147][148] 
Galeoti, "The 'Gerasimov Doctrine' and Russian Non-Linear War."   
Galeoti," 3.   
Edward, Hagerman, The American Civil War and the Origins of Modern Warfare: Ideas, Organization and Field Command (Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1988).
Collins, "Afghanistan: Winning A Three Block War," 61-67.
Watkin, Fighting at the Legal Boundaries.   
"The Copenhagen School of Security Studies conceptualizes security as a process of social construction of threats which includes securitizing actor (mostly political elite), who declares certain matter as urgent and a posing threat for the survival of the referent object, that, once accepted with the audience, legitimizes the use of extraordinary measures for neutralization of the threat." Information Resources and Management Association, National Security: Breakthroughs in Research and Practice.
Holger Stritzel, "Securitization Theory and the Copenhagen School," in Security in Translation New Security Challenges Series (London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), 11-37.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 3-0, Joint Operations.
Headquarters, Department of the Navy, MCDP 1, Warfighting, 2-6.
Monaghan, "Countering Hybrid Warfare," 95.   
McMaster, "The Pipe Dream of Easy War."
Monaghan, "Countering Hybrid Warfare," 93.   
Weinberger, "The Uses of Military Power."
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Commander Mark Peterson
Barbados Defence Force
Ms. Ann Chapman
Command and General Staff College
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
Source: Henk Rengelink, "Tackling Somali Piracy," Trends in Organized Crime 15 (2012): 180-197, accessed 20 October 2019, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12117-012-9171-3.
The counter to these attacks initially was conducted in an ad hoc manner with nations initially opting to protect their own flagged vessels and those of the World Food Program. However, in 2008 it was determined that there had been enough loss of life and disruption to international trade and the freedom of the seas and subsequently the United Nations Security Council was asked to formally consider the matter of Somalia based piracy. This led to the subsequent promulgation of Resolution 1851 (2008) Adopted by the Security Council at its 6046th meeting, on 16 December 2008 it formally authorized Space Warfare Space used to be regarded as a benign locale outside the reach and consciousness of most gravity bound terrestrial inhabitants, the purview of science fiction, adventurous astronauts, scientists, astronomers and superpowers with significant economic and military power. However, the decline of government funded space research supplanted by private sector entities focused on development, exploration and profit has moved space beyond the realm of space stations and satellites to a new domain for competition and inevitable conflict. In fact, it has been posited that "freedom to operate in space is not guaranteed and space is now a warfighting domain similar to the more familiar domains our men and women are fighting in today."1 0 3F 104 Concurrently significant development by the tri-polar powers in the ability to weaponize space has now impacted the global thought processes about what will conflict in space look like. The considerations have outlined more definitively that "we must assume future war on earth will extend into space and that we will need to 'fight through' attacks on our space assets and capabilities and continue to provide the space support our warfighters need and have come to expect."1 04F 105
The space domain is defined as the area above the altitude where atmospheric effects on airborne objects becomes negligible. Like the air, land, and maritime domains, space is a physical domain within which military, civil, and commercial activities are  General Gerasimov in his comments articulated that essentially the rules of conflict had changed and everyone had to adapt to a new paradigm if they were to be successful in geo-strategic affairs. He outlined that "the role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, in many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness."1 46F 147 145 Mark Galeoti, "The 'Gerasimov Doctrine' and Russian Non-Linear War," In Moscow's Shadows, 6 July 2014, accessed 20 October 2019, https://inmoscows shadows.wordpress.com/2014/07/06/the-gerasimov-doctrine-and-russian-non-linear-war/. What Gen. Gerasimov articulated was in fact nothing new. In fact, it could be opined that there was "in fact very little in conceptual novelty in what the Kremlin did in the Crimea and the conceptual roots could be traced back to the early 2000s indicating from then a clear shift in their conceptual approach to war."1 4 7F 148 Gen Gerasimov had outlined this when he said that;
the focus of applied methods of conflict has altered in the direction of the broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary amphibious warfare, special operations, airborne operations, carrier operations, and submarine warfare; all of which were formulated, practiced and perfected. It also facilitated a formalization of its defense apparatus in order to better formulate strategy, integrate and wield their significant instruments of national power. The US had now become in the space of two decades, without centuries of experience, the world's leading subject matter experts on warfare.
Despite this cognitive and theoretical foundation, the US defense establishment went through a period of atrophy following WWII. It engaged in limited conflicts globally and placed most of its focus during the Cold War on being able to stand toe to nuclear toe with the USSR, with the ever-present fear of mutually assured destruction.
The US defense establishment believed that as one of the world's superpowers, outside of conflict with the USSR everything else could be handled. This belief was subsequently proven to be invalid by the Chinese and North Koreans in Korea and the Vietnamese in Vietnam.
The Vietnam conflict in particular, erased the hubris that had set in and exposed the American way of war as unadaptable and failing. This became even more apparent to the American defense establishment in the aftermath of the 1973 Arab-Israeli war. The weaponry, strategy, innovation, mission command systems and combined arms philosophies on display by both sides, cognitively rocked the US defense establishment.
After significant needs analyses, restructuring and procurement were conducted, the American military was revamped but with nowhere to test these new precepts, that is until Iraq decided to invade Kuwait in 1990.
This chapter provided a review of relevant literature that was necessary to provide answers to the research questions of the study. This chapter sought to identify what has been written on the nature of contemporary conflict, also, identified current and emerging categories of warfare that should be represented on an updated spectrum. It also examined the military related history and current precepts of the United States, the Russian Federation, and the Peoples' Republic of China. Chapter 3 will focus on the methodology that is used in the study.
CHAPTER 3
The purpose of this study is to assess the general validity and utility of the current accepted models of the Spectrum of Conflict. In this chapter the methodological approach used to answer the primary and secondary research questions is discussed.
The research was conducted utilizing a qualitative combination of exploratory and descriptive research organized in accordance with a variation of the Creswell Model.1 62F 163
See figure 
14
Source: Modified by author. John W. The exploratory research was conducted in order to provide insights into the nature of conflict, background into the spectrum and emerging concepts of warfare. The descriptive research was conducted in order to ascertain new perceptions of conflict from a multiple geo-strategic perspective. The method for data collection was documentary research (secondary analysis). This involved analysis of literature and related data focusing on the global perceptions and codifications of the spectrum of conflict and the main elements of conflict as articulated in the Literature Review. Criteria for inclusion were non-fiction books, scholarly articles or reports, written in or approved translation to English, National Security Strategies, National Defense Strategies, military doctrinal publications. This data was gained primarily from library and internet resources. The research did not involve dealing with any human subjects and as such no interviews, focus groups, questionnaires or other form of purposive sample was utilized. Relevant ethical concerns were however, considered, such as ensuring that non-western basedcentric information was also presented for consideration.
The primary research question posited was: Is the current Spectrum of Conflict model an accurate representation of twenty first century warfare and its associated levels of intensity and dynamic inter relationships? In order to successfully articulate a response to the primary question two secondary questions were also formulated. The two secondary research questions will be addressed in a sequential manner.
1. What are the emerging types of conflict that are not represented on the current model but because of their current and predicted probability of occurrence and intensity warrant inclusion on the spectrum?
The research has gathered data on the current and significantly emerging forms of conflict/warfare that fit the question profile. These types have primarily emerged as significant offshoots from the limited war category. Securitization theory will be used to assess the types of conflict and their merit for inclusion.1 63F 164 See figure 15 of securitization process.
164 "The Copenhagen School of Security Studies conceptualizes security as a process of social construction of threats which includes securitizing actor (mostly political elite), who declares certain matter as urgent and a posing threat for the survival of the referent object, that, once accepted with the audience, legitimizes the use of extraordinary measures for neutralization of the threat." Information Resources and Management Association, ed., National Security: Breakthroughs in Research and Practice (Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2019).
Source: Roxanna Sjstedt, "Securitization Theory and Foreign Policy Analysis," Oxford Research Encyclopedia, accessed 16 October 2019, https://oxfordre.com/politics/view /10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.001.0001/acrefore-9780190228637-e-479.
The research has noted that the optimal representation for the spectrum of conflict, is a visual diagrammatic based representation. In keeping with the foregoing and prior scholarship, the James D. Watkins, US Naval Institute line graph model depicted in figure 
16
Source: James D. Watkins, "The Maritime Strategy," Proceedings, no. 112 (January 1986): 8, accessed 10 August 2019, https://www.usni.org/magazines /proceedings/1986/january-supplement/maritime-strategy-0.
The derived line graph as seen below (figure 
17
17
1
166 "There are five universal levels of conflict intensity, which are defined according to the stage of physical violence: dispute, non-violent crises, violent crises, limited war, and war (see Table 
1
Chapter 1 of the study provided the background to the formulation of the research question and scope of the problem. Chapter 2 contained the literature review that provided a detailed investigation as to the nature of warfare, the existing and emerging categories and also the viewpoint of China, Russia and the United States on conflict and the spectrum of conflict. This chapter outlined the methodology that was utilized to gather the relevant data in order to be able to answer the primary and secondary research questions. The next chapter focuses on the analysis of the collected data.   
This chapter provided the necessary analysis of the literature, which was used to answer the research questions. The chapter considered the existing spectrum of conflict model, validated the current and emerging categories of warfare and examined their interrelationships. The chapter also ranked the categories according to their intensity and