# ID: 24c7da4491754aa99c4fc96a337073b7
# Title: Fighting With the Air: Airpower, Violence, and Public Sentiment in Irregular Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Also, I would like to thank my wife for supporting the many hours of study, writing, and speaking necessary to complete this thesis; nothing I do would be possible without her. I would also like to thank my daughter, Nina, and son, Asher, for their recurrent questions on my "report card," which kept me striving for the "A."
A.
Since the turn of the century, the use of aircraft in irregular warfare has evolved in both complexity and importance. Multiple contributing factors increase this trend's importance including airpower derived human rights violations, deception campaigns, and third-party influences. Although these factors are not novel, upsurges in technology proliferation have lowered the entry cost for using aircraft at war and increased the salience of airpower debates. 
1
2
3
4
5
1 Patrick Tucker, "ISIS Has a Drone Strategy Too," The Atlantic, October 18, 2016, http://www.the atlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/10/anti-drone/504479/.
2 Both the battle of Cannae and the battle of Kursk were conventional force on force engagements. Both are used as historical case studies for traditional warfare, and notably, both battles are void of the influence of civilian populations on the battlefield.
In addition, states are increasingly turning to aircraft to coerce civilian populations through airpower, as depicted in the Syrian government's bombing of hospitals and United Nations (UN) convoys. 
6
7
8
9
10
Heuristic studies attempting to explain airpower effects often assume a correlation between airstrikes and negative sentiment toward a local state, especially when civilian casualties are reported. 11 However, given the proliferation of unmanned and aerial technologies, it is difficult for the civilian population to identify precisely the actor using military aircraft. 
12
13
14
15
Therefore, empirical studies on the spread of sentiment for state and non-state actors-within this unique irregular warfare context-are necessary to sharpen the debate on associations of positive or negative sentiment after airstrikes.
Irregular warfare is often referred to as a fight for influence over a population. 
16
18
19
often more adept than the United States at building narratives in response to airstrikes. 
20
This thesis takes up the challenge of measuring the effects of airstrikes on public  
2009): 101-13, doi: 10.1111/j.1747-7093.2009.00201.x. 21
This thesis posits that irregular warfare-heavily influenced by the human domain-will experience distinct effects in regions with higher levels of airstrikes.
Therefore, regarding airpower's role in irregular warfare and the corresponding public sentiment, this thesis attempts to answer the following questions:
1.
To what extent does airpower affect popular sentiment and political violence in irregular warfare?
To what extent do the effects of airstrikes on political violence differ across campaigns?
To what extent do airstrikes increase or decrease the level of local support for insurgent organizations or the existing state?
The first combat use of airpower is said to be by Italian Captain Carlo Piazza who flew reconnaissance missions in Libya on October 
23, 1911. 22
23
Lawrence, used the new technology for supporting armored cars and for inserting agents. 
24
25
Irregular airpower proponents in Germany, the United States, and Great Britain grew in both frequency and scope during World War II. Germany in several irregular airpower firsts used dirigibles to dominate a population center from the air instead of bombing it directly. 
26
27
28
29
Conflicts in Korea and Vietnam saw a development of airpower in irregular warfare for the British and French, but showed regression for the United States. 
30
31
32
33
34
From 1975 to the end of the century, airpower failures in irregular war were common. In 1980, Operation Eagle Claw, the attempted hostage rescue in Iran, failed in part due to an aircraft collision on a remote runway. Russian counterinsurgency (COIN)   in Afghanistan was thwarted by the destruction of their helicopters by the Mujahedeen armed with anti-aircraft missiles. In 1993, humanitarian and protection operations in Mogadishu were disrupted after the loss of 18 U.S. soldiers and two Blackhawk helicopters shot down by militia-men firing anti-tank rockets. These failures showcased the rift that had developed between human domain-centric warfare and airpower 
30
35
Three primary aspects fuel current debates over the use of airpower in irregular warfare. First, the choice to use airpower either exclusively or in partnership with SOF in the Middle East and Africa deviates from large-scale, land-based warfare tactics by the United States. 
38
39
40
Winston Churchill famously claimed, "Air power is the most difficult of all forms of military force to measure, or even express in precise terms." 
45
In response to the many dimensions of airpower, classical theory has been dominated by Jominian principles that espouse empirically based attrition and its cascading effects. 
46
47
Additional airpower theories continued the theoretical divide from human-centric and information-centric warfare. Coercive airpower, in an attempt to move away from cascading effects, oversimplified a state's choices to either bombing the military or bombing civilians. Coercive airpower theory then suggests that airpower is best employed to limit the ability of adversaries to accomplish their political goals by using the military. 
48
Byman,
Waxman,
and Larsen. 49
50
Issues immediately arise when attempting to marry strategic bombing or coercive bombing theories with irregular warfare goals. Based on Warden's writings, current airpower guidance-even for irregular warfare-advocates for overwhelming force on as many vital centers as possible to provide the cascading effects. 51 However, the human centricity of irregular warfare, and the need to influence the populous, negates a clearly definable vital center. In addition, cascading effects, when in an information dominant atmosphere are subject to bias and interpretation; effects that could equally cascade into mobilization for or against state forces. Insurgents, in contrast, often use non-military means, such as information to accomplish their goals. 
52
53
52
53 Colin Grey is a proponent of strategic bombing, which led him to the conclusion that because airpower had never been as tactically proficient as in Afghanistan and Iraq, the failure in the years post-2003 only existed because airpower was being asked to partake in a campaign it was not designed for with a lack of operational guidance. As such, airpower can take little blame for the results of an irregular campaign. Colin S. Gray, Airpower for Strategic Effect (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2012), 238-246; Trest, Air Commando One, 11-15. 
54
A small body of empirical analysis exists by Jason Lyall, Patrick Johnston, and
Anoop Sarbahi that focuses primarily on retaliatory terrorism to airstrikes. 55 However, these empirical studies are contradictory, one claiming kinetic strikes have increased retaliatory violence in Afghanistan, and the other claiming kinetic strikes have decreased retaliatory violence in Pakistan. These discrepancies leave a gap in academic studies, but could exist due to data or methodology differences. In addition, discrepancies could exist due to both the type and motif of airpower use. For example, airpower was most commonly used in Afghanistan in a reactive role, reactively supporting Army troops who could not defend with organic support. Pakistan, in contrast, used selective targeting without large-scale ground troop support.
Regrettably, in attempting to distill measurable variables, scholars within the aforementioned camp overly simplify the effects of airpower to increases or decreases in insurgent violence. Measuring insurgent violence in isolation can bring about causal fallacies, primarily in irregular warfare campaigns wherein airpower exists in response to violence, not as a precursor to it. In contrast, researchers, such as Janos Radvani, have shown that violence is only one of several conditions for insurgent effectiveness. 
56
It should be noted that a statistical study into the use of indiscriminant violence in irregular-or population centric-warfare does exist. On one hand, the use of indiscriminant violence has been correlated to a decrease in political violence. 
57
58
55
56 Janos Radvanyi suggests that spectacular events of violence will increase as an insurgency is building up and also dying. Janos Radvanyi, Psychological Operations and Political Warfare in Long-Term  Strategic Planning (New York: Praeger, 1990), 130. 
57
58 Sebastian Schutte, "Violence and Civilian Loyalties Evidence from Afghanistan," Journal of Conflict Resolution, January 22, 2016, 0022002715626249, doi: 10.1177/0022002715626249. appropriate avenue to vent their frustrations. Even so, indiscriminant violence is a separate avenue of study, distinct from this thesis looking to understand kinetic strikes in a politically constrained, or limited, environment.
Consolidating the review, U.S. airpower has slowly moved from state and situation appropriate technology, to the broad-brush application of higher, faster, and more accurate aircraft. These aircraft are focused on the destruction of military targets through the use of attrition-based or coercive-based theories. Both major theories fail to address the human-domain or information-domain necessities of irregular warfare adequately. This failure exists, at least in part, because of the lack of empirical analysis on variables outside of direct kinetic destruction. The small amount of analysis that has been conducted exists only to test airpower effects to increase retaliatory violence.
Violence, used in isolation, is too shallow a variable to encapsulate the prescribed application of airpower in irregular warfare. Nonetheless, the debate on airpower is consistently increasing, creating an academic gap and a policy need to discuss the interplay between bombs, public sentiment, and political violence.
This thesis uses two studies to determine the level of correlation between airstrikes and sentiment, and airstrikes and political violence. The units of analysis for this thesis are individual geospatial events recorded each day from January 2002 to July 2016. Both studies use advanced statistical regression techniques to assess the relationships between civil conflict, as measured using Uppsalla University's georeferenced event dataset, and public sentiment, as measured using the report from Yemen program support research. Political violence was recorded per individual event where an attack occurred between a politically motivated group and a state. Importantly, actions from political groups are recorded in the dataset only when the overall threshold of 25 battle-related deaths per year is reached. 
59
When assessing sentiment, this thesis tests the ability of airstrikes to have an enduring temporal effect. Temporal effects are measured by aggregations of airstrikes in various timeframes including days, months, and years prior to the examination, such as the nationwide survey in Yemen. In addition, sentiment changes are measured against regions with higher levels of airstrikes between two separate survey time periods to infer causal direction. For civil conflict, airstrikes are measured against a spatiotemporal window 90 days prior to the event to control for existing levels of violence, geography, economic status, and power relations. Afterwards, political violence trends in the surrounding area are measured to suggest associations between airstrikes and violence.
This thesis progresses with the following chapters. Chapter II assess associations between airstrikes and sentiment that lays the foundation between objective kinetic destruction and subjective human-domain issues. Chapter III measures associations between airstrikes and political violence, both within and across campaigns. In turn, this measurement ensures that connectivity between sentiment and political violence is explored. Each statistical study introduces the issue at hand, the current discussion, relevant literature, methodology, and results. Finally, Chapter IV contains conclusions, theory development, and recommendations.  Therefore, research is necessary to resolve discrepancies between airstrikes and political violence studies to uncover whether the differences were due to variances in methodology or in campaigns.
The current chapter aims to resolve the aforementioned statistical issues through variable spatiotemporal windows that measure the number of deaths from individual airstrikes and resultant political violence. Importantly, these measurements are conducted across campaigns from Yemen, Somalia, Afghanistan, and Pakistan from January 2002 to January 2016. However, prior to conducting statistical modeling, applicable literature within the four campaigns is assessed to denote similarities and differences in information asymmetry. Next, the statistical analysis is described in detail to include a new spatial-temporal measurement of airstrike density. Finally, the chapter concludes with hypothesis testing and an interim conclusion.
This research combines two geo-referenced datasets with a newly coded dataset of airstrikes that increases the locational accuracy and meta-data available for future studies. Building on previous studies, the New American Foundation airstrike dataset-
the same used by Johnston and Sarbahi-was used as a baseline to include an additional three years of data. This information was cross-referenced with a separate open-source airstrike dataset from the Bureau of Investigative Journalism and is therefore well positioned to clarify the debate on airstrike effects in irregular warfare. 
63
Historical air campaigns among Yemen, Somalia, Afghanistan, and Pakistan are considerably distinct. Each campaign has differing levels of information asymmetry resulting from targeting strategies, as well as sate and insurgent capacities for narrative distribution. George Akerlof first conceived information asymmetry, an economic theory of decision making with incomplete information. 
65
66
This thesis uses the theory of information asymmetry theory as a foundation to explore hypothesis regarding air campaigns. In particular, this chapter argues that a state using airpower holds more information than civilians do on the strategy or product of kinetic strikes. Withholding of information exists, at least in part, to protect a state from adverse insurgent actions that may reduce the destructive capacity of its military. For example, a state typically does not broadcast when an insurgent leader is being targeted for fear that the leader will take actions to inhibit the strike. Even so, in irregular warfare, civilians or investors are attempting to rationalize whether they see the product as good or bad based on the information available. As seen in Chapter II, airstrikes move bystanders to participants in the political process. Therefore, the state must balance its military's desire for secrecy, and its population's desire for information regarding the product.
Insurgencies, must also balance their need for secrecy, due to aforementioned targeting concerns, with their own narrative regarding the airstrikes. In other words, the state and the insurgents construct competing narratives while seeking to maximize their ability to leverage power.
Two important theories are drawn from merging information asymmetry and irregular warfare information operations. First, mounting evidence states that with effective vertical information, technologies experience a pacification of political violence. Camber Warren suggests that vertical information technologies, such as mass media, were effective in Africa to decrease collective violence. 
67
68
Second, information asymmetry when equal between the state and insurgency may increase the level of political violence. Kentaro Hirose, Kosuke Imai, and Jason Lyall suggest that insurgencies target areas of pro counter-insurgent support with violence to insert their own political agenda. 
69
In contrast, areas that were usually strongholds of insurgents, when challenged by the state, would be subject to increased attention to hold onto a perceived information dominance by the insurgents. 
70
67
Yemen's history with airpower has contained several variations of targeting strategies since the turn of the century. After Yemen's first elected president created the fertile ground for corruption, two insurgencies grew in the country, a Shia-based Houthi insurgency called Ansar Allah, and a Sunni based AQAP. In 2013, following the Arab Spring, Ansar Allah began to move against the capital Aden. In 2014, backed by the Government of Iran, the Houthi rebellion captured Aden and massive swaths of Yemen. 
71
States and the United Kingdom was formed to counter the Houthi rebellion and reinstate
Yemeni president Mansure Hadi. 
72
73
74
75
76
77
In contrast to state militaries, AQAP and its affiliates have maintained a high level of information operations and have crafted successful narratives in response to military actions. This success showcases two important implications. First, AQAP focused on local-level exploitation, passing information along lines most available to local populations. Second, AQAP narratives not only crafted a believable story but also gave individuals an actionable plan to resolve the local-level grievances. 
78
Somalia has long suffered insurgencies and political violence. In the 20th century, the lands of Somalia passed from the British to Italian hands to General Mohamed Siad Barre in the 1970s and 1980s. However, by 1991, civil war ousted Barre, and civil conflict grew to an extent that the UN and United States intervened in December 1992. Soon thereafter, the United States removed its troops in the region, bringing criticism on U.S. support to humanitarian operations as a viable option to decrease civil conflict. 
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
The federally administered tribal areas (FATA) in Pakistan have long been a
haven for tribes that resisted states and colonialism. 
99
102
Table 
1
operations, as well as air campaign differences among Yemen, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Somalia. In Pakistan and Yemen, information dissymmetry between military operations and civilian understanding is high. According to open source reports, the targeting scheme in Pakistan has been purely offensive. However, it is unknown if U.S.
or Pakistan airstrikes have included information operations. Therefore, a wide range of state information asymmetry-from high asymmetry to low asymmetry-is plausible.
Even so, geographically, the FATA region is away from the established Pakistani government and has the potential to limit the reach of state information region within the area. In addition, at least three insurgent groups exist with fully functioning, and mature, information operations. This type of operation presents the possibility that within Pakistan, the information operations conducted by insurgents may outweigh any information operations conducted by the United States or Pakistan.
102 Tribune News Services, "Obama Administration: Up to 116 Civilians Killed in U.S. Airstrikes," Chicago Tribune, July 1, 2016, http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/ct-obama-drone-strikecivilian-deaths-20160701-story.html. 
103
Unfortunately, the lack of precision munitions with Saudi-led airpower has led to an abundance of civilian casualties. These casualties are an important conversation starter for many civilians seeking answers; however, the state provides little to information. In contrast, the Iranian supported Ansar Allah and AQAP are adept at providing narratives in response to airstrikes. These combined observations suggest that the information dissymmetry is high between airstrikes and civilian understanding, leaving a gap for narrative distribution.
Hypothesis 1: Campaigns experiencing a higher level of information asymmetry between civilians and military airstrikes-such as Yemen and Pakistan-will have a higher level of political violence following an airstrike.
In contrast, Somali and Afghan information dissymmetry between military operations and civilian understanding is relatively low. In Afghanistan, it is due to years of NATO and U.S. unilateral actions that have turned the focus on local level grievances and village support operations. Additionally, Afghan operations turned in 2014 to working with and through indigenous army and police forces, giving more credence to information operations. Detracting from this benefit, defensive airpower campaigns leverage kinetic strikes in defense of military troop movements. In these cases, government agencies are typically reactive, and as such, do not plan effective information campaigns. When facing unitary insurgencies, such as the Taliban and al-Qaeda, civilians within the area are left primarily to receive framing narratives from insurgencies rather than the state following a strike. Even so, it is possible that information operations conducted by U.S. and Afghan militaries at the lowest village level have decreased the information asymmetry between the state and civilian below that of the insurgency.
In Somalia, a growing-as opposed to failed-state could theoretically manage the information space better. However, it is unknown if the multitude of supporting
African nations increase or decrease information asymmetry. In addition, airstrikes are being conducted primarily, if not solely, by the United States in a primarily offensive nature. It is assumed, based on the capabilities of the United States Air Force that defensive airstrikes that have been conducted done with a critical eye to decrease civilian casualties and unnecessary destruction of property. This allows the state and executing agency to plan information operations in support of the network targeting. Although the insurgency is unitary, and able to provide more counter-narratives to airstrikes, this chapter hypothesizes that the state status, type of targeting, and air campaign status will result in a lower level of violence after an airstrike compared to Afghanistan and Yemen.
Therefore, the following is hypothesized.
Hypothesis 2: Campaigns experiencing a lower level of information asymmetry between civilians and military airstrikes-such as Afghanistan and Somalia-will have a lower level of political violence following an airstrike.
This chapter uses a spatiotemporal methodology for evaluating the effects of  Airstrike measurements are obtained from the New American Foundation's dataset on airstrikes combined with the International Bureau of Investigative Journalism dataset on airstrikes. 104 Geocoding focused on using the available information from the datasets and then refining locations based on media reports. Individual geo-coding for airstrikes are refined as possible given the available media data. The centroid of towns is used as an initial starting point where amplifying information could more the geo-coded event in a direction. For example, if the airstrike were conducted against a vehicle that was on a specific road in a town, the geo-tagging would deviate from the centroid of the town to be offset to the road. Order of precedence for geo-coding was given to the centroid of towns. Offsets to roads or large geographic features were allowed based upon media reports. Geo-coding should be understood as information based on media reports, and not necessarily the precise location of an airstrike. Geo-coding also used latitudes and longitudes that provide bandwidths no smaller than one kilometer for a given geographic location. 
2
When considering political violence in response to airstrikes in Yemen, events were associated with increases in political violence within 30, 60, 90, and 120 days. The results in Table 
3
2
Second, based on the lack of statistically significant results until after 60 days the effects of airstrikes can be seen as having long-term effects, which may not be initially visible.
This suggests that correlations with information operations and sentiment may have the best explanatory power when viewed across longer time frames.
Table 
5
6
These findings support the propositions by Lyall who also discovered an association between airstrikes and political violence. 
105
7
Afghanistan could be limited due to the mountainous terrain and lack of horizontal communication across the country. In effect, this would limit narrative distribution about an airstrike that would increase post-strike violence via insurgents to a confined area.
Second, counter narratives by U.S. and Afghani forces could have effects outside of local populations that could be significantly changed by competing narratives. This could also suggest that local level grievances in Afghanistan are more pronounced than in other countries.  
The statistical results presented here support the hypothesis that political violence tends to increase in and Pakistan in response to airstrikes. This implies that the Yemen and Pakistan campaigns are experiencing a higher level of information asymmetry between civilians and military airstrikes, leading to a higher level of political violence following an airstrike. As argued above, airstrikes are subject to information asymmetry, resulting in extreme interpretations of events. The findings provide robustness to the Hirose, Imai, and Lyall study that suggests sentiment can be a discriminator for political violence. 
106
106
case, this could be the result of competing information campaigns at the local level.
Whereas insurgencies could leverage the effects of the airstrike in the immediate local area, villages outside of the immediate area are under a separate information asymmetry condition due to the VSO conducted by special operations.
The models presented in this chapter give support for an overall violent response to airstrikes in limited irregular battles. This model gives credence that airstrikes have the potential to increase political violence, and as such, should be taken into account for policy concerns when conducting limited irregular warfare. It should be understood however that political violence is a tool commonly used when an insurgency is both fledgling and flailing, and as such, as a poor discriminator of success in limited irregular warfare.
In addition to the overall violent response, the models in this chapter support prior academic studies in Afghanistan that associate political violence increases with airstrike locations. However, when used across campaigns, this chapter does not support prior academic studies in Pakistan. In this case, the differences in methodology between the Afghan and Pakistani studies are the most likely rational for the differences in results.
Importantly, the study in Pakistan was bounded by region and could have been subject to modifiable areal unit issues, wherein the size of the boundaries erroneously impact the injects, and as such, the results. 
107
Finally, the models presented in this chapter give credence for assessing the strategic impact of information asymmetry in limited irregular battles. Although exporting these results beyond the scope of the study cannot be directly supported, future models should look to correlate actual information operations with sentiment to 
107
You don't barrel bomb children! -John Kerry United Nations Syria Support Group, 28 Sep 2016   To what extent-if any-do airstrikes affect civilian support of a state, an insurgency, or an external coalition? More specifically, do locations with higher incidences of airstrikes correlate with increases or decreases in popular support for political entities? This chapter uses geospatial measurements of popular support for terrorist groups and the Yemeni state from November 2013 to January 2014, combined with airstrike data from 2002 to 2014, to explore this issue. The results show that airstrikes are not simply associated with higher or lower support for a particular side in the conflict, but rather are associated with higher levels of political extremism on both sides of the conflict.
Current quantitative research on airstrikes focuses exclusively on airpower attempts to coerce an insurgent organization to reduce terrorist acts or supporting activities. 
108
109
110
111
This This association is assessed by first converting the airstrike data into a spatial grid (aka "raster") by generating a smoothed estimate of the density of airstrike points over space. This density is then compared to the spatial patterns of support for various political entities in Yemen. The statistical analysis shows the following-seemingly conflicting-111 Department of Defense, Sustaining U.S. Global Leadership: Priorities for 21st Century Defense (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2012), 6.
112 Veracity was measured by reports that contained at least two reputable and external news stations. Endurance was measured by links that remain active as of July 2016.
113 U.S. Special Operations Command (J39), Yemen Program Support, Research Report Wave #4 (MacDill Air Force Base, FL: U.S. Special Operations Command (J39), 2014). results. First, locations with higher densities of airstrikes resulted in higher levels of extreme support for al Qaeda, Ansar Allah, and violent extremism in Yemen. Second, locations with higher densities of airstrikes are associated with higher levels of extreme support for the government of Yemen. Third, locations with higher densities of airstrikes are associated with higher levels of extreme support for Western involvement. All findings pass multiple robustness checks and suggest that the effects of airstrikes are not simply associated with increases or decreases in support for a particular political entity.
Instead, these findings support the idea that airstrike effects beyond immediate destruction are amoral effects. In other words, airstrike effects are not predisposed to causing negative sentiment for a standing state or government. Instead, airstrikes appear to move individuals from bystanders to participants in the political process, causing extreme support for both the state and insurgencies. In this way, airstrikes may be subject to civilian interpretation through narrative distribution. Said another way, political opportunities are available for exploitation by individual bias, social structure, and external accounts. Airstrikes as a political opportunity, allow opportunities beyond normal circumstances to mobilize populations through a particular narrative and exist as precursors to potential political violence.
The Republic of Yemen is a country of embattled history and strategic importance. Yemen is surrounded by the Gulf of Aden to the south, Saudi Arabia to the north, and Oman to the east. In the 20th century, Yemen was divided into North and South Yemen, which existed as two states until 1990 when President Ali Abdullah Saleh was elected. 
114
115
115 U.S. Government, U. S. Military, and Department of Defense, Yemen in Perspective-Orientation Guide and Yemeni Cultural Orientation: Geography, History, Economy, Security, Customs, Aden, Sanaa,  Sunni and Shi'a, Sufism, Qat Chewing, Al Qaeda, Houthi Rebellion (Progressive Management, 2015). until 2012. After the Arab Spring in 2011, President Saleh was succeeded by President Hadi, who promptly lost the capital to the Houthi rebels and large portions of the south to Al-Qaeda in November 2014. 
116
Historically, Yemen has been a hotbed for broad socio-economic grievances.
During his tenure, President Saleh often used extra-judicial violence to quell popular uprisings and anti-government speech. The UN reported that 92% of women in Yemen suffered violence within their households. 
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
In 2006, remnants of Al-Qaeda in Saudi Arabia merged with AQY to avoid persecution, as well as improve branding and global perception. 
126
127
In fact, AQAP's growth and stake in destabilizing the Yemeni government from peace talks with the Houthis was so troubling that it quickly developed into a UN Security Council discussion. 
128
123
124 Tom Quiggin, "Understanding Al-Qaeda's Ideology for Counter-Narrative Work," Perspectives on Terrorism 3, no. 2 (November 25, 2010), http://www.terrorismanalysts.com/pt/index.php/pot/article/view/ 67. 
125
126 Laura Smith-Spark, "What Is Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula?," CNN, accessed November 15, 2016, http://www.cnn.com/2015/01/14/middleeast/yemen-al-qaeda-arabian-peninsula/index.html.
127 "Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)," accessed November 15, 2016, http://www.cfr.org/ yemen/al-qaeda-arabian-peninsula-aqap/p9369.
128 "UN News-At Security Council, UN Envoy Says Yemen on 'Rapid Downward Spiral' as Tensions Rise," March 22, 2015, https://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=50403.
First, AQAP focused on growing popular support locally and regionally under a narrative of grievances against the United States and its allies that intruded in Sunni Muslim affairs. 
129
2011, 2014, and 2015. 130
131
132
133
134
135
136
The political history of Yemen has created a fertile ground to measure political support and opposition for both state and sub-state entities. Therefore, this thesis analyzes the relationship between airstrikes and resulting support for AQAP, Ansar Allah, The Government of Yemen, external states, and overall external extremism from 2012 to 2014.
First, it may be that airstrikes increase positive sentiment and legitimacy of a state. For example, the United States has a long history of associating sentiment with state power. "Winning hearts and minds" is the theory that popular sentiment strengthens legitimacy in the state. 
137
138
Growing literature also suggests state strength is a key deterrent of civil conflict. 
139
143
144
Hypothesis 1b: All else equal, regions experiencing recent airstrikes are more likely to experience subsequent downturns in support for the Yemeni state.
It is also possible that public support for insurgencies would grow in response to airstrikes. First, if the insurgents see an airstrike as the state extending its power in a
given geographic area, insurgencies may focus on this area to control public sentiment and maintain their reputation. 
145
146
Second, insurgents may attempt to coerce the population using fear in a given geographic area, thus forcefully increasing insurgent support. In Yemen, al-Qaeda often used this tactic to dissuade locals from supporting the state or Houthi rebels. 147
Theoretically, locations with higher levels of airstrikes would then be areas where the insurgents would be more likely to retaliate with terrorist attacks due to reputational concerns. 
148
149
In contrast, air strikes may decrease support for insurgencies by showing the insurgency to be weak against the state in the following ways. (1) Leadership decapitation and a systemic network attack may lead to decreased recruiting and a reduction in the ability to operate in a cohesive manner; therefore, less public support for the insurgency. (2) A degradation of networks could cause a loss of skilled labor for the insurgencies, and as such, an inability to fulfill promises to the local population. A lack of promises could lead to a decrease in public support. In addition, if the area was suffering a suppression of support for the state, network targeting could theoretically free up civilians to decrease their support for insurgents.
Hypothesis 2b: All else equal, regions experiencing recent airstrikes are more likely to experience decreases in support for al-Qaeda and Ansar Allah.
Finally, evidence suggests that insurgents are prolific at casting a narrative in response to military action, particularly those insurgents with access to mass media. 
150
This chapter utilizes 2D kernel density estimates to generate smoothed "heatmaps" as approximations of regions where higher and lower levels of airstrikes exist. Importantly, kernel density estimates allow for nonparametric statistics inferring density information based on bandwidths associated with a Gaussian distribution of variation in point locations. However, as is the case with airstrikes, there is a lack of data to suggest a consistent bandwidth selection. More specifically, it is not clear what assumptions should be made about the distances over which airstrike effects are likely to be observed, so it is not clear how much "smoothing" should be applied to the point locations. Standard bandwidth selection techniques-such as the mean integrated squared error-relies on a common distribution. However, it would be a mistake to assume a common distribution of airstrike effects, particularly in a military engagement, primarily because effects are likely to occur over multiple distances. Therefore, for each variable this thesis builds several rasters using varying bandwidths for the density estimates.
These bandwidths have been selected at the 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 5 degrees of latitude and longitude to cover the range of possible airstrike effects. The independent variable is then generated by calculating the average density at each location across all bandwidths.
Airstrike measurements were obtained from the newly compiled dataset described in Chapter II, which coded events from the New American Foundation's dataset on airstrikes 151 and the International Bureau of Investigative Journalism. Importantly, this data aggregates all airstrikes regardless of nationality dropping the munition. This is primarily due to a lack of confidence in the accuracy of information regarding the originator of the strike due to the open-source collection methods.
Additionally, the models reported as follow include controls for economic status, population density, power relations, and prior levels of airstrikes. By controlling directly for economic status, it is possible to account for populations who may have harbored negative sentiment toward the state due to poverty. Power relations controls for populations that may have harbored negative sentiment toward the state due to a negative correlation with power disparities. Population density has been correlated with an increase in political violence; therefore, it must be accounted for to ensure the effects of airstrikes are measured in isolation. Finally, prior level of violence within an area, such as airstrikes must be accounted for; therefore, a control for the density of airstrikes over the previous five years is included.
Figure 
5
6
151 "Covert Drone War Archives"; "World of Drones," accessed September 25, 2016, http://security data.newamerica.net/world-drones.html. 
This chapter uses a multivariate regression models to assess the relationship between airstrike density and popular support for various political entities in Yemen.
Importantly, the dependent variable is reduced from a Likert-type scale giving four possibilities to a dichotomous measure indicating "extreme" support. Because the dependent variable is dichotomous, I utilize logistic regressions to assess the effects. The results from these models are reported in Table 
8
8
7
Results shown in Table 
8
Furthermore, when assessing substantive effects, it can been seen in Figure 
7
However, in seemingly conflicting results, it also appears that airstrikes are associated with increased confidence in the national government, a finding that is also significant at the 99% confidence level. In addition, the results show positive associations between airstrikes and support for Western states, such as Germany, France, and the United States, again the case with 99% confidence. However, these results only appear to be conflicting if it is assumed that sentiment is a zero sum game. Instead, these finding suggest that as airstrike density increases, extreme support both for both sides can increase at the same time.
To assess the robustness of these findings, Table 
9
8
Second, differences arise between negative associations with support for the United Kingdom, and the United States and aforementioned positive associations with support for "western governments." In this case, the negative coefficients for the United Kingdom and Iran suggest that Yemeni civilians have long-standing socio-economic grievances surrounding historical external intervention. As stated previously, these findings suggest that the political opportunity of airstrikes is not only subject to a given narrative, but also subject to prior social situations, such as historical resentment.
Interestingly, sentiment for the United States is not associated positively or negatively with airstrike density at standard levels of statistical significance.
The results from the models reported above provide substantial support for Hypothesis 1a, which predicted that regions experiencing recent airstrikes would be more likely to experience subsequent increases in support for the Yemeni state. It should be noted, however, that the historical relevance of government corruption in Yemen suggest that regions experiencing airstrikes are additionally subject to uncovering dissatisfaction with government institutions. This suggests a broad mechanism of airstrike effects driven by transitioning populations from bystanders to participants in the political process.
The findings in this chapter also supports Hypothesis 2a, which predicted that regions experiencing recent airstrikes would be more likely to experience increases in support for al-Qaeda and Ansar Allah. Intriguingly, although each of the Yemeni insurgencies have shown positive associations, those insurgencies with higher local-level focuses-such as al-Sharia-appear able to generate greater increases in support in response to local airstrike events. This suggests that public support in Yemen may be best garnered by focusing on information operations at the local town level, even for a multinational insurgency, such as al-Qaeda. Finally, the data presented in this study suggests support for Hypothesis 4, which predicted that regions experiencing recent airstrikes would be more likely to experience increases in support for external extremism.
In contrast to both grievance and power-based explanations, this evidence suggests that an information centric argument has the best power to explain the relationship between airstrikes and political support. Instead of assuming that airstrikes demand a particular response from civilians, it is more likely that airstrikes are subject to information distribution regarding their causes and effects. In this way, airstrike effects are amoral, not predetermined to either support or detract from sentiment for or against a state. Within Yemen, and elsewhere, it is likely that airstrikes are drawing upon prior socio-economic grievances and being utilized as a political opportunity using a narrative.
This being said, within a given socio-economic landscape additional measurements are needed to assess how sentiment is mobilized into political violence. If the theory of information distribution using the political opportunity of an airstrike is accurate, the resultant political violence may exist in areas where information asymmetry, or the narrative, is not dominated by the state.
airstrike accelerated bystander-to-participant process, as shown in Chapter III, aligns more closely with radicalization theories that espouse a mixture of both ideology and social factors. 
156
9
These findings help sharpen the debate on mobilization and sustainment theories, which fall generally into three camps. First, the classical theory of insurgent mobilization holds that disenfranchised individuals within society develop disruptive psychological states that drive participation in social movements. 
157
Yemeni government in areas with higher state violence suggest further mechanisms are at play. 
158
159
160
161
The statistical models presented here also support the proposition that airstrike effects are driven by forces similar to those seen in the economic theory of information asymmetry. 
162
First, increasing information disclosure or decreasing information asymmetry may subsequently increase buy-in to the state's political message upon the execution of violence. If rational actors do indeed choose between good and bad interpretations of airstrikes, increasing the information disclosure on a good product should theoretically increase the buy-in of that product. Often, this requires information "intermediaries" who are skilled at presenting information to the investor. 
163
Second, issues naturally arise with airstrike information disclosure, as not all airstrikes are effective in destroying only the intended target. George Akerlof describes this issue as the "lemon problem," in which the product itself is never guaranteed completely beneficial. 
164
165
162 For an overview of information asymmetry and the foundational concepts of the theory, reference Healy and Palepu, "Information Asymmetry, Corporate Disclosure, and the Capital Markets." 
163
164
165
Finally, investment in a product allows an entrepreneur the ability to manage that investment to benefit the company. When civilians trust a state to use violence, or interpret violence by giving extreme support for the state, they are investing in the state. This is a critical component of controlling a population, as prior research suggests that civilian belief in the state monopoly of violence keeps revolutions at bay. 
166
It is important to note that the cases considered in this thesis focused on the secondary effects of airpower in limited irregular conflicts. These limited irregular airpower campaigns are fundamentally different from campaigns seeking the submission of a population through indiscriminant violence. Indiscriminant violence studies have shown that in circumstances such as the Russian artillery barrages in Grozny, domination over the civilian population may decrease political violence.
167
of Sentiment for Yemen, External States, and Extremism ..................................................................................................58
49  
49  
61  
61  
70 John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, 1st ed. (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2014), 341-34.
80  
80  
93
terrorism campaign, whereas the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was designed to support NATO troops occupying Afghanistan.
terrorism campaign, whereas the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was designed to support NATO troops occupying Afghanistan.
105  
105  
157 Doug McAdam, Political Process and the Development of
"Operation Inherent Resolve: Targeted Operations against ISIL Terrorists," October 12, 2016, http:// www.defense.gov/News/Special-Reports/0814_Inherent-Resolve; "ISIS Now Weaponizing Drones in Syria," October 12, 2016, http://nypost.com/2016/10/12/isis-now-weaponizing-drones-in-syria/.
Kristina Wong, "Petraeus: "'It's Not Too Late' for a No-Fly Zone in Syria," The Hill, September 29, 2016, http://thehill.com/policy/defense/298641-petraeus-its-not-too-late-for-a-no-fly-zone-in-syria.
For an excellent primer on the growing complexity of irregular warfare, read Frank G. Hoffman, "Complex Irregular Warfare: The Next Revolution in Military Affairs," Orbis 50,no. 3 (2006): 395-411,  doi: 10.1016/j.orbis.2006.04.002.   
Mihai Croicu and Ralph Sundberg, UCDP GED Codebook Version 2.0 (Sweden: Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala University, 2015).
Johnston and Sarbahi, "The Impact of U.S. Drone Strikes on Terrorism in Pakistan," 9-13.
"Covert Drone War Archives," accessed September 25, 2016, https://www.thebureauinvestigates. com/category/projects/drones/.
Chalmers Johnson, Revolutionary Change, 2nd ed. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,  1982), 100.
McAdam, Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 1930-1970.   
the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
____N/A____. 12a
The evidence presented in this thesis supports the theory that in irregular warfare, locations with higher airstrike density associate with measurable effects on civilian sentiment and political violence. The importance of these effects will deepen in consequence as the number of non-state actors and protracted wars increase. 
152
Airstrikes as measured in this thesis appear to have a systematically polarizing effect on civilian populations. These findings contrast revenge-based accounts that generally espouse airstrikes are responsible for negative civilian sentiment against state entities. 153 Instead, these findings lend support to information-based accounts explaining civilian responses to airstrikes. 
154
155
States must compete with insurgents for this information space in the same manner companies compete for potential investors. Because information dissemination techniques are readily accessible in today's information age, the smaller the political entity, the faster the information may be disseminated. Therefore, government leaders must think deeply about their information dissemination techniques to lower the information asymmetry between the state and the population. As shown in this thesis, when using disseminating information, states should account for the sentiment-increasing effects of kinetic airstrikes.