# ID: 24fe4f81fba841c3a84dc568fc1cb92c
# Title: A Call to the Future❙ 3
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The United States did go through a major period of uncertainty as the world thawed from the Cold War.
However, trends connecting recent events enhance certainty about competitor archetypes that the military may be called upon to engage, favoring a return to context-based planning.
The first likely archetype that the DOD should account for includes rogue states enabled by weapons of mass destruction (WMD) (e.g., Iran, Pakistan, and North Korea).
The second includes "competitive superpowers" attempting to create regional hegemonies to challenge US primacy and undermine American rule sets that ensure our peaceful geopolitical and geoeconomic power.
This archetype is distinguished by competitive power projection and exemplified by Russia and China although the former may be collapsing back towards rogue status.
The final archetype is the global insurgent who broadly rejects the Westphalian state system and threatens to wage revolutionary wars of culture and identity.
There will be other enduring military missions-missile defense, nuclear deterrence, maintenance of a strategic reserve, rescue, noncombatant evacuation, humanitarian aid, and so forth-but these are only military activities within strategy.
Strategy should contextualize specific adversaries and the means to achieve sufficient control over them.
Not every regional conflict demands American attention, but rogue states that reject international law and destabilize regions become a special case when they pursue WMDs.
Such rogues threaten to terrorize allies or ignite arms races, both of which undermine American interests.
While possession of WMDs is not a blackand-white trigger for action, the military should be prepared to deter hostilities, compel disarmament, or forcefully disarm a rogue of offensive WMDs through air strikes.
The United States' recent experience in Iraq demonstrates that total regime change of the state order maintained by a rogue may be less advantageous than strikes in support of limited objectives to modify the rogue's behavior while leaving it largely intact.
To maintain the strategic initiative, the US Air Force and Navy should be equipped to disarm an adversary quickly through limited-duration precision strikes with local penetration of defended territory.