# ID: 250e7df8e2be466ebeb3e98d4941c605
# Title: The Beginning of the End: Are US Navy Helicopters Still Relevant?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
This thesis addresses and seeks to explain why the Navy is deemphasizing the helicopter as an aviation platform after important service in myriad roles and missions for than 70 years. Helicopters have been a foundation of the Navy's capability throughout much of the post-World War II era. Today, the helicopter and its associated aviation community appear to be at the precipice of being phased out of service. What explains the United States Navy's apparent deemphasis of the helicopter community? This thesis explores the lifetime of this venerable platform and the reasons for its decline in the modern era.
The Navy began exploring the use of helicopters in the early 1940s and has used them operationally since 1946.
1
This thesis will fill gaps in the literature on naval aviation, which contains little treatment of Navy helicopters in the post-World War II era. Most literature regarding Navy helicopters is either technical in nature or a review of operational history, but there is a surprising lack of analysis as to why the Navy helicopter community has remained in a secondary role and is now in a further deemphasized role despite growing to a plurality of naval aviation officers over the last ten years. 
3
The thesis is relevant to current and future Navy and naval aviation policy. The shift in aviation concept to the "CVW of the Future" has major implications for naval aviation's largest branch-helicopters. Other Navy operational concepts are shifting toward the focus on great power competition (GPC) and the fleet concept of distributed maritime operations (DMO). While DMO has spread from the surface community to aviation, there is minimal treatment of helicopters in this future vision. Additionally, since the early 2000s, the helicopter community has struggled with assigned mission areas, capabilities, and partner platforms (e.g., airborne mine countermeasures development, littoral combat ship deployments, MQ-8B/C Fire Scout integration). Research, analysis, and recommendations generated by this thesis have potential to explain these issues and affect future policy, doctrine, and operational use of helicopters.
The military innovation studies literature provides several theories that seek to explain the behavior of military organizations. This thesis will draw upon this literature to analyze the Navy's treatment of the helicopter. In "Military Innovation Studies:
Interdisciplinary or Lacking Discipline?" Stuart Griffin describes the field of military innovation studies as one that leans heavily towards practitioners and academics who aim to provide pragmatic research and analysis. 
4
4 Stuart Griffin, "Military Innovation Studies: Interdisciplinary or Lacking Discipline?" Journal of Strategic Studies 40, no. 1-2 (2017): 201-2.
Navy helicopter pilot that has been selected to return to the Fleet as a helicopter squadron commanding officer, I am in a unique position to conduct academic research and discover explanations-then directly apply this knowledge in practice. With luck, knowledge gained from this thesis will also contribute to the field of military innovation studies.
Adam Grissom's "The Future of Military Innovation Studies" serves as the organizing framework for the review of military innovation literature. In the article, Grissom explains military innovation as a function of three components: it must change the manner in which military organizations function operationally, be "significant in scope and impact,"
and result in "greater military effectiveness." 5 He compiles military innovation research into "four primary schools of thought," each of which serve as explanatory models to determine whether a military organization will innovate. 
6
Grissom summarizes the civil-military model by stating, "senior civilian decisionmakers interpret the geopolitical context and impose innovation upon the military services with the help of maverick proxies within the service." 7 He names Barry Posen as the founder of military innovation studies and the developer of the civil-military model after the publishing of his book, The Sources of Military Doctrine. 
8
6 Grissom, 908.
7 Grissom, "The Future of Military Innovation Studies," 920.
8 Grissom, 906.  interwar innovation of Britain, France, and Germany. His primary argument states "civilian intervention in military affairs is the key determinant of integration and innovation." 
9
10
11
13
The inter-service model of military innovation asserts that competition for resources between military bureaucracies within a state serves as the catalyst of innovation. While militaries will typically desire to maintain control of their traditional missions, new or reinvigorated old missions provide a new avenue for inter-service competition. Grissom asserts, "services will compete to develop capabilities to address these contested mission areas, believing that additional resources will accrue to the winner. Force and U.S. Army in the 1950s. The Eisenhower administration placed priority on nuclear warfare which stoked competition for resources between the services. In reaction to the Air Force's advances in nuclear capabilities, the Army reformed doctrine to fight on the nuclear battlefield resulting in the Pentomic Army. 
15
16
The intra-service model of military innovation focuses on competition between communities within the same service. 17 Uniquely, this model treats a service as a collection of communities instead of a single, unitary actor. Innovation occurs in modern militaries when a community that embraces new capabilities emerges to challenge an established community. 
18
19
20
The cultural model of military innovation focuses on strategic and organizational culture as causal factors of military innovation. At the time of Grissom's writing, culture lacked equal standing with the other three major models. In "Military Innovation Studies: 
The technology model contends that changes in technology determine the course of innovation. 
26
27
28
29
30
There are several explanations and hypotheses that may explain the apparent deemphasis of the helicopter community by the Navy, but there is no evidence to suggest that an attempt has been made. This thesis will utilize the four major military innovation paradigms with an additional contested model-technology-to determine which has the best explanatory power. The following five hypotheses will be tested against empirical evidence found in historical and current accounts of the Navy's use of and policy towards helicopters. The five hypotheses are listed below, followed by potential explanations:
1.
Navy policy that caused the Navy to deemphasize the role of the helicopter community.
A potential explanation is the flagging support for aircraft carriers from civilian leaders. If civilian leaders determine that aircraft carriers have questionable relevance in the current and future environment, Navy leaders will innovate in order to protect a traditional platform and mission. This support may have influenced Navy leaders to approve the "CVW of the Future" concept, leading to the diminished role of helicopters in carrier aviation. 
H3: A new theory of victory and subsequent bureaucratic structure developed by senior Navy leaders caused the Navy to deemphasize the role of the helicopter community.
A potential explanation is the Navy's evolution of operational concepts. Each change in maritime strategy and operational concepts constitutes a new theory of victory. An analysis of historical theories of victory may show that other aircraft and capabilities were prioritized over helicopters, further supported by a bureaucratic structure that eschewed the helicopter community. Despite empirical evidence that a new theory of victory developed in the early 2000s (i.e., Helicopter Master Plan, Helo Concept of Operations 1.0) brought helicopters to the forefront, analysis may find that a promotion pathway was not created for officers from the helicopter community to rise to major operational command assignments.
H4: The Navy's unique strategic and organizational culture caused the Navy to deemphasize the role of the helicopter community.
A potential explanation is the historical focus of naval aviation's strategic culture on strike warfare. This strategic culture fosters an organizational culture based on aircraft carriers and carrier-based jet aircraft. Norms and values are based on officers that conform to the Navy's organizational preferences of being a pilot of a tactical, offensive, fixed wing, carrier-based platform. As a rotary wing platform that is largely used in support or defensive roles, helicopters may not be a fit for the Navy's strategic and organizational culture, further explaining the Navy's deemphasis of the community. 
The basis of the thesis is a single case study of U.S. Navy helicopters. I have chosen this specific case study as I am a career helicopter pilot who will be returning to the Fleet as a squadron commanding officer. I am in a unique position to study my professional field in an academic setting, then apply my gained knowledge to influence the helicopter community upon my return. In addition to personal and professional relevance, the case study selection provides for analysis of a major naval aviation branch with potential implications for future policy. The majority of materials used for the historical study of the Navy, naval aviation, and helicopters are primary sources from professional journals and some secondary historical sources. These sources will enable gathering of empirical evidence for comparative study.
Within the single case study, this thesis will use a comparative study of five models of military innovation studies. Four of the models are accepted as major paradigms of military innovation. I have chosen a fifth, more minor model as I believe it may have considerable explanatory power in support of the thesis. The thesis will apply each model separately to determine which military innovation paradigm best explains the deemphasis of Navy helicopters. A comparative approach allows for a thorough and broad analysis of causal explanations. Sources include literature from the field of military innovation studies.
The thesis is organized to provide context and empirical evidence via a historical survey of the Navy and helicopters, which will then be used to evaluate the hypotheses for causal explanations. Chapter I explains the problem, explores literature, and describes the hypotheses. Chapter II establishes a framework of the problem through a history of Navy helicopters from the early 1940s through 2021. The history will include a summary of technology and capabilities, missions, strategic and organizational culture, and strategic and operational concepts. Chapter III analyzes the Navy helicopter community through the lens of the five military innovation models to determine a causal explanation for the Navy's apparent deemphasis of helicopters. Chapter IV reviews the explanatory power of the five military innovation models with respect to the Navy helicopter community, highlights implications, and provides recommendations for future research in military innovation studies and Navy policy towards naval aviation and helicopters.
For more than 70 years, the U.S. Navy's helicopter community has been an integral part of naval aviation during times of both peace and conflict.  Development, 1919-1941 (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1999), 14.  34 Hone, Friedman, and Mandeles, 17-18.   35 Hone, Friedman, and Mandeles, 19.   36 Archibald D. The interwar period marked significant growth for naval aviation. In 1921, naval aviation was established organizationally with the creation of the Bureau of Aeronautics (BuAer), 42 cementing aviation as an integral-but still fledgling-component of the Navy.
During this period, naval aviation leaders strived for a balance between complementing and challenging the established conception of the battleship of the center of the battle fleet.
"Battleship admirals" 43 filled the senior ranks and thus had control over naval applications of aircraft, which were largely seen as auxiliary to the battleship. However, there were several battleship admirals that saw the potential of aviation. Arguably the most significant advancement of the period was the development of aircraft carriers, specialized carrier aircraft, and carrier tactics and doctrine. Naval aviation advocates successfully challenged the battleship paradigm during Fleet Problems IX (1929) and X (1930), when independently-steaming carriers launched strikes against land targets-"sinking" the 37 Turnbull and Lord, History of United States Naval Aviation, 42; Johnson, Fly Navy, 114-115.   38 Turnbull and Lord, 96.   39 Turnbull and Lord, 105.   40 Johnson, Fly Navy, 118-9.   41 Turnbull and Lord, History of United States Naval Aviation, 139-144.   42 Turnbull and Lord, 190.   43 Hone, Friedman, and Mandeles, American & British Aircraft Carrier Development, 3.  Panama Canal-and main battle forces comprised of battleships and other carriers. 
44
45
46
Entering World War II, naval aviation comprised a significant force that would grow further throughout the war. In 1940, the force was comprised of carrier-based fighters, dive-bombers, and torpedo planes; flying boats and land-based aircraft for patrol; spotter seaplanes launched from cruisers and battleships; various utility and transport aircraft; and several blimps. 
47
After the de Bothezat failure, the aviation industry and U.S. military pivoted toward developing a different type of rotary-wing aircraft. The autogiro-also known as the gyroplane-had the fuselage and front propellor of an airplane, suspended beneath rotating wings. Similar to a helicopter, autogiros were capable of slow flight that fixed-wing aircraft could not achieve but were unable to hover like a helicopter. A Spaniard-Juan de la Cierva-created the first autogiro to successfully fly in January 1923. 
54
55
56
while Igor Sikorsky's revolutionary single-main-rotor helicopter design 58 proved that vertical flight was possible-and practical for military use. gunnery spotters. 
67
68
69
77
After the end of the Cold War, Navy helicopters had considerable momentum as a part of the Navy's emphasis on asymmetric threats and the transition to littoral warfare.
Experience in the Persian Gulf during Desert Storm proved the utility of helicopters against smaller surface combatants. 
78
79
In the early 2000s, Navy leadership introduced a new acquisition strategy and force structure that renewed enthusiasm for the future of helicopter community. 1.0) redesigned the rotary wing force structure and planned to streamline four legacy communities to two based on the capabilities of the new platforms. 81 Helo CONOPs 1.0 doubled the number of helicopters onboard the aircraft carrier, potentially facilitating increased influence within carrier aviation. The Seahawks were organized in maritime strike squadrons (HSM) and deployed on aircraft carriers and smaller surface combatants with a focus on ASW and ASuW. The Knighthawks were organized into sea combat squadrons (HSC) and primarily deployed on aircraft carriers, large amphibious assault ships, and Military Sealift Command (MSC) ships with a focus on ASuW, SAR, logistics, and NSW support. 
82
83
In 2020, the Commander, Naval Air Forces, Vice Admiral Dewolfe Miller, USN, approved a new direction for the future of naval aviation. The concept-named the "CVW of the Future"-emphasizes the importance and integration of emerging platforms-the F-35 Lightning II, CMV-22B Osprey, MQ-25 Stingray-while subsequently reducing the number of helicopters within the CVW by over 30 percent. 
84
85
Culture is a product of history, motivations, and preferences that, in turn, shapes the behavior of an organization. 
86
Even further-within the Navy-naval aviation has a distinct sub-culture that informs the treatment of the helicopter community throughout its history. This section will provide a brief overview of the culture of naval aviation since its inception, providing context for the following chapter's analysis of how this culture has affected the Navy helicopter community.
Before aviation integrated into naval warfare, surface warfare officers dominated the Navy and set its culture. Until the beginning of World War II, these officers created a battle force centered around capital ships that controlled the seas and projected offensive power far away from American shores. This culture of the offensive was conveyed by capital ships: the Great White Fleet, World War I era dreadnoughts, and interwar battleships. 
88
After achieving intra-service primacy in World War II, aviators-specifically, carrier-based tail-hook pilots-ascended to the top of the Navy's hierarchy. 
89
91
92
Since the inception of helicopters, the strategic thought of naval leaders-and the operational concepts that support it-has both benefited and hindered the helicopter community. Due to classification levels, specifics about the Navy's strategy and operational concepts throughout history is difficult to fully explain. Further difficulty emerges from whittling down the broad maritime strategic thought due to the Navy's institutional tendency of not relying on a single strategy. 
94
Maritime strategy in World War II centered primarily on sea control and power projection. As the reality of a two-ocean war emerged, American leaders created a "Europe first" 95 strategy that prioritized the Atlantic theater over the Pacific. In the Atlantic, materiel was transported to Britain for the war effort against Germany under the Lend-  helicopter aviators created a "hunter-killer" 114 concept that leveraged the strengths of both helicopter types to combat smaller surface threats to the carrier strike group (CSG).
However, multi-mission capabilities have again taken a subordinate role to specialization.
Recently, the "jack-of-all-trades, master-of-none" syndrome nurtured by the wide scope of missions conducted by multi-mission helicopters has affected a large portion of the helicopter community-specifically, HSC squadrons-as the preference of naval aviation leaders appears to pivot back toward higher-technology, more specialized aircraft. This is embodied in the aforementioned "CVW of the Future" concept, where utility-based MH-60S helicopters found in HSC squadrons have been reduced by 50 percent on the carrier, compared to 14 percent of the more-specialized MH-60R helicopter found in HSM squadrons. 
115
121
123
124
This chapter's purpose is to provide a historical understanding of the Navy, naval aviation, the helicopter community, and naval strategy. In the end, the strongest explanatory power is found in the combination and evershifting interaction between the five models. However, evidence suggests that each model contributes differing levels of impact. Individually, intra-service, cultural, and technology dynamics seem to each offer a compelling model to understand the helicopter community's standing within the Navy. Aspects of the inter-service model are also valid, but more indirectly. Civil-military dynamics appear to have minimal influence. Ultimately, this chapter's goal is to present the empirical evidence to establish if and why the Navy is deemphasizing the helicopter community.
Direct civilian intervention with respect to the Navy helicopter community has been minimal. Intervention that did occur was largely felt indirectly-both through greater changes in Navy doctrine and a notable lack of intervention in the face of other Navy and naval aviation platforms. In the lead-up to World War II, President Roosevelt touted a policy of "Europe first" that centered around U.S. aid to the Allies via the Lend-Lease Act. 
125
145
153
158
Naval aviation has possessed a near monopoly in airborne mine warfare since its emergence, which limits innovation within MCM force, of which helicopters are a part. The helicopter proved its capability for mine detection during the Korean War, 164 although this was limited to the naked eyesight of aircrew. In 1960, the Navy successfully demonstrated air-portable mine sweeping gear, making the helicopter a self-contained minesweeper. 
165
RH-53s-in 1971. 166
167
168
169
An alternate perspective within the inter-service model posits that increased jointness stifles innovation. 
170
171
172
173
174
The intra-service model highlights the importance new theories of victory developed by senior services leaders and the competition between branches within that single service to fulfill the new theory. This section will address competition between the three primary unrestricted line branches of the Navy-aviation, surface, and submarines-but will primarily analyze the communities within the aviation branch. Historically, the preferred theory of victory for naval aviation is power projection and offensive strike operations delivered by carrier-based, fixed-wing fighters. 
175
180
181
182
The preceding examples of evolving theories of victory clearly facilitated the emergence of the helicopter within naval aviation. Recently, a new theory of victory emerged with a negative impact on helicopters: UAS. In an attempt to adapt, leaders within the In line with the intra-service model, analysis of promotion data
188
189
192
1
This promotion data largely reflects the historical naval aviation hierarchy but does not reflect the current force structure. In terms of number of naval aviators, the helicopter community comprises 35 percent of naval aviation, followed by TACAIR at 34 percent.
MPRF makes up the smallest portion at 31 percent. 
193
191 Jackson et al., Raising the Flag, 110.   192 Jackson et al., 90.   193 "PERS-43 Aviation Update." The presentation from August 2020 lists helicopters at 35 percent (up from 30 percent in 2010) of naval aviation. TACAIR accounts for 34 percent (down from 41 percent in 2010). MPRF accounts for 31 percent (up from 29 percent in 2010 comprised of six TACAIR squadrons (four of which are VFA), two helicopter squadrons, and a fleet logistics support (VRC) detachment. Mathematically, a TACAIR officerspecifically, a VFA pilot-is more likely than a helicopter pilot to be selected for higher promotion. A nuanced explanation can be found in the Navy's long-standing organizational preference for TACAIR over all other platforms, despite TACAIR's reduced share of naval aviation compared to helicopters and MPRF. Promotion pathways to senior rank for TACAIR aviators have been established almost as long as naval aviation has existed. As the tendency is for "ducks to pick ducks," 194 TACAIR admirals continue to pick TACAIR aviators to promote to higher ranks with impunity. The Navy's warfare branches possess a high degree of autonomy in promoting their own officers, 195 allowing TACAIR's bureaucratic power to dominate internal politics to an extent that is difficult for the other communities to challenge. The cycle continues as these senior TACAIR admirals perpetuate the theory of victory based on the aircraft carrier and carrier air wing. For helicopters, the reverse is true-lower selection for peak aviation major command jobs results in lower promotion to admiral. Less high-ranking helicopter pilots are then unable to influence the promotion of promising helicopter pilots or advocate for the community. The disproportionate promotion opportunity to flag ranks has cascading effects and provides an explanation for the legacy of limited bureaucratic influence and the current deemphasis of helicopters within the Navy.
The helicopter's role in U.S. Navy doctrine has been shaped by the Navy's unique strategic and organizational culture. The Navy's strategic culture values power projection through conventional offensive platforms-principally, aircraft carriers. 
196
Helicopters influenced a paradigm shift within the Navy soon after being introduced to the fleet. After World War I, the U.S. Navy emerged as one of three major navies-along with the Royal Navy and Imperial Japanese Navy-to develop naval aviation. 
199
200
201
When helicopters were introduced to the fleet in the mid-1940s, aircraft carriers and carrier-based aircraft were established as the Navy's central battle force due to combat performance in World War II. 
202
203
204
205
A potential exception to the Navy's cultural preference against helicopters is found with the introduction of the HMP and Helo CONOPs 1.0 that equipped helicopters with offensive weaponry in missiles, rockets, and machine guns. When introduced, senior Navy service leaders appeared to adapt the helicopter to fit within naval aviation's strategic culture for innovation. In contrast, the Navy's new Offensive ASuW (OASuW) strike weapon for the Super Hornet-the AGM-158C Long Range Anti-Surface Missile (LRASM)-is an airlaunched cruise missile with a 1,000-pound warhead, 213 a significant increase in stand-off firepower for future peer adversary conflict. The LRASM adds to the already considerable weapons loadout for the Super Hornet, which also includes air-to-air missiles and precision guided bombs. In comparison, the payload limitations prevent helicopters from truly fulfilling the Navy's preferred offensive strike role.
Additionally, the SST view asserts that helicopters are not affected by technological limitations, but by Navy leadership's shaping of the helicopter technology within a certain role. Since inception, Navy leaders have viewed helicopters in defensive and supporting roles, further providing explanatory power for the lack of resources funneled to technological development of helicopters and helicopter-carried weapons. The inherent technological limitations are further limited by the Navy's reluctance to truly develop platform and weapons technology to make helicopters an offensive contributor on par with fixed-wing aircraft.
The Navy's social shaping of UAS technology has secondary effects on the helicopter community. As unmanned technology underwrites the vision of future warfare for both civilian and service leaders alike, UAS are emerging to potentially supplant helicopters in traditional roles within the Navy. Leaders envision UAS as a more cost-effective and riskaverse war of war that also overcomes the range and endurance limitations of manned platforms. 
214
215
216
In summary, evidence shows that the standing of the Navy helicopter community is a result of the combination the five military innovation levels. While there is evidence of some civilian intervention over the course of the Navy's history with helicopters, the level of direct influence over any phase is questionable. Any civilian intervention appears largely to reflect general opinion or reinforce the perspective of the senior service leaders. For example, President Roosevelt's thoughts on including autogiros in convoys for ASW was made at about the same time that the group of mid-grade military officers were trying to convince senior officers of the viability of helicopters in that very role. There is no evidence to show that President Roosevelt's thoughts influenced Admiral King-then the Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Fleet-to direct the development of helicopters for the ASW role. Since inception, the lack of civilian support for helicopters provides a possible explanation for their persistently limited role. Other platforms-aircraft carriers, fighters, UAS-simply garner more attention from civilian leaders.
Evidence suggests that inter-service dynamics influences the Navy's treatment of helicopters, but indirectly. Each DOD service employs helicopters in support rolesreducing bureaucratic influence-and many helicopters have been developed jointly, limiting the chances for innovation. Throughout history, inter-service competition arises 215 Sam LaGrone, "Northrop Grumman Pitching Fire Scout Helicopter Drone for ASW Missions," USNI News, February 16, 2021, https://news.usni.org/2021/02/16/northrop-grumman-pitching-fire-scouthelicopter-drone-for-asw-missions.; John Keller, "Navy Orders Three MQ-4C Triton Long-Range Maritime Surveillances UAVs for Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW)," Military & Aerospace Electronics, May 22, 2017, https://www.militaryaerospace.com/unmanned/article/16726349/navy-orders-three-mq4ctriton-longrange-maritime-surveillance-uavs-for-antisubmarine-warfare-asw.
216 Joseph Trevithick, "Huge Navy Unmanned-Focused Experiment Underway Featuring Live Missile Shoot and 'Super Swarms,'" The Drive, April 20, 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/ 40262/huge-navy-unmanned-focused-experiment-underway-featuring-live-missile-shoot-and-superswarms; Keller, "Navy Orders Three MQ-4C Triton Long-Range Maritime Surveillances UAVs." from the quest for resources for marquee programs that have strategic impact. For the contemporary Navy, these programs include the Ford-class aircraft carrier, Columbia-class submarine, and several unmanned aerial, surface, and sub-surface systems. These programs garner the most attention from within and without the Navy, funneling resources-and opportunities for expansion and influence-away from the helicopter community.
The strongest explanation appears to be in the Navy's enduring theory of victory centered on power projection and offensive sea control and its effects on intra-service politics and culture. Although the new ASW theory of victory drove the introduction of helicopters immediately after World War II, the defensive nature of the role limited the influence of the helicopter community, a reality that continues today. In contrast, the TACAIR community embodies the power projection mission, giving it undeniably superior bureaucratic power within the Navy at large, and specifically above the helicopter and MPRF communities within naval aviation. As a result, officers of the strike-fighter community are promoted at greater rates and comprise a significant portion of prestigious command billets and flag ranks. With the prevalence and power of these officers, the culture supporting the preference of carrier-based, fixed-wing, offensive operations perpetuates at the expense of others.
Inherent technological limitations underwrite the helicopters inability to fulfill the Navy's offensive strike and power projection roles, further confirming cultural bias against the helicopter community and limiting its influence within the Navy and naval aviation.
A.
The U.S. Navy's commitment to helicopters spans over 70 years. In the face of unprecedented expansion of the helicopter community in the first two decades of the 21st century, the Navy seems to be reversing its investment. What explains the Navy's apparent deemphasis of helicopters despite a long-proven record of supporting naval strategy and doctrine? This thesis attempts to answer the question by analyzing the Navy's historical and current treatment of the helicopter community through five models of military innovation studies-civil-military, inter-service, intra-service, cultural, and technologyand to determine which model provides the best explanation.
Ultimately, this thesis finds that no single model provides a sufficient explanation for the Navy's apparent deemphasis of helicopters. However, analysis of the empirical evidence shows that the best explanatory power is found in the dynamic interaction of the models. The Navy's treatment of helicopters evolved throughout the platform's history as aspects of each model waxed and waned and, thus, provided both beneficial and unfavorable different outcomes. Fluctuations in the influence of different aspects of each models explain the varying levels of importance applied by the Navy to helicopters. This chapter provides a detailed review of the findings for each hypothesis, outlines policy recommendations for the Navy, and presents potential future contributions to the field of military innovation studies.
The civil-military model posits that military innovation occurs when civilian leaders' interpretation of the geopolitical environment drives an intervention in military policy. 
217
A stronger explanation is found in a distinct lack of support for the helicopter community due to civilian intervention for other Navy programs, typified by current backing for the "CVW of the Future." The concept is an example of innovation based advanced aviation platforms-the F-35 Lightning II, CMV-22B Osprey, and MQ-25
Stingray-against which the helicopter community was unable to counter due to a lack of civilian intervention. The effect for helicopters appears to be less budget share, reduced influence, and diminished physical presence on aircraft carriers, the center of naval aviation.
In this model, military service organizations within a state compete for budget share in a zero-sum game, resulting in innovation. 
218
More recently, empirical evidence provides validity for the hypothesis in the form of UAS. The Navy currently invests in several forms of UAS-the Stingray, Fire Scout, Triton-as unmanned platforms become more central the American way of war. Resources that could be funneled to the helicopter community are instead given to Navy UAS programs, thus validating this hypothesis.
The intra-service model asserts that innovation emerges when a new community within a military service embraces new capabilities in a challenge against an established community. 
219
220
Historically, Navy helicopters benefited from a new theory of victory. Empirical evidence shows that helicopters were initially brought into service to conduct ASW for trans-Atlantic convoys during World War II and continued ASW mission throughout the Cold War. A corresponding bureaucratic structure was created throughout the period, bringing helicopters pilots on par with other aviation and Navy communities-on paper at least.
Another example that benefited helicopters-but refutes the hypothesis-was the development of the HMP and Helo CONOPs 1.0 in 2001, which played to helicopters capabilities, expanded presence within the carrier air wing, and paved a path for increased bureaucratic influence.
The trend in favor of the helicopter community appears to be reversing. Recent evidence validates the hypothesis as the Navy has transitioned its focus from asymmetric warfare-a wheelhouse for Navy helicopters-to an era of great power competition. The pivot emphasizes other strategies, concepts, and platforms (i.e., theories of victory) that nullify the swell of influence from the early 2000s and diminishes the role of helicopters under the new theory of victory. As a recent development, the effect on promotion for helicopters pilots remains to be seen. It is doubtful that the helicopter community's stillunder-development response to the current situation-Helo CONOPs 2.0-will garner significant change in the current dynamic.
In this model, a military organization's unique culture explains why and how innovation occurs. 
221
The technology model asserts that changes in technology determine how military organizations innovate and, thus, how wars are fought. 
222
The dynamics of each model are present in this case study, but individually do not provide a sufficient explanation for the Navy's deemphasis of a community that has existed for over eighty years and represents a current plurality of naval aviation. Analysis of the empirical evidence provides an alternate hypothesis-the dynamic interaction between the military innovation models caused the Navy to deemphasize the helicopter community.
There is precedent for this hypothesis. Griffin asserts that while each military innovation model can provide a specialized explanation for a given case, the best explanatory is often found in a synthesis of the models due to their mutual compatibility. 
223
The alternate hypothesis provides the strongest explanation for the current deemphasis of the helicopter community by the Navy. Helicopter technology has not developed sufficiently to allow it to emerge into an offensive strike platform. Thiscombined with the Navy's preference to relegate helicopters to defensive and supporting roles-prevents the community from truly embodying the culture of naval aviation.
Because they are culturally incompatible, helicopter pilots face institutional inertia against promotion to higher ranks and positions. As a result, the helicopter community lacks advocates in senior ranks, which restrains bureaucratic influence and power within the Navy. Less power and influence leads to the helicopter community losing the intra-service competition for resources, personnel, and relevance-completing the loop that keeps helicopters in a diminished position. Finally, there is no evidence of civilian intervention to counter Navy leadership and save the helicopter community from its apparent demise.
The field of military innovations studies aims to provide pragmatic research and analysis to aid practitioners in formulating policy and strategy. 
224
The "CVW of the Future" reduces the number of helicopters by three MH-60S 
To remain relevant in the intra-service competition for resources and bureaucratic influence, the helicopter community must re-establish dedicated rotary-wing UAS Ultimately, increased aviation NSW capabilities of a composite HSC and fleet logistics multi-mission squadron (VRM) may garner a larger interservice budget share as special operations forces (SOF) missions are increasingly used as an instrument of national power.
DMO is a concept that emerged from the surface Navy, which aviation has yet to fully support. This provides ample opportunity for the helicopter community to leverage the "extra" aircraft that will be removed from the carrier to lead naval aviation's backing for DMO. Three MH-60S and one MH-60R helicopters will be removed from each new air wing, theoretically making 36 aircraft available. 
227
This permits Navy leaders to position helicopters armed for ASW and ASuW at geographic 231 In 2018, LT Benjamin Foster, USN, proposed the experimental surface action group (X-SAG) with expeditionary sea base ships and Navy helicopters at the core (https://www.usni.org/magazines/ proceedings/2018/may/whats-next-third-fleet-forward). The concept encompassed broad mission sets encompassing the range of military operations and emphasized interoperability with other surface units and strike groups. The recommendation in this thesis emphasizes a specialized HSC/VRM squadron and focuses on naval aviation's support for NSW.
232 "Expeditionary Sea Base (ESB)," U.S. Navy Fact File, January 21, 2021, https://www.navy.mil/ Resources/Fact-Files/Display-FactFiles/Article/2169994/expeditionary-sea-base-esb. helicopters provide a medium-lift capability or can be armed to escort the larger capacity CMV-22B Ospreys. Navy pilots accustomed to operating at sea provide a specialized capability to support the SEALs as they return to the maritime environment. The range of the Ospreys extends the reach for potential overland missions. The mobility and flexibility of the ESB allows on-demand NSW missions for combatant commanders. As the concept grows and additional ESB ships are commissioned, naval aviation will have a significant impact on global operations, marking a larger-scaled return to the legacy of the Seawolves of Vietnam.
This thesis both advances the field of military innovation studies and highlights opportunities for further research. In line with recent trends in the field, this thesis confirms that the dynamic combination of the models provides greater explanatory power than each model individually. 
233
This thesis provides significant opportunities for further research in the field of military innovation studies. Specifically, an all-encompassing military innovation case study of U.S. naval aviation would offer an unprecedented perspective on the world's leading military aviation organization. While TACAIR historically garners the most attention, an analysis of the community through the lens of military innovation sheds new light on the community's unprecedented and pervasive position at the top of the naval aviation hierarchy. Similar to helicopters, the MPRF community has a long history of Navy service but has not received the field's attention. This thesis humbly presents some insights or-minimally-provides resources for the helicopter portion of the study.
The research is even more important as the Navy's warfighting focus continues to transition towards unmanned platforms, resulting in bureaucratic structures that have already established a fledgling Navy UAS community. In 2015, Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus asserted that the F-35C "should be, and almost certainly will be, the last manned strike fighter aircraft the Department of the Navy will ever buy or fly."
234
How does U.S. naval aviation ensure its survival as UAS replace manned aircraft? When do the fighter pilots relinquish superior bureaucratic power to UAS operators within naval aviation and the other officer communities within the larger Navy? Does naval aviation get absorbed into the surface fleet? Will the aircraft carrier finally lose its primacy? Further research is required to discover the answers.
23 Theo Farrell and Terry Terriff extol culture as a causal factor of military innovation in The Sources of Military Change: Culture, Politics, Technology. Farrell and Terriff describe cultural norms that influence how military organizations react to "strategic, political, and technological developments." 24 Dima Adamsky asserts culture is at least equally as important as access to technology in Culture of Military Innovation as a military's unique strategic culture explains why and how technological opportunities are leveraged. 25 Ultimately, technology only constitutes an innovation if an organization possesses the strategic and organizational culture to exploit it to improve military effectiveness. 25 Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors on the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the U.S., and Israel (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2010), 5.
The true genesis of the Navy helicopter community began in the late 1930s and is intertwined with the Coast Guard. The Dorsey Act of 1938 earmarked $2 million for rotarywing research and development, leading to the creation of an inter-agency board to administer the funds.
The true genesis of the Navy helicopter community began in the late 1930s and is intertwined with the Coast Guard. The Dorsey Act of 1938 earmarked $2 million for rotarywing research and development, leading to the creation of an inter-agency board to administer the funds.
The budgetfriendly plan-called the Helicopter Master Plan (HMP)-aimed to reduce the number of fleet helicopter types from seven specialized airframes to two multi-mission helicopters based on the ubiquitous H-60-the MH-60R Seahawk and MH-60S Knighthawk. 80 Concurrently, a new Helicopter Concept of Operations (now referred to as Helo CONOPs 76 Grossnick, United States Naval Aviation, 303. 80 Joseph Bauknecht, "Helo CONOPs, Organizing for 21st Century Warfare," Wings of Gold 35, no. 2 (Summer 2010): 18, ProQuest.
92 Jackson et. al., Raising the Flag, 99-100.   93 Jackson et. al., 186.  
Lease Act, starting in early 1941. In September 1941, President Roosevelt expanded the commitment by providing convoy escorts for British ships enroute to Iceland, making the U.S. a cobelligerent with Britain against Germany.
Lease Act, starting in early 1941. In September 1941, President Roosevelt expanded the commitment by providing convoy escorts for British ships enroute to Iceland, making the U.S. a cobelligerent with Britain against Germany.
The following chapter will analyze the empirical evidence to test the hypotheses and explain the Navy's treatment of helicopters. Why did the Navy pursue helicopters and continue to fund their existence? What explains the limited role and lack of investment in advanced technology compared to other naval aviation communities? Is this even the case? And, ultimately, what explains the current perceived deemphasis of Navy helicopters? The next chapter will apply the military innovation paradigms in an attempt to answer these questions. 122
submarine the first military helicopter was not introduced until 1944
submarine the first military helicopter was not introduced until 1944
149  
149  
The helicopter community attached itself to the rotary-wing Fire Scout and endeavored to adopt mannedunmanned tactics, but the program continues to struggle with fleet integration. 163 Not only 163 Department of
The helicopter community attached itself to the rotary-wing Fire Scout and endeavored to adopt mannedunmanned tactics, but the program continues to struggle with fleet integration. 163 Not only 163 Department of
The history of Navy helicopters is characterized by continuously evolving theories of victory. Helicopters gained a foothold within naval aviation when a small group of midgrade officers-led by the aforementioned LCDR Erickson-allied with the Commandant of the Coast Guard, Vice Admiral Russell Waesche, to advocate for the use of helicopter in ASW. After viewing an early helicopter demonstration, VADM Waesche convinced Admiral King, CinC, U.S. Fleet, of the viability of helicopters for military applications.
The history of Navy helicopters is characterized by continuously evolving theories of victory. Helicopters gained a foothold within naval aviation when a small group of midgrade officers-led by the aforementioned LCDR Erickson-allied with the Commandant of the Coast Guard, Vice Admiral Russell Waesche, to advocate for the use of helicopter in ASW. After viewing an early helicopter demonstration, VADM Waesche convinced Admiral King, CinC, U.S. Fleet, of the viability of helicopters for military applications.
2  
2  
203 Baer, One Hundred Years of Sea Power, 136-147.   204 Evans and Grossnick, United States Naval Aviation, 261.  
Vincent Secades, The Naval Helicopter: Highlights in Naval Helicopter History (Naval Helicopter  Association,  
2012), 12. 2 "PERS-43 Aviation Update" (presentation, Navy Personnel Command, August 2020).
Grissom, "The Future of Military Innovation Studies, 
Adam Grissom, Sarah Harting, Caitlin Lee, Karl P. Mueller, and Jerry Sollinger, Innovation in the United States Air Force: Evidence from Six Cases, PR-1450-AF (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation,
"Helicopters," Naval History and Heritage Command, accessed February 25, 2021, https://www.history.navy.mil/research/histories/naval-aviation-history/naval-aircraft/helicopters.html.
Professor Jeffrey Kline, Naval Postgraduate School, personal communication, February 22, 2021.   
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Frank A. Erickson, "The First Coast Guard Helicopters," Proceedings 107, no. 7 (July 1981): 941. https://www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/1981/july/first-coast-guard-helicopters.
Johnson, Fly Navy, 284.    
Robert M. Browning, The Eyes and Ears of the Convoy: Development of the Helicopter as an Anti-submarine Weapon (Biloxi, Mississippi: Coast Guard Historian's Office, 1993), 4-16.
Johnson, Fly Navy, 
Boyne and Lopez, Vertical Flight, 98.   
Grossnick, United States Naval Aviation, 361.    
Bill Keller, "The Navy's Brash Leader," The New York Times Magazine,
December 15, 1985.
Department of Defense Inspector General, Acquisition of the Navy's Mine Countermeasures Mission Package (Washington, DC: July 25, 2018), 11, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Jul/27/ 2001947725/-1/-1/1/DODIG-2018-140.PDF.
Evans and Grossnick, United States Naval Aviation, 261.   
Builder, The Masks of War, p. 25. The author did not reference the Navy helicopter community but ranked carrier (TACAIR) and patrol (MPRF) aircraft;Jackson, et. al., Raising the Flag, 110. The authors mention officers from certain platforms (i.e., communities) rarely get picked for flag, alluding to the inferior bureaucratic position of the Navy helicopter community.
Promotion data derived from current commanding and executive officers (CVN, LHA/D), current commanders and deputy commanders (CVW), Fiscal Year 2022 aviation major command screen board results (bases), and Fiscal Year 2021 PERS-43 aviation lists (flag).
Jackson et al., Raising the Flag, 
Grissom, "The Future of Military Innovation Studies," 920.   
Grissom, "The Future of Military Innovation Studies, 
Grissom, "The Future of Military Innovation Studies," 913.    
Rosen, Winning the Next War, 
Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation, 5.    
Grissom, et. al., Innovation in the United States Air Force, 9; Friedman and Friedman, The Future of Warfare, x.
Griffin, 
Griffin, 
Joseph Trevithick, "Navy  Establishes First Squadron to Operate Its Carrier-Based MQ-25 Stingray Tanker Drones," The Warzone, October 1, 2020, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/36859/navyestablishes-first-squadron-to-operate-its-carrier-based-mq-25-stingray-tanker-drones.
Joseph Trevithick, "Check Out  This Eerie Image of a Navy Special Ops Seahawk Raining a Ship in the Dead of Night," The Warzone, March 23, 2020, https:/www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/32711/ check-out-this-eerie-image-of-a-navy-special-ops-seahawk-raiding-a-ship-in-the-dead-of-night.
As of July 2021, there are currently nine active CVWs. In theory, the "CVW of the Future" concept releases 27 MH-60S and nine MH-60R for reorganization.
Griffin, 
Meghann Myers, "SECNAV: F-35C Should Be Navy's Last Manned Strike Jet," Navy Times, April 16, 2015, https://www.navytimes.com/news/your-navy/2015/04/16/secnav-f-35c-should-be-navy-slast-manned-strike-jet.
First and foremost, this thesis is an acknowledgment of the past, present, and future pilots, aircrewmen, and maintenance personnel of the 
U.S. Navy helicopter community. Fly Navy! Second
Dr. James Russell
Captain Edward McCabe
USN
Becca
Henry
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Department of Defense or the 
U.S. Government
helicopter community latched on to the Fire Scout program, but the results have proved disappointing. A new squadron type was formed in 2012-Unmanned Helicopter Reconnaissance Squadron ONE (HUQ-1) 
183
184
Unmanned systems also provide an arena for intra-service competition between the surface and aviation communities. In order to garner a larger budget share, the surface Navy is developing unmanned surface combatants to support the unmanned theory of victory. 185 Naval aviation's reaction is the previously mentioned "CVW of the Future." In 2019, due to impending budgetary decisions, senior aviation leaders directed the helicopter community to accelerate the analysis of planning for Helo CONOPs 2.0. 186 While the concept is still under development and is undoubtedly an example of innovation, it is a reactionary consequence to the Navy's preferences that-in the short term-physically removes helicopters from the carrier and air wing, reduces the role of helicopters within carrier aviation doctrine, and diminishes the bureaucratic influence of the helicopter community.
The previous examples are illustrative of the Navy helicopter community as a continuously evolving and successful innovation case with respect to theories of victory, but it is necessary to look at the other side of the intra-service model-officer promotion-to explain its limited bureaucratic power. As discussed above, the force structure of the Navy and naval aviation has been changed several times to establish helicopter squadrons in support of new theories of victory. Bureaucratically, this establishes the helicopter community on par with the surface, submarine, and other aviation communities. However, empirical evidence found in higher-level promotions explains why helicopters hold an A proposed "Lightning Air Wing" continues the theme of helicopter-and naval aviation's-support for DMO. Much has been written in recent years about "Lightning Carriers," a concept in which large amphibious ships (LHA/D) deploy with a full contingent of Marine F-35B Lightning II short takeoff and landing (STOVL) aircraft in lieu of the traditional Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) aviation combat element (ACE). 
228
229
The proposed "Lightning Air Wing" is complementary to the "Lightning Carrier" concept and provides an opportunity for the helicopter community to support DMO. This new air wing would embark on LHA/D ships and notionally consist of 16 to 20 F-35Bssplit between two Navy (VFA) or Marine (VMFA) fighter-attack squadrons-and two six to eight helicopters-split into two detachments of HSC's MH-60S and HSM's MH-60R.
The Navy helicopters leverage the hunter-killer concept to gain sea control, from which the F-35s project power against a near-peer adversary. Expansion of the concept disperses additional Navy helicopters to the smaller combatants accompanying the LHA/D within the expeditionary strike group (ESG) and brings the detachments to squadron strength (providing additional command opportunities and influence within the air wing for helicopter pilots). An addition of a yet-to-be developed STOVL UAS provides airborne early warning (AEW) and a detachment of Ospreys supports the ESG with over-thehorizon logistics. These additions bring the capabilities of the "Lighting Air Wing" on par with the traditional CVW, but on a smaller scale. This smaller scale-that still packs 228 Tyler Rogoway, "Here's the USMC's Plan for 'Lightning Carrier' Brimming with F-35Bs," The Warzone, March 30, 2017, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/8798/heres-the-usmcs-plan-forlightning-carriers-brimming-with-f-35bs. 229 The LHD/A also has a three helicopter Navy HSC detachment that provides ASuW, SAR, NSW and logistics support-and often integrates with the MEU to support various missions.