# ID: 263311bae3d54d979f2df01c6039ee4b
# Title: Enhancing Full-spectrum Flexibility: Striking the Balance to Maximize Air Force Effectiveness in Conventional and Counterinsurgency Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
With the United States currently engaged in difficult and taxing counterinsurgency operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, renewed emphasis has been focused upon the countrys capabilities and priorities vis-à-vis this type of warfare. Within the military, the Air Force has been especially and increasingly criticized for being too enamored with a Cold-War era conventionally minded force structure and for not shifting aggressively to meet the threats of COIN-style conflicts that many predict will be pervasive throughout the Global War on Terror. This paper addresses the conceptual capabilities and limitations of air power in COIN in order to illuminate how the Air Force can leverage the distinct asymmetric advantage that air power presents across the spectrum of conflict. This asymmetry is founded upon a clear U.S. superiority in air power capabilities combined with the unique flexibility inherent in air power. An understanding of air powers efficacy in COIN, measured against conventional requirements and capabilities, will inform decisions on appropriate force structure and employment. Conceptualizing the generic strategic mindset of insurgent doctrine is indispensable before a relevant discussion of the effectiveness and limitations of air power can be undertaken. Chapter 1 offers a brief examination of the nature of insurgencies so that the reader can understand the framework and broad assumptions from which the discussion will proceed. If COIN operations come to represent the greatest challenge to U.S. interests in the future, as many suggest they will, changes in Air Force programs and structure must also be predicated on whether or not air power by its nature can be fashioned into an appropriate response. Chapter 2 seeks to understand the conceptual limitations and capabilities of air power in COIN operations in order to determine potential seams of using weapons developed for conventional contests in an irregular role. Chapter 3 examines the fundamental premise that COIN operations will be more frequent and critical than conventional operations, and introduces factors that may mitigate a repetition of current resource-intensive COIN operations. Chapter 4, the concluding chapter, presents broad recommendations regarding implications for force restructuring based on the findings of the previous chapters. The basic conclusion reached is that weapon systems should continue to be developed largely based on the most critical perceived (generally conventional) requirements, but that the application of air power should be guided by officers with a much greater understanding of COIN as well as other military operations across the spectrum of conflict. This approach will ensure that the Air Force is best prepared for the most critical and existential threats, for which it is most uniquely decisive and relevant. Given the political nature of counterinsurgency, air power should be seen as a critical factor in military operations, but not in itself decisive in defeating an insurgency. The final recommendations of Chapter 4 are 1) Understand and accept the relevance of air power in COIN and conventional warfare, 2) Neither focus on nor neglect COIN-specific requirements in future development, 3) Better educate officers on the operational and strategic levels of warfare across the spectrum of conflict, and 4) Return to beginning with strategy and operational art to address military quandaries. Leveraging inherent flexibility and with only modest investments in COIN-specific capabilities, air power can be a more consistent and effective contributor to COIN campaigns when directed by airmen who are educated and trained to employ it in a spectrum-appropriate manner.
[Type text]
[Type text] v ensure that the Air Force is best prepared for the most critical and existential threats, for which it is most uniquely decisive and relevant. Given the political nature of counterinsurgency, air power should be seen as a critical factor in military operations, but not in itself decisive in defeating an insurgency.
The final recommendations of Chapter 4 are 1) Understand and accept the relevance of air power in COIN and conventional warfare, 2) Neither focus on nor neglect COIN-specific requirements in future development, 3) Better educate officers on the operational and strategic levels of warfare across the spectrum of conflict, and 4) Return to beginning with strategy and operational art to address military quandaries. Leveraging inherent flexibility and with only modest investments in COIN-specific capabilities, air power can be a more consistent and effective contributor to COIN campaigns when directed by airmen who are educated and trained to employ it in a spectrum-appropriate manner.
"All men dream: but not equally. Those who dream by night in the dusty recesses of their minds wake in the day to find that it was vanity: but the dreamers of the day are dangerous men, for they may act their dream with open eyes, to make it possible."
With the United States currently engaged in difficult and taxing counterinsurgency operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, renewed emphasis has been focused upon the country's capabilities and priorities vis-à-vis this type of warfare. Much has been made of the neglect of counterinsurgency warfare since, and arguably due to, the failed attempt to salvage Vietnam. In the past, even reaching a consensus on what to call such conflicts has been elusive, and terms such as counterinsurgency, counter-terror campaign, low intensity conflict, small wars, unconventional wars, uncomfortable wars, irregular wars, Military Operations Other Than War, internal wars, fourth-generation wars, limited wars, civil wars, guerilla wars, counterrevolution, and many others have been liberally applied to the same or similar conflicts. Though some of the terms are clearly more meaningful for certain conflicts, and most of them at least have some subtle shade of merit and thus may represent a more appropriate taxonomy for a given operation, in the pursuit of standardization and simplification, the term counterinsurgency, and its acronym, COIN, will be used throughout this paper when referring to conflicts in which a government is seeking to defeat a significant, often existential, internal threat to its legitimacy using military means as well as other elements of national power. 1 This is not to minimize the subtle differences, which are important. One preponderant theme that runs throughout this paper is that each conflict must be judged, dissected, and evaluated anew: there is no panacea or magical template to apply to all counterinsurgency-type warfare.
While questions about how to prevail in Afghanistan and Iraq (as well as in the larger Global War on Terrorism, now increasingly referred to simply as 'the long war') apply equally to government agencies and interstate coalitions worldwide, nowhere has the debate been more acute or urgent than within the U.S. military. 
2
3
4
5
This asymmetry is founded upon a clear U.S. superiority in air power capabilities combined with the unique flexibility inherent in air power. This paper concludes that weapon systems should continue to be developed largely based on the most critical perceived (generally conventional)
requirements, but that the application of air power should be guided by officers with a much greater understanding of COIN operations. This approach will ensure that the Air Force is best prepared for the most critical threat of conflict, for which it is most uniquely decisive and relevant. Given the political nature of counterinsurgency, air power should be seen as a critical
[Type text]
[Type text] 3 factor in military operations, but not in itself decisive in defeating an insurgency. Leveraging inherent flexibility and with only modest investments in COIN-specific capabilities, air power can be a more consistent and effective contributor to COIN campaigns when directed by airmen who are educated and trained to employ it in a spectrum-appropriate manner.
Understanding the generic strategic mindset of insurgent 'doctrine' is indispensable before a relevant discussion of the effectiveness and limitations of air power can be undertaken.
While emphasizing that every insurgency must be dealt with in its own unique context, a brief examination of the nature of insurgencies is presented in Chapter 1 so that the reader can understand the framework and broad assumptions from which the discussion will proceed. If
COIN operations come to represent the greatest challenge to U.S. interests in the future, as many suggest they will, changes in Air Force programs and structure must also be predicated on whether or not air power by its nature can be fashioned into an appropriate response. Chapter 2 seeks to understand the conceptual limitations and capabilities of air power in COIN operations in a bid to determine potential seams of using weapons developed for conventional contests in an irregular role. Chapter 3 returns to examine the premise that COIN operations will continue to be more frequent and more critical than conventional endeavors and examines factors that may mitigate a repetition of current resource-intensive COIN operations. The concluding chapter presents broad recommendations regarding implications for force restructuring based on the findings of the previous chapters.
This paper is not intended to examine in depth the tactical utility of existing or theoretical platforms or systems in COIN operations or to delineate specific recommendations regarding educational or training programs that would enhance COIN capabilities. It will attempt to remain within the conceptual realm and outline problems with the hope that others who plan and design programs and systems may be better empowered to solve the problems.
[Type text]
[Type text]
Chapter 1: The Nature of Insurgencies "All warfare is based on deception. Hence, when able to attack, we must seem unable; when using our forces, we must seem inactive; when we are near, we must make the enemy believe we are far away; when far away, we must make him believe we are near. Hold out baits to entice the enemy. Feign disorder, and crush him."
It may seem strange for a country founded upon a successful insurgency and which has participated in or provided critical support to counterinsurgency operations in Mexico, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Nicaragua, the Philippines, Greece, China, Cuba, Vietnam, El Salvador, and Colombia (just to name a few) to seem so uncomfortable and off balance in the face of contemporary insurgencies in Afghanistan and Iraq. The United States is no stranger to either side of insurgent warfare. As an illustrative modern anecdote, after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, the U.S. supported an insurgency waged by mujahidin fighters which successfully removed the Red Army by 1989; in 2001, the U.S. organized a successful insurgency to oust the ruling Taliban, relying heavily upon special operations forces and indigenous Northern Alliance militia elements, only to find itself now fighting a counterinsurgency operation against the resurgent Taliban and its supporters in order to sustain the current democratically elected government. Insurgencies are an enduring and common occurrence in military history: a quantitative project on warfare classified 43 percent of 118 violent international conflicts between 1816 and 1980 as insurgencies. 
6
The codified U.S. military definition of an insurgency is "an organized movement aimed at the overthrow of a constituted government through use of subversion and armed conflict." 8
Though there are many illuminating works on the nature of insurgency and case studies of numerous past insurgencies, to an even greater extent than conventional warfare, insurgencies develop their own character based on a myriad of factors including leadership personalities, political goals and means, government responses, regional and international influences, geography, demography, religion, sociological underpinnings, and the collective culture of the indigenous population. Such complexity makes it imperative that each insurgency be considered in its own unique context. Added to this confusion, the lines between conventional warfare and insurgency are often blurred during the struggle, and many conventional wars spawn reactionary groups that can, as operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom make clear, present challenges that often far surpass the complexities of the conventional phases of conflict. 9 Each insurgency has, as it were, its own unique fingerprint that uniquely distinguishes it in subtle but perceptible ways (to the perceptive) from all conflicts that preceded it and all that will follow it.
Even with fingerprints, however, there are patterns and generalities that help us to classify, sort, and utilize them. A general examination of the whirls, loops, and arches of insurgencies reveals many commonalities that distinguish insurgencies from conventional warfare and is useful as a starting point for seeking to gain a fundamental understanding of any particular insurgency. 10
"It does not require a majority to prevail, but rather an irate, tireless minority keen to set brush fires in people's minds."
The first thing that must be understood about an insurgency is that it is formed around intangible objectives that cannot be destroyed or captured as is often attempted in conventional warfare. 
11
12
Contrary to popular perceptions, insurgency is not generally a reasoned choice between alternatives. As Merom writes, "Almost by definition, starting an insurgency war is a matter of default choice. Communities turn to insurgency because other forms of fighting, such as limited or full conventional war, are unavailable or excessively dangerous." 
13
14
[Type text] 6
In the operational warfare lexicon of space, time, and force, insurgents are generally resigned to concede space and force to the enemy while manipulating time until able to wear down the will of the opponent or to reach some sort of conventional parity. Henry Kissinger simply but powerfully described the dichotomy posed by insurgency: "the guerilla wins if he does not lose. The conventional army loses if it does not win." 15 Time is leveraged by insurgents for building up their own forces (both morally and quantitatively), capabilities, and legitimacy while simultaneously degrading those of the enemy. If they are to have any chance of success, counterinsurgent forces must likewise be extremely patient and disciplined-the average successful counterinsurgency effort requires 14 years. 
16
Insurgency can also be placed in the context of Clausewitz's famous triangle of warfare relationships formed by the government, the people, and the army. 
17
18
19
20
[Type text]
[Type text] nonexistent (traditionally rural areas), or simply hiding amongst a sympathetic population (increasingly amongst urban populations). 
21
22
23
24
Another critical turning point in many, though not all, insurgencies is the decision to resort to a conventional strategy. Movements following the Maoist and similar popular models of revolution expect to progress to conventional superiority and then defeat government forces in regular combat. 
25
[Type text]
[Type text] 9
There are other common asymmetries that insurgencies often wrest from the government in their campaigns. Historically, for example, insurgents have displayed a cunning ability to control and exploit propaganda both at home and in the international media. Galula judges this to be a key advantage that successful insurgents can exploit to great effect:
The asymmetrical situation has important effects on propaganda. Attempting to manipulate the press is not a viable option for Western militaries either ethically or practically. Even when dealing with innocuous information, most uniformed personnel are uncomfortable and ill prepared to deal with the media to begin with, having little to gain and a career to potentially lose. 
28
29
Other common potential asymmetries insurgents often achieve include strategic initiative (given their ability to exploit safe areas), culture (differences in the value placed on human life, for example), morality (insurgents are not normally recognized as legal combatants and generally have little interest in abiding by internationally established laws of armed conflict), economics (it
[Type text] 10 being much cheaper to fund an insurgency than to extinguish one), organization (insurgents will likely exceed a government bureaucracy's capacity to rapidly make and execute decisions), intelligence (at least on a local level), and any number of other possibilities. This is not to say that government forces are not without inherent non-military asymmetries that derive from the considerable legitimacy and resources inherent within a nation-state. Each asymmetric advantage that an insurgent organization accrues must be wrested from the opposing government. Each asymmetry thus becomes a virtual battleground in itself, and success or defeat hinges on defending or mitigating one's own critical vulnerabilities while discovering and exploiting enemy asymmetric weaknesses.
"You can't kill your way out of an insurgency."
Conventional military forces are designed and trained to destroy threats. The U.S.
military, for example, brings overwhelming firepower to bear to inflict damage to the enemy while minimizing the loss of life and materiel to itself. 
30
33
The fact that insurgencies have been overcome through naked force necessitates a careful reconsideration of the familiar cliché that counterinsurgencies are all about 'winning hearts and minds'. Not all insurgencies are popular and not all insurgents attempt to 'win hearts and minds'; this is especially true when insurgents receive third-party materiel support for their cause relaxing their reliance on local support. 
34
35
36
37
If You're Not Sure It's a Nail, Put Down the Hammer "The hard must humble itself or otherwise be humbled. The soft will ultimately ascend."
Given the difficulty of defeating an insurgency through purely military means, especially for liberal democracies and especially in the information age, effective COIN campaigns are marked by political reforms that address the concerns of the target audience of the insurgency.
COIN can then be thought of as containing a constructive element as well as a destructive element. This is the singular distinction of insurgency that is most responsible for the observation that "military superiority can no longer guarantee political victory, while military inferiority does not exclude the possibility of victory." 
38
39
[Type text]
[Type text] reconciliation. 
40
Requiring and assisting non-military indigenous government agencies to address the constructive requirements of a campaign will restore legitimacy to the government more effectively and fully, and will require the host government to develop capabilities required for long-term stability.
Between constructive and destructive purposes, the former is significantly more important for eventual success. As one of the architects of the British counterinsurgency effort in Malaya, Field Marshal Sir Gerald Templer, reflected, "the shooting side of the business is only 25 percent of the trouble. The other 75 percent lies in getting the people of this country behind us." 
41
"There is at least one thing worse than fighting with allies -And that is to fight without them"
Modern insurgencies rarely occur in a vacuum. Third party groups and states often have strategic political interests at stake related to the success or failure of the besieged government. The approach that usually works against national insurgents-demonstrating that the government can address the root causes of the conflict through reform-does not work nearly as well since the occupiers are inherently and insurmountably distinct from the insurgents and their supporters. Their outsider status cannot be overcome by even the most skilled information campaign. What motivates the insurgents is not the lack of jobs, schools, or the right to vote, but resentment at occupation, interference, and rule by outsiders or those perceived as outsiders. Reform is not the key to a solution as it normally is in national insurgencies. For this reason, skilled insurgents prefer to have their movement seen as a liberation one rather than a national one, thus making the mobilization of support and internal unity within the insurgency easier. 
43
[Type text]
[Type text]
An antithetical problem of large-scale intervention is that it sometimes actually discourages the partner government from effectively combating the insurgents. Before significant U.S. support is offered, U.S. policymakers must understand the character of the host government and its ability and desire to implement any requisite political, economic, and social changes necessary to defeat the insurgency. U.S. intervention may take the pressure off of an incorrigibly corrupt or obtuse regime to develop and use its resources against the insurgents, as well as delaying or denying the need to address fundamental issues of policy or corruption that, if resolved, could bolster legitimacy. This effect was notable in South Vietnam throughout the 1960s as government and military reforms were desultory at best and never took full advantage of the breathing space afforded by an unprecedented, though admittedly often ill-focused, level of U.S. involvement and assistance. By contrast, when the U.S. provided COIN support to El Salvador throughout the 1980s, Congress limited the number of troops in the country to 55 and restricted them to an advisory role. 
44
45
46
[Type text]
"There are two things which a democratic people will always find very difficultto begin a war and to end it."
Realist assumptions about relative power do not adequately account for the higher statistical probability of success for insurgent movements confronting powerful states and third country supporters as compared to the likely success of a larger power when confronting a smaller nation in a conventional conflict. This paper has already touched upon the moral and psychological asymmetry that insurgents often exercise over opponents, and which seem especially effective against democracies, as well as constraints which make it extremely unlikely for a modern liberal democracy to overcome an insurgency by purely military means. There are several credible theories extant in the available literature as to why states with armed forces vastly superior to the military capabilities of an insurgency are not as likely to attain victory over insurgents as they would be over conventional military forces. Three of the most important are posited or referenced by Ivan Arreguin-Toft in his work "How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflict". Toft's own theory is based on strategy mismatches, while two others that he presents are based on 'democratic squeemishness' and interest asymmetry in COIN.
Each of these warrants some examination to better understand COIN challenges for the U.S.
"The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish . . . the kind of war on which they are embarking."
In his book, Toft notes that, "With the exception of long wars, democratic states appear to win wars more often than authoritarian states." 
47
48
Toft's analysis may be useful insofar as it portrays the difficulty of overcoming an insurgency by means of a conventional military strategy-attempting to fight an insurgent movement using conventional strategies is like trying to rid a house of termites with an axe.
Unfortunately, his analysis has no prescriptive value for liberal democracies that find themselves constrained from resorting to barbarism as strategy. None of the case studies he presents explains the case of a successful COIN intervention without resorting to barbarism. To be fair, his argument seems to be geared more toward detailing how authoritarian governments have an advantage in this type of warfare. 
53
A related theory which predates Toft's asymmetric strategy analysis is submitted by Merom who proposed that "democracies fail in small wars because they find it extremely difficult to escalate the level of violence and brutality to that which can secure victory." 
54
55
The internal struggle in democracies does not escape insurgents. Rather, it emboldens them, influences their feasibility calculations, and provides them with strategic targets outside the battlefield. Indeed, insurgency leaders often follow the domestic developments within their enemies' societies, seeking to exploit the divisions they identify. They do so by trying to impose on their enemies a high enough casualty-rate in the expectation that the latter will trigger expedient opposition to the war. Occasionally, however, they also try to lure democratic opponents into behaving brutally in order to increase the moral opposition to the war. Both efforts are usually accompanied by welltailored messages that are directed at the democratic society. 
56
60
62
63
"So what, if we win?" and, "So what, if we lose?" As lives are lost, treasure is expended, and propaganda, whether true or not, takes its toll, there is apt to be a gathering movement for withdrawal: "When the survival of the nation is not directly threatened, and when the obvious asymmetry in conventional military power bestows an underdog status on the insurgent side, the morality of the war is more easily questioned." 
64
Notwithstanding the limitations that should not go unheeded, modern democracies that are able to apply sound counterinsurgency principles in the proper cultural context do have a favorable chance of success. Fishel and Manwaring, for example, conducted extensive quantitative research on 43 insurgencies between 1945 and 1985 involving a Western state as one of the antagonists. Using seven variables, they found that 88 percent of the cases could be accurately explained. 
65
and may not completely fall within the ability of an intervening power to affect, but they have
[Type text] 22 considerable prescriptive value for Western democracies both in determining whether or not involvement is likely to be successful and in devising effective strategies once intervention has been determined. While there is no silver bullet for COIN success, a thorough understanding of the nature of insurgencies is the first key in stacking the odds in one's favor.
1 This standardization is based on Army Field Manual FM 3-24, which was jointly adopted by the Army and Marine Corps and shared inputs from various inter-and non-governmental agencies. The author prefers the term "Small Wars" as popularized in the U.S. by the 1940 Marine Corps Small Wars Manual, and, prior to that by British Colonel C.E. Callwell, author of the 1896 book, Small Wars: Their Principles and Practice, though he was also not the first to use the term. "Small Wars" tends to be linguistically appropriate to a broader range of conflicts though it can carry the unfortunate connotation that these conflicts are somehow not as important, as difficult, or apt to require as significant numbers of forces as conventional conflicts. Army Field Manual 3-24, Counterinsurgency (Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, 2006). 
2
The label "war" implies the primary use of armed force. Other instruments like diplomacy and intelligence may be used, but they are in the service of the deployment of armed force. I believe this conceptual frame is unfortunate when it comes to dealing with terrorism. Here diplomacy, the international criminal justice system, and especially intelligence are primary. With good information, almost everything is and can be done to reduce terrorism; without it, very little is possible. As cited in Isabelle Duyvesteyn, "Understanding Victory and Defeat (Some Conclusions)," in Jan Angstrom and Isabelle Duyvesteyn, eds., Understanding Victory and Defeat in Contemporary War, (London; New York: Routledge, 2007): 228. The author disagrees with the short shrift implied by Jervis to the term war which should always imply the most serious and existential national emergency requiring, by definition, the coordinated use of all elements of national power. The Obama administration has unofficially discarded the GWOT phraseology without replacing it with a term that broadly defines and connects the global efforts of U.S. diplomatic, economic, and military efforts to confront Islamic extremists. 
3
" Washington Times, December 16, 2008, p. 2. 4
6
7
9
10 For a discussion on the question of whether or not the study of past insurgencies is productive in providing insights into current and future insurgencies, see Austin Long, On Other War: Lessons from Five Decades of 
RAND Counterinsurgency Research, (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2006): 13-20. 11
0,1518,571345,00.html;
Internet;
accessed Nov 18, 2008. 17
18
Clausewitz,
596. 19
20
Taber,
31. 21
22 Taber,
[22]
[23]
24
25
26
28
29
30
32
Galula,
29. 33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
Metz and Millen,
32. 43
44
45
46
47
53
54
59
" Taber,
[31]
[32]
64
65
Given that heavier-than-air craft have only recently celebrated their centennial, the utility of aircraft in modern warfare is truly revolutionary, and both the evidence and the promise engendered in the exploitation of the air and space medium continue to widely surpass that offered by land and sea platforms in terms of applications in current and future projections of warfare. There can be no doubt as to the critical, even potentially decisive, nature of the airplane in conventional conflict. Air power purists and their ground-focused critics routinely, and esoterically, argue the theoretical conventional limits of unassisted air power and whether or not it can independently win a war. Such arguments are only likely to lead to (or perpetuate, as the case may be) dysfunctional relations between services and to influence strategy in ways that are more parochial than tailored to specific prevailing circumstances. 1 Air power's great military utility lies in its contribution to warfare in general and, specifically, in the synergies it generates when utilized in concert with joint force and interagency capabilities. Depending on the nature of operations, a heavy or even total reliance on air power may be prudent; but because some operations lend themselves to air warfare solutions is no reason to believe that air power has made other joint capabilities obsolete. The same is true for operations where air power applications are more limited and primarily warrant a supporting role to ground or naval forces.
In order to better determine force structure implications, it is necessary to consider the limitations and capabilities of air power in COIN. Generally one speaks of capabilities and then limitations, but in this case the limitations of air power in COIN serve to establish its boundaries and frame an overall conceptual groundwork more fully than its capabilities do. Since this is a conceptual more than a practical level discussion, to be useful it is also necessary to consider arguments for how the Air Force might increase its capabilities and applicability with regard to COIN. The most persistent argument offered as to how the Air Force should transform to meet COIN threats is that the 'Cold War' high-tech assets that the Air Force routinely procures at present are not effective in dealing with insurgencies, and low-tech, COIN-centric assets are more appropriate.
[Type text]
[Type text]
"Know your limitations and be content with them.
Given the nature of insurgencies as outlined in Chapter 1, air power must generally be relegated to a subordinate, though important, role in successful COIN operations. The paramount reason that the Air Force cannot be independently successful in COIN operations is that its primary effectiveness either resides within the destructive domain or in its support of other means-all major Air Force missions with regard to COIN operations are either concerned with destroying insurgents and their infrastructure, or providing a vast array of support to ground-based COIN forces. Military ground forces are also insufficient in and of themselves, but the ability to utilize a vast number of military personnel for non-military missions in lieu of qualified civilian personnel allows them to be used in a greater variety of constructive pursuits, though at a diminished effectiveness vis-à-vis experienced civilian administrators. Ground forces, especially when leveraged with appropriate air support, can also provide security, which is the ideal constructive mission for military forces.
The unparalleled speed, range, lethality, and precision of Air Force strike platforms make them ideal for conventional operations where massed fires are critical to battlefield victory.
They are equally and increasingly adept at destroying insurgent targets when they can be definitively identified. U.S. air power has rapidly evolved to the point where it is virtually able to destroy any surface target (increasingly encompassing moving targets) anywhere on the planet at will and notwithstanding enemy efforts to prevent it. This precision strike capability is an important contribution in any counterinsurgency operation, but it is unlikely to be decisive. As presented above, the constructive element of a COIN operation is more critical than the destructive element, especially when employed by a liberal democracy. Some potential reasons that air power enthusiasts as well as many of their vociferous critics-the one arguing that air power can do everything, while the other contending that it isn't doing anything-seem unable to objectively recognize the limits of air power in COIN operations are the overwhelming success of air power in its conventional role, the perceived lack of Air Force participation in current endeavors, and the low casualty rate among Air Force personnel.
[ Alliance forces with embedded U.S. Special Operations Forces teams, a strategy that enjoyed considerable success in limiting U.S. losses and overthrowing the Taliban. Likewise the conventional opening of Operation Iraqi Freedom was also characterized by intensive and effective aerial attacks though with an abbreviated air-only phase due to the accelerated launch of the ground invasion. Even as the overall effectiveness of air power in each of these operations will continue to be disputed by parochial pundits well into the future, by any reasonable standard the Air Force has proven its ability to conduct extensive and successful strike operations against opponents with relatively sophisticated anti-air defenses while sustaining only minimal casualties. Largely for this reason air power has come to be seen as part and parcel of the 'American Way of War'. Given air power's demonstrated superiority over opponents and with the public frequently exposed to images of precision guided weapons hitting their targets with pinpoint accuracy, there is little wonder why many find it hard to understand why the Air Force, with its superabundance of technical wizardry, seems unable to play a more substantial role in defeating insurgents with extremely modest military capabilities.
The perceived lack of participation by Air Force personnel, as well as the comparatively small casualty statistics among airmen for current operations, together form the basis of the charge that the Air Force is not 'pulling its weight'. Much of this is misperception. Media coverage seems more apt to bias its reporting towards negative events on the ground centering on of propaganda to the insurgent has already been outlined. Air strikes reinforce the romantic sympathies of many, which are enabled by the psychological portrait of a powerful and ruthless leviathan seeking to impose its will on the insurgent underdogs who are locked in a revolutionary struggle for their very lives-the image of "a giant flailing helplessly against ants". 11 Some of the negative reaction might also carry over from indiscriminate bombing tactics used in the past, including in counterinsurgency campaigns (such as British 'air control' doctrine prior to World
War II). 
12
Insurgents play upon the historical sense of the indiscrimination of aerial bombardment and propagandize every strike that kills or injures, or can be made to appear to have killed or injured, noncombatants. Modern insurgents also have an established reputation for using civilians as shields for acute defense and to provide strategic propaganda should U.S. forces strike:
One farmer told Human Rights Watch: The Taliban came to my village and forced us to stay close to them. The Taliban then came into my house and forced me and my family to stay with them. They then started firing their weapons at the Americans. The Americans then bombed my village. People in my village were getting killed because the Taliban would not let us leave. 
13
14
15
There are no credible studies as to the recruitment effect of civilian deaths, either real or virtual, but in many cases the military effect obtained was undoubtedly far outweighed by the propaganda effect suffered. This is especially true when one considers that the propaganda
quickly reaches a multitude of audiences and is not easily countered even when it is disputed by the U.S. military. 
16
17
"If our air forces are never used, they have achieved their finest goal." --General Nathan F. Twining
General air power capabilities for COIN operations can be segregated generically under destructive and constructive elements though some capabilities are mission dependent. Airlift, for example, could be considered constructive if it was delivering humanitarian supplies or reconstruction equipment, but it might be better classified as destructive if it were airdropping troops or supplies in support of a strike mission. For the purposes of this paper, those capabilities with an independent strike capability will be broadly described under the section relating to destructive capabilities, while those that function primarily in a supporting role are described under constructive capabilities.
"But man is not made for defeat. A man can be destroyed but not defeated."
The ability of air power to strike ground targets in a precise and overwhelming manner is one of its greatest advantages in conventional conflict. The importance of discriminately targeting insurgents has been previously emphasized, and planned airstrikes are generally more effective in this endeavor than ground forces. The use of ground forces in the direct attack role is subject to significant fog and friction resulting from intelligence lapses, high emotions, dynamic conditions, and the difficulty of attaining complete surprise during raids. Air power can often mitigate these difficulties by surreptitious surveillance techniques and matching ordnance and employment parameters as required with no indication of attack until the munitions are delivered. Planned airstrikes follow a regimented and meticulous process:
This includes a 'pattern of life analysis,' which looks for civilians in the area for hours or days before an attack using 'eyes on the target' ranging from ground observers to technical reconnaissance…. the U.S. and NATO also require positive visual identification of the target during a planned strike, allowing the pilot to look for civilians and call off an attack based on those observations. Planned strikes also allow the U.S. and NATO to develop a target over time, thereby using far more detailed intelligence to understand who is and is not in the target area. 
19
[Type text] 36
Airstrikes cannot capture insurgents or intelligence in an attack as ground forces can, and they are subject to insurgent propaganda even when successful, but they represent a compelling destructive capability when used in a disciplined and deliberate manner.
While much more likely to generate collateral damage than planned attacks, close air support is another critical destructive mission of air power. Close air support allows for the destruction of insurgent targets in contact with friendly forces, but it also helps shield the U.S. Precision weapons combined with trained ground controllers allow modern close air support missions to be accomplished by virtually every strike-capable platform including B-1 bombers, which are routinely used in that role.
Though often exaggerated, strike air power can reduce the demands on coalition ground forces by filling strike requirements and by providing close air support to increase the available firepower. The extreme version of this argument is rooted in the British doctrine of 'air control' used during the 1920s and 1930s, and some enthusiasts argue for a similar air-heavy role in modern counterinsurgency. 
20
Air control was never as effective as advertised, and it could not provide answers to the political causes of colonial insurgencies. Except in the case of minor policing, airpower served mostly as a support arm to ground forces. A colonial power in the 1920s could employ such a doctrine on the far reaches of the empire against natives who had no direct contact with parliament or the media. 
21
[Type text]
Since the main effort of a counterinsurgency will rely on constructive successes, the number of ground personnel that can be replaced by destructive airstrike capabilities is limited. The ability of air power to independently and persistently provide security to a local population is also immature. There is, however, some promise for air power to further reduce troop requirements in the future as the ability to track and 'tag' insurgents through the use of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance assets that also have a strike capability has been rapidly
evolving. 
22
A related potential advantage of air power in a destructive role is its ability to strike [Type text]
[Type text]
If You Build It, They Will Leave: Constructive Capabilities "Am I not destroying my enemies when I make friends of them?" --Abraham Lincoln
The ability of air power to make serious independent contributions towards meeting the constructive requirements of a successful COIN operation are by nature limited. Air power does not lend itself towards human interaction, which is a critical component of counterinsurgency.
As one writer described it, "If success is ultimately tied to the people, I am sorry but they live on the ground. Their government operates on the ground, and people need to be secure to go about their lives. Until civilian populations take up residence in space or start to raise families at 10,000 feet, there will be limitations as to what airpower writ large, or the Air Force more specially [sic], can accomplish." 24 Military forces are by design ill-equipped to play a constructive role outside of providing security and training indigenous military forces and should not be utilized in such a fashion when more suitable civilian agencies and organizations are available. Though not without supporting constructive functions, air forces will find it even more difficult to transition to a nation-building role without transforming into something completely foreign to their nature and inept for their conventional purpose.
The most important independent constructive role for air power must be to help train, organize, and equip host nation airmen so that they may conduct counterinsurgency operations independently, or alongside coalition forces, and jointly with their sister services and other governmental agencies. This may seem to be an enabler for the destructive role that such a national force is more suited to play, but in reality the establishment of a credible indigenous air force has a tremendous positive psychological effect on the population. This effect is renewed each time indigenous forces are used instead of U.S. forces as long as the forces are considered legitimate and support a legitimate government. The success of this critical role is proportionate to the Air Force's ability to provide airmen who are well-versed in both their technical career field and the host nation culture and language. Related to this role would be Air Force assistance in building or modernizing the commercial air traffic sector, though this assignment would ideally be carried out by civilian aviation experts.
Air power, in both kinetic strike and non-kinetic roles, is also an important enabler for maintaining security in conjunction with ground forces. This ability can reduce the number of personnel required to secure an area and increase their mobility by lessening their dependence on Air Force personnel can also be used interchangeably in many instances to support constructive roles that otherwise might be delegated to sister service or civilian counterparts.
These include generic roles and roles for which an individual member is uniquely qualified. Air
Force Civil Engineering and Security Forces personnel are ready examples and have been used
in Iraq and Afghanistan in the same capacity as their counterparts in other services. Some have argued for a greater 'boots on the ground' capability for the Air Force to increase its constructive footprint, but this seems to be straining to create a mission for which, outside of a small number of personnel, the Air Force is neither designed for nor likely to have a comparative advantage at. 
26
Information operations are a prime capability for undermining insurgent propaganda and bolstering government legitimacy. The Air Force maintains the ability to broadcast independent or government-sponsored media messages via airborne platforms to influence the population and insurgents. Low-tech leaflet drops have also been utilized to some effect. Information
[Type text]
[Type text] 40 operations are one of the few constructive areas where there is great growth potential for the Air Force. There is not necessarily a decisive advantage that air power offers vis-à-vis information operations, but currently none of the services seem to be taking adequate measures to promote information dominance in conventional or COIN operations. To be effective, information operations require messages that are carefully crafted in terms of local culture and language;
these messages are most effectively devised by indigenous personnel, but U.S. personnel should be prepared to produce messages independently or to assist host nation personnel who may not be trained or sociologically adept at collecting and disseminating information to local and national populations. 27
"Beware lest you lose the substance by grasping at the shadow."
With a discussion of current capabilities completed, it is appropriate to examine the question of whether procuring equipment that is geared towards fighting an insurgency and not a conventional war is advisable. The Air Force, along with the other services, has come under fire for its reliance on high-technology platforms that were programmed and developed largely during the Cold War to combat a conventional foe with an impressive combined arms capability across the board. Insurgent forces represent the opposite end of the spectrum: low technology, small decentralized cells to carry out attacks on military and non-military targets for political effect, and a modicum of the resources available to all but the most decrepit state opponent.
While it is certainly true that an Air Force designed around counterinsurgency demands could be significantly less expensive than one geared toward meeting high-end conventional threats, assertions that low-tech forces actually offer an advantage over high-tech ones warrant scrutiny. This is especially true if one requires a full-spectrum force that continues to maintain a capability to defeat potential conventional opponents.
Traditionally, the overall force is largely designed around high-end conventional requirements and then platforms are used flexibly to meet the full-spectrum requirements of other levels of conflict. Given the previously outlined nature of insurgencies, it is unthinkable for an insurgency to demand the level of acute, violent air power response required in a conventional effort; to use strike air power so liberally would likely be deleterious in any case.
[ The ability of precision guided weapons, including laser-guided bombs and Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAM), to accurately destroy targets of interest is well established and has allowed virtually all strike aircraft to support Close Air Support (CAS) missions. In Iraq, for example, B-1 bombers have been frequently used in roles that were once the purview of dedicated CAS aircraft like the A-10 Thunderbolt that trained to fly at slower speeds and extremely low altitudes. 
35
36
37
38
Low-tech aircraft employing the same sensor and weapons technology of advanced fighters are not likely to be more tactically effective in COIN than high-end fighters. The most significant potential benefit of using COIN-dedicated assets while still maintaining the required conventional force is the reduced expense of operating low-tech aircraft as opposed to modern turbojet aircraft. Given that insurgencies are long-term commitments, such savings in fuel and maintenance costs could be considerable. Slower aircraft replacing high-performance platforms would, however, be required in greater numbers to provide comparable air coverage to ensure the same ability to respond to requests for support. Fighter aircraft are also more adept at influence tactics such as the common 'show of force' high-speed, low altitude flybys which have been successfully employed to disperse insurgents and riotous crowds in Afghanistan and Iraq. If Added to that would be the need to build and maintain numerous acceptable landing strips in remote areas and to provide security for the strips. 
42
Airdrop System now allow for medium altitude airdrops with unprecedented precision.
High-end conventional aircraft serve well in COIN operations and, while more expensive to maintain and operate, are more capable and less vulnerable than lower-tech options that would be appropriate for COIN but of little utility for conventional requirements. Economic efficiency can best be sought by rapidly standing up an indigenous air force that can conduct COIN missions unencumbered by the responsibility to maintain a world-leading conventional capability. To expedite this process, the Air Force is required to maintain at least a minimal
[Type text]
[Type text] 45 number of COIN-specific low-tech platforms to be used in training host nation forces. The degree to which the host nation will choose low-tech assets for COIN or high-tech assets for external defense will depend on its financial situation as well as perceived external threats. Iraq, for example, has requested to purchase F-16 fighters; Afghanistan would have little need or ability to pay for such high-end assets. The Air Force has lagged badly in its attempts to build or rebuild air forces in both countries; the likely price of this failure is a late checkout from those campaigns complete with extended-stay charges.
[Type text]
[Type text]
1 Air power purists often point to Operation Allied Force over Kosovo as an example of a successful and unassisted air war, even though airmen leaders (including the Combined Force Air Component Commander, Lieutenant General Michael Short) were generally critical of the constrained way in which air power was used. Critics, on the other hand, note that the campaign was protracted beyond initial expectations, that it was unable to prevent an increase in Serbian military actions against Kosovars on the ground, and that the end of the conflict is more attributable to the loss of Russian support or the threat of ground intervention. 12 British experiments with air control over sections of their vast empire prior to World War II are sometimes held out by air enthusiasts as a model for the effective use of air power in COIN. Such arguments are misguided as the novelty of air power on what are more readily regarded as bandit hordes is not reproducible in modern COIN operations. Nor is the vicious extent to which Britain applied air power likely possible (certainly not morally desirable) in the post-war world where information is more readily available and true insurgents are masters in its manipulation. Corum and Johnson offer a similar opinion: "In the aftermath of Malaya, most British military authorities had concluded that 'the traditional method of disciplining restive natives [punitive expeditions, either by ground or air] had become not only politically unacceptable, but also an international embarrassment.' Bombing obstreperous tribesmen from the air offended modern sensibilities and was ineffective in the face of ideologically inspired rebellion. Air control was therefore ruled out as a viable and exclusive means to manage the insurgency." James S. 15 Two illustrative incidents are provided in Troops in Contact, 27-28. An account of an air strike leading to joining the insurgency: "Two months after the raid, a man named Mohammadullah told a journalist that the airstrikes had killed 20 people in his village after Taliban fighters had come through. He said the bombing had killed six members of his family, including his children's grandmother, and wounded five. He believed the village was bombed in mistake because at the time insurgents were fighting U.S. forces well below the village. Villagers were so angered by the bombing that many men from the village reportedly left to join the insurgents. Support for the international forces 'depends on the behavior of ISAF,' he said. 'If they treat the civilians well, they will win.'" An account of an air strike leading to anti-insurgency sentiment: "According to the villagers, the high loss of civilian life led to violence between the Taliban and local villagers. One villager told The New York Times that villagers had pursued the Taliban commander who led the ambush, Wali Mahmud, to the village of Heratian and had killed him. Another villager said he had heard that when Taliban fighters came to a village near Sarwan Qala with the aim of attacking international forces, a group of tribal elders asked them not to attack out of concern that the village would be bombed; after an argument, the leader of the tribal elders killed the Taliban commander and two of his bodyguards." 
16
33
34
35
36
37
"Anything worth fighting for is worth fighting dirty for."
One observation that would seem to support the future of more and larger COIN campaigns is that insurgency seems to have, as described in Chapter 1, a much better chance of success against a major conventional power, especially when that power is a liberal democracy, than conventional warfare does. One difficulty, however, with extrapolating this argument out to a new strategy for would-be U.S. opponents is rectifying theoretical obstructions surrounding the presumption that the strategy is even viable for a nation state. For a state actor to rely wholly on an insurgency strategy against a sizable conventional competitor would imply the willing cession of territory and all overt means of controlling the country including the ability to collect revenue
[Type text]
[Type text] 50 openly. This is markedly different from strategies of ceding space for time, as was used to great effect against both Napoleon's and Hitler's armies in their attempt to occupy and control Russia, a territory of vast expanses not afforded to most states. Especially in the case of Napoleon, indigenous Russian forces were particularly effective at harassing Le Grande Armée (though the harsh winter was even more compelling), but the overall success still rested on building a conventional stopping force and relying on conventional principles of interior lines and Napoleon's overextension well beyond his culminating point.
A strategy based primarily on insurgent warfare by an invaded state is historically the result of a failed conventional campaign that results in terms of surrender deemed unacceptable to either the regime, the people, or both-"in war the result is never final". 
4
Been There, Done That, Don't Want the TShirt: Escape from Iraq "It is well that war is so terrible -otherwise we would grow too fond of it."
If insurgency is not a likely strategy for a state competitor, it is possible if not probable that post-conventional warfare will still have to be followed by a counterinsurgency campaign.
Neither Afghanistan nor Iraq was originally conceived of as a COIN campaign, yet both have transformed into wide insurgencies. There are, however, solid reasons that undermine the likelihood of another such effort anytime soon. One mitigating factor is the debilitating effect that the two wars have had on the U.S. national psyche and the military readiness of the country.
[Type text]
[Type text] 51
The wars have resulted in significant American casualties (compared to the conventional stage operations), tremendous financial expenditures, and a perceived loss of international prestige even as victory is still not assured in either conflict and no one knows for sure what victory will look like or how palatable it will be if it is attained. Difficult wars dampen enthusiasm for future wars unless the perceived threat is proportionately high. 
6
and Saddam Hussein was one of the most easily vilified personalities on the planet.
Overwhelming success in Desert Storm combined with the heightened sense of threat awareness after 9/11 were likely significant factors in producing initially high public and congressional support for the most recent actions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
A similar pattern emerges on the 'small war' frontier. The loss of 18 U.S. Army Rangers in Somalia in 1993 led to a precipitate U.S. withdrawal quickly followed by a collapse of the entire UN effort to stabilize the failed state. In 1994, Rwanda became the scene of a horrific extermination program perpetrated by ethnic Hutus against the Tutsi population. The UN failed to act even as an estimated ten percent of the population of Rwanda perished. The former British ambassador to the UN, Lord David Hannay, explained the UN's paralysis by saying, "No one will ever understand Rwanda properly if they don't read it through the prism of Somalia. Why did the international community not do something? Because they were traumatized by the collapse of the mission in Somalia." 7 During the Bosnia and Kosovo crises, though the UN again failed to authorize meaningful measures to protect ethnic minorities, NATO, led by the United States, had no desire to revisit the embarrassment of Rwanda in its own backyard and resorted to limited action in the form of continuous air attack-a compromise intended to avoid another Rwanda as well as another Somalia. Given the trauma of Iraq and Afghanistan, it seems likely that, for the near future at least, the U.S. will take every opportunity available to avoid all but the most vital military operations, especially when the potential for committing large
[Type text]
[Type text] 52 numbers of exposed forces for an extended period is high. This thought is voiced by the current Secretary of Defense who speculated that, "The United States is unlikely to repeat another Iraq or Afghanistan-that is, forced regime change followed by nation building under fire-anytime soon." 8 Whether or not public opinion and political determination will discriminate in particular against counterinsurgencies, nation building, interventions without UN backing, or other subsets vis-à-vis conventional combat or even air-power-intensive scenarios a la Operation Allied Force remains to be seen. 9
"Time is a great teacher, but unfortunately it kills all its pupils." --Louis-Hector Berlioz
Even if the U.S. is unlikely to seek out nation-building adventures in the near future, there are many who argue persuasively that it is conceivable, if not likely, that it may have to intervene in failed or failing states to prevent instability which could lead to a power vacuum that then results in the establishment of a safe base of operations for Al Qaeda or other affiliated terrorist groups. 10 There are several obvious difficulties with U.S. involvement in shoring up failing or failed states. The first inevitable question that must be confronted is, "Why is it failing?" By definition, there is no surer sign of a loss of competence and legitimacy than that which accompanies a failing state. There may be events beyond the regime's control that exacerbate a crisis, such as drought and famine, but legitimate governments are expected to be able to plan for and react to such crises and generally have access to significant international aid.
If the troubled government's flagging legitimacy is a result of incompetence or corruption, the U.S. is likely to be viewed unfavorably both locally and internationally if it attempts to shore up the regime, unless it can negotiate conditional support based on significant and rapid sociopolitical improvements. In any case, the introduction of armed forces on a large scale may further delegitimize the regime and result in irreconcilable tensions that result in combat operations (a mission creep similar to Somalia) or the demise of the regime requiring the forceful installation of a new government (such as Afghanistan or Iraq). To deploy combat forces in such situations is to accept significant risk; as Dunlap notes, "…there is something disquieting about deploying America's most authoritarian and socialistic arm, our armed forces, to teach struggling For failed states or failing states with governments that should not be supported, the U.S.
should consider that experience teaches that it is generally less expensive and risky to support an
[Type text]
[Type text] 54 insurgency than it is a counterinsurgency, just as it is easier to criticize than to govern and to destroy than to build. This is not a novel approach for the U.S.; as Romberg notes of the post-Vietnam era, Heeding the lessons of Southeast Asia for the remainder of the Cold War, Washington adopted a nimble strategy to keep boots off the ground in new hotspots in Asia and Africa, choosing to support local proxies instead of intervening itself. Applied to the Soviet Union's war in Afghanistan, the tactic defeated the Kremlin on the battlefield, adding to an increasingly unbearable set of economic and political stresses that ultimately led to the demise of the Soviet Union itself. 
16
17
18
Another significant factor that will tend to limit large U.S. expeditions abroad is the logistical difficulty or impossibility of stabilizing most failed or failing states. Army FM 3-24 posits that 20 counterinsurgents per 1,000 residents is the standard minimum required troop ratio for successful COIN efforts, though troop levels in Afghanistan and Iraq have been significantly lower than this, even providing for indigenous military capability. 
19
20
"Only the dead have seen the end of war."
If there are mitigating factors that suggest that U.S. counterinsurgency efforts in the future are unlikely to be on the scale of current operations, there are also reasons to believe that the oft-advertised death of conventional warfare is both premature and exaggerated. 
23
Despite political theories that are developed in the sterile laboratory of rational actors and perfect information, wars by their nature prescribe a more transcendent calculus. In any conflict, both sides resort to violence in the belief (or at least hope) that they will be able to attain a better state of peace than submission would produce. If a rational calculus could prevail then it would
[Type text]
[Type text] 56 always be possible for both sides to perfectly understand the exact costs and precise likelihood of success in war, and war would ultimately cease to exist. Victory would not have to be achieved, but only proven via theorem. War would then be replaced by computer algorithms and endless virtual wars that would entail no true risk to powerful states in accomplishing their ambitions.
This would ineluctably lead to the sterile fulfillment of the Athenian description of power, "the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they must". 24 Such a calculus is frustrated, however, by the expansive myriad of variables and unknowns that attend international relations at the grand strategic level of war and peace. The first and most obvious reason an inferior military power would find itself in a pitched conventional battle with a vastly superior force is a miscalculation regarding the intentions of the superior power. Such is a reasonably sure explanation for the genesis of the 1991 Gulf War, Grenada, Panama, and a sizable portion of conflicts throughout history. In retrospect, it seems singularly irrational for these weaker nations to provoke a war with the United States, but it is unlikely any of them were prescient enough to understand how the U.S. would respond to their provocations. Similar events occur on a not-infrequent basis without precipitating U.S.
interference-past terrorist events subsidized or supported by Libya, Syria, and Iran, or Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, genocide in Rwanda, or even Russia's recent drubbing of Georgia might be seen as equally egregious to the U.S. as the events that led to war in other instances. It is not difficult after the fact to point out differences in strategic interests, in U.S.
leadership and capabilities, and in any number of other discriminating factors that led to war in one instance but not in another; but it is generally quite difficult to forecast with any degree of accuracy when, for what reason, and to what extent the U.S. will undertake military actions against a political opponent. Contributing to the complexity of the problem is the effect of domestic pressures on international decisions. Political leaders are nearly always constrained to prioritize domestic issues above foreign policy considerations, and weak regimes often look to focus attention outwards to consolidate national support. This irrational propensity vis-à-vis
[Type text]
[Type text] 57 foreign policy can strain relations leading to an increased risk of conflict, or even actual conflict such as the 1982 Falklands War, which was precipitated by the Argentine government's attempt to quell mounting domestic discontent by focusing public attitudes on a popular irredentist international dispute.
Even if a nation is confronting war with the U.S. and concedes a lopsided military advantage, like any adept insurgency it can effectively mitigate whether and with what degree of success the U.S. can bring its military might to bear through the adroit utilization of non-military influence. This introduces new sources for miscalculation. Prior to the 1991 Gulf War, for instance, the Iraqi government had found some reassurance in ambiguous U.S. remarks concerning its disputes with Kuwait. 
25
Though now often viewed as a pre-war requirement, the UN-sponsored invasion of Iraq in 1991 was most remarkable for its singularity: after the UN-backed effort to repel the North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950 it marked only the second time the UN has authorized military force against an invading power. 
26
Even in that most rare of cases where consensus is obtained, or when unilateral action is undertaken, a weaker enemy is not without recourse. In Desert Strom, even after hostilities
[Type text]
[Type text] 58 commenced, Saddam Hussein continued attempts to fracture the alliance and undermine the support of international audiences by launching Scud missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia to inflict casualties, precipitate a ground attack, and perhaps involve Israel in the war; he also portrayed the air campaign as indiscriminate and barbaric while seeming to maintain a last hope that the Iraqi army would be able to inflict sufficient casualties during a ground battle to alter the strategic equation. 
28
If there are political factors that can be exploited prior to and during a military campaign, there are also military difficulties that always make war itself the realm of chance and uncertainty. Even assuming that the U.S. is likely to possess vastly superior forces to any potential conventional foe, given U.S. commitments around the world it is unlikely that the full might of the military can be brought to bear. In addition, logistical problems such as infrastructure, lack of forward operating bases, diplomatic clearances to use airspace, and time available can all work against U.S. efforts. 
30
Another significant asymmetry in a Taiwan scenario would likely be political will-presumably very high for China but likely a peripheral issue at best to most Americans. 
31
[Type text]
[Type text] 59 economic influence. Again, using a Taiwan conflict as an example, U.S. allies such as South Korea and Japan would be faced with angering either the U.S. or China by sponsoring or denying access to U.S. forces; without the use of bases in these countries, U.S. success would be inconceivable. 
32
"For if we merely take what obviously appears the line of least resistance, its obviousness will appeal to the opponent also; and this line may no longer be that of least resistance.
In studying the physical aspect, we must never lose sight of the psychological, and only when both are combined is the strategy truly an indirect approach, calculated to dislocate the opponent's balance."
If the premise that conventional war is somehow rendered obsolete by the qualitative advantage of the current U.S. military is universally accepted, it would seem counterintuitive and irrational for other large powers to continue to devote scarce resources towards maintaining or even expanding their conventional capabilities. This is especially true for states that already have sufficient capabilities to dissuade, deter, or defeat traditional or likely regional competitors.
China, for example, has increased its defense budget by double digit percentages for 19 years including the 2008 increase of nearly 18 percent. Russia, fresh off its conflict with Georgia, announced and approved a 25 percent increase in defense spending for 2009 even given the paralyzing financial difficulties it is currently experiencing. 
33
that may validate the need for increased capabilities. All of these countries also seek regional or global prestige through a balanced economic and military capacity with India and Brazil being persistent contenders for a permanent Security Council seat in UN reform proposals. If their current motives should not be presumed to be sinister, however, then neither should any future
[Type text]
[Type text] 60 intentions be dismissed out of hand. Military planning is most conservatively done based on existing and predicted capabilities with a blind eye to intentions, which can change too rapidly for an adequate reactionary response. It is likely that the relative imbalance between the U.S.
and China especially will continue to shrink. Put in a regional context, the imbalance is already likely to be perilously small-probably too small already to maintain a deterrent effect in the Taiwan Straits by military calculations only.
The biggest concern for the future should not be current threat assessments or a specific peer or other competitor, but that that the logic of warfare itself may be discarded. Warfare is like water flowing through even small crevices and cracks constantly seeking out the path of least resistance. The risk is that if the capabilities of current conventional forces are compromised in order to focus on the warfare de jure of large nation-building counterinsurgency efforts, other actors are likely to take advantage of this weakness in pursuit of their interests. 
34
should not waste defense dollars to maintain nuclear weapons which would never be used. The greatest benefit of nuclear weapons is found in their capability to render their own form of warfare obsolete-as General Omar Bradley stated, "The way to win an atomic war is to make certain it never starts"; perhaps the same is true to some extent of the utility of maintaining an unquestionably superior conventional force. The necessity to continue to provide substantial 
"Globalization is a fact of life. But I believe we have underestimated its fragility." --Kofi Annan Some point to globalization as even more central than military asymmetries in deterring future conventional conflicts, at least among major powers. Global interdependence may well serve to dampen enthusiasm for some military adventures by escalating perceived costs, but it is not likely to lead to the end of conventional conflict and may even serve to generate or exacerbate conflict in some contexts. 
36
In Russia's recent invasion of Georgia, the financial ramifications to Russia were epicthe stock market value plunged over 50% within weeks of the August 2008 invasion as foreign direct investment hemorrhaged effusively. The stock market was, however, already in a precipitous decline, and shortly after Russia's crash, many other large markets crashed due to problems ostensibly originating within U.S. financial markets. The true impact to Russia is therefore hard to glean and it is impossible to determine at present how long lasting it might be.
Equally enigmatic is whether or not Russian Prime Minister Putin and President Medvedev understood and accepted the economic ramifications of their actions or if they simply miscalculated. Certainly not lost on them or on European leaders was their ability to leverage Russia's stranglehold over European energy markets to mitigate Europe's propensity to provide any significant support to Georgia. Russia may have also felt inclined to utilize its military muscle to help reestablish its prestige and international position in light of its reduced economic and political significance within Europe. Russia's gross economic muscle may be diminutive compared to the United States or the European Union, but its regional military might remains formidable. One negative lesson to be taken is that economically weak nations can enlarge their prestige through military capability and will. The cheaper, though no less disconcerting, version of this is manifest in the quest for nuclear weapons as famously articulated by India's Army Chief of Staff who, when asked by reporters what he had learned from observing the U.S. defeat of Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War, replied, "Don't fight the Americans without nuclear weapons." 
37
[Type text] 62 Globalization is not a new phenomenon; indeed some form and degree of globalization has been extant for millennia tracing back through the likes of Dollar Diplomacy, Commodore Perry's Black Ships, the East India Company, Rome's extensive commercial relations, and the Silk Road. 
38
39
and "the ebbing of enthusiasm [towards international trade] has been particularly dramatic in the United States, home to the world's largest economy." 
40
41
42
[  
23
24 Strassler,
352. 25
Dec 16, 2008. 26
Nichols,
120. 28
29 "Excerpts From Iraqi Document on Meeting with U.S. Envoy". Osama Bin Laden drew the same conclusion from America's rapid withdrawal from Somalia after the loss of 18 servicemen. 
30
31
"Hard pressed on my right. My center is yielding. Impossible to maneuver.
The first recommendation, to understand and accept the relevance of air power in COIN and conventional warfare, applies equally to Air Force, sister service, and national policy decision makers. Clausewitz warned of the prime necessity of not "mistaking [war] for, nor trying to turn it into, something that is alien to its nature." 1 As it is for war, so it is for the instruments of war, and any attempt to make the Air Force ultimately decisive in COIN operations is likely to violate both of these principles. There is no reason to believe that conventional air power capabilities are incapable of responding to current and projected COIN requirements. Indeed, the greater risk is that strike assets in particular will be overly utilized or emphasized in an effort to impose a military solution on a COIN problem. This is illustrated by Aside from destructive capabilities, the Air Force acts as an enabler and support arm in the constructive requirements of COIN. As one author noted regarding remaking U.S. COIN capabilities: "For air forces, and to an even lesser extent for navies, there is not much radical adjustment to be made; they will continue to play vital, but supporting roles." 3 Efforts to radically bend Air Force capabilities to constructive purposes are likely to be expensive, redundant, and ultimately ineffective.
Assertions that the Air Force is less relevant to current conflicts (presumably as opposed to past conflicts), even given that they are greatly exaggerated, carry some merit, just as the same assertions would apply to the Navy (separating the role of the Marines). Similar critiques could be made of each service branch during different conflicts during recent history. 
4
The inexorable danger of persisting arguments of irrelevance is that they presume that the nature of warfare has ineluctably changed and that all future wars will look like current wars.
Truly the world has changed since September 11, 2001, but to determine in such a short blink of history that warfare has made a generational shift rendering current capabilities irrelevant is an audacious leap of logic that would engender extraordinary risks if conventional war is not really dead but only sleeps. Perhaps a most optimistic case analogy is that major conventional war is indeed currently tenuously bound by the chains of American conventional superiority; but how much rust can the chains sustain before the beast breaks lose? Nowhere is this risk more keen than in an Air Force that would be persuaded or forced to abandon the unprecedented asymmetrical advantage it enjoys over the military forces of any other entity on the planet to pursue the myth that it can fight and win a type of warfare that is against its doctrinal, its theoretical, and its experiential applicability. To be sure, there are contributions the Air Force
[Type text]
[Type text] 68 can make-most of them it already excels at, but these are constrained by the nature of insurgent warfare. To put the Air Force on the Procrustean bed of counterinsurgent warfare requirements and start stretching and chopping would be the strategic equivalent of requiring all future Navy vessels to also have wheels so that they can be more relevant in places like Afghanistan.
Arguments that the equipment of the Air Force and other services are too Cold-War oriented are ill-conceived red herrings. The Cold War was characterized by the all too frequent employment of forces and support to wars small and large. As unfamiliar as it is, today's strategic landscape is certainly no more strewn with national security landmines than it was during the heady days of the Cold War. Al Qaeda and Islamic extremism are not the strategic equivalent of Soviet Communism with its ideology of world domination, its demonstrated ability to devour neighboring nation states, its overarching worldwide influence that dictated reactionary U.S. foreign policy for nearly half a century, and its conventional and nuclear arsenal that continually threatened the consumption of Europe and the destruction of civilization. Al Qaeda must be put in perspective; at present it appears analogous to a morphed global insurgency, perhaps more similar to, though certainly more capable than, late-19th century anarchist movements, relying on small groups or even individuals united by a common fundamental ideology. Anarchists also enjoyed many highly-publicized successes, notably the killing of highprofile figures in Russia and President McKinley's assassination in the U.S., and this movement marked the origin of the concept of 'propaganda of the deed' so integral to contemporary terrorist operations. The potential of Al Qaeda demands its purposeful confrontation, but, unlike the U.S.-USSR match-up, it is far from an existential threat and is not likely to circumscribe all other conventional state competition in the way that the Cold War did-the opposite may prove true as state actors see a window of opportunity in the current conflicts that have stretched military resources thin and made national will amorphous.
[Type text]
[Type text]
"By means of glasses, hotbeds, and hotwalls, very good grapes can be raised in Scotland, and very good wine too can be made of them at about thirty times the expense for which at least equally good can be brought from foreign countries. Would it be a reasonable law to prohibit the importation of all foreign wines, merely to encourage the making of claret and burgundy in Scotland?" --Adam Smith
The second recommendation is that the Air Force should neither focus on nor neglect COIN-specific requirements in future development. The Air Force does not enjoy a comparative advantage in developing constructive COIN capabilities vis-à-vis the Army or the Marine Corps.
Contemporary conventional air power weapon systems have thus far proven more than adequate to accomplish any reasonably expected military role required in defeating insurgents.
Insurgency itself teaches that military superiority will not overcome ideological attractivenessto think otherwise is to ignore deeply held American values incubated in our own ideological revolution. While it may be true that cheaper weapons can still be effective, they are unlikely to be as effective as their high-end counterparts; they are just as unlikely to be decisive even if procured in greater numbers; and they will require the U.S. to either maintain two militaries or assume away high-end conventional conflict. As new Air Force systems are programmed, they should continue to be predicated on the greatest threats developed by other nation-states. This will ensure that the Air Force continues to maintain adequate capabilities to operate across the threat spectrum. New systems should also, however, take into account other levels of conflict and integrate promising technologies when they do not detract from conventional capabilities. Given that all insurgencies have 'conventional moments', and vice versa, it is unlikely that there are air power related systems that are specific only to insurgencies, though greater weight may be placed on certain capabilities during an insurgency. One of the greatest capabilities for further exploitation at present appears to be in ISR capabilities, especially using UAVs, and reasonable investments in advancing both the number and capabilities of these platforms is prudent. UAVs represent persistence, economy, flexibility, and the ultimate in operator security. Though the Air Force has struggled in this area, UAVs are conventionally-driven requirements and will prove useful in future conventional conflicts as well as in non-kinetic uses from Humanitarian Relief Operations to Peacekeeping Operations. In the rare case where capabilities are not relevant across the spectrum, spectrum interoperability should be engineered where able. As an example, if sensors required for insurgency are not common to those desired for conventional operations, plug-andplay sensor platforms that can be tailored to requirements would provide the greatest flexibility.
The exception to the earlier admonition against maintaining two militaries is Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC). AFSOC requires some degree of low-tech COINspecific systems, not because they are more effective than high-tech platforms, but because AFSOC's mission encompasses training other nations in COIN operations. Other countries experiencing or preparing against indigenous insurgencies are unlikely to have the same requirements or resources as the U.S. and will purchase and operate equipment tailored to their specific needs and affordable within their respective budgets. AFSOC personnel must be conversant in how to maximally integrate these platforms in a COIN role in order to be effective, and they need a robust inventory of suitable systems and platforms to fulfill their role.
[Type text]
[Type text] 71 AFSOC has not been fully leveraged in the past and requires greater emphasis and resources. While the direct-action missions of Special Operations Forces (SOF) receive the most attention, the Foreign Internal Defense (FID) role is perhaps most critical in the COIN environment. In Chapter 1, the desirability of early recognition and intervention in COIN was presented, and FID is the catalyst in that process. Early and aggressive FID can be the difference between success and failure, as well as measured U.S. involvement versus large-scale, high-risk intervention. One recent RAND counterinsurgency studied determined that early intervention in a broad number of budding insurgencies, even at the significant level of an El Salvador model, would still be considerably more cost effective than a wait-and-see attitude which would lead to a focused, but dilatory, response. 9 RAND suggested expanding the only existing AFSOC FID squadron to a wing. 10 An alternative would be to create FID-centered squadrons within each geographic combatant command (excepting NORTHCOM) allowing them to gain a greater regional familiarity and greatly expanding the combatant commander's options to execute what are increasingly emphasized as Phase 0 (zero) operations. 11
"The Nation that makes a great distinction between its scholars and its warriors will have its thinking done by cowards and its fighting done by fools."
The third recommendation is to better educate officers across the spectrum of conflict, to include COIN operations. Insofar as this paper is concerned, this recommendation originates from the opinion that the genesis of the current confusion represents a conceptual lack of understanding of the limits of air power. This is not just true of Air Force officers, but they maintain the greatest burden for mastering and explaining the capabilities and limitations of their service. Air power has been shown to provide great flexibility when used in innovative ways, and all campaigns representing the entire spectrum of conflict require innovation at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels.
With certain exceptions (e.g., Special Ops personnel), full-spectrum education is most relevant to the officer corps and, among them, those who will serve as planners and senior leaders. Unlike ground forces, which operate in close proximity to insurgents and the population, due to the centralized nature of flying operations most operators have little need to appreciate the context of the conflict they are in to be effective at a tactical level. Fighter pilots [Type text] 73 complete grand triumvirate above, though some Field Grade Officers have sampled bits and pieces in Professional Military Education. Too many are inclined to 'cram' for warfare by skipping these essential building blocks and proceeding directly to contemporary doctrine and templates to fill out their military portfolios. The same is true for military history-would-be strategists are too quick to focus on the last campaign rather than invest the time and effort to gain the knowledge requisite to put it in a historical perspective. This leads to the mistaken conception that every campaign represents revolutionary changes and therefore nullifies all past military knowledge. Given that it is impossible to predetermine who will become future planners, much less strategic decision makers, the number of officers who are well versed in warfighting theory and history should be expanded at every opportunity.
Prescriptions for greater education need not be-and should not be-unwieldy or expensive. For example, the Air Force Academy should be more war centric in its outlook.
Traditionally it has been technically biased with such a myriad of math, engineering, and science core requirements that all graduates, including those with liberal arts degrees, receive Bachelor of Science as opposed to Bachelor of Arts degrees. Some of these courses could be eliminated, at least for non-science majors, and replaced with required courses taken from the current Master's-level courses taught at war colleges. 
15
ROTC could encourage the same, though it has less flexibility given its dependence on the respective civilian university it is attached to. receive no professional advantage from pursuing a particular degree type, should also be subject to increased incentives for degrees which focus on warfighting and area studies.
Language and cultural fluency can be equally vital to conventional operations as the likelihood of unilateral operations in today's combat environment is increasingly rare. Cultural interoperability is even more paramount than systems interoperability in coalition operations.
U.S. officers, especially at the senior level, generally expect other countries to adapt themselves to English and understand U.S. military culture, and coalition partners generally oblige very well. Unfortunately, the Air Force abrogates the advantages of being able to understand peer perspectives in their proper cultural context and is often surprised when counterparts react in ways that seem counterintuitive from an American perspective. The same tendency sometimes obtains when officers develop a one-dimensional cultural understanding through only militaryto-military contact, as is often the case for exchange programs. Military culture in any country, including the U.S., is likely to be eccentric to overall culture and true area specialists must be able to appreciate the differences.
Similar methods to the means for emphasizing expertise in military arts could be reasonably applied to bolster cultural expertise and could be expanded to include accessions, promotion potential, and increasing available exchange positions. Significant and lasting 
"Wars may be fought with weapons, but they are won by men.
The final and most important recommendation is for military and civilian national security policymakers to return to beginning with strategy and operational art to address military quandaries. This recommendation is neither meant to be cynical nor condescending. It reflects the sense of an overreliance on technology and resource abundance to solve problems that almost always can be solved more effectively and efficiently through more appropriate and subtle means. As a British official serving in South-East Asia prophetically observed during the early days of U.S. operations in Vietnam, "I fear that in this as in other respects the Americans are too
[Type text]
[Type text] 76 apt to think that quantity is a substitute for quality and method." 22 At first blush this may seem to contradict previous arguments concerning the efficacy of high-tech weapons in COIN, but the contradiction is only illusory. U.S. technology is an asymmetric advantage that should be readily wielded in appropriate ways, but technology cannot continue to be viewed as the panacea for strategic difficulties, and its asymmetric value will quickly be drained by its overextension.
In a sense, technology has too often become the morphine that covers the strategic pain designed to alert the body military that things are wrong and getting worse. A contemporary example is the reaction to the use of IEDs in Iraq. The military reaction was to invest billions of dollars to wring technological solutions-jammers, detectors, robots, UAVs, up-armored HMMWVS followed by MRAPs, using airlift to reduce convoy requirements-with the laudable intent to counter the leading cause of U.S. casualties. 
23
24
In order to reinvigorate the ability to operate on a high strategic and operational plane, there must be a return to the notion, both preached and practiced, of warfare as an art. The first step of this is embodied in recommendation three above-preparing the officer corps early to deal with issues currently above their pay grade. A further leap forward requires decision makers at all levels to avoid the pitfalls of simple and false analogies in order to see war as both a continuum and for the unique event that it represents each time it occurs. Analogies are often spoken but more often implied, sometimes unconsciously-comparisons between Vietnam and Iraq or Afghanistan are often made and sometimes implied by the use of words such as 'slog'
and 'quagmire'. More subtle, and arguably more dangerous, are the implications that a particular successful strategy in one conflict can be readily replicated in another-theories of oil spots and surges, and even the notion of 'winning hearts and minds' are all common clichés that should be considered illustrative but not definitive. As Greenhill and Staniland caution, "privileging
[Type text]
[Type text] 77 particular ideal-type strategies runs the risk of creating false dichotomies between approaches, whereas successful COIN requires mixtures of these approaches, not an embrace of any single one." 25 Illuminating theories such as Boyd's OODA (Observe, Orient, Decide, Act) Loop and Warden's Five Rings are too often 'cut and pasted' into the latest conflict in an attempt to adhere to the prevailing requirements of 'military science'; they ought to be considered as useful elements of military art to be plagiarized in whole or in part for any conflict to which they are suited, but never, ever to be seen as universally applicable.
In the uniformed military, nowhere is the potential for mental shortcuts more tempting than in the (mis)use of doctrine. Military doctrine is best viewed as a framework from which to begin and not as a straightjacket for planning. Not only can rigid application of doctrine have the ill effect of rendering U.S. actions easily predictable, but far more serious consequences can present themselves when a round doctrinal peg is forced into a square conflict contextsomething is likely to break with dramatic effect. Ironically, one of the first indicators that doctrine may be debilitating is when military practitioners defend poor performance on a lack of, or outdated, doctrine-this has occurred frequently after September 11th. The leading example is the publication of Army FM 3-24, which was widely anticipated and heralded to the extent of being published by the University of Chicago Press and reviewed by the New York Times. The greatest mitigating advantage of FM 3-24 is perhaps that it was specifically written with the current counterinsurgencies in mind, so its applicability is much more contextually relevant to contemporary conflicts than most doctrine documents.
The potential constructive uses of doctrine are undeniable when it is viewed as a historical compendium affording insight into valuable lessons drawn from the past. 
26
My belief is that doctrine mainly serves to constrain the imaginative use of the flexibility of air power. In every situation there are different circumstances and parameters. On one hand you have the aircraft that you bought and the air power characteristics that it possesses. On the other, you have a military situation in which you wish to use the aircraft which reflects both geography and politics. How you use a weapon system should be a result of analysis of the situation that prevails at the time, and should not be dependent on a general doctrine that was developed without relation to specific situations. 
28
29
"Never, never, never believe any war will be smooth and easy, or that anyone who embarks on the strange voyage can measure the tides and hurricanes he will encounter.
The statesman who yields to war fever must realize that once the signal is given, he is no longer the master of policy but the slave of unforeseeable and uncontrollable events."
In the final analysis, neither insurgency nor conventional war is likely to pose an existential threat to the United States for the foreseeable future-both will continue to be wars of choice based on national priorities and interests. The type of warfare the U.S. conducts will therefore be based on the perceptions of decision makers regarding what threats should be confronted and how. Overly preparing for either level of warfare at the expense of the other will
[Type text]
[Type text] 79 at least partially become a self-fulfilling prophecy much as the neglect of COIN after the conclusion of Vietnam led to conventional conflicts with only limited and small scale involvement in irregular wars-likely a fortuitous occurrence given that the U.S. is currently relearning that extended involvement presumes considerable expense and risks. The most common argument for a major restructuring around COIN capabilities is that the nexus of failed and failing states, terrorist organizations that take refuge in anarchy, and the eventuality that terrorists will acquire and utilize weapons of mass destruction no longer permits the U.S. to ignore intrastate conflict. This paper has attempted to show, however, that success in such operations rests on many factors beyond the control of the U.S. military and often well beyond the control of the U.S. The concept of success itself is also likely to be more ambiguous and require extraordinary effort and resources for a considerable period of time, as Iraq and Afghanistan forewarn. Such endeavors will greatly reduce military readiness and leave other U.S. interests vulnerable for extended periods of time.
Though increasing the competence and capability of U.S. COIN capabilities is long overdue, nation building and massive scale military incursions generally can and should be avoided. Given that conventional-type military employment will likely continue to be a U.S.
strength and an enemy vulnerability while irregular warfare will, by its nature, continue to play to the strengths of terrorists and other enemies, the U.S. should asymmetrically employ conventional capabilities when possible and appropriate. Proper and early application of COIN principles will also lead to a reduction in military manpower and time required to accomplish reasonable objectives, which should increasingly rely on other non-military instruments of national power.
An examination of the nature and future threat of insurgent warfare juxtaposed against the capabilities of military air power suggests that the Air Force should continue to pursue conventional primacy against the most critical conceived threats. Air Force weapons designed for high-end conventional conflicts have performed well when used innovatively in support of COIN operations. Efforts to meld COIN requirements into conventional systems during and after development are laudable so long as they do not permanently mitigate conventional capabilities or lead decision makers to falsely conclude that new technologies will lead to military victory in COIN operations. As a matter of overall defense policy, the destructive capabilities of conventional systems are more than adequate for contemporary COIN efforts; AFSOC FID capabilities should be expanded, and the Air Force must be more aggressive and capable in its ability to surge FID for large-scale counterinsurgency operations such as Iraq and
Afghanistan. Innovative and inexpensive solutions to make Air Force officers more competent in warfare across the spectrum, including Area Studies competencies, must be pursued more vigorously. This recommendation is the fulcrum for the innovative, effective, and efficient use of air power and existing and future specific weapons in COIN (and all other operations as well), and for ensuring that technology and resources are not substituted for proper strategy or the adroit application of operational art in future conflicts.
The future of counterinsurgency probably lies somewhere between the post-Vietnam mantra of 'never again' and the Iraq-scale nation building experiment. It may have to be confronted, but it should generally not be sought. Ultimate victory in anything but a purely domestic counterinsurgency is not completely within the realm of U.S. power, much less U.S. military power. COIN difficulties will always be more proportional to the extent to which causes are popular and regimes are not than to U.S. support of either side. Great discretion must be exercised in deciding when to commit military support to COIN operations, and more thorough planning must attend all operations where insurgent warfare could be empowered. 
30
[Type text]
[Type text] 81 1 Clausewitz, 88. 
2 Nagl,
138. 3 Terriff et al,
8. 4
5
6 "Precautionary counterinsurgency is based on the idea that it is best to stop the growth of insurgencies early, before they develop into powerful armed movements capable of posing severe threats to local governments. Precautionary counterinsurgency interventions will thus tend to be relatively small overall and will tend to involve very limited military components." Alan J.  
11
12 From Owen and Mueller: "A C-17 crew delivering a load into an austere airfield in a serious threat environment will employ essentially the same tactics whether they are transporting a tank in a conventional interstate conflict or armored patrol vehicles in a counterinsurgency. Likewise, the tactical issues and solutions involved in airdropping supplies to a covert team observing an Iranian nuclear site or watching a road junction in Afghanistan will be similar, at least for airlifters, if not for their 'customers.'" 
Owen and Mueller,
27. 13
14
15
16
17
34. 19
Nagl,
197. 20 Nagl,
202. 21 Greenhill and Staniland,
408. 22
Nagl,
130. 23
24
25
[Type text]
[Type text] 82 
26
27 Nagl,
204. 28
Corum and Johnson,
218. 29
30
Through impatience or miscalculation many insurgent groups have leaped to this stage prior to having obtained true conventional superiority over government forces, which are generally most adept at this level of combat. Examples of this are the premature and near crippling 'final offensive' by the FMLN in El Salvador in 1981, Viet Cong participation in the 1968 Tet Offensive (though
61 Mack, 184.  62  
61 Mack, 184.  62  
3  
3  
Insurgents are not wholly helpless in striking back against the overwhelming advantage of U.S. air power; they are singularly adept at wielding what T.E. Lawrence called, "the greatest weapon in the armory of the modern commander," the power of the press. The general criticality [Type text] [Type text]
Though with the considerable caveats established above, this same ability can be used to great effect in offensive COIN operations. As opposed to ground forces, air power can quickly destroy targets located anywhere throughout the area of operations and with little threat of ambush or incurring casualties. Modern precision [Type text] [Type text] 35 weapons are extremely When aerial bombing is planned, mostly against suspected Taliban targets, U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan have had a very good record of minimizing harm to civilians. In 2008, no planned airstrikes appear to have resulted in civilian casualties. In 2007, it appears that only one planned airstrike resulted in civilian casualties. In 2006, at least one attack resulting in civilian deaths may have been a planned attack. 18
6  
6  
Corum and Wray R. Johnson, Air Power in Small Wars: Fighting Insurgents and Terrorists (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2003): 205.
17  
17  
42
41
40
39
military to sustain over the long term.
military to sustain over the long term.
"
"
8  
8  
relevant for both conventional and counterinsurgent operations as do many of his erudite predecessors such as Sun Tzu and Thucydides. Few Air Force officers today have ever read the
relevant for both conventional and counterinsurgent operations as do many of his erudite predecessors such as Sun Tzu and Thucydides. Few Air Force officers today have ever read the
two-star recently put it: Those who are promoted are the 'can-do, go to people….Their skill is making the trains run on time. So, why are we surprised that, when the enemy becomes adaptive, we get caught off guard? If you raise a group of plumbers, you shouldn't be upset if they can't do theoretical physics."
two-star recently put it: Those who are promoted are the 'can-do, go to people….Their skill is making the trains run on time. So, why are we surprised that, when the enemy becomes adaptive, we get caught off guard? If you raise a group of plumbers, you shouldn't be upset if they can't do theoretical physics."
10 Ibid,[136][137][138][139][140][141][142][143] 
Submitted to Air Force Fellows, 
CADRE/AR Colonel (ret) Robyn Read
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or