# ID: 265a805e8e2843d6a760243e2368896d
# Title: F 785 Dtic Pv
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1991.0
# Fulltext:
C' 'vo's"~ tn5!%ft'0M,' $fcIIl'~t I C.. %ource Qother-' r if",t~neao vu .1.~ .1.'~~ h C" t* %-ncf (oh'mets tewo'1. s t oe pmt~nte (11 A-'V W,t ~ 3.-ct of th's navigator in reconnaissance aircraft, I understand the rationale for maintaining secrecy for more current aspects of this field. As a result, this dissertation has passed appropriate security clearance procedures. On the other hand, I believe that the efforts of the many unsung individuals must be recognized in Cold War history. I understand the values and sacrifice of the Air Force personnel involved in aerial reconnaissance. I hope my exploration, although limited in time and focus, provides an understanding of the origins of strategic aerial reconnaissance.
On 
September 1, 1983
The vehement charges and counter charges surrounding KAL 007 evoked similar periods of international tension involving United States reconnaissance aircraft during the early years of the Cold War. For example, the effect of KAL 007 upon Soviet-American relations reminded many of Francis Gary Powers' ill-fated U-2 mission of 
May 1, 1960.
1945-1953.2
A study of strategic aerial reconnaissance illuminates the link between intelligence and strategy and between military capability and doctrine. Finally, a focus upon strategic aerial reconnaissance raises questions of ends and means: did reconnaissance aircraft merely serve as a tool of war planners or did strategic reconnaissance actually shape military strategy?
Traditionally, aerial reconnaissance played a secondary role in the minds of military planners and the public. Although the airplane's ability to provide commanders "eyes in the air" led to the first military use of the new technology, the exploits of pursuit aircraft and fighter aces seized public attention. In addition, despite unique and vital information provided by reconnaissance aircraft during World War I, interwar air power theorists concentrated upon the use of aircraft in combat.
Following World War I, the long-range bomber became the primary strategic weapon and the focus of air power thinking. Drawing upon the wellpublicized theories of Giulio Douhet, Hugh Trenchard, and "Billy" Mitchell, air power advocates within the United States advanced theories of strategic air warfare as the justification for Air Force independence. According to the theorists, air attacks upon enemy armed forces in the immediate vicinity of the battlefield constituted "tactical" air power; "strategic" air power attacked the industrial and economic sources of the enemy's armed strength. In bureaucratic battles for limited defense budgets, air leaders argued that strategic bombing represented a new way of war. Long-range strategic bombardment would destroy the "vital centers" of an enemy's political and economic structure. The combined effect of high explosives, incendiary bombs, and poison gas would destroy the enemy's capability to wage war and break his will to fight. Furthermore, the airplane's ability to bypass armies and navies rendered traditional services obsolete. Since future wars would commence with the clash of air armies, the Air Force represented the nation's new first line of defense."
3 For further explanation of the development of American theories of strategic air warfare, see Robert F. Futrell, Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine: Basic Thinking in the United States Air Force, rev. ed. (Maxwell Air Farce Base, Al.: Air University Press, 1989), 
David Maclsaac, Strategic" Bombing in Worla War Two:
Power (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1964
, 1975)
Press, 1948-1958), vol. 1: Plans and
Early Operations, pp. 17-71.
By the late 1930s, the US Army Air Corps further refined strategic bombing theories to produce a doctrine based upon high-altitude, daylight, precision bombardment. The concept called for the destruction of the enemy's industrial base by the pinpoint bombing of a few carefully selected industrial choke points. Stressing economy of force and the destruction of the enemy's cpacity to fight, precision bombardment doctrine downplayed attacks upon civilians and the enemy's will to wage war. By 1937, the US Army Air Corps assembled the means to implement its version of strategic air war: the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress and the Norden Mark XV bomb site.'
To air power advocates, World War II represented the test of strategic air warfare. Desni .sy theories, the Battle of Britain proved the effectiveness of air defer, e° es.'ecial', with the introduction of radar. Similarly, Germany's determine(. rense of the "Fatherland" showed that although the bomber may always get through, the cost could be prohibitive. The relative effectiveness of air defenses threatened strategic bombing theory. To protect its heavy bombers, Britain's Royal Air Force (RAF) abandoned daylight bombing in favor of night attack. Because of problems associated with navigation and target identification, the RAF gradually adopted a doctrine based upon "area bombing" of German cities aimed at destroying the enemy's morale, as well as physical capacity to wage war."
The US Army Air Forces disagreed with the RAF concept. The USAAF pursued precision daylight bombing doctrine despite heavy losses, Fortunately, the introduction of the North American P-51 Mustang long-range escort fighter  9 On the other hand, the Allies modified aircraft to collect ELINT. Known as "Ferrets," these electronic reconnaissance aircraft carried special equipment to detect and analyze enemy radar signals.
Radar works on the principle of echoes. Just as it takes a certain amount of time for a voice echo to return after shouting, it takes a short amount of time for radio waves to return after they bounce off an object. A radar (originally an acronym for RAdio Detection And Banging) measures this time and determines the distance of the object. In other words, a radar station is a two-way radio system that includes a transmitter and a receiver. The transmitter sends out short pulses of high-frequency radio waves and the receiver detects the echoes of the waves after they have bounced off a target. The time between transmitted pulse and received echo is converted into the distance of the object. Since the echo returns with far less energy than originally transmitted, an amplifier works with the receiver and the results are projected upon an oscilloscope. Because the whole process occurs in fractions of a second, the oscilloscope, or radar screen, presents a continuous picture.
The primary purpose of electronic reconnaissance, or Ferret, aircraft centers on locating enemy radar stations and analyzing the performance characteristics of the set. The Ferret uses radar intercept receivers to detect enemy radar transmissions and a pulse analyzer to display the radio waves Perhaps the best surveys of electronic warfare may be found in Alfred Price, Instruments of Darkness 
(Los Altos, Ca.: Peninsula Publishing, 1987)
Inadequate manpower, equipment, and training rendered SAC "a hollow threat." Moreover, in "The Origins of Overkill," "American Atomic Strategy and the Hydrogen Bomb Decision," and other articles, David Alan Rosenberg reveals the limited size and capabilities of America's nuclear stockpile.
,0 For further explanation of radar performance characteristics and Ferret operations see Appendix A. Navy Department, Office of the Chief of Navai Operations, Radar Bulletin No. 12 (RAD TWELVE): Airborne Radar Countermeasres Operator's Manual, 8 April 10,46, File 32c: CPT L. Heron, Association of Old Crows Archive, The Association of Old Crows, Alexandria, Virginia (hereafter abbreviated AOC).
"For a survey of the issuos and significant theories see Lawrence Freedman The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy, 2nd ed. 
(New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989)
the Cold War 1945
-1950
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980)
Nevertheless, even if SAC possessed adequate planes, well-trained crews, and sufficient atomic bombs, could the United States wage strategic air war based on precision bombardment doctrine? Did US war planners know the locations of enemy targets and the capabilities of Soviet defenses?
A closer look at American war plans reveals a lack of intelligence data that jeopardized US strategic air war doctrine. Without target information, air planners could not determine the enemy's vital centers. In addition, without knowiedge of Soviet radars, jet fighters, and anti-aircraft artillery, unescorted bombers faced perils potentially worse than those faced by the Eighth Air Force against Germany. Given the technological limitations of strategic bombers of the immediate postwar period 
(1945)
(1946)
(1947)
(1948)
(1949)
(1950)
(1951)
(1952)
(1953)
American experiences in the Korean War revealed the limits of American reconnaissance capabilities and demonstrated the impact of intelligence flaws upon war planning. Viewed as a prelude to a general war, the invasion of Korea spurred the development of Air Force strategic aerial reconnaissance.
The war strained the technological and manpower resources of the Air Force and revealed significant flaws in aircraft performance, organizational structure, and analytical ability. During the conflict, Air Force electronic reconna -ance capabilities increased exponentially with the creation of a world-wide buategic Soviet cities in an effort to destroy the enemy's capacity and will to wage war.
Therefore, aerial reconnaissance was more than a tool of the war planners, the limits of strategic aerial reconnaissance shaped strategic doctrine.
Now in those days the tribe of Dan was in search of a territory to live in, because up till then no territory had fallen to them among the tribes of Israel. From their clan the Danites sent five brave men from Zorah and Eshtaol to reconnoitre the country and explore it. Judges 18:2
The quest for military information predates recorded history. From before Biblical times, men conducted reconnaissance whether as hunters, explorers, or as warriors. The concept of reconnaissance, "an exploratory or preliminary survey, inspection, or examination to gain information," offered advantages in gaining surprise or to exploit terrain that seem obvious today.' In fact, reconnaissance appears so basic that studies of military history often ignore the subject. Furthermore, although poor reconnaissance may lead to military disaster, successful reconnaissance seldom assures victory. Most often, good reconnaissance provides the commander an edge that may combine with other important advantages in numbers, equipment, training, or doctrine to defeat an enemy. 2 Yet, good reconnaissance may lead to strategic or tactical surprise. In Western warfare, some military thinkers rank surprise next to numerical 12 superiority as an essential condition of battlefield success. According to the nineteenth-century Prussian theorist Carl von Clausewitz, the desire to achieve surprise is basic to all operations, for without it superiority at the decisive point is hardly conceivable.' Moreover, Eastern traditions of war perhaps emphasize surprise to an even greater extent as shown by the writings of Sun Tzu:
Attack where he is unprepared; Sally out when he does not expect you... Appear at places to which he must hasten; move swiftly where he does not expect you."
Therefore, although relatively unstudied as a separate entity, reconnaissance serves as a means of gaining surprise and for guarding against enemy surprise.
The advent of manned flight offered revolutionary potential for reconnaissance. Two days after Joseph-Michel and Etienne-Jacques de Montgolfier introduced the first practical hot air balloon in September 1783, Andre-Giroud de Villette ascended in the craft. He recognized the enormous military potential of aviation:
From that moment I was convinced that t.'s apparatus, at little cost, could be made very useful to an army for discovering the position of its enemy, its movements, its advances, its dispositions, and that this information could be conveyed by a system of signals, to the troops looking after the apparatus.' Despite de Villette's foresight, the balloon did not immediately transform warfare. By the time of the American Civil War, although both Union and Confederate armies employed a small number of observation balloons, the invention achieved mixed results. The Federal army planned to use the invention as early as the First Battle of Bull Run; however, strong winds   
(New York: Macmillan, 1970), pp. 22-24: Mead.
'Lee 
Kennett. The First Air War, 1914
-1918
(New York: Free Press, 1991), p. 18.
During the epic struggle along the Western Front, aerial reconnaissance provided the most important use of the new weapon. For example, the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) tracked the advance of German armies before the crucial Battle of the Marne in August 1914 and discovered a critical gap in the enemy's line. As a result, the Allies successfully counterattacked and saved Paris. In his dispatch following the battle, General Sir John French lauded the exploits of the airmen: "Their skill, energy and perseverance have been beyond all praise.
They have furnished me with the most complete and accurate information, which has been of incalculable value in the conduct of operations."'" The airplane also proved its value by spotting the fire of artillery. As early as September 1914, British airborne artillery observers sent their reports by wireless." When the German and Allied armies ground to a halt in the morass of trench warfare, the airplane offered the best m3ans to gather tactical intelligence. With cavalry unable to penetrate the trench barrier and enemy troops living underground in vast trench and bunker complexes, aircraft scanned the roads and railways behind the trenches for evidence of enemy build-ups or troop withdrawals. The introduction of air photography in January 1915 allowed photographic interpreters to analyze long-term trends and subtle changes in enemy dispositions. By the Battle of Neuve Chapelle in March 1915, the Allies had photographed the German trench system and transformed the information into detailed maps. Thus, the airplane proved useful for all William E. Burrows, Deep Black: Space Espionage and National Security (New York: Random House, 1986), p. 32; Infield, Unarmed and Unafraid, pp. 31-32.
'°Mead, E) e in the Air, pp. 
[56]
[57]
Although the Battle of the Somme represented trench warfare's futility and slaughter, the campaign served as a milestone in aerial combat. In this ' 2 Strategic reconnaissance refers to gathering information required for the formation of policy and military plans at national and international levels, whereas tactical air reconnaissance seeks information concerning terrain, weather, the disposition and movement of enemy forces, and artillery adjustment. In other words, strategic and tactical intelligence differ primarily in levels of application, scope, and   The success of military aviation during the First World War launched a bitter debate over its future. In the spring of 1919, two manuals summarized the official US Army view, " ... in the future, as in the past, the final decision in war must be made by men on the ground, willing to come hand-to-hand with the enemy. When the Infantry loses the Army loses. It is therefore the role of the Air Service, as well as that of other arms, to aid the chief combatant the Infantry." In addition, the traditional view enhanced the position of aerial reconnaissance, "the greatest value of the Air Service to date has been in gathering information of the enemy and of our own troops. ' Pursuit, or fighter, aircraft served " Vertical photographs referred to those taken from directly overhead, while oblique photos used a camera inclined to the earth's surface to produce a panoramic view. 
Infield,
Unarmed and Unafraid,
Kennett,
First Air War,
p. 37
(1925)
Theorists believed the best defense against an enemy air force was to destroy it on the ground.' Consequently, because air power represented a unique, new weapon, airmen sought organizational independence from ground and naval forces.
In their polemical writings, Douhet, Mitchell, and others failed to grasp a fundamental flaw of strategic bombardment theory. During the interwar years, air theorists assumed complete knowledge of the enemy's vital centers.
Mitchell and Douhet understood the need for reconnaissance, but air power  
Economic and Military (Port Washington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, 1971)
(Washington, D.C.: Office of Air Force History, 1983)
For example, Giulio Douhet proposed an ideal reconnaissance plane that featured superior speed and long range even at the cost of defensive armor and armarr"int.2 Although he showed prescience regarding reconnaissance aircraft, Douhet failed to recognize the need for maps, cameras, specialized equipment for photo analysis, and sophisticated organizations to process and assess information. Along similar lines, although the US Army Air Corps Tactical School refined the concept of precision, daylight bombardment, it failed to think through the problems associated with strategic aerial reconnaissance.
Instead, the Air Corps thinkers stressed bomber development and theoretical analyses of industrial choke points. They failed to study sufficiently the need for pre-strike surveillance and post-strike damage assessment. Furthermore, to many airmen, reconnaissance symbolized the shackles of ground force control.
As a result, air reconnaissance occupied a position of secondary importance within the Air Corps. Interwar reconnaissance training still stressed artillery spotting and First World War observation techniques. By the eve of World War II, aerial reconnaissance remained little advanced from the techniques and concepts of World War 1.24   Although the conceptual thinking behind strategic aerial reconnaissance lagged, technological improvements occurred during the interwar years. Head of Army Air Corps photographic research, Captain George W. Goddard introduced new cameras for photo reconnaissance and mapping, plans for specialized reconnaissance aircraft, portable film processing laboratories, and Giulio Douhet, The Command of the 
Air, trans. Dino Ferrari (New York: Coward-McCann, 1942)
615-616.
World War II provided a test for air power theory as well as technology.
Early British efforts at "strategic" bombing revealed that the bomber "would not always get through." From the initial Royal Air Force sorties against Wilhelmshaven in 1939 to the fall of France in 1940, British bomber raids suffered unacceptable losses to German fighter defenses. Well-armed, highperformance fighters refuted the assumption of bomber omnipotence. In response, the RAF developed a doctrine of night area bombardment that "Assigned to aerial photographic work in 1918 as a second lieutenant, Goddard worked on aerial photography during most of the interwar period. He advanced in rank from lieutenant to major in various positions. Before World War II, he served as head of the The European air war also demonstrated the difficulty of conducting aerial reconnaissance. At the beginning of the war, confidence in existing reconnaissance procedures vanished when photo reconnaissance Blenheims were shot down at alarming rates and frozen cameras, fogged lenses, and cracked film ruined the valiant efforts of surviving pilots.2 The dismal results forced the British Air Ministry to revamp reconnaissance methods.
Despite initial failures, the RAF pioneered the concepts, equipment, and tactics of modern strategic photographic intelligence. Beginning as a civilian before the war, Frederick Sidney Cotton developed a new approach to aerial reconnaissance:
The best method appears to be the use of a single small machine, relying on its speed, climb, and ceiling to avoid destruction. A machine such as a single-seat fighter could fly high enough to be well above Ack-Ack fire and could rely upon sheer speed and height to get away from the enemy fighters. It would have no use for armament or radio and these could be removed to provide room for extra fuel, in order to get ",he necessary range. It would be a very small machine painted so as to reduce its visibility against the sky.
During the first two years of the war, Cotton's exploits with a stripped-down, polished Supermarine Spitfire assumed legendary proportions as he gained information unobtainable by other sources. Moreover, technicians at the RAF's Photographic Reconnaissance Unit developed high-altitude cameras with a 36inch focal length that produced high-quality photographs with clear resolution.
Equally important, the British Air Ministry recruited talented, highly motivated individuals from a broad range of civilian occupations to serve as photographic interpreters. By refining the equipment, techniques, and methodology of this seemingly mundane field, the RAF furthered the processing and analysis of data gathered by reconnaissance crews.-' Finally, throughout the war, the British understood the importance of centralization and coordination of intelligence data. Efforts to streamline the processing of intelligence information furthered the proper analysis of data and the use of information by field commanders.'
The entry of the USAAF into the European air war proved the inadequacy of pre-war reconnaissance concepts and training After a poor showing in the initial phase of North African operations, the AAF reorganized observation units along the lines of RAF tactical reconnaissance.3 Like their British counterparts, " In her book, Evidence in Camera, Constance Babbington Smith showed that a sexist assumption paid great dividends for British intelligence. Reasoning that photo interoretation required long hours of effort, tremendous patience, and attention to detail --the same attributes of sewing, the Royal Air Force recruited women to serve as photo interpreters. Judging from Babbington Smith's firsthand tales of inspired deduction that resulted from painstaking effort, successful results justified the RAF decision. Ibid, p. 66.
2 In British Intelligence in the Second World War, F. H. Hinsley omphasizes the organizational efforts to create a comprehensive, rational method lor the entire inteligence process. By analyzing the spectrum of activities associated with the intelligence cycle, the British enhanced the quality and timeliness of intelligence information. In other words, they not only improved intelligence collection, but the processing of daia, analysis, coordination, and dissemination of information. F. H. Hinsley Brifish Intelligence in the Second World 
War, 4 volumes (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1929
-1988)
Ovry, The Air War 1939
-1945
. paperback ed. (New York Stein and Day. 1985)
98-108 and Williamson Murray, Luftlaffe (Baltimore: Nautical & Aviation Publisl~ng Co., 1985)
Once there was an operational requirement for it [the APR-2 Carpet jamming transmitter] the Army Air Force wanted 15,000 and I was sent to Delco at Kokomo, Indiana, to discuss the contract to mass produce it. Bert Schwarz, their brilliant chief production engineer, showed me around the plant .... As we walked around Bert looked rather unhappy and he kept scratching his head. In the end I said to him 'What's wrong, can't you build the 15,000 for us?' He paused for a while, then answered 'Well, 15,000 a week, that's an awfully tough rate. . . 
' I looked
Furthermore, the vast distances, long supply lines, and relatively primitive conditions complicated operations and demanded a knack for ingenuity and improvisation. 3 0 °Originally the Carpet noise jammer was intended solely for use in amphibious assaults.
Eaton, "The Ferrets," pp 3-5 Ibid , p. 2.
In the spring of 1944, the USAAF s XXI Bomber Command lacked sufficient photographic reconnaissance to target its primary oolective -the Japanese aircraft industry On November 1, ,944, an F-13A (a photo reconnaissance version of the B-29) provided enough photographs for the first series of missions. Haywood S. Hansell, The Strategic Air War Against Germany and Japan 
(Washington, D. C.: Office of Air Force History, 1986), p. 169 & p. 179.
The air war against Japan introduced the USAAF to night area bombing, but did not refute its belief in precision bombing. Desires to end the war quickly, avoid a costly ground invasion, and demonstrate air power's decisiveness influenced the planning. 4 The initial bombing campaign called for the destruction of the Japanese aircraft industry through precision bombardment.
From November 1944 -March 1945, Boeing B-29 Superfortresses conducted daylight, high-altitude, precision strikes using tactics similar to the European air war. Unfoitunately, ch.,onic bad weathet, extreme long range, maintenance problems, and inexperienced crews combined for disappointing results.
impatient with low bomb tonnages and the lacK of measurable success, the USAAF swithced to low-level, night area attacks.' Although the fire bombing of Japanese cities resulted in impressive, horrific destruction, AAF leaders viewed the Pacific strategic bombing camraign as a unique expedient. Air planners recognized the unusual vulnerability of Japanecities to incendiary attack and many air leaders considared Japan a defeated nation in conventional terms.
Night area bombing represented a move to break Japan's will to resist and to force surrender. Because of these unique conditions, the Pacific experience did not alter most airmen's conviction for the concept of precision bombing? °Although the need for ELINT remained significant, air leaders viewed strategic electronic reconnaissance operations in the Pacific as a secondary concern. The ad hoc, freewheeling nature of ELINT operations staged out of China reinforced this view. Apparently, Brigadier General Claire L. Chennault initiated the demand for ELINT within the USAAF when Japanese Zeros began To start. I planned to go where there was the biggest chance of finding a radar, to prove there were radars in the area. My pilot and I figured that the Hong Kong -Canton area was probably the most likely place...
We planned the first mission to go down to the Linchow Peninsular (sic), then to Canton and then home; a run of about 8 hours over enemy territory in darkness. We got over the Kowloon docks about 10 pm local time --not a peep from our receivers. We were very disappointed. Lt Uthe (the pilot) felt that the Japs in Canton were fighting in a very civilized manner, and had probably gone to bed. So, he made a couple of low level passes over the Kowloon docks. Sure enough, by the time he leveled off from the second pass, we began to pick up radar signals loud and clear. We flew a couple of plotting runs and returned to Kunrming. "
Eventually, the Ferret 8-24 flew missions to Formosa, the Pescadores, Hainan Island, and over most of Japanese-occupied China. By the time, the B-29 campaign began in earnest, Wright Field modified B-29s to serve in an RCM role. Each squadron received a B-29 equipped with receivers, a pulse analyzer, and preset jammers. Unfortunately, since the B-29 lacked a crew seat, the RCM operator sat on the airplane's toilet (a move considered painfully symbolic by later Air Force electronic warfare officers). 9
Although operational anaiysis proved the value of electronic reconnaissance and radar countermeasures, electronic warfare fought an uphill Letter, Perry to Price, AOC 31, p. 8. Ibid., pp. 6-7. Since bomber squadrons possessed few personnel trainec for electronic warfare, a few specialists set the frequencies for aircraft jamming equipment before flight. lbid.,p. 5 & p. 7. battle for acceptance. Unlike photographic intelligence, commanders and crews could not "see" the results of electronic countermeasures." Electronic warfare represented a form of mysterious, technical wizardry understood by few.
Most Pilots objected to the weight and drag induced by electronic gear; they "didn't want any of that crap" on their airplanes.' About the time ELINT data enabled scientists and engineers to design and build new jamming devices, other developments made electronic warfare less necessary. For example, the introduction of large numbers of long-range North American P-51 Mustang fighters gained Allied air superiority in February 1944. In addition, the Allied land offensive following the Normandy invasion reduced Luftwaffe radar sites and advanced fighter bases. Instead of jamming enemy early warning and GCI frequencies, Allied fighters wanted the Germans to launch planes so they could be shot down. Finally, as Allied numerical superiority mounted, the quantity of existing electronic jammers and WINDOW (chaff) overwhelmed German radars.' Therefore, airborne electronic intelligence decreased in significance even as Ferret effectiveness increased. As a result, in November 1944, the 16th Reconnaissance Squadron became one of the first units decommissioned.
Of greater significance, electronic warfare and electronic reconnaissance failed to establish a permanent foothold in US Army Air Forces organization. As a hybrid of operational, research, and intelligence functions, airborne eiectronic reconnaissance failed to fit neatly into existing staff organizations. In the "° For this study, the terms "Electronic Countermeasures" (ECM) and "Radio Countermeasures" (RCM) are interchangeable. Contemporary documents followed this practice for the most part, although the official designation remained "Radio Countermeasures" until 1948.
' Perry, AOC 3"1, p. 4. On more than one occasion, local commanders reconverted their specially modified ELINT aircraft back into standard bombers. They did not want "a lot of signals junk" loading down their planes. Haugen, AOC 25, p. European Theater, the USAAF balked at creating a separate a RCM organization. ' Therefore, no single agency centralized and coorainated ELINT activity. Although Division 15 and the Radio Research Laboratory attempted to promote electronic warfare and headed research and development, civilians ran these organizations. As a result, they had little impact on AAF hierarchy.
When the war ended, the proponents of electronic warfare returned to civilian life.' Thus. electronic reconnaissance lacked a "champion" to defend its organizational interests.
In summary, by the end of World War II, strategic aerial reconnaissance demonstrated its value in both the conduct of land battles and air campaigns.
From the early days of flight, aviation promised advantages in gaining surprise.
During the First World War, aerial photography proved vital in assessing enemy battlefield strength, planning operations, and adjusting artillery fire. By the end of the Combined Bomber Offensive in the Second World War, photographic intelligence from high-flying reconnaissance aircraft provided the foundation for strategic air warfare. Unfortunately, although electronic reconnaissance proved important for defeating enemy defensive systems, Ferret aircraft failed to earn the respect of commanders as an essential intelligence gathering system. With abundant forms of ground communications intelligence, photographs, and spy networks, ELINT remained a peripheral, "nice to have" source of information.  
Kennan Memoirs 1925
-1950
(Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1967)
Russia, and the Cold War, 1945
.1966
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1967)
Kennan, Memoirs 1925
-1950
(Boston Litie, Brown and Co, 1967)
A 'Hap" Arnold, Commanding Genera! of the USAAF, commissioned studies to assess the impact of new technology upon air power doctrine. In the first series, the United States Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS) utilized a team of historians, economists, and operations analysts to assess the effectiveness of strategic air warfare during the war. For the most part, the Survey affirmed the precision bombardment doctrine practiced in the Combined Bomber Offensive.
In the overal reDort for Europe. the survey concluded, "Allied air power was decisive in the war in Western Europe." Furthermore, the USSBS summary report of the Pacific War stated. 'it seems clear that, even without the atomic bomb attac,3. air supremacy over Japan could have exerted sufficient pressure to bring aboLut unconditional surrender and obviate the need for invasion."' Nevertheless, the specter of Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced the USAAF to Under the leadership of Ferdinand Eberstad! the Navy plan emphasized a governmentwide coordination of defense policy through a national security council and an independent ,nteifigence agancy The military departments would remain separate entilts, but would work togethe through the JCS. the World War II theater command system, and an array of interservice r-,oards and committees Rearden. The Formative Years. pp 19-20 & p 142, Allan R Milett and Peter Maslowski For the Common Defense A Military History of the United States of Amenca 
(New York Frev Press, 1984)
1. The atomic bomb does no, at this time warrant a material change in our present conception of the employment, size, organization. and composition of the postwar Ar Force.
2. The atomic bomb has not altered our basic concept of the strategic air offensive but has given us an additional weapon.
3. Forces using non-atomi, bombs will be required for use against targets which cannot be effectively or economically attacked with the In addition, because of the range limitations of existing bombers, the Spaatz Board urged the creation of a network of overseas air bases.
When viewed from a later perspective, the Spaatz Board missed the revolutionary impact of atomic weapons on strategy. Its conservative assessment merely reinforced existing doctrine by presenting the atomic bomb as a weapon to augment, but not replace, existing bombers. In addition, although the generals advocated the funding of a large scientific research and development program, they fai!ed to anticipate technologica! breakthroughs, which would result in smaller atomic weapons that could be transported and assembled more easily. However, such criticisms overlook the extreme secrecy surrounding the bomb. For example, even these distinguished AAF generals lacked access to details of bomb yields and existing stockpile numbers.
Therefore. the generals assumed the atomic bomb would be a scarce, In another perceptive assessment, the Spaatz Board's crticism of U.S. intelligence systems reflected American experience with British intelligence during World War II. Despite its occasional lapses, the British intelligence system represented a successful fusion of data collection, collation, analysis, and dissemination of intelligence information. Unfortunately, except for a few Americans involved in ULTRA and Y-service communications intelligence, the British controlled the Allied intelligence organization.'" Because of their close association with the British, Spaatz, Vandenberg, and Norstad appreciated their counterparts' attributes. Nevertheless, they believed ,,it although the United Kingdom remained a close ally, the United States could not afford to be dependent on British inteligence. As a result, the Spaatz Board recommended an intelligence organization capable of knowing the strategic vulnerability, capabilities, and intensions of any potential enemy." ' Moreover, General Vandenberg served on a separate subcommittee to evaluate the Army's G-2 (Intelligence) Division. Headed by Assistant Secretary of War for Air Robert A.
Lovett, the committee's report chided the Army for a lack of cooperation between users and producers of intelligence information and for the poor quality of Army intelligence personnel." Therefore, ir, its various assessmenl efforts, the Army Air Forces recognized problems with its intelligence organization. Unfortunately, iotelligence weaknsses remained only one of the major shcrtcomings facing the Air Force on the verge of its independence.
In an effort to prepare the AAF for its postwar defense roles and to enhance its transition to autonomy, General Arnold reorganized the air arm on "Y-service" referred to the intercept of low-grade communications intelligence such as radio messages betweer tactical un!ts. Meiiinger, Vandenberg, p. 
68
Command-1946, p. 66 and Forowski, A Hollow Threat, pp 36-48
Aithough the JCS reazed growing tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union, American strategists considered the outbreaK Of war unikely. In JPS 789 "Concept ot Operations for'PINCHER.", the Joint Staff Planners estimated that Soviet economic potential remnairned undeveloped and " at least for the next ten or fifteen years, the gains to be derived inlternaliy during peace outweigh the advantages of any external objective that might be attained at the risk of war.*" However, planners believed that the Soviets would apply maximum political pressure to attain Soviet domination of bordering countries.
"For a descvition of JCS t-hinking abow t he Soviet Union in the latler stages of World War HI, see Steven T 
Ross. American War Plans 1945
-.950 (New York Garland Publishing, 1988)
There are a number of factors which could lead to the capitulation of the U.S.S.R. prior to the defeat of her armed forces, such as: the collapse of her totalitarian government; destruction of her industry or the complete disruption of her communication system? 7
Accordingly, PINCHER proposed destroying "definite areas which contain a substantial portion of vital resources, without which tf"e Soviet war effort would be seriously curtailed (if not prevented)." These "vital areas" (reminiscent of Mitchell's vital centers) included in order of precedence: e. To conduct air operations against the British Isles, Spain, North Africa, Middle East, North China, Japan, the Aleutians and Alaska. f. To conduct limited raids against Iceland, Greenland, the Azores, and the Philippines. g. To conduct naval operations in the Black. Bai.ic and Okhotsk Seas, limited ,aids in the Atlantic and Pacific, and submarine operations in both these latter areas.'"
In sum, PINCHER's estimate of Soviet capabilities matched a land juggernaut against a strategic air force armed with a limited number of atomic weapons.
Since the JCS plan only covered the initial stages of the war, PINCHER made no definitive predictions of the war's outcome or plans for the reconquest of Europe.
Besides its importance for presenting the JCS perception of the Soviet threat and acceptance of strategic air war doctrine, the PINCHER plans revealed significant gaps in US intelligence capabilities. Although designed as a conceptual outline for a later Basic War Plan, PINCHER acknowledged the JCS's inability to plan a strategic air campaign due to a lack of intelligence data:
" In JPS 789 planners estimated that the Soviets could complete the abstract research for atomic energy within two years. Thiee additional years would be required to design and construct the mining, power, transportation, and manufacturing facilities needed for weapons production. By JWPC 432/7. the Joint Staff constaered it unlikely that the Soviets would be able to develop an atomic device before 1948 and it might take until 1956 In turn, the planners predicted that the Soviets would not be able to produce atomic energy by June 1949, although they might be capable of producirg weapons based upon radioactive dust or gas. JPS 789, Annex 'A" to Enclosure "B,* p 28; jWPC 43217. Annex 'A' to Appendix -A" to Enclosure 'B,' p. 29.
"JWPC 432/3, Appendix to Enclosure 'B," p 18. The scarcity of reliable and detailed intelligence on the U.S.S.R. precludes the determination at this time of specific target systems for air attack. Any strategic bombing program established at this time would b provisional even for purposes of current planning; it is certain to be altered radicaily when additional information becomes available. The current lack of intellgence on the U.S.S.R. is due not only to the rigid security maintained by that country, but also to the fact that such information as is available has not yet been properly assembled. It will be possible to improve this appreciation by incorporating in it new intelligence as the information now available to the various intelligence agencies is correlated."
To conduct an air war, strategic planners needed information concerning all aspects of the Soviet economy and war potential. the United States knew less about the Soviet Union than prewar Japan.
In order to conduct a precision bombing campaign, the United States needed a vast amount of accurate information. Dr. James Lowe, an analyst for Air Intelligence. offered 1he "four foundation stones" of target analysis:
1. An exact knowledge of the 70,000 or more potential bombing objectives ..
2. An exact knowledge ot the mission of the attacking air force 3. Reasonable approximation of the capabilities of the attacking air force.
4 Some professionai 'know how" with respect to analyzing these 70,000 or more targets, siWng them down to a very fine mesh until we finally arrive at the minimum number of targets within the capabilities of the attacking air forces, the destruction of which would make the maximum coniriution to an accomplishment of the mission of the attacking air  , 0 i-gen, AOC 25, pp. 
[4]
[5]
p. 5.
Along the same lines, the brief directed electronic reconnaissance around the perimeter of the USSR and satellite states and in the vicinity of strategic industrial and population centers. The report cited the Russo-European land mass and the maritime areas of thE -ar East between Korea and the Bering Strait as areas of greatest interest.' By establishing formal intellige,'ce recuirements, Headquarters, USAF provided guidance and direction missing from previous intelligence efforts. In addition, the articulation of intelligence requirements focused Air Force tninking on the capabilities and need for reconnaissance. By addressing thes, issues, the Air Force established the vital first link in the intelligence cycle. 3 
The Soviet Union's emergence as a potential military thriat prompted SAC interest in potential surprise attack. SAC commander, General George C.
Kenney, worried about Soviet atomic potential. Disagreeing with earlier AAF assessments, he viewed the atomic bomb as the decisive weapon:
When we consider that 100 atom bombs will release more foot pounds of energy than al! the TNT bombs released by all the belligerents of World War I! combined ... and that that effort could be put down in a single attack, it is evident that the long drawn out war is out of date. When it is further considered that probably 80 percent of World War Il's bombs were wasted, 100 atomic bombs would cause at least four times the destruction.... No nation, including our own. could survive such a blow. 2 " Ibid.
2 Ibid. 30 Ibid. "The intelligence cycle refers to the process by which information is converted into intelligence and made available to users. There are five steps in the cycle: planning and direction, collection, processing, pt.zduction. and dissemination. JCS Pub 1, Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, p. 189. Kenney's strategic concept emphasized a short destructive war that would be over in a few days. He considered the bombing of targets that would affect enemy production in a few months to be "meaningless." Kenney's SAC regarded the advantage gained by a surprise attack as "so great that it can almost be considered decisive. I believe this should be studied analyzed and discussed far more than we are doing today." ' As a result, the Strategic Air Command focused on the vast, uninhabited expanse of the Arctic as offering the greatest potential for surprise attack. Whether as a route of SAC bombers or as an avenue for a Soviet atomic strike upon the United States, the potent, i ]or   The Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics presents its compliments to the Department of State and has the honor to communicate the following: On December 23, 1947 at 14 hours and 15 minutes an American airplane violated the Soviet frontier in the region of Cape Chukotsk, flying for about seven miles along the coast of the Chukotsk Peninsula at a distance two miles from the shore.
In communicating the foregoing, the Embassy, upon instructions of the Soviet Government, requests that the case under reference of a violation of the Soviet frontier by an American airplane be investigated and that measures be taken not to permit such violations in the future."
The US Department of State asked the US Air Force for an explanation. Project It is not believed that the extreme cold itself increased the mental stress and strain of our flying crews; however, the types of terrain over which they were flying did. The terrain being vast, uncharted, very sparsely populated, with inherent navigational difficulties plus over-water flying and frequent icing conditions increased the stress of flying in Alaska. Survival in some areas would be impossible for long periods of time. The crews had very little confidence in the adequacy of Air-Sea rescue... , Finally, Arctic weather conditions set absolute limits to polar flying. Following a January 1947 crash in a take-off attempt at -500 F, the AAC restricted flying operations below -350 F.4 By the conclusion of the projects, SAC valued the vast amount of information gathered by its reconnaissance crews in the Arctic, "Letter, Cleland to 46th Recon Sq, 'Progress of Flight B," 30 Jul 47 in Strategic Air 
Command 1947, Vol. 4, Tab 116;
Strategic Air Command 1947, Vol. 1, p. 141
2. The analysis of the data compiled in the bomb encyclopedia to include the plant's name, geographic coordinates, function, output, and transportation routes.' 6 3. The creation of operational target folders for bomber crews that contained the name, identity, location, and profile of the specific objective. In addition, the Strategic Air Command was tasked to provide    
Although BROILER contained the language and industrial emphasis of previous precision bombardment doctrine, the plans assumed the destruction of urban areas as inseparable from the destruction of the industry itself. In other words, whereas orecision bombing doctrine targeted a specific industry within a city, BROILER targeted a city to destroy a specific industry. Because of American military weakness and a lack of target information, the Air Force abandoned the b. The United States will possess reasonable stockpiles of atomic bombs at the outset of an emergency, will be in production of atomic bombs during hostilities, and will have the capability of continued and increased production of atomic bombs during hostilities. c. No agreement exists for the international control of atomic weapons nor will such agreement be reached during this period.'"
The Joint Planners realized that the Soviet Union would exert every effort to develop and produce atomic weapons, but America's atomic monopoly served as the cornerstone of its defense strategy." Although the United States believed the bomb to be a tremendous strategic advantage, JCS planners did not know the extent of the atomic bomb's psychological impact. Advocates asserted that "the combined physical destruction and psychological effect would be so great as to cause the Soviets to capitulate and accept Allied terms of surrender."' 7 On the other hand, BROILER contained provisions for the longterm conventional bombing of thirty-nine petroleum industry targets and thirtysix submarine bases." Regardless of the war's duration, the early effectiveness of the strategic air campaign determined the success of BROILER.
The United States based its strategy upon the atomic bomb forcing immediate Soviet surrender or providing time for mobilization.
Although BROILER's reliance on atomic area bombing reduced the need for precise target information, the war plan still required effective aerial reconnaissance for success. Even though an area bombing campaign needed strategic photographic intelligence only to the extent of providing routes to cities and a general layout of 'urban industrial areas," the bombers still required (Group strength D to D+3 is 3 squadrons. Augmentation to 4 squadron strength will be effected during the period D+3 to D+12. Some units will be equipped with heavier type aircraft, as they become available, during the period D+3 to D+12.)' = Furthermore, the air campaign called for 10,184 air sorties on primary targets, including 2,700 reconnaissance missions. ' On June 18, 1948, France, Britain, and the United States announced that the three western powers would establish a new currency for the western zones in order to integrate western Germany into the European economy. Ibid. war?' 7 Although the Berlin Airlift provided a means of facing the challenge without hostilities, President Truman appreciated the gravity of the situation: Our position in Berlin was precarious. If we wished to remain there, we would have to make a show of strength. But there was always the risk that the Russian reaction might lead to war. We had to face the possibility that Russia might deliberately choose to make Berlin the pretext for war. but a more immediate danger was the risk that a trigger-happy Russian pilot or hotheaded Communist tank commander might create an incident that could ignite the powder keg.' 8 Thus, the Berlin Crisis resembled the political miscalculation which launched the war as envisioned by the Joint Emergency War Plans. Rather than planning exercises based on hypothetical scenarios, the Berlin Crisis illustrated the distinct possibility of war with the Soviet Union. systems.'" The policy letter also established a ten-day deadline for complete mission reports to be forwarded to the Directorate of Intelligence. This action rreflected the failure of previous Alaskan reporting to keep higher headquarters informed of current developments. '  We consider that strategic air warfare, as practiced in the past and as proposed for the future, is militarily unsound and of limited effect, is morally wrong, and is decidedly harmful to the stability of a postwar world.
Rear   
Strategic Air Command 1949
, Vol. 8: General Orders 1-78, File number: 416.01, vol.8,1949, USAFHRC.
In order to focus Ferret efforts, the USAF Electronic Reconnaissance Program established specific intelligence requirements. The first requirement resembled earlier directives that sought information on the location, characteristics, and capability of foreign radar. The Air Force also ordered a search of the electronic spectrum for evidence of Soviet research and development. Air Force Intelligence sought clues to Soviet advances in electronics, guided missiles, and pilotless aircraft. To aid efforts, the plan '3 For a basic mission, an RB-29A was capable of 329 knots at 25,000-foot altitude under maximum power, a 4,075 nautical mile range at best endurance airspeed, and a 35,000-foot service ceiling. An RB-50G (the eventual model used for Ferret missions which included additional electronic equipment) performed only slightly better with a 338 knot speed at 31,000 feet under maximum power, a 5,050 nautical mile ferry range, and a 32,900 foot service ceiling.   Plus, headquarters personnel struggled to define the mission for each unit, to identify the specific tasks required for mission success, and to design training plans to accomplish these tasks. For SAC reconnaissance, a series of discussions between SAC Headquarters, Air Force Intelligence, and the 311th Air Division in August 1949 identified six essential tasks: For each task, intelligence requirements established performance criteria. For example, target verification photography sought to attain the following standard:
(1) First Priority --Photography of sufficient interpretability to distinguish thirty (30) foot cubes thirty (30) feet apart within each target complex (urban area), and of sufficient coverage (60-70 square miles for the average target) to permit the production of photographic target materials.
(2) Second Priority --Photography of sufficient interpretability covering certain installations selected.., to determine the functions, production rates, and structural compositions of such installations.... 
2
The coastal targets ranged from Ambarchik to Petropavlovsk and included Ostrov
Vrangelya, the Kommandorski Islands, and the Northern Kuries. Letter, Frank A.  Soviet missile developments represented a greater concern. The Air 31 Notice that the estimates show a more rapid build-up of the Soviet atomic stockpile, but the same number of bombs. This is due to estimates of limited quantities of uranium ore available to the Soviets that would limit their total capacity. MFR, Status of the U.S.S.R. Atomic Energy Project --1 July 1949, {Joint Nuclear Energy Intelligence Committee), TS Control number: 2-8151, File: 2-8100 to 2-8199, Box 45, Entry 214, RG 341, NA.
31 Contemporary documents do not identify the Tu-4 by name. Instead, they refer to the aircraft as 'the Soviet B-29. i have adopted this practice.
Force Directorate of Intelligence credited the Soviets wi'lh the capability for producing surface-to-surface guided missiles based on the German V-2 by 1952. In addition, analysts anticipated an improved V-I type missile able to be launched from a submarine against coastai installations. 6 For defense, the Soviets appeared to be developing the German Wasserfall surface-to-air missile, the Mannheim system for target detection, and the Wurzberg-Reise radar for tracking. 3 ' Although no electronic missile guidance system would be deployed before mid-1950, Air Material Command sought additional Ferret information in order to design countermeasures.
In   
"On May 19, 1948, the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved a short-range emergency war plan named HALROON that closely followed the concepts of war plan BROILER. Although HALFMOON called for the destruction of 70 Soviet cities with 133 atomic bombs, the plan differed little from the preceding series. Since OFFTACKLE represents the plan under discussion during the most bitter interservice feuding and the most recent of the declassified war plans, I consider it more useful for analysis. For a summary of HALFMOON, see Steven T. 
Ross, American War Plans 1945
-1950 (New York: Garland Publishing, 198S)
Finally, the war plan featured a four-phase strategic air offensive that intended to knock-out Sovot war capacity through atomic attacks on Soviet cities. In this plan, the bulk of the atomic offensive was to be launched in the first three months.-Depending on the success of the first phase, the remaining three phases outlined a general "policing" of target systems already attacked and the "full exploitation" of opportunities created."' In many ways, OFFTACKLE confirmed the earlier doctrinal shift from precision bombardment to urban area attack with atomic weapons.
Despite its many similarities, OFFTACKLE differed from earlier war plans in a few key areas. Although not emphasized heavily, the plan acknowledged the need for European allies and the importance of providing aid to them. OFFTACKLE 1so recognized opportunities to "[ejxploit ... the psychological weaknesses of the USSR and its satellites by informational activities and other special operations."2 Finally, OFFTACKLE presented "calculated risks" due to inadequate budgets: a. The ground fcrces deployed during the first year of the war will not all have the full combat equipment specified in current tables of organization and equipment. However, deficiencies in equipment are not serious enough to invalidate the plar, ... b. The prospective shortage of aircraft and parts therfore (sic) is such that reduced operational rates may have to be accepted. "JCS 1844/46, Enclosure, p. 348. c. In addition, certain logistic deficiencies which are not sufficiently serious to invalidate the plan will, however, limit combat effectiveness to r a varying degree.... The deficiencies are:
(1) Insufficient technical and specialist personnel for units to enable commitment of balanced forces with full logistic support.
(2) Insufficient supply items in all Services.
(3) Insufficient construction units in all services. (4) An indicated shortage of aviation fuels in the early months.'
Although the JCS considered these risks to be acceptable, a follow-on study declared OFFTACKLE "logistically unfeasible" in terms of aircraft. Finally, the Harmon Report's general conclusion continued the mixed assessment:
Atomic bombing will produce certain psychological and retaliatory reactions detrimental to the achievement of Allied war objectives and its destructive effects will complicate post-hostilities problems. However, the atomic bomb would be a major element of Allied military strength in any war with the U.S.S.R., and would constitute the only means of rapidly inflicting shock and serious damage to vital elements of the Soviet warmaking capacity. In particular, an early atomic offensive will facilitate greatly the application of other Allied military power with prospect of greatly lowered casualties. Full exploitation of the advantages to be obtained is dependent upon the adequacy and promptness of associated military and psychological operations. From the standpoint of our national security, the advantages of its early use would be transcending.
Every reasonable effort should be devoted to providing the means to be prepared for prompt and effective delivery of the maximum numbers of atomic bombs to appropriate target systems.'
In sum, the Harmon Report presented an ambiguous appraisal. Along the same lines, the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group measured SAC capabilities based on statistical analysis of World War i bomber performance and SAC training records. The report considered not only statistics for the circular error probable (CEP --the radius within which one-half of the bombs dropped may be expected to fall), but the type of target, its distance from the aiming point, and the lethal area of the bomb against the type of structure in question. For daylight, visual bombing, the WSEG estimated a CEP between 1,000 and 1,500 feet with about ten per cent of the bombs falling outside the target area. On the other hand, the group assessed the CEP for SAC's radar bombing as 3,000 feet for "easy" targets and 5,000 feet for "difficult" targets based on the anticipated quality of the target's radar return. " WSEG Report No. 1 stressed the importance of bombing accuracy even with atomic weapons. The board estimated a damage assessment of 0.90 (90% of the target damaged beyond repair) for a CEP of 1,500 feet. When CEPs increased to 3,000 feet and 5,000 feet, the damage assessment dropped to 0.63 and 0.34 42 The higher set of assumpticAis added 2,200 additional planes from Soviet tactical and naval air forces to the 1,800 PVO fighters and included 300 night fighters based upon the German Me-282 62t fighter. JCS 1952/11, Enclosure *C," p. c-3 & c-15. Plus, the higher set of estimated Soviet anti-aircraft weapons included 3,500 modernized 88 mm guns, 3,500 Taifun rocket launchers, 8,000 conventional guns, fire control radar similar to the US SCR-584, fire control directors similar to the US M-9, and contact fuzed shells. JCS 1952/11, p. 168. In contrast, the German air defense system numbered 12,000 AA guns, 800 night fighters, and 1,500 fighters to oppose the 3,000 four-engine bombers of the US Eighth Air Force alone. JCS 195211, p. 166. " Operating an airborne radar set was (and still is) as much of an art as a science. Certain types of buildings reflect radar energy better than others. In addition, large cities often appear as amorphous blobs with few distinguisNng features. Thus, cities with distinct geographical features or offer land-water contrast, i. e. San Francisco, are *easy" targets, wfe those with few respectively."
After similar assessments of fighter versus bomber engagements, the effects of ECM upon both defenses and bombing radar, and other calculations, the WSEG determined the overall success and losses of several hypothetical air-atomic campaigns based on the current war plan OFFTACKLE. In each attack, a total force of 360 medium bombers, 30 heavy bombers, and 72 reconnaissance aircraft sought to deliver 220 atomic bombs on Soviet urban areas. Subtracting planes lost for routine maintenance and air aborts, the remaining aircraft accomolished the following:" One of the difficult tasks in planning those raids was to incorporate reconnaissance missions into the raid pattern. The loss rates of unescorted reconnaissance planes appear to be too large to sustain such operations in daylight. Since 43 of the targets under the current plan may require visual reconnaissance, it appears that the required reconnaissance sorties cen be obtained only by running the reconnaissance planes in with a massed day raid. A re-atlack of the same region would therefore be required at a later time."
In overall terms, WSEG Report No. 1 represented a comprehensive, unbiased attempt to assess whether a strategic air campaign would work.
Combined with the Harmon Report, the WSEG evaluation supported Air Force confidence in strstegic bombardment, but in guarded. cautious terrns. Neither the Air Force, nor the Navy weie pleased by the findings. The Navy disagreed with even the limited endorsement of strategic air warfare, while the Air Force d!sputed the assessment of high casualties and adverse psychological effects The inadequacy of strategic intelligence challenged the accuracy of the WSEG's reasoned, yet speculative, sets of assumptions. Although the report mentioned the consequences of a German breakthrough in night fighter radar and tactics, the WSEG assumed that the Soviets were incapable of making unexpected technological advances. 2 In addition, the report acknowledged the susceptibility of existing US bombing radar to noise jamming and it recognized that the US knew little about Soviet ECM capability, but the report assumed that the Soviets could not exploit this US weakness. 73   
, 1969
), vol. 2: Atomic Shield 1947
-1952
, pp. 130-131: Jeffrey Richelson. American Espionage and the Soviet Target (New York: William Morrow & Co., 1987)
Strauss. Men and Decisions (Garden City. N. Y.. Doubleday, 1962). p. 202 & p. 204;
Richelson, American Espionage and the Soviet Target, p. 116;
Hewlett and Duncan, Atomic Shield 1947
-1952
, p 131 detecting radioactive particles.7 Between May 12, 1948
and September 3, 1948
September 3, 1949, a WB-29
In contrast to the previous pronouncements of the 
Truman
" Washington Post, 28 April, 1950, n. p., DNC, Foreign Affairs
The fact that no wreckage could be produced over Soviet territory disproved the Russian claim of violated territorial sovereignty. Lippman questioned the motives for the Soviets decorating the fighter pilots credited for the kill:
The ostentatious award of "The Order of the Red Banner" to four Soviet flying officers was plainly intended to advertise the exploit. The award is particularly significant, it seems to me, because these officers did not in fact succeed in doing what, according to M. Vishinsky, they tried to do. He says that they tried to capture the plane by making it land in Latvia. He says that they did not do that. Failing the capture of the airplane, the Soviet fighters ought to have been able to shoot it down within Soviet territory. M. Vishinsky says that they did not do that either. What then did these fighters do that entitled them to special honors and decorations? Answering his question, Lippman postulated that the incident served a twofold purpose: "One, which probably failed, was to capture a plane with valuable military secrets; the other was to demonstrate to the world that the Soviet air defenses are able to repel American strategic air power." Obviously. The affair lends considerable weight to the view that the Russians are intent first of all upon making their own territory invulnerable to American airpower. If they could make it invulnerable, then the Red (A]rmy would be virtually unopposed around the periphery of the Soviet Union. This Baltic incident is meant, I believe, to convince the Russian people and also the people of Europe that the Soviet Union has achieved an air defense." 9 Regardless of whether the speculation of national columnists was correct or the tirades of politicians justified, the 1950 Baltic incident thrust aerial reconnaissance into the limelight. Largely caught unaware, President Truman called for a thirty-day suspension of flights until matters could be properly assessed. The political volatility of the missions had to be weighed against the need for intelligence. As General Omar Bradley stated in a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense, "It is recognized that there is a risk of repetition of such incidents upon resumption of these flights, but it is felt that there would be more serious disadvantages occurring to the United States if the cessation of these operations were to be extended over an excessively long period. -Flights will not be made closer than twenty miles to the USSR or USSRor (sic) satellite-controlled territory.
-Flights will not deviate from or alter planned courses for ,ther than reasons of safety.
-Aircraft engaged in these operations over routes normally flown by unarmed transport-type a!,craft, i. e., the land masses of the Allied Occupied Zones and the Berlin and Vienna corridors, will continue to operate with or without armament. [The President scribbled "which?" on the copy forwarded to him. A later memo explained that the statement meant to "permit operation of either armed or unarmed aircraft dependent upon whether the armed or unarmed type is available at the particular time."] -Aircraft engaged in these operation; over all other routes adjacent to the USSR or to USSR-or satellite-controlled territory will be armed and instructed to shoot in ,.elf-defense. ["good sense, it seems to me. 142 inspired joint strategic talks between the United Sates and the United Kingdom.
Headed by General Omar N. Bradley and Ambassador Philip C. Jessup on the American side and Lord Arthur Tedder and Sir Oliver Francis on the British, Allied delegations agreed to localize the Korean conflict as much as possible.
They sought to limit the involvement of troops on the Asian landmass in light of the potential threat to Europe. Consequently, the American and British leaders decided to increase military strength, to establish joint planning staffs, and to study further options in the event of Communist Chinese interventicn. However, in one critical area, the two sides disagreed. The US representatives vehemently rejected a British intelligence study of Soviet military capability. The British believed that the Soviets would not be prepared to engage 4n general war before 1955. On the contrary, the Americans stressed their estimate that the Russians would be prepared by 1952, or earlier, and before that time, the Russians would attempt to "cause maximum difficulties short o f general war. In order to establish the fact of support to the North Koreans by the USSR or the Chinese Communists, you are authorized to conduct aerial reconnaissance over all Korean territory, including Korean coastal waters, up to the Yalu River on the west coast and up to but short of the Korean-Soviet international boundary on the east coast. Such aerial reconnaissance operations will be conducted from as far south of the frontiers of Manchuria or the Soviet Union as practicable and in no case will these frontiers be overflown.c In his book, American Espionage and the Soviet Threat, Jeffrey Richeison claims RB-36s f;ew long-range reconnaissance missions that penetrated Sovie airspace. ! have found no documentary evidence for this claim. Furthermore. sirnce penetration flights run counter to President Truman's fears of war caused by unintent!onal provocation of the Soviets, I find it hard te be!ieve the President would approve such missions. In addition. General LeMay consistently resisted efforts to permit newer models of SAC aircraft (B-50s ,B-36s, and B-47s) to operate in areas where their peuformance characteristics might be compromised. He did not want the Soviets to learn the strengths and weaknesses of SAC aircraft. 'Richeson, American Espionage and the Soviet Threat, p. observations." The 338th Strategic Reconnaissanice Squadron, Photo-M:'pping, added the ability to accomplish electronic geodetic mapping with its fifteen RB-50F aircraft. Geodetic mapping utilized the SHORAN navigation system to produce highly accurate aeronautical charts. The information piov;ded also served as the basis for SHORAN bombardment, which permitted bombers to strike without seeing their targets.' 8 Rounding out the wing, the fourteen RB-50Gs of the 343rd SRS, Electronics, provided "air intelligence of enemy electronic missions throughout the full range of the usable spectrum ...  
Bowers, United State3 Military Aircraf't Since 1908
, (London: Putnam, 1971)
'1 ^In SHORAN controlled aerial photography, the cameas automatically take pictures every two, five, or 10 seconds. The system utilized electronic ground stations and a special receiver in the RB-50 .... The ground stations are accurately positionud in relation to the area that is desired to photograph. The principle involved in this operation is a measurement of the time it takes electronic signals, simultaneously transmittd from two ground stations, to arrive at the RB-50's receiver. The time differential of arivai of these sigrals at the airborne receiver, can be measured and recorded as the geographical position of the RB-O50, at any particular instant. In this manner, spaced photo flight lines over an area of interest can be very accurately flown because the plane has a constant true position." Harry Lever, "Strat Recon + Technical Aids + 'Pinpoint Bombing, Brodie strongly criticized the air planners' failure to calculate the overall impact of the strategic air offensive. Additionally, his review revealed significant intelligence gaps. For example, the Air Staff did not know where aill the major Soviet power plants were located. Without this knowledge, the total damage inflicted upon Soviet industry could not be calculated. In other words, no calculated strategy for destroying the Soviet ability to wage war existed.
Apparently, the planners simply expected the Soviet Union to collapse following an atomic attack. 25   Ironically, Lieutenant General Curtis E. LeMay, Commander-in-Chief of SAC, attacked the target list from another angle. At a high-level meeting on January 22, 1951, he stressed that current planning placed unrealistic demands on his air crews. Too many targets required visual, pre-strike reconnaissance and isolated, unfamiliar target complexes would be difficult to locate by radar, especially in periods of bad weather. As a result, General LeMay argued, "We should concentrate on industry itself which is located in urban areas," so that even if a bomb missed, "a bonus will be derived from the use of the bomb."" As Chinese troops routed UN forces during November and December 1950, US strategic reconnaissance prepared for war against the People's Republic of China. In response to a request from Headquarters, United States  " Unfortunately, the specific target list remains classified. This reveals a research roblem with this topic. In this case, most command histories were written at the "secret" level and did not include "top secret" material. Before 1950, many top secret annexes and other documents have been declassified, but most top secret documents related to intelligence remain classified after 1950. 
Histoi, of the Far East Air Forces, 25 June-31 December 1950, p. 213.
Command, January-July 1953
, vol. 1, pp. 47-48, File number: K713.01, Jan -Jul 1953, v
History of the 91st SRS, May 1951,p. 5, USAFHRC History of the 91st SRS, August 1951, USAFHRC. "The K-30 camera was mounted on the left side of the RB-29 at ?. 15 1/2 degree angle. This caused a major problem tot both the crew and the photo interpreters. For optimum results, the aircraft had to be flown with the wing raised, or lowered, 3-6 degrees. Unfortunately, the plane could not maintain a constant heading with this attitude. This constant turn caused the operators to stop and re-align the camera every 8 to 10 miles. In addition, when flying at 25,000 feet, the bottom of a picture would show a target 12 miles away while the top depicted a target 25 miles away. History of the 91st SRS, Vol.   .Night photoflash bombs lacked the necessary brightness and, as a result, produced marginal pictures.
-Inadequate maps reoced SHORAN bombing effectiveness."
Although equipment problems handicapped reconnaissance efforts, the FEAF report cited a shortage of trained personnel as the greatest problem.
Prewar budget cuts left a void in the initial number of intelligence analysts, The FEAF assessment concluded by advocating a permanent, peacetime reconnaissance program. The Korean War demonstrated that reconnaissance had lagged behind. Collection, processing, and analysis suffered from equipment and personnel shortages. Additionally, the report emphasized the need for detailed, accurate mapping before hostilities start. The Korean experience taught that delay drained scarce reconnaissance resources in the critical, initial phase of conflict. In the event of atomic war, there might not be enough time to conduct pre-strike mapping.Y Therefore, the study presented the two major lessons learned in the conflict:
One important lesson repeatediy emphasized by experience in Korea was that units which may be comm~itted to combat should be organized with wartime personnel and equipment. Units which must absorb and train new personnel are not ready...."
There was anl urgent need for an organization whose continuing responsibility would be to anticipate the needs of aerial reconnaissance, in whatever phase or field, and to devise and develop the systems, equipment, practices, and techniques necessary to fulfill these needs."  
The JCS and everyone else committed one cardinal sin. We 6er-ously misjudged Chinese communist reaction to our plans to cross the 38th parallel. It is the duty and responsibility of military advisers to gauge a potential enemy's capabilities rather than his intentions. In this case, we Joint Chiefs allowed ourse!,es to be overly influenced by various estimates of Chinese cov.;,T.unist intentions. As historians have now shown, those who drew those estimates ignored too many obviou warning flags and miscalculac11 badly. American military leaders will not repeat the errors that followed World War I1.
Well-trained, well-equipped reconnaissance units and intelligence organizations provide the means to assess future threats and shape strategic alternatives. Furthermore, adequate collection capability alone is not sufficient:
Iconstant attention to the entire intelligence cycle is necessary to assure national security in a world of change. Otherwise, the less well known verses of Sun Tzu may again prove true:
When you are ignorant of the enemy but know yourself, your chances or winning or losing are equal.
If ignorant both of your enemy and of yourself, you are certain in every battle to be in peril.'
The anxiety surrounding the "search for Scuds" in the recent war with Iraq illustrates the limits of even today's technology and its impact on strategy.
'Sun i
Radar works on the principle of echoes. Just as it takes a certain amount of time for a voice echo to return after shouting, it takes a short amount of time
for radio waves to return after they bounce off an object. A radar measures this time and determines the distance of the object. In other words, a radar station is a two-way radio system that includes a transmitter and a receiver. The transmitter sends out short pulses of high-frequency radio waves and the receiver detects the echoes of the waves after they have bounced off a target.
The time between transmitted pulse and received echo is converted into the distance of the object. Since the echo returns with far less energy than originally transmitted, an amplifier works with the receiver and the results are projected upon an oscilloscope. Because the whole process occurs in fractions of a second, the oscilloscope, or radar screen, presents a continuous picture.
i The primary purpose of electronic reconnaissance, or Ferret, aircraft centers on locating enemy radar stations and analyzing the performance characteristics of the set. The Ferret uses radar intercept receivers to detect enemy radar transmissions and a pulse analyzer to display the radio waves received upon an oscilloscope for analysis. The Ferret operator (called radar observer, RCM officer, Electronic Warfare Officer (EWO), Raven, or Crow at various times) seeks the following performance characteristics:
Frequency --The usual way of recognizing a radar is on the basis of the carrier frequency of the radio waves it sends out. This frequency is usually expressed in terms of megacycles, or millions of cycles per second. Thus, the radar frequency is like the radio channel of a conventional radio set.
Pulse Repetition Frequency --a measure of the rate at which radio pulses are transmitted. Radars do not transmit continuously. They must pause briefly in order to receive the returning echo. The rate of pulses, or PRF, produce an audible humming sound or whine. Proficient Ravens recognize individual radar types by their sound.
Pulse Length --the duration of the pulse of transmitted radio energy. The pulse length are usually so brief that they are expressed in millionths of a second or microseconds.
Beam Width --A radar sends out a beam of radio-frequency energy much like a searchlight sends out a beam of light. The beam width is expressed in degrees. Less sharp than a beam of light, the radar beam usually measures ten or fifteen degrees wide. Although a sharper beam is more accurate, it is also more likely to miss an elusive target.
Lobe Switching --a means of determining the bearing of a target. The radar looks to one side and then to the other of a particular target. When the radar is looking at equal angles to each side of the target, it is said to be "on target" or "locked on." Lobe switching occurs rapidly, roughly fifty times per second in certain radars, and indicates the relative accuracy of the radar.
From these performance characteristics, ferrets determined the function of the radar. For example, Early Warning radars featured high power, low frequency, low PRF, long pulse length, and wide beam widths to achieve high  Electronic Warfare --Military action involving the use of electromagnetic energy to determine, exploit, reduce or prevent hostile use of the electromagnetic spectrum and action which retains friendly use of electromagnetic spectrum. Also called EW. There are three divisions of electronic warfare:
a. electronic countermeasures --That division of electronic warfare involving actions taken to prevent or reduce an enemy's effective use of the electromagnetic spectrum. Also called ECM. Electronic countermeasures include:
(1) electronic jamming --The deliberate radiation, reradiation, or reflection of electromagnetic energy for the purpose of disrupting enemy use of electronic devices, equipment, or systems.
(2) electronic deception --The deliberate radiation, reradiation, alteration, suppression, absorption, denial, enhancement, or reflection of electromagnetic information and to deny valid information to an enemy. b. electronic counter-countermeasures --That division of electronic warfare involving actions taken to ensure friendly effective use of the electromagnetic spectrum despite the enemy's use of electronic warfare. Also called ECCM. c. electronic warfare support measures --That division of electronic warfare involving actions taken under direct control of an operational commander to search for, intercept, identify, and locate sources of radiated electromagnetic energy for the purpose of immediate threat recognition. Thus, electronic warfare support measures provide a source of information required for immediate decisions involving electronic countermeasures (ECM), electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM), avoidance, targeting and other tactical employment of forces. Also called ESM. Electronic warfare support measures data can be used to produce signals intelligence (SIGINT), both communications intelligence (COMINT) and electronics intelligence (ELINT). (JCS Pub 1, p. 129)
Ferret --1. An aircraft, ship, or vehicle espccially equipped for the detection, location, and analyzing of electromagnetic radiation. (JCS ?ub 1, p. 143) 2. In 1949, the term was defined as "aircraft specifically modified to perform electronic reconnaissance only."' Intelligence --The product resulting from the collection, processing, integration, analysis, evaluation and interpretation of available information concerning foreign countries or areas. (JCS Pub 1, p. 188)
Intelligence cycle--The steps by which information is converted into intelligence and made available to users. There are five steps in the cycle: a. planning and direction --Determination of intelligence requirements, preparation of a collection plan, issuance of orders and requests to information collection agencies, and a continuous check on the productivity of collection agencies.
b. collection --Acquisition of information and the provision of this information to processing and/or production elements.  d. production --Conversion of information into intelligence through the integration, analysis, evaluation, and interpretation of all source data and the preparation of intelligence products in support of known or anticipated user requirements.
e. dissemination --Conveyance of intelligence to users in a suitable form. (JCS Pub 1, p. 189) Intercept Receiver --A receiver designed to detect and provide visual and/or aural indication of electromagnetic emissions occurring within the particular portion of the electromagnetic spectrum to which it is tuned. (JCS 
Pub 1,
Pub 1,
Pub 1,
p. 334)
Summary. Strategic Air Command, December 1948
. File number: 416.01, v.8, 1948
Kennett, __ . . . . . i i ... . --. . reconnaissance. By 1918, so efficiently that only twenty minutes elapsed from the time a photo was taken to its use by artillery batteries." As a result of technological and organizational innovations during the First World War, aerial reconnaissance emerged as an indispensable means of gaining tactical intelligence.
. '0
. '0
2' Ibid., p. 28. 21 For summaries of air power theory following World War I see Futrell,
. Infield, Unarmed and Unafraid, p. 53. 28 Burrows, Deep Black, p. 38. recognized
oscilloscopes for analysis.' In addition, the RCM school taught the rudiments of electronic jamming and the use of WINDOW (also called chaff), small strips of aluminum foil scattered from an aircraft that masked the aircraft's image on a radarscope. Unfortunately, shortages of equipment and experience limited the school's effectiveness." In the words of one participant, "The RCM course was a riot --nobody was sure how anything (equipment) worked, if it worked nobody really knew why, and if it did what it was supposed to accomplish."'" Since the Army Air Force acknowledged British expertise in the European Theater, the first American Ravens headed for the Pacific."' On March 6, 1943, Second Lieutenants Bill Praun and Ed Tietz flew the first American electronic reconnaissance flight against a Japanese radar on
•-" The nickname "Raven" derived from the codeword used for radar countermeasures at the time By 1948, the abbreviation RCM was replaced by ECM (Electronic Countermeasures) and most Electronic Warfare Officers (EWO) were referred to as "Crows" (an American Rav6n). Nevertheless, Ferret I blazed the trail for American electronic reconnaissance With the Allied invasion of North Africa, the US Army Air Forces broadened the scope of Ferret activity. In May 1943, Ferret III entered service with the 16th Reconnaissance Squadron.' Later joined by Ferrets IV, V, and VI, the modified B-17s flew night, low-level missions into Axis radar coverage. Initially concentrating on Sicily, eventually the aircraft flew electronic reconnaissance missions over Sardinia, Corsica, Italy, and southern France. (Figure 1) Between May 1943 and September 1944, the Mediterranean Ferrets flew 184 sorties and discovered 450 enemy radar sites. As a result of Ferret data. analysts learned the range and operating frequencies of German Freya early warning radar, Gema coastal surveillance radar, and Wurzburg groundcontrolled intercept radar.'4 9 This information aided operational planning for amphibious assaults HUSKY, AVALANCHE, SHINGLE, and DRAGOON and the strategic bombing missions conducted by the 15th Air Force. In addition, the 16th Reconnaissance Squadron determined that the new American RC-156 "Winter, AOC 47, p. 6: Interview, Lieutenant Colonel Ingwald Haugen. USAF (ret) by Alfred Price and Frank Vohtaggio, pp. 1-2. File 25: Col. I. Haugen, AOC Archive, AOC Building. Alexandria, Va.. Price. "Major Charles Eaton, 'The Ferrets,' {1947}. pp. 1-2, File. No. Africa Ferrets, AOC Archrve, AOC Building, Alexandria, Va, Winter AOC 47, p. 10.
•-" The nickname "Raven" derived from the codeword used for radar countermeasures at the time By 1948, the abbreviation RCM was replaced by ECM (Electronic Countermeasures) and most Electronic Warfare Officers (EWO) were referred to as "Crows" (an American Rav6n). Nevertheless, Ferret I blazed the trail for American electronic reconnaissance With the Allied invasion of North Africa, the US Army Air Forces broadened the scope of Ferret activity. In May 1943, Ferret III entered service with the 16th Reconnaissance Squadron.' Later joined by Ferrets IV, V, and VI, the modified B-17s flew night, low-level missions into Axis radar coverage. Initially concentrating on Sicily, eventually the aircraft flew electronic reconnaissance missions over Sardinia, Corsica, Italy, and southern France. (Figure 1) Between May 1943 and September 1944, the Mediterranean Ferrets flew 184 sorties and discovered 450 enemy radar sites. As a result of Ferret data. analysts learned the range and operating frequencies of German Freya early warning radar, Gema coastal surveillance radar, and Wurzburg groundcontrolled intercept radar.'4 9 This information aided operational planning for amphibious assaults HUSKY, AVALANCHE, SHINGLE, and DRAGOON and the strategic bombing missions conducted by the 15th Air Force. In addition, the 16th Reconnaissance Squadron determined that the new American RC-156 "Winter, AOC 47, p. 6: Interview, Lieutenant Colonel Ingwald Haugen. USAF (ret) by Alfred Price and Frank Vohtaggio, pp. 1-2. File 25: Col. I. Haugen, AOC Archive, AOC Building. Alexandria, Va.. Price. "Major Charles Eaton, 'The Ferrets,' {1947}. pp. 1-2, File. No. Africa Ferrets, AOC Archrve, AOC Building, Alexandria, Va, Winter AOC 47, p. 10.
2 ?
Ironically, even as the Strategic Air Command struggled, the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) produced war plans based upon the strategic bombing doctrine seemirig!y vindicated by World War 11. Although the JCS had produced previous assessments of Soviet intentions and capabilities, the series of war plans known as PINCHER established the basic outline for America's military SHtorian, Strategic Air Command, Strategic Air Command -1946: Organization, Missicn, Trainng and Personnel, Vo! 1 Text, (n. p: April 1948), p. 66, File Number 416.01, v 1, 21 Mar-31 Dec 1946, USAFHRC, "Borowski, A HIollow Threat, p. 39
. op. 4-6 in addition. the PINCHER plans conststed of a number of docunients, including JPS 789 Concept of Operations for "P;NCHER, 2 Miarch 1946 JPS 78911. Staff Studies of Certain Miltary Problems Deriving from "Concept of Operat-,ons for'PINCHER,'" 13 Aoril 1946 JWPC 432/3, Joint Basic Outline War Plant. Short Tale *PINCHER.' 27 Aoril 10,46 JWPC 43217, Tentative Over All Strategipc Cocncept and Estirnaia of inita) operations, Short Title 'PINCHER ' 18 Jime 1946 JWPC 458M1 Preparation of Joint Plan 'Broadview,' 5 The Pincher Plans (New York GarlandP ublishing. 1989)1 See Ross. Amnerican! War P!ans. chapter 2 'The Pinchet Plans,' pp. 2-49 for P-1 Overviews ~JPS 789, Joint Staff Plarnes. 'Concept of Operations for 'PINCHER," 2 March 1946, Enclosure '8,*)p 4, in S"teven T Ross arid David Alan Rosentmrg, Wd., Ametica's Plang 'or War Against the Sovief Union. 1945-1950, "Vol 2-Desig, tot G16 "-We.'; The Pincher Plans (New York: Garland Publishing. 1989) Therefore, they created a scenario in which World War III started as a result of a Soviet miscalculation that led to a Soviet invasion of Turkey. Because the loss of Turkey threatened the Suez Canal, Great Britain intervened in defense of the Empire's life-line.
"' Ibid., p 6; JWPC 432/3. Enclosure 'B, p 3 in Ross and Rosenberg, ;JPS 789, Enclosure 'B.' p. 8. "JPS 729, Enclosure *B," p 14.
Therefore, because of demobilization and severe budget limits, the Joint Chiefs of Staff relied on the theory of strategic aerial bombardment as the primary American response to war with the Soviet Union. At the heart of JCS planning, the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) presented a Soviet military machine of awesome potential. Like the United States. the Soviet armed forces had reduced their strength from World War II levels. According to JWPC 432/3, one of the later PINCHER estimates, Soviet armed forces consisted of 6,400,000 men (347 divisions) in March 1946. By JPS 789, Enclosure "B," pp. 15-16 ibd., p 3 "JPS 789, Enclosure "B.-p. 16
The creation of a postwar aerial reconnaissance program illustrated the dichotomy between American intelligence collection capabilities and its need for information. With the initial Ferret program, the United States collected data on Soviet radar systems useful for planning bomber penetration and designing jamming equipment; however, the Army Air Forces required basic economic information to determine target priorities. Furthermore, the Strategic Air Command needed photographic reconnaissance for chart preparation and target folders. On a larger scale, the United States lacked the information necessary for proper threat assessment. As PINCHER showed, the Joint Chiefs of Staff grappled with producing a war plan without knowing the actual threat.
The creation of a postwar aerial reconnaissance program illustrated the dichotomy between American intelligence collection capabilities and its need for information. With the initial Ferret program, the United States collected data on Soviet radar systems useful for planning bomber penetration and designing jamming equipment; however, the Army Air Forces required basic economic information to determine target priorities. Furthermore, the Strategic Air Command needed photographic reconnaissance for chart preparation and target folders. On a larger scale, the United States lacked the information necessary for proper threat assessment. As PINCHER showed, the Joint Chiefs of Staff grappled with producing a war plan without knowing the actual threat.
information either as independent methods or in conjunction with conventional photography. He also speculated that television might enhance night photography. Regardless of the validity of these ideas, Cullen argued for SAC guidance in analyzing reconnaissance: "This, I believe, is recognized by the various agencies of your (McMullen's SAC) Headquarters but very little specific action or thought seems to be taking place. Frankly this disturbs me a great deal." , 6 Joining Cullen's critique of SAC reconnaissance concepts, Major Genera! Earle E. Partridge, Director of Training and Requirements. urged a fundamental rethinking of strategic aerial reconnaissance. In a memorandum to the Director of Air Force Intelligence, Major General George C. McDonald, Partridge observed, "The scope of the reconnaissance needed to carry out atomic bomb attacks in Russia staggers my imagination. Some means must be devised to narrow this field to the point where a reasonable number of missions "a. Are we right in sticking to a plan for photographing our targets in daytime? As you know, the Russian winter provides little useabie [sic ] photographic weather.
information either as independent methods or in conjunction with conventional photography. He also speculated that television might enhance night photography. Regardless of the validity of these ideas, Cullen argued for SAC guidance in analyzing reconnaissance: "This, I believe, is recognized by the various agencies of your (McMullen's SAC) Headquarters but very little specific action or thought seems to be taking place. Frankly this disturbs me a great deal." , 6 Joining Cullen's critique of SAC reconnaissance concepts, Major Genera! Earle E. Partridge, Director of Training and Requirements. urged a fundamental rethinking of strategic aerial reconnaissance. In a memorandum to the Director of Air Force Intelligence, Major General George C. McDonald, Partridge observed, "The scope of the reconnaissance needed to carry out atomic bomb attacks in Russia staggers my imagination. Some means must be devised to narrow this field to the point where a reasonable number of missions "a. Are we right in sticking to a plan for photographing our targets in daytime? As you know, the Russian winter provides little useabie [sic ] photographic weather.
'bid. & History Strategic Air Command 1948, Vol. 1. p. 248.    
,3 Voltaggio, 'Out in the Cold. .. "p. 8, File: Voktaggio, AOC; Wack, AOC 11, p. 11. SWack. AOC 11, p. 11, AOC. "+ Votaggio. 'Out in the Cold....: p. 11, File: Volta.gio,
I said, "Kelly we're over land!" He says, "I know it." I said, "Why don't we get the hell out of here?" I said, "Flanagan (-st navigator), what the hell are we doing?" Flanagan said, "Well, we've hit a reverse jet stream and we're trying to get out. It's carried us inland about 50 miles and we're making about 20 knots ground speed trying to get out." Io Eventually, Headquarters USAF passed instructions to the Commanding General of the Alaskan Air Command that prohibited flights closer than fifteen I" t"Wac .
I said, "Kelly we're over land!" He says, "I know it." I said, "Why don't we get the hell out of here?" I said, "Flanagan (-st navigator), what the hell are we doing?" Flanagan said, "Well, we've hit a reverse jet stream and we're trying to get out. It's carried us inland about 50 miles and we're making about 20 knots ground speed trying to get out." Io Eventually, Headquarters USAF passed instructions to the Commanding General of the Alaskan Air Command that prohibited flights closer than fifteen I" t"Wac .
"'Ibid. "The United States Strategic Bombing Survey Summary Report, (European War), September 30, 1945, p.
Turkey. While waiting approval of the Turkish government, the Air Staff apparently tabled the projects." Despite wide-ranging efforts, the dilemma posed by inadequate strategic intelligence influenced strategic war planning. On February 11, 1948, the Joint Staff Planning Group completed Joint Emergency War Plan BROILER. In some respects BROILER resembled the PINCHER plans: the United States assumed an accidental outbreak of war, o-verwhelming Soviet superiority in land forces, a Russian capability to overrun Europe with little resistance, the need to safeguard North America, the United Kingdom, and a few key air bases, and an American strategic air campaign as the principal response to Soviet aggression. Nevertheless, while PINCHER reflected the Spaatz Board Addng to the desire for security, the staff officers involved in the project worried that they might be held "remuneratively iale" for any lost " npment. Memorandum for Record, Subject: To request that Director of Supply and Services, DCSIM direct Base Accountable Officer, Boiling Ar Force Base. issue property for urgent use. n. d. 14 Feb 19481, TS Control number. 2-963, File number: 2-900 to 2-999 Feb 48, Box 40, Entry 214, RG 341, NA. "Letter, George C. McDonald, Major General, USAF , Director of Intelligence, Office of Deputy of USSR from Turkey, n. d., TS Control NtTber: 2-951, File 2-900 to 2-999 Feb 48, Box 40, Entry 214, RG 341, NA. ° As a result, the national objectives of the United States consisted of the following: a. To destroy the war-making capacity of the U.S.S.R. to the extent and in such manner as to permit the accomplishment of b, d, and d below. b. To compel the withdrawal of Soviet military and political forces from areas under their control or domination at least to within Soviet 1939 boundaries. c. To create conditions within the U.S.S.R. which will insure abandonment of Soviet political and military aggression. d. To establish conditions conducive to future international stability." To achieve these goals, the Joint Chiefs advocated a strategic concept based on Douhet's view of air power. The United States plan sought "To destroy the will of the U.S.S.R." by launching an air offensive designed "to exploit the destructive and psychological power of atomic weapons against vital elements of the Soviet warmaking capacity... "' War plan BROILER's outline for the strategic air campaign reflected a subtle, but important, doctrinal shift. At first glance, BROILER's key target IJSPG 496/4, BROILER, 11 February 1948, p. 2, in Amedca's Plans for War Against the Soviet Union, 1945-
"JSPG 496/4, 11 Feb 49, Appendix, p. 7.
'°JSPG 496/4, 11 Feb 48, Annex 'A' to Appendix, pp. 27-28.
0 'Specific objectives of the electronics reconnaissance mission are as follows: a To search and report upon the following frequency spreads: (1) 50 Mcs to 1500 Mcs. (2) 1800 Mcs to 2000 Mcs. (3) 2400 Mcs to 3100 Mcs.... b. While intense search should be centered on the above spreads, s.ystematic full range searches should not be ignored.... " Letter, C. P. Cabell, Major General, USAF, Director of Intelligence, Office of Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations to Commanding General, Alaskan Air Command, Subject: RCM Ferret Program --Alaskan Air Command, 26 Jul 1948, TS Control number: 2-3037, File: 2-3003 to 2-3099 Jul 1948, Box 42, Entry 214, RG 341, NA. 121 Ibid.; MFR in Memorandum for Secretary Joint Intelligence Committee from C. P. Cabell, Major Ge,ral, USAF, Acting Director of Intelligence, 12 Mar 1948, TS Control number:
I: Narrative, p. 1. 20 Curtis E. LeMay, General, USAF, United States Air Force
Armstrong, Jr., Brigadier General, USAF, Commanding, to Chief of Staff, Headquarters U.S. Air Force, Subject: Photographic Coverage of Northeastern Siberia, 7 Nov 1949. TS Control number: 2-10097, File: 2-10000 to 2-10099, Box 46, Entry 214, RG 341, NA. " The Ar Force assumed that airfields in Northeastern Siberia would serve as bases for Soviet B-29s aimed at the U.S. 2 1 2 Ferrets discovered Soviet radars in the following areas: Rostock,
I-
"JCS 1952/11, p. 189.
"JCS 1952/11, p. 189.
Coinciding with Chinese intervention in Korea, the introduction of Sovietbuilt MiG-15 jet fighters threatened FEAF operations. The superior speed, acceleration, climb rate, and ceiling of the Soviet fighter shocked Allied air forces. In most air-to-air engagements, the greater experience and better training of American pilots prevailed; however, the MiG's 660 mph top speed
Coinciding with Chinese intervention in Korea, the introduction of Sovietbuilt MiG-15 jet fighters threatened FEAF operations. The superior speed, acceleration, climb rate, and ceiling of the Soviet fighter shocked Allied air forces. In most air-to-air engagements, the greater experience and better training of American pilots prevailed; however, the MiG's 660 mph top speed
' 44 k-Uv 444f" FIGURE"7. Mission 180, 23 March 1951F / l FIGURE 8. Mission 181, 25 March 1951 r7A7\fP I-'2 A comparison of the ECM flights flown in March and August 1951 reveals a shift in emphasis from northwest Korea to the Soviet coast. Mission numbers 199, 200, ard 204 (Figures 12, 13, 14) probed Soviet air defenses over the Sea of Japan and near Vladivostok. The remaining missions, number.-201 and 20.KZ, continued surveillance of the People's Republic of China. 3 (Figures 15 and 16) To a large extent, the shift away from northwest Korea acknowledged the danger posed by large numbers of MiG-15s. By this stage of the fighting, Communist fighters menaced even the FEAF's jet reconnaissance aircraft."
"
"
"Letter, W. P.
, in Hstoyof Me A-ft Ak Force, Januiry -Ju IK6, Vol. 2: SuppotV Document, File nuImb:: K-713.01-38, vol. 2, Jan-27 Ju 1953, USAFHRC. lbd. J III l ll I I / ll II l IIII I I l I 1169 i photo interpreters found night photos difficult to analyze. Fires caused by bomb strikes distorted the shadows used by photo interpreters to identify the height of buildings. 6° As a result of mediocre night photography, FEAF Bomber Command sought Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) from the jet aircraft of the 67th Tactical Fighter Wing. Unfortunately, BDA requests swamped tactical I reconnaissance, already overwhelmed by the needs of the Amy and 5th Air Force.6 ' In theory, the jet RB-45 should have provided BDA coverage; however, the unarmed plane's 500 mph speed was still 160 mph too slow to survive against MiGs. In addition, the RB-45 proved particularly vulnerable to flak. According to a FEAF report, "even the slightest rip, tear, or battle damage affects '91st Strategic Reconna.sance Squadron (M) Photo," In History of the Fifth Air Force, January-July 1952, Vol. 2: Suorftng Documents,
"Jamn F. Brady, Lt. Col., USAF, Deputy for Intelgence, (FEAF Bomber Command),
j 38, Jan-Jul 1953, v. 1, USAFHRC.
*FEAF " OPesonnel Problems,' in FEAF Report eti Korea, (p. 58), USAFHRC. eFEAF Historical Report. Novemnber 1953, pp 35-36. USAFHRC. As a test of strategic air war, Korean War experience proved inconclusive. Advocates of strategic air power noted that even aging B-29 bombers successfully completed assigned missions. Although the Sinuiju missions of April and October 1951 proved a setback, a shift to night missions and increased use of ECM countered enemy defenses. FEAF Bomber Command statistics showed 35 aircraft lost out of 23,572 sorties --a minuscule .0015 loss rate." Furthermore, in Korea, the Air Force never employed atomic bombs --"Annex XV) to FEAF History of ECM During the Karen fct, 3 May 1954,Rle number:K-720.04C. Jun 1950-Jul 1953, USAFHRC.
, p. 84. 'Ibid. : i !-U * I * j I (RADTWELVE): Airborne Radar Countermeasures Operator's Manual, published in 1946.
Vol. 1: 1907-1960 (Maxwell Air Force Base, Al.: Air University Press, 1989), p. 29.   
The Alaskan project also demonstrated the problems of cold-weather photography. Infield, Unarmed and Unafraid, p. 68.
Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany 1939-1945, vol. 1, pp.
349-350.
0 Ibid., p. 32
3-Strategic Air Command 1947, Vol. 1, p. 138, USAFHRC.   
Memorandum for Chief, Air Intell Requirements Div. from Green, Subj.: Coordination of Photo, 11 Dec 47, NA.
'" Voltaggio, "Out in the Cold.. "'p. 12. File. Voltaggio, AOC.
3'R & R, Frank P. Sturdivant, Colonel, USAF, Executive, Air Intelligence Division, Directorate of Intelligence, to Industrial Planning Division, Directorate of Procurement and Industrial Planning, Subject: Strategic Consideration Re Boeing Aircraft Production, 12 Aug 1949, TS Control number: 2-8670, File: 2-8600 to 2-8699, Box 45, Entry 214, RG 341, NA. 35 Ibid.
Ibid., p. 358 & p 366. "loid.. p. 406. "JCS 1844/37, p. 267 & JCS 1844/46, Enclosure, p. 350.
distinguishing features, I. e. Omaha, are 'difficult.' Author' personal observation; JCS 1952/11, pp. 185-188.
Routing and Record Sheet. Director of Intelligence to Director of Plans and
BIBLIOGRAPHY
, I appreciate those who provided me help. Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Kuehl opened the door to the 
Association of Old Crows
Mr. Gus Slayton
Captain George W. Cully
US Air Force
Admiral Sherman added that standing orders required US Navy aircraft to "make no approached closer than 20 miles to any shore of the USSR, its possessions or its satellites." Verifying that the aircraft was unarmed, Admiral Sherman concluded:
A relatively slow unarmed patrol p!ane could not have attacked a Russian fighter and the Soviet note is untrue in that regard. It is probably untrue also with respect to the location of the incident. It is not likely that competent personnel would overfly Soviet occupied Latvia, nor that Soviet fighters would break off action over land under such  