# ID: 265a805e8e2843d6a760243e2368896d
# Title: F 785 Dtic Pv
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1991.0
# Fulltext:
Turkey.
While waiting approval of the Turkish government, the Air Staff apparently tabled the projects."
Despite wide-ranging efforts, the dilemma posed by inadequate strategic intelligence influenced strategic war planning.
On February 11, 1948, the Joint Staff Planning Group completed Joint Emergency War Plan BROILER.
In some respects BROILER resembled the PINCHER plans: the United States assumed an accidental outbreak of war, o-verwhelming Soviet superiority in land forces, a Russian capability to overrun Europe with little resistance, the need to safeguard North America, the United Kingdom, and a few key air bases, and an American strategic air campaign as the principal response to Soviet aggression.
Nevertheless, while PINCHER reflected the Spaatz Board Addng to the desire for security, the staff officers involved in the project worried that they might be held "remuneratively iale" for any lost " npment.
Memorandum for Record, Subject: To request that Director of Supply and Services, DCSIM direct Base Accountable Officer, Boiling Ar Force Base.
issue property for urgent use.
n. d. 14 Feb 19481, TS Control number.
2-963, File number: 2-900 to 2-999 Feb 48, Box 40, Entry 214, RG 341, NA. "
Letter, George C. McDonald, Major General, USAF , Director of Intelligence, Office of Deputy of USSR from Turkey, n. d., TS Control NtTber: 2-951, File 2-900 to 2-999 Feb 48, Box 40, Entry 214, RG 341, NA.
° As a result, the national objectives of the United States consisted of the following: a. To destroy the war-making capacity of the U.S.S.R. to the extent and in such manner as to permit the accomplishment of b, d, and d below.
b. To compel the withdrawal of Soviet military and political forces from areas under their control or domination at least to within Soviet 1939 boundaries.
c. To create conditions within the U.S.S.R. which will insure abandonment of Soviet political and military aggression.
d. To establish conditions conducive to future international stability."
To achieve these goals, the Joint Chiefs advocated a strategic concept based on Douhet's view of air power.
The United States plan sought "To destroy the will of the U.S.S.R." by launching an air offensive designed "to exploit the destructive and psychological power of atomic weapons against vital elements of the Soviet warmaking capacity... "' War plan BROILER's outline for the strategic air campaign reflected a subtle, but important, doctrinal shift.
At first glance, BROILER's key target IJSPG 496/4, BROILER, 11 February 1948, p. 2, in Amedca's Plans for War Against the Soviet Union, 1945-