# ID: 265a805e8e2843d6a760243e2368896d
# Title: F 785 Dtic Pv
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1991.0
# Fulltext:
Although BROILER's reliance on atomic area bombing reduced the need for precise target information, the war plan still required effective aerial reconnaissance for success.
Even though an area bombing campaign needed strategic photographic intelligence only to the extent of providing routes to cities and a general layout of 'urban industrial areas," the bombers still required (Group strength D to D+3 is 3 squadrons.
Augmentation to 4 squadron strength will be effected during the period D+3 to D+12.
Some units will be equipped with heavier type aircraft, as they become available, during the period D+3 to D+12.)'
= Furthermore, the air campaign called for 10,184 air sorties on primary targets, including 2,700 reconnaissance missions. '
On June 18, 1948, France, Britain, and the United States announced that the three western powers would establish a new currency for the western zones in order to integrate western Germany into the European economy.
Ibid.
war?'
7 Although the Berlin Airlift provided a means of facing the challenge without hostilities, President Truman appreciated the gravity of the situation: Our position in Berlin was precarious.
If we wished to remain there, we would have to make a show of strength.
But there was always the risk that the Russian reaction might lead to war.
We had to face the possibility that Russia might deliberately choose to make Berlin the pretext for war.
but a more immediate danger was the risk that a trigger-happy Russian pilot or hotheaded Communist tank commander might create an incident that could ignite the powder keg.'
8 Thus, the Berlin Crisis resembled the political miscalculation which launched the war as envisioned by the Joint Emergency War Plans.
Rather than planning exercises based on hypothetical scenarios, the Berlin Crisis illustrated the distinct possibility of war with the Soviet Union.
systems.'"
The policy letter also established a ten-day deadline for complete mission reports to be forwarded to the Directorate of Intelligence.
This action rreflected the failure of previous Alaskan reporting to keep higher headquarters informed of current developments. '
 We consider that strategic air warfare, as practiced in the past and as proposed for the future, is militarily unsound and of limited effect, is morally wrong, and is decidedly harmful to the stability of a postwar world.