# ID: 280bafddbcce4319a97406438f454fb2
# Title: Impact of political-military relations on the use of German military power during Operation Barbarossa
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
The German General Staff launched Operation Barbarossa in June 1941 assuming the eastern campaign would last only three months. However, within six months after the initiation of hostilities the Red Army blunted the Wehrmacht's attack outside the gates of Moscow, Operation Barbarossa had failed. Although a long standing and professional organization the German General Staff failed to achieve strategic success, despite significant success during the early stages of the campaign. Adolf Hitler's national goal of Russian extermination exceeded the German Army's capabilities. The war lasted nearly four years and resulted in the devastation of western Russia, millions dead and the destruction of Germany. This thesis examines how the divergence between the Wehrmacht's capabilities and Hitler's ideological national objectives affected Operation Barbarossa.
Through examination of the historical role the German General Staff held during military operations, this study addresses the linkage between German political and military relations during war. It begins with an analysis of the Prussian General Staff system under Moltke the elder. It follows the staff's development through the wars of German unification, prelude to WW
Bock said that it was clear to him how to force the Red Army to give battle and defeat it but how, asked the field marshal, can the Russians be forced to make peace? 
1
Field Marshal Von Bock of Army Group Center asked Hitler this question six months prior to Operation Barbarossa. Army Group Center had the responsibility as the main effort in Hitler's war against the Soviet Union. Bock's question illustrates a fundamental divergence between Hitler and his generals concerning their views on war on the eastern front. The nature of war and the military's role in shaping a political outcome is at the heart of Bock's question. Why did Germany's strategic leadership begin an ideological war against the Soviet Union when their military's tactical doctrine predicated short decisive campaigns? At the center of this question lie the differences between the theories of limited and total warfare and the role of the military in achieving national objectives. This thesis focuses on these different theories to answer the following question: How did the divergence between the Wehrmacht's capabilities and Hitler's desire for ideological campaign objectives impact the Army's effect against the Soviet Union at the strategic level?
Several writers, such as David Glantz, Matthew Cooper, and Albert Seaton to name a few, have attempted to analyze the German-Russian war in order to determine the cause of the German defeat. Numerous theories and suppositions on the causes of Barbarossa's operational failure have been suggested. However, there are two factors consistently cited in most analysis of the war. The first identifies Germany's poor logistical planning and inability to sustain forces over great distances. 
2
3
4
Germans losses in transportation vehicles at 75,000 with only 7,500 replacements. 
5
Arguably, even if the infrastructure network had been adequate to support Germany's logistical traffic, the nation lacked the strategic resources necessary to sustain a long war. The 1939-1940 campaigns depleted German war stocks and prior to Barbarossa the Germans still relied on foreign shipments of oil, bauxite, tin, copper, lead and zinc to sustain their military. 
6
7
Although logistics certainly hampered the success of Barbarossa, it can not be solely blamed for its failure.
The German Army fielded a modern force in 1941 that required fuel, ammunition, and spare parts for the maneuver units. Yet the economy needed to produce the war material and the system required to distribute it could not satisfy the logistical requirements of an armored force operating over 700 miles from its supply base.
Mobilization of the economy for war required Hitler's approval; therefore the German Army's logistical short falls are just a smaller component of the larger problem. The problem stemmed from Hitler's understanding of the nature of war which differed from that of his military leadership. Logistically the Wehrmacht supported themselves for decisive engagements designed to force a decision quickly not long battles of attrition.
Their 1939-1940 campaigns taxed their logistical system but was able to support the Wehrmacht's operational plans. Operation Barbarossa, however, illustrated the deficiencies in the German logistical system with respect to campaigns with increased duration and over greater distances.
The second most popular theory on Barbarossa's failure in 1941 addresses
Hitler's increased desire to micromanage the war effort as the campaign lengthened. He curtailed his subordinate commander's freedom of maneuver and independent decision making abilities by directing the movement of specific units on the battlefield. His relief of Field Marshal Brauchitsch, the Commander-in-Chief of the Army, in December 1941 allowed him to assume the vacated position and direct combat forces with reduced military interference. As the war progressed Hitler filled key leadership positions with individuals who demonstrated great loyalty to him despite their military experience.
General Halder notes in his diary of 7 December 1941:
The occurrences of the day have again been heartbreaking and humiliating.
ObdH is now no more than a messenger boy, if that. The Fuehrer, over the head of ObdH, gets in direct touch with the Cs-inC of Army Gps. 
8
Following the end of World War II in Europe, the prominent military historian B.
H. Liddell Hart had the opportunity to interview captured German officers in order to gather their accounts relating to the conflict. During one of those interviews General Blumentritt, Chief of Staff of Kluge's 4th Panzer Army, credited Hitler's micromanagement of the war as the primary reason the German Army failed to take Moscow in 1941. 
9
Traditionally, the German General Staff had attempted to isolate the organization from political vacillations and opinions. The staff believed after the politicians made the decision to mobilize the army for war, the operational maneuver fell to the General Staff to prepare, plan, and conduct. Hitler on the other hand did not follow this traditional viewpoint and frequently interfered with his generals and their operations. In Liddell
Hart's interviews with the German generals after the war, General Blumentritt stated that:
After we had reached Smolensk there was a stand-still for several weeks on the Desna. This was due partly to the need of bringing up supplies and reinforcements, but even more to a fresh conflict of views within the German command about the future course of the campaign. There were endless arguments. 
10
The German generals were not prepared for this level of friction between the political and military systems and were not equipped to deal with it effectively. The German Army had to rely on the personalities of its senior commanders Brauchitsch and
Halder in order to influence Hitler. However, they allowed him to erode their positional responsibilities over time to the point that they became ineffective.
Brauchitsch's influence over Hitler decreased as the dictator's popularity increased after the successes against Austria and Czechoslovakia. His arguments against Hitler's decisions did little to sway matters. Eventually Hitler would accept Brauchitsch's resignation in 1941 and appointed himself as Commander in Chief of the Heer. Halder's impact on operational matters as the Chief of the German General Staff also had a decreasing trend as Hitler reduced the staff officer to that of an "advisor, helper and executive, but [one that] did not participate in the Commander's responsibility." 
11
Although these theories point to contributing factors in Germany's defeat in 1941,
they do not answer several important questions. Primarily, why such a professional military organization overlooked logistics, or why the political leadership supplanted military experience with increased micromanagement and fanaticism? Prior to Barbarossa Hitler and his Generals held the belief that they could win a war against the Soviet Union in a matter of months. 
12
13
would have to wait.
A third possible conclusion is that the General Staff lacked the necessary skill sets to comprehend and adapt to warfare on the eastern front. It is unlikely that the German military leadership failed to prepare adequately for combat operations in Russia due to its history and efforts in military transformation since World War I. The successful campaigns in 1939-1940 directly resulted from the efforts of the German General Staff to prepare their forces for combat. The staff had pride in military professionalism and possessed a long-standing history of refining German tactical doctrine, increased modernizing and reorganizing the army to suit Germany's threats.
Even after the disastrous consequences of the Great War and the restrictions enforced through the Treaty of Versailles the German military continued to demonstrate a willingness to adapt its organization. The limitations placed on the German Army to cap its end strength at 100,000 men and ten divisions seriously hampered the Reichswehr's ability to publicly develop a military force. Additionally, the treaty disbanded the German General Staff in an attempt to prevent Germany from planning another war in Europe. This further complicated any German effort to develop its forces and prepare for future military operations. 
14
Through study and analysis under the General Staff's guidance, the German Army began to war game new and revolutionary tactics, such as conducting breakthrough and exploitation attacks using armored and mechanized forces. Due to the treaty's limitations it had to develop the concept using mock tanks fabricated by attaching wooden skirts to the chassis of a truck. Inventiveness and initiative became the bedrock of the German officer corps when preparing for tactical warfare. 
15
On the eve of Barbarossa the German Army leadership and Hitler agreed on three objectives. The first objective dictated the Red Army's destruction in western Russia.
The second objective sought to deny the Russians the ability to bomb Germany's infrastructure. The third and final objective in 1941 identified the line from Archangel to the Volga River in order to isolate Asiatic Russia for follow-on operations (see figure 
2
16
When Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933 the political landscape of Germany changed dramatically and with this change so did the nature of German warfare.
Between 1933 and 1939 the German Army underwent a vast transformation of its armed forces. In the span of six years the Army grew to over 1.8 million men under arms and in the reserve. 
17
18
Historians and theorists have attempted to establish the relationship between the political and military branches of a nation. One in particular, a German military historian and critic from 1881-1929, wrote extensively about the relationship between German political and military establishments. Hans Delbrück, a student of history, sought to establish a link between political and military theory by illustrating military means as an extension of the state's political framework. Clausewitz wrote in his book On War that "War is therefore an act of policy." 
19
20
Delbrück asserted that "state policy conditioned" war and strategic planning, and therefore the latter should be subordinated to the former. 
21
Delbrück's work is significant not only because of the period in which he wrote his work but also because he establishes the critical linkage between national objectives and military capabilities. Delbrück's assertions were not met with enthusiastic support from the German military establishment. Primarily because he suggested the political and military spheres should interact closely. This close interaction allowed political desires to interfere with military operations and this was something many German military leaders, such as Moltke the elder, did not favor.
If one concedes Delbrück is correct, then it is not unreasonable to propose the relationship between the political and military establishments plays a critical role in the success of combat operations. Delbrück's theories on military power contrasted those of the German General Staff. Delbrück's assertions came at a time when the German Army began to incorporate the emergence of modern battlefield technology into its view on war at the end of the eighteenth and into the beginning of the nineteenth centuries. The army's focus on technology at the tactical and operational level shaped its doctrine during the Great War and again during World War II. The German General Staff officer failed to grasp the significance of his role in national strategic policy and therefore it impacted the application of military force on the eastern front.
The German military lost sight of the importance of the relationship between the political and military elements and failed to act in time to avert defeat. The German Army underwent a significant transformation to learn from its mistakes. Ultimately, this transformation did not shape the military force for success on the eastern front in 1941.
The German General Staff failed to identify several critical elements of political-military relations. Military leaders at any level can learn from the failure of the German General
Staff and avoid making the same mistakes that befell it and the German Army in 1941.
This thesis examines the linkage between German political and military relations from 1864 until 1941 in order to answer the question: Did the divergence between the Wehrmacht's capabilities and Hitler's political desires impact the Army's ability to affect the strategic level of war on the eastern front? In order to answer the primary question this thesis addresses the following secondary questions. First, what military theories did The first question addresses the issues concerning German leadership, their views on the nature of warfare and the war theories they adopted to support those views. The second question addresses the implementation of those theories throughout the interwar years leading up to Operation Barbarossa. The third question will address the critical elements of political-military relations and their significance on military operations.
There is one fundamental assumption concerning this research. Germany could not have won the war on the eastern front after December 1941. Although the conflict Between Germany and the Soviet Union lasted from June 1941 until May 1945, the thesis will focus only on operation Barbarossa during the summer and winter months of 1941.
There was a conscious decision in restricting research to the time period before 1942 for several reasons. First, the Germans never regained the ability to affect the strategic level of war after they failed to capture Moscow in 1941. The German Army lost a significant amount of personnel and material which it was not able to recover adequately through the rest of the war. Second, its major summer offensives, in June 1942 and July 1943 to gain strategic advantages over the Soviets, failed due to several reasons but most importantly due to a loss in division combat power. The loss of which eliminated its capability to achieve Hitler's strategic objectives. Once the army lost these capabilities it could not regain it without sufficient reset and rearmament periods.
The main limitation in researching the topic is the author's inability to speak or read the German or Russian language. This limited the research of original source documents without the filters of translation. This required the use of translated works from multiple sources in order to research the necessary data. The use of translated works from official war records, after action reports, personal manuscripts, and interviews became primary source documents in order to mitigate this problem. German official records for this time period are generally accurate with respect to force structure and training during the interwar years leading up to the Nazis gaining power. In particular they are especially critical of their evaluation and application of lessons learned from World War I.
In order to gain a better understanding of this work there are several key terms, models, and concepts that require understanding. The sources for these terms vary from current army field manuals to captured German-Soviet documents.
The first key term is Kriegsfuhrung or war direction. The Kriegsfuhrung is the "strategic doctrine that may be defined as the art of distributing and applying military means to fulfil [sic] the ends of policy." 
22
The first model that used in this thesis is one commonly referenced by the
College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, as the DIME (Diplomatic, Informational, Military and Economic) model. 
23
The different theories on the nature of war establish varying degrees of importance on the components of the instruments of national power. The two that this thesis will focus primarily on are the military and diplomatic aspects of the model.
Nature of War 
24
25
Clausewitz believed nations fought wars for one of two purposes. The first purpose sought to destroy the political freedom of a nation. The military campaign eliminated those factors or centers of gravity which gave the nation strength to resist.
The second purpose seeks to achieve some level of favorable peace terms that satisfy the nation. The underlying theme with the former is that the political/military goals need to encompass a broader range of objectives in order to successfully achieve their desired end state. The latter purpose allows for a smaller range of objectives and ones that are not as severe as in the former. The two purposes do not necessarily coincide with any one particular view of war. It is logical to conclude the severity of national objectives sought by one nation will shape the nature of war for the other. The interaction between the belligerents and these different views on the nature of war had a profound impact on the conflict. In 1941 Germany and the Soviet Union approached war differently and this had an impact on the nature and the conduct of war on the eastern front.
Another Clausewitzian concept used in this thesis is the notion of the "paradoxical" trinity and its application in war. Clausewitz wrote about war comprising three elements which he claimed were wars dominant characteristics. The interaction or balance between violence and passion, uncertainty, chance and probability, and political purpose and effect were the foundation for describing war. 
26
Clausewitz drew his experiences for the basis of his writings from the Napoleonic era. This is significant because the impact it had on his theory. Macgregor Knox and Williamson Murray, two prominent historians, categorize the French Revolution as a military revolution. That is a revolution which affected the fabric of society, not only in France but also the rest of Europe. 
27
Each characteristic affected war differently and uniquely based on the conflict.
Since each conflict would be distinctly different based on the belligerents, time, scale of conflict and desired end state, he did not elaborate what the impact each characteristic would have on war. Clausewitz, therefore, believed careful consideration should be given to the interaction and affects of these three characteristics when preparing for war.
Level of War is a concept defined by the U.S. Army as "doctrinal perspectives that clarify the links between strategic objectives and tactical actions." 28 Strategic, operational and tactical categorize the three levels of war. Furthermore, actions taken in the field affect either one, some or all levels depending on what objectives they achieve.
This thesis will focus on the strategic level of war.
"The strategic level is that level at which a nation, often as one of a group of nations, determines national and multinational security objectives and guidance and develops and uses national resources to accomplish them." 
29
Hitler's strategic goals in Russia, first established in his book Mein Kampf, played a significant role in planning for Barbarossa. "We National Socialists must hold unflinchingly to our aim in foreign policy, namely, to secure for the German people the land and soil to which they are entitled on this earth." 30 This strategic goal would drive Hitler's foreign policy from 1938-1941 and was one of the primary goals in his war against Russia. Although Hitler used the other components of the DIME model, he relied on the use of his military power in order to gain lebensraum during his Russian campaign.
"Centers of gravity are those characteristics, capabilities, or localities from which a military force derives its freedom of action, physical strength, or will to fight." 
31
32
33
This is important because the effect it has on military operations. National objectives sought to support an ideological war significantly alter the enemy's COG.
During limited conflicts the army may become the COG. However, during a protracted conflict fought for state and cultural survival, the COG may in fact shift to the population or to the government itself. Identifying the correct COG is critical for military planners so that they may prepare operations which target it.
Chapters 2 and 3 discuss the impact that German military theorists had on shaping the German Army during the years prior to and including The First World War. This work identifies those individuals that had the most influence in creating the operational and tactical doctrine the Wehrmacht would use in 1941. These chapters primarily focus on war theorists and their contribution to the German war machine from 1850 until the beginning of Operation Barbarossa. Chapter 4 discusses the operational planning for Barbarossa and its initial execution. It also discusses Hitler's strategic level goals and the operational methods the German Army used or employed in order to achieve them.
Chapter 5 includes conclusions concerning the linkage between the political and military elements of power and the implications they have concerning future conflicts.
Theory is instituted that each person in succession may not have to go through the same labor of clearing the ground and toiling through his subject, but may find the thing in order, and light admitted on it. During the three wars of unification the role of the Prussian General Staff changed significantly, at least for the duration of the conflicts. Prior to the war with Austria in 1866 the Chief of the General Staff did not have a significant role in military affairs. 
3
Additionally, the War Ministry department drafted and transmitted orders to field commanders, bypassing the General Staff. This meant that the Chief of the General Staff did not have a significant role in either the strategical planning or conduct of Prussian wars. However, in 1866 this changed due to a combination of fortuitous events, Moltke's personality, and his success in operational planning during the Danish War of 1864.
Shortly after the war's conclusion legislature expanded the role of the General Staff and granted it two important responsibilities. The Chief of the General Staff was appointed as the sole military advisor to the King with direct power to transmit orders to the field commanders bypassing, the War Minister. These measures enabled the military to become involved in strategical as well as operational planning for war.
However, Moltke had difficulty combining political maneuvering with strategic thinking. 
4
Politics uses war for the attainment of its ends; it operates decisively at the beginning and the end, of course in such a manner that it refrains from increasing its demands during the war's duration or from being satisfied with an inadequate success. . . . In this way, it aids politics best, working only for its objectives, but in its operations independent of it. 
5
6
Moltke thought this curtailment placed the army at a disadvantage.
Bismarck's political maneuvering prevented a multi-front war between France and Austria perhaps indicating a cooperative need between military and political actions. 
7
This interaction of the political-military realm from 1864-1871 was unique due to the increasing importance of the General Staff and its chief. Bismarck and Moltke did not agree on the role each had in Prussia's foreign policy. However, each shared the same limited aspect of war as is evident in Bismarck's approach to diplomacy and Moltke's operational objectives.
Bismarck was aware of the impact military objectives had on foreign relations.
He attempted to limit objectives in order to facilitate the peace process. Moltke understood it as well and stated "Strategy can only direct its efforts towards the highest goal which means available make attainable." 
8
In addition to the increased importance placed on the General Staff, Moltke also established the foundation on which the German military anchored its operational and tactical doctrine throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. He sought an alternative to frontal attacks because advancements in technology and larger battlefield armies required greater military capability to disperse forces along external lines. 
9
German military planners refined this doctrine over time into what western historians have called Blitzkrieg.
Moltke the elder developed his primary views from two themes of Clausewitz's writings on the nature of war. The first concerned the purpose of war and the second dealt with the object of combat. As described in chapter one, Clausewitz identified two purposes to war. Moltke subscribed to the belief that the objective of war was the achievement of a satisfactory political end. 
10
The second Clausewitzian theme Moltke adopted concerned the objective of combat. Clausewitz wrote "combat means fighting, and in this the destruction or conquest of the enemy is the object, and the enemy, in particular combat, is the armed force which stands opposed to us." 
11
Aware of mobilization tipping Germany's hand to the adversaries, Moltke attempted to harness the use of railroads to provide the strategic surprise lost through the deployment of the army. By transporting troops by rail, he could retain the initiative through rapid offensive operations. Moltke's theory of encirclement and the decisive battle became the foundation which shaped German tactical doctrine. Succeeding Chiefs of the German General Staff continued to build and refine his doctrine.
Another important aspect of Moltke's tenure was the influence of Alfred von Waldersee, Moltke's deputy as Quartermaster-General for the General Staff. Waldersee became involved with Prussia's foreign politics and the affect on the General Staff warrants examination. Waldersee involved himself with foreign affairs through interaction with Prussia's military attachés. Although unorthodox, it was not uncommon for him to receive copies of the official country assessments sent to the foreign minister.
Additionally he also maintained communication and encouraged the military attaches to "represent the views of the General Staff, even when such views were at variance with those of the Foreign Office." 
12
13
I cannot avoid the impression that it is the aim of certain military circles in Vienna to distort our defensive alliance. . . . We must both take care that the privilege of giving political advice to our monarchs does not in fact slip out of our hands and pass over to the General Staff. 
14
15
Schlieffen needed a strategy to achieve victory against a numerically superior force. 
16
17
Schlieffen firmly believed the answer resided in an encirclement doctrine which brought mass against the enemy's flank. The desired intent, which came to be known as battles of annihilation, was to encircle, isolate, and eliminate the enemy forces. 
18
In an age in which progress of trade and commerce. . . . A strategy of exhaustion [Ermattungsstrategie] is impossible when the maintenance of millions necessitates the expenditure of [billions]. 
19
Schlieffen looked upon war as an eventuality and fate not something that he or Germany could avoid. 
20
However, several historians and one in particular did not share this view and considered other means to achieve victory.
In 1879 Hans Delbrück proposed a thesis in which he asserted annihilation battles were not the sole means the state had to achieve victory. Using history and Clausewitz's work he suggested a partial destruction of the enemy with overwhelming force may compel adversaries to negotiate for peace. 
21
Ironically, both Schlieffen and Delbrück used the same historical battles and text yet each arrived at different lessons from the studies. The difference stems from their differing approaches to war.  Politically Germany became unstable following its defeat in 1919. Four years of savage warfare devastated Germany's economic and social structures. 
22
The concept of defense became increasingly more important than seizing initiative through pre-emptive action because of the military realities after the war.
Militarily the German Army lacked the capabilities required for an approach modeled on Schlieffen's doctrine. The reduction in manpower and the limitations imposed on offensive equipment such as aircraft and armored vehicles limited Germany's military options and required a shift in doctrinal emphasis.
Von Seeckt first set about his task by establishing a basis for mobilization of the German Army. The limitations placed upon Germany severely hampered the Reichswehr's attempt to prepare for war. In order to strengthen Germany's strategic position, Seeckt sought innovative ways around the treaty restrictions. To achieve this goal he focused on four areas to help improve Germany's strategic position.
An attempted coup in Berlin in 1919 affected Seeckt's view concerning politics and the German military. Because of this event Seeckt placed political restrictions on the German Army. One of his first actions was to issue an order to the German Officer Corps in which he stated:
Any kind of political activity in the army will be prohibited. Political quarrels within the Reichswehr are incompatible with both the spirit of comradeship and with discipline and can only be harmful to military training. We do not ask the individual for his political creed, but we must assume that everyone who serves in the Reichswehr from now on will take his oath seriously. Those who do not condemn the unfortunate attempt made during the month of March at overthrowing the government, and those who still believe that a repetition would end in anything but new misfortune for our people and for the Reichswehr, should decide on their own that the Reichswehr is not for them. 
23
24
This legacy persevered after his departure from the army in 1926 since many of his young officers including, Leeb, Guderian, Runstedt, Beck, and Halder would hold command positions within combat units during Operation Barbarossa. Two in particular (Beck and Halder) would later become Chief of the German General Staff during critical times of mobilization and war. 
25
26
27
28
29
The fourth step Seeckt undertook was formulating better relations with the Soviet Union. This is one of the few instances where Seeckt interacted with foreign policy making. In 1921 he convinced von Maltzahn of the foreign office to enter negotiations with Russia which eventually led to signing of the Treaty of Rapallo. 
30
German industry transferred the production of aircraft, tanks and poison gas to Russia. 
31
Seeckt's efforts also had a strategic impact on Germany's security. Peaceful relations with the Soviet Union reduced the potential of hostilities between the two nations. This allowed him to focus on the internal problems facing the German Army, which consumed the majority of his time as Chief of Staff. The cooperation between Germany and Russia in the early 1920s helped establish the foundation for the German-Russo Pact in 1939. 
32
The whole future of warfare appears to me to be in the employment of mobile armies, relatively small but of high quality, and rendered distinctly more effective by the addition of aircraft, and in the simultaneous mobilization of the whole defense force, be it to feed the attack or for home defense. 
33
The second initiative concerned the mobilization of the German economy for war.
In 1924 Seeckt established a military economic office to prepare operational plans for mobilizing the economy during war. 
34
35
Although it appears Seeckt had conflicting thoughts on warfare he did not share the same views on warfare as did other prominent military leaders. One in particular, Erich Ludendorf, had a different approach to it. Ludendorf's total war theory had a severe impact on the German state and the welfare of the population. Seeckt's belief in the importance of the state and the soldier's duty to protect it would have precluded him However, the further divorce from political interaction and the willingness to subordinate the use of military power to the political policies of the state had its consequences. 1 Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Anatol Rapoport (London, England: Penguin Books, 1968), 191. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
This little affair of operational command is something that anybody can do. The Commander-in-chief's job is to train the Army in the National Socialist idea, and I know of no general who could do that as I want it done. For that reason I've decided to take over command of the Army myself. 
1
The year 1933 marked the start of a radical shift in the direction of the German Additionally Beck had to deal with Adolf Hitler and the Nazi regime which resulted in a changing political culture whose members focused on distrust and undermining the military leadership.
Beck dealt with three major issues during his tenure: the expansion of the General Staff and its role in military planning, the adaptation of German operational doctrine to Hitler's foreign policy and the growing competition between the Heer, the SS and the Luftwaffe. 
2
3
Beck could not duplicate Seeckt's methods to maintain political isolation of his officers because of the number of officers required to expand the army. Additionally Hitler's attempt to indoctrinate the officer corps with National Socialist views meant many officers became politically influenced by Hitler. The result was a divide between the older generation staff officer, trained under the traditional staff system and the younger generation who became enamored with Hitler.
Just as officer personnel increased during the rearmament period, so did the German Army. Hitler instituted conscripted service for the Wehrmacht in 1935 in order to expand his armed forces. This expansion decreased the German General Staff's influence because it reorganized and redistributed its existing personnel into new units thereby diffusing the staff's professional expertise. Beck feared for Germany's security during this period because violating the articles of the Treaty of Versailles allowed Germany's traditional enemies of Russia and France to act. 
4
Beck believed that any aggression by German forces against the European community as disastrous for Germany as those countries would retaliate. According to Beck's estimates it would take until 1942-43 before the reorganization of the German Army and General Staff was complete and capable of pursuing Hitler's provocative foreign policy. 
5
Beck not only had to reorganize the staff but also address its role in preparing for war. Historically the General Staff's responsibility was to provide military advice, plan campaigns and oversee combat operations. Germany's strategic geographic weakness became even more significant due to Hitler's rearmament program and his foreign policies. His sudden move to re-occupy the Rhineland in 1936 resulted in a crisis within the German General Staff. Unaware of Hitler's intentions until the day prior, Beck believed occupying the zone violated the Treaty of Versailles and was therefore too great a risk for Germany to undertake. 
6
Hitler interjected himself into the planning process more and more as Germany's rearmament progressed. Initially limited to providing strategic guidance to the German General Staff during his early years in office, it gradually devolved to approving the movement of specific units on the battlefield. As this level of interaction increased his capacity to heed his military leadership's advice waned. Hitler's constant interference in military affairs hampered the General Staff's planning and his desired end state often invalidated their planning assumptions.
The second issue concerned Hitler's shifting foreign policy away from diplomacy and emphasizing military operations. Beck's strategic outlook conflicted directly with Hitler's. Realizing the weakness of the German Army during its rearmament, Beck attempted to prepare operational plans centered on a defensive strategy. Beck believed Germany should avoid any posture with the potential of provoking the Allied powers into action. 
7
The first operation dealt with contingency operations in the event the French opposed Germany through the use of sanctions. The second considered the possibility of defensive action against Poland and Czechoslovakia. However, because of Hitler's insistence on an aggressive foreign policy program, Beck had to prepare for conflict far sooner than he anticipated and with less than ideal military force.
In order to prepare the German Army for conflict, he wrote new instructions shifting military operational emphasis from defensive to offensive operations. 
8
In 1866 Moltke the elder envisioned using rail to achieve strategic mobility and decisively seize the initiative for German forces on the battlefield. The tank and motorized units in the 1930s enhanced this operational capacity, increasing the German Army's mobility on the battlefield. The common themes between these two operational concepts are the German planners assumed speed of maneuver and decisive engagements were critical capabilities required to achieve victory. These capabilities rapidly provided Germany the means to achieve objectives and quickly resolve the conflict. However, German national objectives changed when Adolf Hitler assumed power and therefore dictated a subsequent change to the staff's strategic planning assumptions.
Beck's third issue concerned the role of the Schutzstaffel or SS and Luftwaffe within Germany's strategic planning. During the rearmament of German forces these organizations competed with the army for limited resources of men and material and they did not report to the General Staff for planning purposes. Each organization had its own planning cell and Hitler considered them co-equal in the hierarchy of the German military. The establishment of the SS, and the Luftwaffe as separate military organizations impacted the effectiveness of Hitler's military force by dispersing resources amongst them. Also with the creation of additional planning staffs, the German General Staff lost its monopoly on strategic planning.
Beck's primary concern with these organizations was the growing influence of Henrich Himmler's SS units. Initially the private army of the Nazi leader, SS units slowly began to encroach into military operations. Beck resisted the formation of land units that did not fall within the General Staff's sphere of control. Initially he met with success as Hitler limited the SS to non-military roles such as state security and Hitler's personal bodyguards. However, this did not last and by 1935 Hitler expanded the SS's capabilities to include military responsibilities. 
9
Hitler placed more faith in the Party's army than the regular army. By War's end in 1945 Himmler had control of over forty two Waffen-SS units, a significant number considering the industrial and resource shortfalls of German manufacturing.
Beck did not have the same aversion to the Luftwaffe as the SS since he recognized the value of aviation. As was the case with the SS, Beck wanted the General Staff to maintain authority for planning operations for the German Luftwaffe. However, since it was not subordinated to the Oberkommando der Heer (OKH), its operational To a degree the creation of the OKW had merit. In order to coordinate the efforts of the Luftwaffe, Kreigsmarine and Heer a planning body with the authority to direct Germany's war effort was certainly needed. However, its creation also signified the further divergence of opinion between Hitler and the Chief of the German General Staff's view on the nature of war. Beck's desire to avoid provocative action on the part of Germany provided a look into his views concerning war.
In 1937 Beck drafted a memorandum in which he illustrated his concern. In it he wrote:
Experts have made the point that the situation of 1936 was like that of 1917. . . . We are entering the new year without food reserves; the harvest expectations have proved to be illusory; we will not be able to reach the new harvest without stretching things; and increased imports of fats-and, this time, of grains, too-are anticipated. If it should come to developments of a warlike nature in May or June of 1937, our position would be inconceivable. 
11
12
A war begun by Germany will immediately call into the field other states than the one she has attacked, and in a war against a world coalition she will succumb and for good or evil be put at that coalition's mercy. 
13
His actions concerning foreign policy suggest he was comfortable using war in both limited and total forms. Some of his policies in the mid 1930s have already been addressed but examination of Germany's campaign against Western Europe provides further insight into his views. Certainly the occupation of France indicated Hitler had no objections to seeking acceptable peace terms. He did not displace French citizens and relocate them to gain lebensraum for the German people. His war against France was not an ideological one but one of foreign politics perpetrated in order to set the conditions for Germany's return to European significance. However, German occupation of Poland and the subsequent deportation of Polish Jews to concentration camps highlighted Hitler's more radical views.
The German invasion of Czechoslovakia, Poland, Belgium, and France highlighted the strengths of the Wehrmacht. Rapid envelopment of enemy forces using armored and motorized spearheads was the epitome of German operational doctrine.
Schlieffen's concept of the decisive battle against the west had worked. Despite fierce resistance the French, Czechs, Poles, and Belgians capitulated freeing Hitler to pursue a strategy against Britain and Russia. However, Hitler viewed the Soviet Union differently than France and this had a major impact on the nature of war in the east. In Hitler's Mein Kampf he described his attitude toward Slavs. Three facets concerning Hitler's views not only demonstrated the possibility of hostilities between Germany and Russia, but also illustrated the savagery which would characterize the fight and dictate the nature of the conflict. First Hitler characterized Bolshevism as an attempt by the Jews to dominate the World.
Germany is today the next great war aim of Bolshevism. It requires all the force of a young missionary idea to raise our people up again, to free them from the snares of this international serpent, and to stop the inner contamination of our blood, in order that the forces of the nation thus set free can be thrown in to safeguard our nationality, and thus can prevent a repetition of the recent catastrophes down to the most distant future. 
14
We National Socialists must hold unflinchingly to our aim in foreign policy, namely, to secure for the German people the land and soil to which they are entitled on this earth. 
15
16
World War I illustrated the affects on society such a national commitment could have on the stability of the state. In 1916 Erich Ludendorf was the architect of Germany's total war strategy during the Great War. He would later publish a book in 1935 discussing his total war theory which he had adopted and implemented from 1916 until 1918. Ludendorf described total war as struggle between people and the entire state and not just between armies. This struggle required the full backing of the population with nothing less than the full commitment of the economic, industrial and military base of the nation. This level of commitment became essential in the total annihilation of the enemy state. Anything less than full commitment doomed the state to a long protracted conflict and eventual defeat.
To be successful every aspect of the state should subordinate to the military establishment and a military dictatorship was required to direct the war effort.
Ludendorf's total war theory was a dramatic shift from war with limited objectives to a conflict between nations. Clausewitz theorized on this level of escalation when he wrote, "[war] is an act of force, and there is no logical limit to an act of force." 
17
Ludendorf's policies during World War I eventually resulted in the open social revolt of the German people and helped bring an end to the conflict. The fact that Ludendorf's theory failed to produce decisive results in 1918 did not escape the attention of the General Staff's study in the 1920s. However, the staff acknowledged the destructive nature this theory had on the state and discounted it as a valid approach to war.
Hitler's approach to warfare partially paralleled Ludendorf's prescription for total war. He became a dictator with complete power over the German state. He mastered the art of propaganda and convinced the German people they were destined for something better. His charismatic personality coupled with his desire to return Germany to a position of power on the European continent met with wide popular support. He removed the limitations on the armed forces by the treaty and encouraged rearmament.
Economic growth in local industry and the production of goods and services began to revitalize Germany's sluggish economy. However, Hitler did not fully implement Ludendorf's concepts until February 1943, over a year after Barbarossa began. Why Hitler did not shift his strategy to include the commitment of the entire German State earlier in the conflict is unknown. The question of whether the German people would have supported Hitler if he mobilized the entire nation for war in 1933 is debatable. Historians may never know for certain however, historically the power of nationalism is a very powerful motivation which should not be discounted.
France's mobilization of its "citizenry" in 1794 allowed for the conscription of 750,000 men. 
18
German planners such as Moltke the elder, Schlieffen, and Seeckt sought limited objectives to help achieve a favorable political end state. Once achieved the enemy had to accept peace terms and consider them reasonable or the enemy would continue to fight. Therefore the political end state became the focal point for the use of military force. If the severity of this end state caused the enemy to continue to resist; then the planning assumption of a rapid victory would prove false and therefore impact the General Staff's campaign plan.
Since the German General Staff placed greater importance on technical proficiency and removed the soldier from the political decision making process, the army's leadership was inadequately prepared to counter Hitler's radical views on war.
Until the rise of Hitler and National Socialism German foreign political decisions had not exceeded the army's capabilities. Logically this pattern led the General Staff to believe Hitler's policies would not. Additionally, the German General Staff assumed operational planning would continue to be their responsibility. Hitler's decision to remove them CHAPTER 4
The National Socialist movement must strive to eliminate the disproportion between our population and our area-viewing this latter as a source of food as well as a basis for power politicsbetween our historical past and the hopelessness of our present impotence. 
1
After the fall of France in June 1940, Hitler focused his attention on Great Britain. According to Liddell Hart the Chief of the OKH, the German General Staff, the OKW and its operation department chief did not agree with Hitler's assessment of the Soviet Union. In addition to senior leadership various unit commanders disagreed as well.
According to Field Marshal von Runstedt, Commander Army Group South: Hitler insisted we must strike before Russia became too strong, and that she was much nearer striking than we imagined, He provided us with information that she was planning to launch an offensive herself that same summer, of 1941. For my part, I was very doubtful about this--and I found little sign of it when we crossed the frontier. 
2
3
How could Germany succeed where Napoleon failed? With this question in mind the General Staff began its planning effort for Barbarossa in July 1940. Hitler initially established several key military and political objectives during a meeting with the army leadership. The military objectives consisted of defeating the Soviet Army, establishing a buffer zone for German industry and seizing vast amounts of Russian territory. The intent was to destroy Russia's ability to resist, protect German industry from air attack and eliminate the capability for Asiatic Russia to continue the war once the Germans conquered western Russia. Politically Hitler expressed the desire to establish a separate Ukraine and Baltic States under German control. 
4
Preliminary planning for the operation fell to General Franz Halder. His initial plans focused on a quick drive to seize the Russian capital of Moscow and then subsequent operations to eliminate the Russian forces in the Ukraine and Baltic region.
He believed this would have the greatest chance for success as it would bypass the majority of the Soviet frontier defenses and cause the Red Army to fight on a reverse front. 
5
Marcks' plan identified the Red Army and the Russian capital as the enemy's COG. 
6
7
The vast territory and nature of Russia's geography provided unique challenges to Marcks' campaign plan. The most distinguishable among them was the terrain. (see figure 
1
Army Group North would be assigned the area north of Warsaw to the Baltic Sea and Army Group South would have from Warsaw to the Black Sea. The terrain north of the marshes favored mobility while the terrain to the south was more limited due to only one main highway leading east towards Kiev. Additionally, Russia's unimproved road network meant operations were best conducted either during the dry summer months before the rains started or after the winter freeze when the ground was solid. Since German operational doctrine focused on a quick campaign any slowdown would have a severe impact on operations. Germany's initial assessment of the Red Army estimated their forces at 121 divisions comprised of 151 infantry, thirty-two cavalry and thirty-eight mechanized brigades. 
8
The remainder of their forces faced Japan, Turkey, or Finland. During mission analysis the General Staff assessed the Red Army would defend western Russia due to the location of Russia's industrial centers. 
9
According to their terrain analysis the furthest east the staff thought the enemy would withdrawal was to the Dnepr River. The river was a natural barrier to Germany's advance and therefore posed the most logical course of action for defending Russia. The plan suggested an operation with a total of 147 German divisions, of which twenty-four were panzer and twelve motorized infantry. 
10
The German Luftwaffe's initial assignment was to support the Army Groups with close air support, battlefield interdiction and establishment and maintenance of air superiority. 
11
In order to support the two German Army Groups a logistics force was needed which could maintain sufficient supplies over vast distances. To complicate operations the German logistical tail would have to rely on poor Soviet road and rail networks which only got worse as the forces moved further and further away from their supply points.
The OKH placed emphasis on keeping the Red Army off guard using special operations units to seize key bridges and rail lines before the enemy destroyed them. The General the The first point was the importance of seizing Soviet supplies before they were destroyed. If the Soviets were able to destroy their infrastructure than valuable time would be wasted producing the necessary equipment required to exploit the agricultural and oil rich regions of western Russia. If seized intact, the equipment could immediately be pressed into service by the local population and used to support Germany's war effort.
The second point addressed the local populations and suggested using them to help support the German war effort. Their willing participation would become critical in order to maintain the uninterrupted flow of resources. As already discussed, Hitler expressed a desire in the planning phase to establish German controlled governments within the occupied territories. However, the details of the plan and how the population would be co-opted or coerced into aiding the Germans were not incorporated into the army campaign plans. Instead the details of soliciting the aid of the population were left in the hands of party officials.
The third point concerned the disposition of Soviet production centers within Russia. According to the survey seventy-five percent of the armament and one hundred percent of the precision-tool and optical industries were located in western Russia. 
13
There is no evidence the economic survey changed the operational planning considerations or even Hitler's attitude towards the campaign. Given Hitler's desires for an ideological war against the Soviet Union, consideration for the attitude of the Soviet people towards the German forces should have been considered in greater detail. If anything the economic survey strengthened the popular belief the campaign would be short in duration due to the location of Soviet industrial centers. As a result very little emphasis went into contingency planning for any potential for the campaign to last longer than originally forecasted.
Hitler signed the final draft of Directive No. 21 on 18 December, 1940 and detailed German preparations began for Barbarossa. In the interim months until the campaign's start the German Army continued its military build up of forces in Poland and Romania. In addition German forces continued to harass British shipping in the Atlantic, invaded Yugoslavia, Greece, and Crete and assisted the Italians in North Africa.
As the Wehrmacht prepared for the eastern campaign German forces were spread throughout occupied Europe and in support of operations in the Balkans and the Mediterranean. These operations delayed the start of Barbarossa until late summer. 
14
Germany launched its Russian offensive on June 22, 1941 and met with overwhelming success during the early stages of the campaign. The rapid movement of motorized forces encircled large numbers of Soviet forces. The major battles near Minsk, Kiev, Smolensk, and Briansk as well as other minor engagements resulted in the capture of over three million prisoners of war. 
15
Almost every planning assumption made by the OKH staff had proven false. The war they planned on waging against Russia was not the war Hitler had created. The campaign plan called for rapid decisive engagements over an extensive distance with limited lines of communication in order to destroy the Red Army. In addition to, but separate from the operational plan, was the desire to exploit the Russian resources using the assistance of the local population. Hitler's desire for an ideological war and the military's failure to plan for it severely impacted Germany's ability to achieve its strategic goals.
A disconnect between the political and military instruments of national power resulted in several mistakes concerning key planning assumptions. There are three critical mistakes which deserve particular attention because of their connection to shaping the conflict. The staff assessments identifying the enemy's COG, the operational effect of the population, and campaign timing considerations all played a major role in Barbarossa's outcome. To complicate the situation the planning assumptions were not re-evaluated during the campaign in 1941 even when data from the front indicated the planning assumptions were incorrect.
All three German strategic surveys produced by Marcks, OKW and OKH identified the Soviet Army as the center of gravity for the Soviet Union. According to the campaign plans, defeating the Red Army before it could withdraw to the east was the highest operational and strategic consideration. During the execution of the operation Hitler and the OKH primarily measured German success by analyzing the number of Red Army units destroyed.
One must keep the dominant characteristics of both belligerents in mind. Out of those characteristics a certain center of gravity develops, the hub of all power and movement, on which everything depends. That is the point at which all our energies should be directed. 
16
Despite the German Army's best efforts, they could not completely destroy the combat capabilities of the Red Army. As the Soviet Union's forces replaced losses using extensive manpower reserves, the German Army slowly exhausted theirs. This in conjunction with the ever increasing territory the Germans had to occupy and govern led to the culmination point of the German Army by the end of 1941. Also critically important to Russia's survival was the nature and character of Hitler's ideological war in the east which shifted the critical center of gravity from the Red Army to the population itself.
The Russian people became a force multiplier for the Red Army through their ability to replace troop losses. Although often ill trained, the Russian conscripts added mass to the Soviet Army and provided them the time needed to regain the initiative. The fact these forces would suffer horrendous losses at the hands of the better trained Germans did not overly concern the Soviet High Command. Unless the Germans could neutralize the Russian population from reinforcing the Red Army they could not eliminate the enemy force. They failed to plan against the likelihood of this factor as a significant obstacle to the attainment of Barbarossa's objectives.
The second planning assumption error concerned the local population. Of all of the factors this miscalculation had the greatest impact on the conduct of operation Barbarossa. Although this impact was not immediately felt by the Wehrmacht in 1941, the implication of the actions would have long lasting strategic affects on Germany's war in Russia.
As previously discussed a critical component of the enemy's strength at first appeared to have been overlooked by the OKH, the Soviet population. By reviewing the various strategic estimates produced by the OKW/OKH it appears there were some discussions concerning the local population's importance. Specifically the OKH's plan makes note of the fact of the anti-communist attitudes within European Russia. 
17
A military administration would have to be set up for the occupied areas. In the Baltic States, White Russia, and the Ukraine the military government agencies would have to work toward turning their authority over to autonomous, noncommunist local governments. 
18
The evidence of Hitler's plans for the Soviet people can be discerned by a meeting he held in July 1941 to discuss the future for German occupied territories within Russia. In attendance were Hitler, Henrich Himmler, Reichsleiter Alfred Rosenberg, Reichsminister Lammers and Field Marshal Keitel. 
19
Another interesting fact is the date of the meeting. The meeting was held nearly a month after the eastern campaign began and clearly shows a lack of concern connecting the military operation to German policies concerning the local population. Yet the policies developed from this meeting directly impacted the General Staff's campaign plan by shaping the nature of the conflict.
Several key passages from Himmler's minutes illustrate this point.
We will, therefore, point out we were forced to occupy, organize, and secure a territory. In the interest of the inhabitants we had to provide for law and order, food, transportation, etc. That this is a preparation for a final settlement should not be discernible. That should not prevent us from taking all necessary measures, such as shooting, exportation, etc., and we will do that, too. 
20
21
22
To further exasperate the problems the German Army was not equipped nor was the German economy geared to conduct an attritional based conflict lasting longer than the originally planned time frame. The decision to not provision German units with winter clothing illustrates the shortsightedness of German planners.
In December 1941 the Russian Army began its winter counteroffensive to push back the Germans from Moscow. This was not the first counter offensive from the Red Army; however it was the first which was successful. Although the Soviet counteroffensive faltered at the strategic level, this massive operation demonstrated to the German General Staff that the enemy was not going to be eliminated as easily as predicted. It would still take another three and a half years and millions more dead before the offspring of flawed German planning assumptions would storm into the ruins of Hitler's chancellery. Ultimately the German General Staff failed to grasp the true intent of Hitler's policies and the impact they would have on military operations. The lack of understanding of Hitler's political end state for Russia led the General Staff to make several incorrect assumptions concerning the nature of fighting on the eastern front.
These false assumptions proved fatal for operation Barbarossa.
The German General Staff approached the planning for Barbarossa just as they had done with the previous campaigns against Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and France. Without considering the impact Hitler's racial policies would have on the campaign plan, the General Staff failed to assess the correct lines of operation (LOOs). 
11
In describing how the strategist should approach an operation Clausewitz wrote:
The strategist must therefore define an aim for the entire operational side of the war that will be in accordance with its purpose. In other words, he will draft the plan of the war, and the aim will determine the series of actions intended to achieve it: he will, in fact, shape the individual campaigns and, within these, decide on the individual engagements. 
13
14
Clausewitz's quotation suggests the type of war should dictate the necessary actions required to achieve victory. In this light, if the General Staff had grasped Hitler's intent, they could have planned for an attritional based conflict. LOOs should have emphasized endurance and sustainment of forces rather than speed of maneuver and territory gained.
As our military leaders plan for future campaigns against potential adversaries the hardest question for them to answer is, "what is the desired end state?" In today's contemporary operating environment (COE) more than ever the answer has both a political and military component. The political end state may not always be made clear or may change during the campaign. This will affect military operations and therefore must be thoroughly understood by military planners. In addition our military leaders need to incorporate themselves into the decision making process when the political leadership is considering military action.
It is not sufficient for our military leaders to only be concerned with the application of military power. Political objectives significantly impact military operations, as the Germans discovered during Barbarossa. These political objectives can lead to failure if the military's lines of operation do not align with them. As Clausewitz wrote the desired end state will dictate the necessary actions the military must undertake in order to set the conditions for victory.
The difficulty our strategic military leaders have and the German General Staff never solved, is aligning lines of operation with the political end state. Recent military experiences during Operations Desert Storm, Enduring Freedom, and Iraqi Freedom have proven the U.S. military's dominance during major combat operations. However, achieving success during stability operations has proven challenging for our military planners.
Stability operations are not a new form of conflict. American forces have conducted this form of warfare since the Mexican-American War 1846-48, we have just forgotten the lessons learned from them. Military leaders need to not only understand the political dynamics of the COE but also to incorporate them into campaign planning in order to achieve strategic success. This will allow them to identify the correct LOOs dictated by the nature of the conflict Because of its size and capabilities the U.S. Department of Defense will continue to provide the bulk of assets for the war on terror. In order to gain the necessary understanding of the complex political dynamics surrounding our current fight our COCOMs need to have an active involvement in foreign policy decision making. Their expertise and knowledge in their AORs is critical to gain the necessary understanding of the political climate within the region. Furthermore our civilian leadership needs to acknowledge the importance of including them in the decision process in order to insure the desired end state does not exceed military capability.
Intangibles such as the affect of cultural and societal differences on operations are difficult to model or predict. Yet, these are the areas that can alter the nature of conflict therefore they pose the greatest challenges for our political leaders to understand when  
propaganda minister, Joseph Goebbels, delivered a speech with the intent of maintaining popular support for the war. In his speech Goebbels said "I ask you: Are you ready from now on to give your full strength to provide the Eastern Front with the men and munitions it needs to give Bolshevism the death blow?" 
19
Hitler's decision not to mobilize the German population early on in the war meant the Wehrmacht would fight an ideological war against Russia without the support from the entire German state. In Clausewitz's description of the trinity between a state's government, military and population, he suggested "a theory or policy would be flawed if it ignored any one of them." 
20
Clausewitz did not suggest his state was doomed to failure if the trinity became unbalanced. However, if the enemy correctly maintained the balance between their own elements then success would be much harder to attain.
Unaware of Hitler's vision, the German military began its rearmament in 1933, and utilized the same planning assumptions used in the past. As a result a gap formed between Hitler's political desires and the Wehrmacht's capabilities. Neither the political nor the military leadership recognized this until late 1942-43 when it was too late to reverse the course of the war without altering Hitler's mindset.
Staff also knew the Russian rail system would have to be converted because the gauge of rail lines changed as they moved from Poland to Russia. This would certainly complicate and slow down the logistical system if the Russians managed to destroy their rail rolling stock as they withdrew.
In August as General Marcks submitted his proposal, the OKH (see figure 
2
The intent was for the various staffs to validate the campaign plan through their own analysis. Although similar, the different operational concepts had two differences between them. All assessed the main effort should be focused north of the Pripyat Marshes, but the OKW/OKH plans suggested using three Army Groups instead of two.
Army Group North planned to seize Leningrad in coordination with Finnish forces operating around Lake Ladoga. Army Group Center would retain the task of capturing Moscow and Army Group South would continue its planned drive on Kiev and the Donets Basin.
The other significant difference in the plans rested with the importance placed on the capture of Moscow. In the OKH's and Marcks' plan the seizure of the Russian capital was paramount. Only after its capture would forces be redirected to support other Army Group's advances into Russian territory. The attack on Leningrad would only be a secondary effort and would not draw forces from the advance to Moscow. However, the OKW did not place the same level of significance on seizing the Russian capital. Under their plan Army Group Center's advance on Moscow would only be continued if Army Group North met with success in capturing Leningrad. If Army Group North met with stiffer resistance as the operation unfolded, than the OKW would divert forces from Army Group Center to assist. With the general outline for operations against Russia established the OKH began to war-game the campaign. Headed by General Paulus, the war-game allowed the General Staff to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the campaign plan. Staff officers openly discussed any points of interest in order to isolate problems and develop possible solutions. At the conclusion of the exercises the consensus amongst the Staffs was the eastern campaign would last no longer than ten weeks. 
12
The Armed Forces Economic Office under the direction of Herman Goering conducted the survey. The results of their assessment identified three key economic points that they assessed needed consideration during the campaign.
Closely linked to the second, time was the third major planning assumption which proved incorrect during operations on the eastern front. The predicted length of the campaign ranged anywhere from eight weeks at the earliest and up to seventeen weeks at the latest depending on which staff survey is examined. Although eight weeks was extremely optimistic, seventeen weeks would still be a difficult challenge given the German Army's disposition in 1941.
In the time frame planned the Wehrmacht had to take and hold 2,500 miles of front, eliminate the bulk of over 200 Russian divisions and sustain its force over 800 miles from its supply points. 
23
24
As the territory the German Army seized increased so did the partisan activity. Attacks along limited lines of communications and intelligence gathering forced the Germans to detail more forces to anti-partisan duty. German forces in turn increased the brutality of their operations which further drove the population to the Soviet side.
The resources needed to pacify an area increased as German forces moved further and further in country. These considerations impacted the OKH's timetable for operations by lengthening the campaign. As had already been discussed time was a critical factor for the Wehrmacht because of the approaching winter months. As time Bismarck's decisions during this period demonstrated the importance of close interaction between the two spheres in order to achieve Prussia's national objectives. Despite Moltke's protests, Bismarck subjected the operational objectives and military methods to achieve them to political review and correction. He insisted the military subordinate itself to the political, regardless of the impact on military operations. 
3
5
Bismarck's view on the potential of war was similar to Clausewitz's theory on the absolute nature of war. 
6
7
Following the defeat of the German Empire, the General Staff had the opportunity to re-examine the lessons learned from the war. However instead, Seeckt chose to focus on the scientific aspects of warfare and not political-military relations. Seeckt's views concerning the political affiliation of his officer corps hampered any attempt to examine the military's relationship with political institutions. 
8
9
10
As the campaign progressed the impact of divergent political objectives and military actions began to weaken the German forces. 
12
Operation Barbarossa concerning the relationship between the military and political spheres? First the importance of identifying the intended end state, either specified or implied, is critical to achieve strategic victory. Since the political leadership defines the end state, it is the military's responsibility to understand it thoroughly. Only with a clear understanding of the national objectives can our military leaders identify the correct lines of operation to conduct military campaigns.
The German General Staff generally believed they understood Hitler's intentions for conducting operation Barbarossa. They developed a concept of operations for the eastern front based on their previous experiences in Europe and assessed the enemy's  