# ID: 2a2fd0a3060342dca82160d27021efce
# Title: The Utility of Irregular Warfare in Great Power Competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The 2017 U.S. National Security Strategy (NSS) identified strategic competition between state actors, more commonly known as great power competition (GPC), as the nation's top national security priority. 1 However, the bulk of discussion among national security and defense experts has since centered around nuclear deterrence, new operational concepts and domains, high-end conventional warfare, superior conventional weapons technologies, and innovative weapon system development and deployment. 
2
3
Therefore, the essence of GPC can be understood with three factors: First, a nation seeks to impose cost on a state adversary, without provoking war, to weaken that country's global or regional standing; second, a state seeks to expand its influence in an effort to increase its own global or regional status; and third, nations seek to keep what they have won by protecting or defending their collected gains.
To date, the United States has focused on more overt efforts like deterring aggression via conventional military show of force to improve its position globally.
America's strong record of conventional military prowess has forced its competitors to adopt a strategy more in line with the first two factors of GPC. Russia, China and Iran, the latter of which is being included as in this discussion because of its regional stance against the United States in the Middle East, have each developed methods of imposing cost on the United States or of expanding influence as a means of amplifying their power projection. Though each has accomplished this in different ways, those ways have generally involved as asymmetric warfare, hybrid warfare, active measures, or unrestricted warfare, to name only a few. Essentially, these competitors have developed irregular methods of weakening the United States or expanding their own influence. Each of these cases will be discussed later in further detail, but it is important to identify their efforts as extra-conventional in order to consider appropriate responses.
If the United States truly seeks to compete and win in the competition phase without crossing into the conflict phase, it must consider irregular warfare as its primary vehicle.
Paralleling the first two strategies of GPC, the essence of irregular warfare is to impose a cost using non-standard or unexpected means on an enemy from a minimally exposed position to achieve a national or strategic objective. Similar to GPC, irregular warfare can also be understood as a non-standard or unexpected effort to expand influence to achieve a national or strategic objective. Definitions are important, but when one cuts through semantics and analyzes the core of what is trying to be accomplished, a clear parallel emerges between GPC and irregular warfare. This paper argues that irregular warfare, 
4
When irregular warfare is applied, either in its cost imposition or influence expansion form, its strategic output when successful should net a national or strategic gain.
Its collective execution across various theaters should then constitute an irregular warfare approach to or strategy for GPC, expanding influence when appropriate, but also forcing an adversary to overextend in other circumstances. To defend or retain a stable state-tostate relationship, deterrence and defense may be enough, although relationships, which can be strengthened through irregular activities like foreign internal defense (FID) or security force assistance, will likely play important roles as well. The more deftly irregular warfare is applied, then the more likely the United States will be at emerging from this bout of GPC in a position of strength.
Though this parallel between GPC and irregular warfare remains theoretical, practical applications throughout American history demonstrate the utility of irregular 4 Department of Defense, Irregular Warfare, DOD Directive 3000.07 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2017), https://fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/d3000_07.pdf. The document essentially defines Irregular Warfare as a blanket term describing non-conventional warfare, which may incorporate traditional warfare and the use of conventional weapons. According to this directive, Irregular Warfare is "a violent struggle among state and non-State actors for legitimacy over the relevant populations." This document also uses the term irregular to "describe a deviation from the traditional form of warfare where actors may use nontraditional methods such as guerrilla warfare, terrorism, sabotage, subversion, criminal activities, and insurgency for control of relevant populations." According to the document, IW also includes "any relevant DOD activity and operation such as counterterrorism; unconventional warfare; foreign internal defense; counterinsurgency; and stability operations." warfare as a means to a strategic or national end. Irregular warfare has the potential to weaken America's adversaries in relevant areas, expand American influence in contested areas where the United States decides to invest, and protect areas already considered solidly inside the U.S. sphere of influence. By committing to a GPC strategy that includes a welldeveloped plan irregular warfare, the United States can shape the current era of GPC in America's, and indeed the democratic world's, favor.
This paper examines two related research questions: How can irregular warfare enable the U.S. to influence the competition phase of great power competition? How can this approach simultaneously prepare irregular forces and irregular warfare options for employment during the anticipated conflict phase?
As the United States slowly withdraws from residual military engagements of the Global War on Terrorism, it has reengaged with a world of aspiring powers who seek to challenge American global influence and dominance. The 2017 NSS identified revisionist powers (China and Russia), rogue powers (Iran and North Korea) and transnational threat groups as the principal threats to American stability and security. 
5
6
7 Jim Mattis, "Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy," 2018, 2.
the reemphasis on strategic competition has generated different interpretations across the defense community.
Leaders with a more extensive conventional background have identified the need for investment in conventional military power because the NSS and NDS essentially require the United States military to improve readiness, reestablish deterrent threats, and prepare for war with revisionist and rogue powers. Taken solely on its face, competition with other great powers certainly increases the potential of a global conventional war, and it remains necessary, as it always has been, to prepare for major combat operations against capable enemies. In response to the rising concern over Russian and Chinese military advances, the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command presented an operating concept known as Multi-Domain Battle. The principle purpose of the published work is to "identify how the Army, working as part of the Joint Force, will operate against these peer adversaries to maintain U.S. interests, deter conflict, and, when necessary, prevail in war." 
8
While the need to fight and win wars is paramount, the emphasis that the NSS and NDS place on competition indicates that the United States also needs to actively compete now, not simply prepare for war. In order to contend now, the United States also needs to assess its adversaries and determine how they are competing. Dr. David Kilcullen's book,
The Dragon and the Snakes, seeks to understand the current environment and how nearpeer nations are seeking to compete with the United States. In short, Kilcullen argues that American success in conventional war and failure in asymmetric war over the last 30 years has taught America's enemies how to fight against the west. Writing about non-state enemies Kilcullen argues that, "our adversaries have adopted a suite of 'offset strategies' to sidestep our conventional power." 
9
In response to the actions of America's enemies, many military leaders, policy makers, and defense analysts have argued for a comprehensive response that counters adversarial actions during the competition phase. Author of the 2018 NSS Dr. Nadia
Schadlow, writing for War on the Rocks in 2014, discussed the need to operate between "passivity and large-scale intervention." 
11
12
Schadlow advocates for efforts to maintain peace because it "must be actively and consistently maintained by engaging in the political competitions that are its constant feature." 
13
14
15
16
17
The second gap, and the central problem with the majority of current scholarship regarding irregular warfare is its focus on actions required in the competition phase; their work does not translate to or address the legitimate arguments being made by conventional military leaders. As identified above, the stakes of major war between near peers are markedly higher than other types of conflict. To that end, this study seeks to bridge both research gaps by both exploring the potential for irregular activities to stave off major theater war while also preparing for it. This will be accomplished by analyzing the actions of America's adversaries in the competition phase and by exploring America's past experiences with irregular warfare in both competition and conflict. In doing so, this research will not only seek to identify specific and wide-ranging options that can be executed in the competition phase, but will also prepare irregular forces and irregular warfare options for employment during major combat operations.
The search for answers and options that build and remain relevant across phases of GPC is critical because those options can become the cornerstone of strategy. Actions and options, isolated by phase, risk being isolated solutions forced by enemy actions. Instead, options that span all phases of GPC will allow military leaders to think strategically by prioritizing actions in the current phase that could be employed as a supporting effort should conflict escalate to open military hostilities. Ultimately, filling these gaps in strategic thinking could increase U.S. effectiveness in shaping current and future environments. For this reason, it is the focus of this study.
In order to address these gaps and determine actions that may enable the United States to compete in the current environment and also prepare for future conflict, this study is organized into the following chapters. Chapter II argues that GPC will characterized by irregular conflict; it does this by analyzing and assessing the predominant contemporary responses to increased competition with near-peer adversaries, and how the U.S. is currently responding. It uses case studies of adversarial actions taken by Russia, China and Iran during the Syrian Civil War. Each of these adversaries clearly executed their own brand of hybrid, asymmetric or irregular warfare while also appearing to modernize its military. In response, the United States has focused its efforts on preparing for high intensity conflict, potentially ignoring an advantage it could attain by focusing more on irregular warfare in pre-conflict competition. The chapter closes by identifying critical elements regarding how and where along the spectrum of conflict America's principal competitors gain an advantage.
Chapter III looks at how irregular warfare can be used offensively, to impose costs and cause wicked problems for adversaries. This chapter presents case studies that examine the American experience with various forms of irregular warfare, and notes how irregular warfare provided strategic benefits. First, this study will analyze American support to the mujahedin in Afghanistan during the Soviet occupation from 1979-1989. Though there was limited involvement of U.S. military forces, this case allows for an evaluation of successful American efforts in proxy warfare. This case also occurred during the competition phase, and it therefore provides lessons that can be applied to the current competitive environment. This case provides particularly relevant insight into future policy in areas where the U.S. does not wish to commit forces, but where it does hope to draw adversaries into their own military quagmires. Additionally, this chapter examines how U.S. support to the Afghan mujahedin during the Cold War could translate well to the more complex problems in places like Syria where the current strategic environment gives the U.S. opportunities to counter its adversaries.
Chapter IV delves into an examination of how one form of irregular warfare, FID, can be used in defensive strategies, as a critical tool for strengthening and defending allies and partners. The first case study in this chapter looks at the experience of U.S. Army Special Forces in Bolivia during Che Guevara's efforts to create communist insurgencies throughout South American in the 1960s. This case will be assessed as an example of how strengthening the military capabilities of U.S. partners, through the use of FID, protects against potential threats of instability. Though not a state-on-state conflict, this case highlights the use of irregular warfare before the conflict phase. A second case study of the conduct of counterterrorism and counterinsurgency operations in the Philippines after 9/11 will also be analyzed. Like the case study on Bolivia, The U.S. involvement with military operations in the Philippines, specifically against the Abu Sayyaf Group and Moro
Liberation Front provides a case to examine the use irregular warfare, through FID, as a means to thwart adversaries in the pre-conflict stage.
Chapter V focuses on the role of irregular warfare in transitions between competition and conflict, arguing that pre-conflict irregular warfare activities not only help the U.S. compete, but also help should conflict escalate. This chapter's first case study assesses the development and employment of the Filipino Resistance of Japanese occupation during World War II. By studying this case, the utility and impact of a resistance and guerrilla activities in a high intensity conflict can be assessed. This case is additionally useful because the resistance and guerrilla infrastructure required to coordinated and conduct operations were developed during the conflict phase, not before.
This allows for reasonable speculation that the Filipino resistance movement would have been more effective if American military officers were not developing it amid a Japanese occupation, in a highly restrictive environment. The enhancement of the French Resistance by Jedburgh teams during World War II will also be examined. Similar to the Filipino case, the resistance activities in France were developed after the initiation of conflict. This example highlights difficulty of creating such networks and infrastructure after the fact.
Instead, paired with the cases that represent the competition phase discussed above, this case may demonstrate the need for preparatory actions in the competition phase.
In Chapter VI this study will examine the strategic options available to the United States during the competition phase. The case studies were chosen to understand how the United States has been successful in both the competition and conflict phases in the past.
The concepts and elements identified in the case studies will be used to generate strategic options that can influence the competitive phase and prepare for the conflict phase. These options will then be applied to allied nations, competitive spaces and potential quagmire states. Using the principles and strategic options, this research seeks to provide national and strategic level leaders with the ability to influence the competitive environment while shaping potential future high intensity conflict. Such options give the United States the ability to maintain its position of global leadership now while also shaping an advantageous future battlespace.
Despite all of the discussion in the national security and defense communities regarding the United States' engagement in interstate strategic competition 21 (more readily known as GPC), there has been little analysis as to how such a competition will play out.
Many assume that great powers will fight "great wars," but recent history suggests otherwise. 
22
First, the world remains in the nuclear age, and the constraints that places on violent escalation will most likely shape and limit the manner in which states compete for influence. Specifically, states will seek to manage their level of violence to prevent uncontrollable escalation much in the same manner that the United States and the Soviet Union did in the wake of the detonation of atomic bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the conclusion of World War II. 
23
24
Second, adversaries have acknowledged the United States' conventional military dominance since the Cold War, but they have also watched its struggles in facing irregular threats. Since the end of the Cold War, when engaged in a conventional fight, the U.S. has won handily. Such dominance, as in the case of the Gulf War in 1990 and the Invasion of Iraq in 2003, has shaped the competitive strategies of America's adversaries. 
25
Third, the number of global powers now vying for influence has risen since the Cold War, when only two superpowers existed: the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Today, The U.S. competes with Russia and China globally, and regionally with Iran in the Middle East.
Given that the Cold War primarily featured irregular war and low-intensity conflict rather than direct confrontation, such activity is likely to increase as more actors wrangle for influence and control in their areas of interest. The first two existing conditions, nuclear constraints and the development of irregular strategies, have already begun to shape and amplify the impact of the now multipolar world. Therefore, due to increasing global complexity and the participation of multiple actors currently employing irregular strategies, there are strong indications that U.S. responses to GPC will require an irregular approach.
ATOMIC AMNESIA?
The United States and the Soviet Union arose from World War II as dominant superpowers, and immediately began competing to extend the influence of their political  
31
In the post-Cold War world of the 1990s, the United States emerged as the dominant player on the international stage. Its adeptness on the diplomatic stage precipitated its extension of democracy into areas of former Soviet control. Such encroachment, intended by the United States to increase the number of democratic nations 30 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, "Status of World Nuclear Forces," Federation Of American Scientists (blog), September 2020. https://fas.org/issues/nuclear-weapons/status-world-nuclear-forces/; Colum Lynch, "Despite U.S. Sanctions, Iran Expands Its Nuclear Stockpile," Foreign Policy (blog), posted May 08, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/05/08/iran-advances-nuclear-program-withdrawal-jcpoa/; Michelle Nichols, "North Korea Has 'probably' Developed Nuclear Devices to Fit Ballistic Missiles, U.N. Report Says," Reuters, August 4, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-northkorea-sanctions-un-idUSKCN24Z2PO.
31 Graham-Ashley, "CSA Discusses Army's Growth, Modernization, Readiness during 2-Day Visit to Hood;" David H. Berger, "Notes on Designing the Marine Corps of the Future," War on the Rocks, December 5, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/12/notes-on-designing-the-marine-corps-of-the-future/. Ryan Evans et al., "How Is the Air Force Adapting to Great Power Competition?," June 5, 2019, WOTR Podcast, podcast, 31:23, https://warontherocks.com/2019/06/wotr-podcast-how-is-the-air-force-adaptingto-great-power-competition/. and thus reduce the chance of war, threatened Russia significantly. However, the lack of a Russian response indicated its incapacitation. The United States capitalized on the disappearance of Russian military power and demonstrated its traditional military prowess to the rest of the world by quickly and easily defeating Saddam Hussein's Iraqi Army during the Gulf War in 1991. The future aspiring powers, Russia, China and Iran, noted where the United States failed to score a convincing victory over irregular enemies. The inadequacies of the strategic application of U.S. traditional military power contributed to important innovations in the competitive strategies on the part of America's chief adversaries. These new strategies included both irregular elements designed to remain below an anticipated threshold for an American response and also included the development of advanced technology that could challenge American dominance. This technology included nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons as well as anti-access area denial systems and hypersonic missiles. 
32
33
34
35
The immediate balance of power disparity between American and Russian post-Cold War power can be seen in both the American effort to consolidate former Soviet states into NATO, and the weakening of the Soviet military. At that time, the United States capitalized on Russian weakness and exerted its influence to globally export democracy and establish the liberal international order. By poaching former Soviet states, the United States sought to expand its safety net of democratic nations. 
36
37
In a manner similar to the Soviet Union, the Chinese viewed the 1991 Gulf War as a stark warning that they were woefully unprepared to battle the technologically advanced U.S. military. The antiquated strategies of massing troops, which the Chinese had preferred in the past and on which the Iraqis had depended to account for technological weakness, had been crushed by the U.S. military. In fact, they concluded that they were vulnerable to attack and would lose such an engagement. 
44
45
46
47
45 Dean Cheng, "Chinese Lessons From The Gulf Wars" (Carlisle Barracks, PA: The United States Army War College, November 2011), 153-69. competition, seeking to negate U.S. advantages. The concept of Unrestricted Warfare, initially introduced by People's Liberation Army Colonels Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, sought to broaden Chinese military strategy by combining multiple elements of Chinese power with a renewed emphasis on military technology and Anti-Access/Area Denial weapons. 
48
50
51
52
48 Qiao Liang and Wang Ziangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing, China: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, 1999).
49 Qiao Liang and Wang Ziangsui, 7.
50 Tony Corn, "Peaceful Rise through Unrestricted Warfare: Grand Strategy with Chinese Characteristics," Small Wars Journal, June 5, 2010, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/grand-strategywith-chinese-characteristics. https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/grand-strategy-with-chinesecharacteristics 51 Kilcullen, The Dragons and The Snakes, 202.
52 Corn, "Peaceful Rise through Unrestricted Warfare: Grand Strategy with Chinese Characteristics."
Navy ships passing through international waters, in an effort to reinforce its claim. 
53
54
55
Also observing the Gulf War, Iran, having only three years earlier lost a lengthy and brutal war with the same Iraqi military, understood most pointedly the need to avoid conflict with the United States. 
56
57
58
Iran's nuclear program, conventional military capabilities, domestic politics and cyber activities play important roles in Iranian strategy and behavior, its use of irregular warfare through the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC), especially its foreign and covert component, the Quds Force (QF), and its network of proxies and militias, has been the primary tool used to impose heavy costs on the United States for its presence in the Middle East. Through the Quds Force, which is a highly selective and secretive wing of the IRGC. 
59
Hamas in the Gaza Strip, Hezbollah and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Lebanon, the Badr Corps in Iraq, the National Defense Forces in Syria, and the Houthis in Yemen. 
60
61
71 James Risen, "U.S. Sanctions Are Driving Iran to Tighten Its Grip on Iraq," The Intercept, December 10, 2019, https://theintercept.com/2019/12/10/sanctions-iran-iraq-protests/.
U.S. forces as further evidence of success. 
72
In no place is the complexity and prevalence of irregular warfare more evident than in Syria, where Russia and Iran combined to stabilize the Assad regime and preserve an important Middle East ally. Because of Syria's importance, Iran quickly intervened with support across the full spectrum of the elements of national power, but its most significant contribution came in the form of military advisors and the provision of paramilitary forces to bolster the fractured Syrian Arab Army. 
73
74
75
With the addition of Russian air power and advisors, the Syrian regime solidified its hold on Damascus and gradually expanded its span of control, and in 2016, the regime recaptured Aleppo. This proved to be a turning point that allowed pro-regime forces to relocate to other areas of Syria. Then, in 2017, a series of de-escalation zones, established with Russian assistance to facilitate a peace process, allowed pro-regime forces to relax efforts in southwestern Syria and refocus on capturing other portions of Syria, including Eastern Syria, which was controlled by the Islamic State. This move ultimately did contribute to the defeat of the Islamic State, as the de-escalation zones permitted the needed concentration of forces required to reassert authority over a substantial portion of Syria. 
76
77
As described above, the performance of the United States in traditional warfare using conventional forces has been recognized by other global powers, and despite their sustained efforts in modernizing and advancing their own militaries, it is unlikely that America's peer competitors will intentionally enter into or provoke open war with the United States. Instead, America's proven conventional military strength and its troubles in irregular conflicts of late has driven its great power adversaries to develop their own versions of irregular war (hybrid warfare, unrestricted warfare, and asymmetric warfare).
76 Atlantic Council, "Military Strategy -Breaking Ghouta," January 2018. https://www.publications.atlanticcouncil.org/breakingghouta/military-strategy/.
77 Greg Jaffe and Adam Entous, "Trump Ends Covert CIA Program to Arm Anti-Assad Rebels in Syria, a Move Sought by Moscow," Washington Post, July 19, 2017. https://www.washingtonpost.com/ world/national-security/trump-ends-covert-cia-program-to-arm-anti-assad-rebels-in-syria-a-move-soughtby-moscow/2017/07/19/b6821a62-6beb-11e7-96ab-5f38140b38cc_story.html.
Though distinct, the core of these strategies lies in their attempt to sidestep American strength and compete in areas where the United States struggles to find appropriate responses. These activities have already begun, and in a multipolar competitive space, they are likely to continue until effectively countered.
Other great powers have also individually recognized opportunities to advance using irregular warfare, and as long as such action continues to succeed, there is a high probability that it will continue. With every success, the world will grow more complex, with actors and their state sponsors increasingly maneuvering to achieve their goals and secure their interests around the globe. Given the deftness of the application of these irregular strategies, it would be inappropriate for the United States to rely on its conventional military prowess to quell these limited actions. First of all, the breadth of activity does not permit traditional confrontation in each case. The size and cost of conventional military deployments place constraints on when, where and why the military is used. Besides, at present, the United States displays an aversion to troop commitments of even the smallest scale, so it is unlikely that it would choose to do so in the near future. 
78
To conclude, America's influence, and its attendant liberal international order, are being challenged, not through a traditional military build-up, but through unique versions of irregular warfare that are shaping the competitive environment. Unlike the Cold War, the challenge to American influence has been launched from multiple actors who, understanding the nuclear implications of escalation and recognizing the traditional military dominance of the United States, prefer alternative techniques to chisel away American prestige and reputation internationally. These efforts are achieving notably strategic results, and they are unlikely to cease, even if total war breaks out. Therefore, as the United States determines when and where to counter its various competitors it will be critical that irregular responses be appropriately considered. How can the United States impose costs on its adversaries for their adventurism? How can the United States shore up its areas of influence? Although the overall strategy must be broad and all-encompassing, an American brand of irregular warfare can play a critical role in the areas where the United States chooses to compete.
Although the global challenges presented by Russia, China, and Iran, and the reemphasis on GPC have raised concerns for the United States, the reemergence of global challengers presents opportunities not found in the American-dominated unipolar order.
Despite developing effective irregular methods of challenging the United States, as discussed in Chapter II, the aspiring powers have ambitions that, while driving those nations for greater status and achievement on the world stage, are also a great liability.
Regardless of the ways that those aspiring powers challenge the United States, eventually, as is being seen in Syria, those countries will have to commit to their own interests. Though irregular in their approaches, that countries have demonstrated a willingness to invest in their treasure, military equipment, and the lives of their soldiers should be taken as a signal of national interest. It is this commitment that makes the aspiring powers vulnerable, and it is this vulnerability where the United States, through irregular warfare, could seek to impose costs in areas where it would otherwise be unwilling to dedicate forces.
At the end of the Cold War, the United States stepped into the role, whether intentional or otherwise, of the "world's policeman," a term applied to signify that global problems needed to be managed by the lone superpower in order to maintain a world moderated by the values of the liberal international order. 79 While there are examples of places where the United States failed to act in this manner, in most others, it did. However, with aspiring powers seeking to regain influence, the United States can be more measured in its approach. In fact, it has the opportunity, with minimal investment through an irregular approach, to impose considerable costs on its great power adversaries. These approaches should be reserved for areas where the interests of America's competitors make them vulnerable but where the United States has no interest in gaining, solidifying or expanding its own influence. Currently, this approach could apply to areas like Syria, a place where a litany of problems remains, and the United States has no desire to commit, although its adversaries do. By executing a strategy relying on an irregular approach, the United States would seek to impose costs by creating a tangled series of problems for the aspiring power with the goal of fashioning a disruptive foreign policy quagmire for that adversary. These approaches have been tried before and have succeeded in generating wicked problems for America's adversaries that significantly influenced the course of history, for example, in Afghanistan under Soviet occupation in the 1980s. Furthermore, to maximize the impact of this irregular approach, other elements of the craft must be applied, such as psychological warfare, economic warfare, cyber capabilities, information operations, subversion, etc. This will aid in effectively producing conditions, or wicked problems, that eventually overwhelm America's adversaries, ultimately contributing to the preservation of the free and open international order preferred by the United States and its allies. To illustrate the potential for the United States to create wicked problems for its adversaries, American covert activities in Afghanistan to support the mujahedin will be analyzed and the limited objectives of that operation will be applied to potential operations to disrupt Russia and Iran in modern day Syria. These cases combine to demonstrate that, through irregular warfare, the American irregular warriors should be used to create problems that block or disrupt the its adversaries from achieving their national strategic objectives.
A wicked problem is a system of interrelated conditions that contribute to a broad dilemma. The core problem exists as its own network of conditions, making it difficult to define, characterize, and solve. The reason for this is that a solution to one of those conditions affects, often negatively, the others in unforeseen or unpredictable ways.
Therefore, every effort to solve the problem at hand in turn creates additional issues that generate consistently negative outcomes. While wicked problems are typically discussed in an effort to create a solution, irregular warfare planners, who are seeking to impose costs on America's adversaries, should rather consider how to create wicked problems for America's chief competitors.
Wicked problems have plagued America in contemporary history as they have largely failed to be solved. The re-emergence of other nations seeking to exercise control abroad means that others will now have to confront the problems in their desired spheres of influence. It is this condition that irregular warfare can capitalize upon by amplifying the difficult conditions in certain countries to produce a set of problems in one place that ultimately prevent the advancement of an adversarial global order. In the current great power era, irregular warfare can serve to create wicked problems that impose considerable costs and present obstacles to the achievement of national goals and interests for U.S.
adversaries.
To accomplish this, irregular warfare practitioners can adopt a comprehensive approach of costs imposition that creates a more nuanced problem than simply an enemy to be fought. Instead, in this form of costs imposition, elements of warfare like deception, psychological warfare, information operations, sabotage, and subversion can be layered to create a network of problems that hinder success and, as a byproduct of frequent foreign policy struggles, create additional issues domestically. America's irregular warfare experts frequently subdivide capabilities, even within the same command or task force, rather than applying them in an equal manner. In order to achieve a truly networked and comprehensive approach, these capabilities would need to be considered equally. For instance, an attack on an aspiring power without an accompanying narrative to shape public perception simply creates targets to be attacked. However, if such an attack simultaneously were combined with a narrative that produced public animosity, negative economic consequences and an international legal challenge, the consequences extend beyond borders and creates additional problems. An approach that creates opportunities for the cascading of conditions and circumstances in a given nation or region both minimizes American exposure and maximizes costs on its adversaries.
From a broad perspective, the United States did this effectively during the Cold War, when it shaped the global perception of communism and used all of its capabilities to defeat the Soviet Union. In accordance with the policy of containment, which engendered constant competition, the United States applied concepts of irregular warfare in distinct ways. In areas where simply imposing costs served the national strategy, an appropriate package of practitioners employed all resources at its disposal to hamper Soviet expansions, draw the Soviets into disadvantageous competition and manipulate the Soviet Union into a vulnerable position. 
80
After Afghanistan adopted a communist regime in the late 1970s, President Jimmy
Carter signed a presidential directive, on 3 July 1979, to provide non-lethal aid to the mujahedin, Afghan "freedom fighters" who opposed the regime of communist leader Hafizullah Amin. Later that year, in December of 1979, as Amin's government appeared on the brink of collapse, the Soviet Union invaded and installed its preferred leader, Barbak As the Soviets grew increasingly bogged down in Afghanistan, they developed an effective tactic of helicopter-borne assaults on Afghan mujahedin positions and supply lines. 
82
88
89
Syria, Russia, and Iran, have signaled their interest in maintaining the status quo regime of Bashar al-Assad. The amount of resources and level of effort expended, primarily by Russia and Iran, indicates their desire to assert control over important states and regions. Given the residual and deeply problematic conditions that spawned Syria's now fizzling civil war, this presents the United States with an opportunity to impose costs and create problems for its adversaries. Because Russia and Iran have stepped forward in Syria, they are now responsible for its stability and reconstruction, and have shown through prior commitments that a friendly Syria remains in their national interests. 
90
Before laying out the opportunities, it is important to revisit and differentiate the versions of GPC that the United States would pursue versus those being executed by Iran and Russia. In Syria, Iran and Russia, as shown through their engagement in the Syrian Civil War, would each be attempting to expand its influence in Syria in order to improve its position in the Middle East. Conversely, as evidenced by troop withdrawals and statements by the Trump Administration of an aversion to remaining in Syria. The United
States would be attempting to impose costs on Iran, and potentially Russia to weaken their influence in the Middle East, without escalating to open warfare. 
91
91 Richard Hall, "Trump Says Syria Is 'Sand and Death,'" The Independent, January 3, 2019, https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/trump-syria-troop-withdrawal-us-sand-deathcabinet-meeting-military-a8709131.html.
Syria, which is one of its national strategic goal. The United States, for its part, would be executing the version of irregular warfare that seeks to impose costs on Iran by preventing Iranian influence in Syria with minimal exposure. The American strategic goals in this instance would be disrupting Iranian support to its proxy network and preventing Iran from directly threatening Israel, potentially preventing a broader and more open war in the Middle East. Additionally, it would be to harass Russia as it attempts to stabilize Syria, maintain a reliable ally, and preserve access to the warm water port in Tartus. With the relative versions of GPC and irregular warfare appropriately prescribed, a more thorough consideration of America's options can be considered.
Should the United States choose competition in Syria, it has the opportunity to stoke and support a ready insurgency in various regions of the country and develop a narrative of Iranian and Russian support for a ruthless dictator who gasses his own citizens. As demonstrated by the fervor of support for Vetted Syrian Opposition, who demonstrated a willingness to attack pro-regime forces in southern Syria in 2017, 92 the desire for continued resistance to Assad's rule persists in spite of the devastation of the nearly decade-long civil war. The brutality of Assad's campaign to retain power has not been forgotten and certainly concerns the Syrian people in areas where Assad regains control. This sentiment has likely only been perpetuated by the presence of the IRGC and its Shia militia groups throughout the conflict. Even though the IRGC emphasized that the fight in Syria was not against Sunnis but for Syria, the Syrian people clearly interpreted the events as an affront to the Sunni portion of Syria and an attempted Shia/Alawite consolidation of power. 
93
97 Institute for the Study of War, "Syria Situation Report: January 21 -February 4, 2020," posted February 2020, http://www.iswresearch.org/2020/02/syria-situation-report.html. A weekly report of that contains significant activities in Syria. This can be consistently accessed from the Institute for the Study of War.
98 Institute for the Study of War, "Pro-Assad Regime Forces Locked in Battle of Attrition in Idlib Province," updated July 2, 2019, http://www.iswresearch.org/2019/06/pro-assad-regime-forces-lockedin.html; Bethan McKernan, "Assad's Exhausted Army in Need of Reinforcements as Idlib Battle Looms," The Guardian, October 10, 2018. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/oct/10/assads-exhausted-armyin-need-of-reinforcements-as-idlib-battle-looms; War, "Syria Situation Report"; "The View from U.S. CENTCOM -YouTube." 99 Eric Schmitt, "Russians Pressure U.S. Forces in Northeast Syria," The New York Times, February 14, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/14/world/middleeast/russia-northeast-syria.html. willingness to engage Syrian Army elements. 
100
Clearly, the underlying factors that sparked the Syrian Civil War remain, as well as some additional dynamics. Bashar Al-Assad will not suddenly become less tyrannical, and the Arab rebels in northwest and southwest Syria remain unlikely to accept him. The Kurds and the Turks will remain enemies that threaten security along the northern border. The complexity of the situation in Syria has not been simplified, and it will likely take considerable Iranian and Russian investment if conditions are to ever stabilize. Considering their sluggish domestic economies and already strained international commitments, the price of creating a stable Syria may be too steep. 
101
With these factors present, how should the United States undertake irregular warfare in Syria should it choose to compete there? First, it could stoke, prepare and support the insurgency. The United States is well-positioned to accomplish this due to its presence in the peripheral corners, northeastern and southern, of Syria and its enduring relationships with the Vetted Syrian Opposition and its associated factions. Second, the United States could push the narrative that Russia and Iran support a brutal dictator who has, and will again, use chemical weapons against his own population. This would be a simple and true narrative that will stoke the rage of the Syrian people and force the international community to grapple with its relationships with Russia and Iran.
The preparations for such activity could actually begin prior to a complete troop withdrawal, while the United States remains overtly in Syria. Without appearing to increase its commitment, the United States could prepare the resistance to operate in a latent or 100 Carlotta Gall, "Turkey Declares Major Offensive Against Syrian Government," The New York Times, March 1, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/world/middleeast/turkey-syria-assault.html.
101 Andrey Ostroukh, "Russia's 2019 GDP Growth Seen Slowing to 1%, Central Bank to Cut Rates Further: Reuters Poll," Reuters, July 31, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-economy-idUSKCN1UQ1RQ.
incipient phase as it seeks to impose economic costs on Syria, Russia and Iran. Choosing a course of action such as this, again only if it chose a policy of competition in Syria, would allow the United States to exploit the vulnerabilities of its adversaries: Iran's exposed positions in southern Syria, Russia's poor attempts at counterinsurgency, and Syria's thinly spread military assets. 
102
103
103 Reuters Staff, "Israel's Outgoing Defence Minister Says Iran Starting to Withdraw from Syria," Reuters, May 18, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-israel-iran-syria-idUSKBN22U2MU. The Israeli Defense Minister's claim that Iran had started to withdraw troop was refuted by Iran. Interestingly, Iran refuted this by reasserting it goal of expelling the U.S. from Iraq. This is further evidence of its clear policy goal of a Middle East independent of U.S. influence. forces trained in irregular warfare, could impose significant costs on Iran, Russia, and Syria. While it unlikely that these countries could recover from a well-coordinated effort, even the costs of such an undertaking would serve strategic interests more broadly.
Additionally, the United States' most glaring vulnerability with regards to Iran is its unspoken constraint against initiating a ground war against Iran. Though the United States has taken unprecedented steps, such as the targeted killing of Qassem Soleimani, to curb Iranian malign activity, these actions fall well short of any strategic indication of a willingness to escalate to conventional war. This constraint, while reasonable, also emboldens Iran, as well as Russia. Therefore, introduction of additional overt U.S. forces in Syria would only enhance the vulnerability of large troop deployments in the Middle East. Much as has occurred in Iraq, Iran would view the troops as legitimate targets and may choose to stage attacks on them. This would eliminate the advantage that the United States currently holds in the GPC and irregular warfare arenas throughout the region.
If the United States chooses to engage in GPC in Syria, a recognition of the stakes and commitments of each side should aid in the selection of a strategy. Given Iran and Russia's commitment to expanding their influence in the Middle East, the United States needs only impose adequate costs and expose the weaknesses of its adversaries to achieve its strategic goal of weakening Iran and Russia in the region. Should the United States choose a policy of competition, proper application of irregular warfare could present it with additional strategic opportunities and responsibilities to capitalize on the failure of the Iranian and Russian venture in Syria.
By capitalizing on the instability and competing interests in Syria, the United States can turn the tables on the aspiring powers by harassing them incessantly there. This can be accomplished by combining American capabilities of irregular warfare and psychological warfare with the already in-place resistance to the Alawite regime of Bashar al-Assad. The goals of such an irregular warfare approach do not need to include regime change. The goals can be more limited and manageable, as they were in the initial stages of the covert action in Afghanistan. Harassing the Russians and Iranians and forcing the expenditure of their treasure would be a worthy goal of American irregular warfare in Syria. Harassment of those countries has the potential to disrupt the advancement of the Russian or Iranian agendas during this era of competition. Drawing additional resources and investment from either adversary could shape the overall competitive environment and allow the United States to preserve the overall status quo international order that has benefitted it and other democratic nations since the end of the Cold War.
Despite the potential benefits of supporting resistance movements, many would argue that these activities in places like Syria can threaten global perceptions of the United States. Certainly, there is inherent risk involved. However, adequate selection of the locations for this form of irregular warfare can mitigate those risks. Choosing to execute this type of irregular warfare in locations where resistance activities and instability already exist against a government leader whom the world perceives as corrupt, ineffective, tyrannical or illegitimate will minimize the risk to the American reputation. For example, in Syria, the United States could make the case that it is supporting the resistance to Assad's regime, which has used chemical weapons against his own people, bombed internally displaced persons camps, and will undoubtedly order reprisals in territory that the Syrian Arab Army regains. In doing so, the United States could also, through effective information operations, associated Assad's Russian and Iranian backers, making American support for the already active resistance much more palatable in the international community.
Irregular warfare has been used to effectively impose costs and disrupt America's competitors in the attainment of their national goals. In the renewed era of GPC, an irregular approach of this sort can be effective given the proper circumstances. To be truly effective, the team executing the strategy in each location should be tailored to that particular environment so that problems can be layered using a full range of irregular capabilities (guerrilla warfare, sabotage, subversion, cyber, psychological warfare, economic warfare, etc.) to maximize the impact and create a breadth of issues to ensnare America's enemies. While such an approach may be successful in individual cases, to truly shape the global competitive environment, irregular capabilities can be applied in multiple locations in a swarming and loosely networked manner. This singular aspect of irregular warfare would serve to distract America's competitors and drain them of resources, political will, and public and international support. The United States, however, utilizing irregular warfare of a different type could strengthen partnerships considered vital to maintaining the liberal international order that has bred success for democratic nations over the past 20 years.
While adopting a strategy of imposing costs where America's chief competitors are vulnerable can create negative and disruptive effects, other aspects of irregular warfare seek to create positive and stabilizing effects in America's sphere of influence. This has been accomplished in various ways throughout the country's history, but its predominant vehicle, from an irregular warfare perspective, has been through security partnerships and FID. FID is an element of irregular warfare that uses American advisors to train and organize security forces of a partner or ally against potentially destabilizing actors or forces. Such an effort, from the American perspective, prevents the deterioration of the status quo international order and creates additional proficient forces to combat instability, whether created by subversive state or non-state actors. By strategically utilizing this advisory role, the United States can employ irregular warfare as a non-standard means to expand or solidify its influence in pursuit of the national policy of preserving a free and open international order, especially when that order is threatened by encroaching Great or aspiring powers. 
104
Finally, by pursuing and maintaining these relationships, the United States, clearly signals its interest and intent to potential enemies. The investment of forces in an advisory role indicates that the United States and its partners would resilient against subversive actions and would resist an invasion or occupation with their full measure. In other words, investment in a country or region by the United States makes it clear to the enemy that military action there would not be assured success, and the potential for intense conflict would have to be weighed. 
105
A similar approach can be adopted in the struggle to protect important American allies who are threatened by the resurgence of other great powers.
In 1967, at the height of the Cold War, the United States, at the request of Bolivian President Ren Barrientos, sent an Army Special Forces Team to Bolivia to help solidify the country's defense in the face of a growing communist threat. 
106
108
109
States deployed a select Army Special Forces Team to maintain the stability of the democratic government and prevent communist subversive elements from threatening the government.
Guevara's resistance movement in Bolivia began in 1966, when Bolivia, off the heels of a coup d'tat in 1964, democratically elected President Ren Barrientos. Guevara, viewing Bolivia's checkered history, identified the conditions there as favorable to his revolutionary ideals. 
110
111
112
107 Jones Jr., 12-13.
108 Troy J. Sacquety, "Che Guevara: A False Idol for Revolutionaries," Veritas: Journal of Special Operations History, Special Edition: Special Forces In Bolivia, 4, no. 4 (2008): 31; Henry Butterfield Ryan, The Fall of Che Guevara a Story of Soldiers, Spies, and Diplomats (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 13.
109 Troy J. Sacquety, "Che Guevara: A False Idol for Revolutionaries," 31; Robert W. Jones Jr., "'Today a New Stage Begins': Che Guevara in Bolivia," Veritas: Journal of Special Operations History, Special Edition: Special Forces In Bolivia, 4, no. 4 (2008): 53.  110 Robert W. Jones Jr., "Beggar on a Throne of Gold: A Short History of Bolivia," 12-13.
111 Troy J. Sacquety, "Che Guevara: A False Idol for Revolutionaries," 53.
112 Alan C. Cunningham, "The Effects of the U.S. Army's Special Forces in Bolivia during Che's Foco," Small Wars Journal, November 11, 2020, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/effects-us-armysspecial-forces-bolivia-during-ches-foco.
To best capitalize on the country's instability, Guevara sought to establish his insurgency in the dense forest along Bolivia's border with Brazil. 
113
114
115
116
118
120
However, having received reports of insurgent activity in the rural eastern portion of his country, President Barrientos requested military assistance from the United States.
The United States agreed and specifically organized and deployed a U.S. Army Special Forces Team for the mission. It is important to note that the United States sent this team before any significant insurgent movement had begun; when the Special Forces Team arrived, there was not a widespread insurgency to deal with, only the beginning of a revolutionary effort. This made the situation more manageable and allowed adequate time for effective training. Though Guevara's presence was originally unknown, the deployment of the team is indicative of the wider global upheaval that threatened U.S.-led democracy. 
121
122
123
121 Henry Butterfield Ryan, The Fall of Che Guevara: A Story of Soldiers, Spies, and Diplomats, 91.   122 Charles H. Briscoe, "Introduction," Veritas: Journal of Special Operations History, Special  Edition: Special Forces In Bolivia, 4, no. 4 (2008): 2.
123 Kenneth Finlayson, "Turning the Tables on Che Guevara: The Training at La Esperanza," Veritas: Journal of Special Operations History, Special Edition: Special Forces In Bolivia, 4, no. 4 (2008): 77-78.  collective tasks that would be required in future counterinsurgency operations. 
124
125
126
127
128
In addition to expert training and engagement with local forces, key to the mission's success was the Special Forces Team's utilization of other capabilities inherent to irregular warfare, such as civil affairs, to establish rapport and gather intelligence on communist activity in the countryside. To better ingratiate itself with the local population, the Special Forces Team supported the local economy by frequenting local businesses rather than relying on their own logistical infrastructure for resources. The majority of the team's basic 124 Finlayson, 78; Christopher Rodriguez, "The Bolivian Insurgency of 1966-1967: Che Guevara's  Final Failure."  125 Finlayson, 76-85.   126 Finlayson, 83; Alan C. Cunningham, "The Effects of the U.S. Army's Special Forces in Bolivia during Che's Foco."
127 Kenneth Finlayson, "The 2nd Ranger Battalion and the Capture of Che Guevara," Veritas: Journal of Special Operations History, Special Edition: Special Forces In Bolivia, 4, no. 4 (2008): 95-96; Cunningham, "The Effects of the U.S. Army's Special Forces in Bolivia during Che's Foco."
128 Alan C. Cunningham, "The Effects of the U.S. Army's Special Forces in Bolivia during Che's Foco.." life support items were purchased through off of the local economy. Additionally, the team frequently ate and socialized with locals at nearby restaurants. This effort effectively established rapport with the local populace and provided ample evidence that the Americans were friends rather than foes. 
129
In addition to supporting the local economy, Special Forces medics taught sanitation and provided medical services to the locals. 
130
131
Finally, the Special Forces Team was instrumental in completing the construction of a school in cooperation with United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 
132
133
135
136
As a result, the United States Pacific Command leaned heavily on its Theater Special Operations Command, Special Operations Command -Pacific, to develop a plan to enable the Filipino counterterrorism effort. Given the extent of operations elsewhere at the time, first in Afghanistan and then in Iraq, the Philippines remained an "economy of force theater." 137 Correspondingly, Special Operations Command -Pacific approved a plan to build the Filipino Armed Forces' ability to defend against insurgency and terrorism and maintain national stability. 
138
139
140
The thrust of the effort against terrorism in the Philippines was centered on establishing a semblance of security in Basilan, the region where the Abu Sayyaf Group flourished. These efforts came from U.S. Army Special Forces, who initially focused on training Filipino forces in combat skills. The training produced more effective Filipino units, and subsequently, security forces increased their patrolling operations in Basilan.
The uptick in counterterrorist patrols gradually allowed Filipino forces to regain control at local levels, and established the security required to leverage other capabilities in the effort against Abu Sayyaf and other terrorist organizations. 141
With footholds of security at local levels, civic action, humanitarian assistance and information operations were employed to expand security and generate stability in the region. The United States supported the Filipino government's efforts to restore essential services and provide basic life support. 
142
143
Special Forces Teams on accompanying the partner force and on the employment of certain capabilities and tactics, must be identified. Without the resolution of these missteps, use of U.S. irregular warfare in the future would prove detrimental to its ability to effectively strengthen its partners and allies and prevent influence by other great power competitors.
The concept of employing small teams with a wide array of capabilities comes with the need to allow those experts a wider berth to operate to accomplish the mission. This certainly does not mean that operators can act as they please, but rather, that severe restrictions that limit American activities should be avoided, as they tend to also limit effectiveness. Instead, operations such as the battle against the Abu Sayyaf Group should have support from both the U.S. and host nation governments and clear but wide limits on American activities should be applied. 
144
Waiting until an issue arises may prove detrimental in that the problem may have taken root and will then require extensive effort to uproot. However, the Philippines remains as an example of a small number of American forces that succeeded in using a wide range of capabilities to counter an irregular enemy within the borders of an ally.
Through the analysis of the cases presented against communist insurgency in Bolivia and against terrorism in the Philippines, it is clear that American counterinsurgency and counterterrorism efforts effectively used irregular warfare to degrade and disrupt irregular threats within the borders of allies. Specifically, several important factors emerge.
First, the United States can and has employed irregular warfare to support and stabilize allies that are facing an irregular challenge. It is important to note that in both cases, these efforts occurred at the behest of and with the permission and participation of the host nation. This, therefore, represents the more overt side of American irregular warfare.
Certainly, operational security must be maintained, but American irregular forces will not always be operating in the same clandestine manner as would be expected when supporting resistance forces as discussed in Chapter 3. In fact, the clear policy and commitment to cooperation between the United States and the host nation greatly bolstered the efforts. 
145
Second, the counterinsurgent and counterterrorism elements deployed by the United States in these case studies leveraged a wide range of capabilities to counter their specific threats. In each situation, the special operations force was tailored to meet the unique characteristics of the enemy and the environment. While those capabilities remained relatively basic, utilizing operational training, civil affairs, and psychological operations, it is the concept of creating teams uniquely tailored for the problem that must endure. America's competitors employ a diverse range of capabilities in their efforts to upend the status quo, and small, networked units of American forces should be permitted to deploy with a plethora of capabilities to meet those challenges in multiple locations.
Depending on the situation, the requisite capabilities will likely be expanded and may include nonstandard military packages to account for the numerous axes along which adversaries are seeking to compete. These different capability packages, which will likely be needed at the small unit level, will be required to achieve the desired comprehensive effects. The combination of multiple capabilities is emblematic of the irregular approach and should be considered as a critical aspect of the American approach. The creation of tailored units capable of applying multiple capabilities to unique situations is an important characteristic of American irregular warfare and should be considered as the United States seeks to apply it to the current competitive environment.
Furthermore, future subversion, insurgency or other irregular threats will not necessarily look like Che Guevara's band of guerrillas or the Abu Sayyaf Group, and therefore, other capabilities may need to be utilized. In fact, the selection of these case 145 Hy S. Rothstein, "Less Is More," 286-87.
studies does not imply that counterterrorism or counterinsurgency principles hold true across the board in GPC, but they do demonstrate the ability of small, tailored teams to improve host nation capability and preserve the strategic value of key partner and allies.
Therefore, nodes of comprehensive irregular warfare capabilities that are small, agile, and comprehensive in their ability to counter foreign subversion and adventurism will be critical to strengthening America's allies and protecting its well-established international order.
Finally, using irregular warfare in this way to combat other great power aggression can help to eliminate subversive forces and make the allied host country more stable. By improving security forces in threatened or developing nations, the United States, through its important network of allies, can harden itself against irregular or asymmetric threats during GPC. Such an approach should be considered in any case where the United States has clear interests that directly conflict with its adversaries. As competitors venture into that space, the United States must have a ready option to prevent instability and close the door to actors seeking to revise the international order in their favor. With Russian efforts to expand its borders, and Chinese designs on multiplying its influence, an irregular warfare strategy, uniquely applied, has the ability to maintain stability in exposed American allies.
Such efforts should be aimed at preventing subversive or adversarial elements or ideas from taking root, and in maintaining stability and resiliency in the face of an encroaching enemy; they can also prevent or diminish the effectiveness of competitors in cultivating influence and change in areas where the United States has a national interest in retaining an allied relationship.
Despite the benefits offered through a networked and comprehensive irregular warfare campaign, proponents of investment in conventional military modernization argue that America's chief competitors have chosen to employ their own irregular strategies ultimately as a preparatory measure for full-scale conflict. These more discreet operational activities are meant to dissuade U.S. involvement, allowing for continuous but measured progress while they build their conventional forces to a level of parity with the United States. In fact, this argument is true: as Chapter II notes, adversarial irregular strategies, are multifaceted. America's competitors are employing their brand of irregular warfare in lieu of leverage provided by traditional military balance. While the Russians focus on hybrid warfare, they are also modernizing their nuclear arsenal and making significant technological advancements within their military. 
146
147
148
149
151
Despite being established in a hostile environment, the United States Armed Forces in the Philippines, North Luzon (USAFIP-NL) exemplified the utility of a resistance network and demonstrated numerous ways that an irregular force can be an asset to a traditional one. While the USAFIP-NL sought to execute effective disruptive attacks in the years before the American landings on Luzon, they also provided value to the Allies as they planned their landing and future offensive operations in the Philippines. It is this mindset, one of execution of the present mission while simultaneously planning for possible future roles in conjunction with conventional forces, that truly captures how the irregular approach can be scaled from extremely limited involvement to full-scale conventional intervention. The utility in adopting a networked and scalable irregular approach to competition is in its ability to influence the competitive environment and the conflict phase simultaneously. With ready irregular forces, the United States, should conflict occur, can call upon those forces to support future operations without needing to generate them after the fact, as has been done more often than not in the past.
In the case of the Philippines, ten hours after the bombing at Pearl Harbor, the Japanese began their invasion of the islands. In a campaign that culminated in March 1942 with the withdrawal of American forces, including General MacArthur, out of the need to 151 Peter T. Sinclair, "Men of Destiny: The American and Filipino Guerillas during the Japanese Occupation of the Philippines" (Fort Leavenworth, KS: School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army Command and General Staff College, 2011), https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a558187.pdf.
perimeter of the island while also degrading the readiness and capability of the defending force. This gradual erosion of readiness and focus on the defense prompted the Japanese to withdraw their forces to the interior of the island to prepare a defense in the mountainous terrain. 
157
158
These methods, created between guerrillas and the Army Air Force pilots, also contributed to the future of air-to-ground coordination, and provide another example of the effectiveness of combining American technological and traditional military advantage with irregular forces operating with an intimate knowledge of the area. 
167
168
168 Mike Guardia, American Guerrilla: The Forgotten Heroics of Russell W. Volckmann, 134-37.  lines. Accomplishing this provided the Allies with an air strip to support future bombing of the Japanese throughout the Pacific and greatly improved the logistical efficiency in resupplying the Sixth Army and the USAFIP-NL. 
169
170
171
the Normandy invasion, flaws in the employment of those forces provide critical lessons for their future efficacy in operating with conventional forces.
The allied employment of the Jedburgh teams, three to four men inserted into
France to organize the resistance and conduct guerrilla warfare against the German occupiers, yields several important distinctions from the USAFIP-NL. First, Eisenhower recognized the potential benefit offered by the French Resistance and included their activities in the larger plan for the invasion of France. Second, despite this positive recognition of the capability of irregular warfare in the planning stages, the Jedburgh teams, for primarily political reasons, were not infiltrated into France until 5 June 1944, only one night prior to the landings at Normandy. 
172
In the planning phase for the Normandy invasion, Eisenhower, the Supreme allied Commander, recognized the presence and potential of the French Resistance. With estimates placing the number of resistance forces near 100,000, Eisenhower sought to employ the Maquis, French guerrilla fighters, to disrupt German movement and logistics behind their forward line of troops. In order to accomplish this, the Allies included the Jedburgh teams as part of the invasion plan to link up with resistance forces and direct a guerrilla warfare campaign in support of the main allied invasion. 
173
their task was to execute guerrilla operations with the Maquis that would support other ongoing allied operations. 
174
The critical component necessary for achieving strategic results was the amount of time allotted the Jedburghs on the ground with the Resistance. Though not necessarily the fault of Eisenhower, as political considerations delayed the infiltration of the Jedburghs, the decision not to insert the teams until the night prior to D-Day minimized the influence that the allied advisory teams could have on the direction of resistance operations. In cases where the Jedburghs joined with well-organized and prepared elements of the Maquis, tactical operations succeeded and proved relevant to the strategic objectives of the invasion.
However, where the Resistance was not fully developed nor harbored an ulterior political motive for its operations, the Jedburghs generally failed to marry their operations to the larger allied strategic picture. 
175
176
For the teams, problems created by the lack of a cohesive resistance delayed their expected execution of their tactical mission. Instead of focusing on training and equipping the forces or on planning operations, the Jedburgh teams spent valuable time mitigating differences between the competing resistance groups in an effort to unify them. 177
In addition, even with the fragmentation issue, the unexpectedly large numbers of Maquis could not be accommodated with training and weapons due to the limited time for this to be supplied. This exacerbated the political sensitivities and highlighted the lack of time to appropriately develop the Resistance in France. Those teams that succeeded, generally did so because the resistance was more united and well-developed in their areas of operation. Those teams who struggled were neutered in preference for a hopeful attempt to plug tactical liaisons into ready-made resistance networks. Unfortunately, those networks were not without flaws and drawbacks that affected the overall usefulness of the Jedburgh teams to the wider campaign. 178
These vignettes of contrasting experiences among Jedburgh teams further demonstrate the larger point about the need to allow adequate time for American advisors to organize and train their partisan forces and to direct them in operations that support the  Such an assessment of the untapped potential is captured in the Epilogue of Irwin's book as he quotes a British member of the Jedburghs, Sir James R.H. Hutchinson, who would later serve as the British Under-Secretary of State for War: "Jedburgh teams were more than justified. The pity is that more were not sent sooner as was requested. The maquis wanted them and asked for themallied officers were recognized immediately as having and offering views unbiased by French internal questions; they could have no axe to grind.
The Jedburgh conception was truly founded. It was, alas, not used to the full.
180
Irregular forces can and have provided key benefits to traditional forces at the commencement of hostilities. Therefore, the choice in GPC does not need to be between investment in irregular approaches and conventional military power. Rather, investment in irregular warfare can feed into the eventual plan for the introduction of conventional forces.
It would be wasteful to build relationships with local forces to employ a resistance movement during the competition phase only to reverse course and abandon the irregular approach altogether in preference for the traditional military activities during open conflict.
Therefore, in keeping with the need for a networked approach to GPC, irregular warfare leaders must plan for escalation from the beginning of American involvement.
While seemingly planning for irregular warfare to fail, it is actually this preparation that makes irregular warfare efforts in the competition phase transferrable to conventional forces in the event of war. Planning for escalation of this sort should be done from the beginning, concurrent with any other type of irregular warfare. Such efforts prepare resistance forces for future employment in support of conventional forces.
During that planning, adequate preparations should be made continuously to provide viable options for future indigenous support for conventional operations. As
Volckmann did in a denied area, these preparations should include the development of an intelligence network, communication systems, contact procedures, infiltration routes, safe areas, logistical networks, etc. Anything that could be called upon to support future operations by indigenous or irregular forces or the U.S. military should be considered throughout the campaign. With these considerations, America's irregular approach to GPC becomes useful if planning for escalation in traditional conflict fails. Even if the irregular approach fails to adequately shape the competition phase or prevent open war, the necessary groundwork that supports the combat environment will have been laid.
By doing this, a comprehensive, networked irregular approach achieves the characteristic of scalability and modularity. What may with a handful of troops practicing the irregular approach could grow to a larger effort to train and employ irregular forces. That effort could grow more still into a conventional operation with irregular forces supporting the wider war effort. This is how irregular warfare remains relevant for conventional military operations. Even though the larger fear that the United States' conventional military will not maintain its edge, must be addressed, irregular warfare can aid in tipping the balance in future conflicts.
In sum, the contrasting cases of the use of irregular warfare to support traditional warfare offer insight into best practices for the integration of irregular and conventional forces. First, American advisors of irregular forces should plan for escalation from the outset of the campaign so that they are immediately relevant in the war effort. In the case of the USAFIP-NL, this did not occur, and leaders like Volckmann spent many months developing reliable resistance networks under Japanese occupation. Second, engagement of irregular forces prior to conflict can allow adequate networks to form. If this engagement before a conflict does not occur, it is equally important for traditional commanders to exercise patience as the irregular network is validated in a denied environment. As evidenced in the Jedburgh case, a late infiltration can cause teams to depend more on the existing resistance organization rather than on the skills of the advisor. As such, this strategy relied on luck for success rather than on the ability of advisors in organizing for and executing guerrilla warfare. Third, while working with irregular forces, effective communication should be established between the irregular and traditional forces so that appropriate actions can be synchronized between both elements. In Volckmann's case, the establishment of communication took two years. His organization would likely have been better served with consistent and reliable communication with SWPA. Fourth, American irregular advisors and their forces should plan and recommend the best ways for their integration into conventional operations. This allows the irregular forces to convey their strengths to conventional forces and, as in the case of USAFIP-NL, for the development of combined operations that capitalize on each other's strengths. All told, an irregular approach that considers and prepares for the possibility of escalation to traditional conflict serves the United States during the competition phase and contributes to success in the conflict phase as well.
With the publication of the 2017 National Security Strategy and the 2018 National Defense Strategy, the United States has declared a renewed focus on GPC. In response, each armed service branch has sought to prepare for major power war, under the assumption that competition breeds war. However, an effort to prepare for advanced largescale military engagement solely focused on preparing for conventional combat, rather than competition, constitutes an incomplete strategy. Though the notion of competition conjures visions of a major war between superpowers, the emphasis placed on competition in the NSS and NDS requires the United States generate a complete concept of how it intends to compete. American efforts to bolster U.S. conventional forces or large-scale military concepts, while necessary in the event of war, do little to affect the current competitive environment. These new approaches to competition are slowly shaping the overall environment because America's adversaries have developed irregular strategies to successfully circumvent American traditional military power.
Though it clearly cannot represent the full thrust of American strategy during GPC, American irregular warfare can shape this current era in critical ways, most notably by imposing costs on America's competitors in areas important to them, and by strengthening allies and partners by preparing forces that are resilient and resistant in the face of external threats. In fact, on a smaller scale, the goals of irregular warfare parallel the goals of GPC.
In the latter, nations seek to improve their geopolitical position by weakening opponents by imposing costs without sparking escalation and by expanding their influence to enhance their own status. In parallel, though more localized, irregular warfare seeks to impose cost through non-standard means without exposing the nation to the potential of traditional conflict, or by expanding influence in pursuit of an individual national or strategic objective. Stated simply, individual irregular operations around the world can aggregate to form the collective irregular strategy for competition between great powers. Irregular warfare, applied selectively and appropriately, can help the United States maintain the international order that has allowed free nations to thrive. There are three primary ways where irregular warfare can influence GPC: disrupting its adversaries' pursuits, expanding its sphere of influence and in preparing irregular options in the event of traditional conflict.
First, irregular warfare can shape the competitive space by disrupting the efforts of America's adversaries through the intentional generation of difficult problems for its competitors in areas where they have signaled national interest or commitment. These efforts could range from supporting resistance activities, as illustrated by U.S. support to the mujahedin in Afghanistan in the 1980s, to information operations, influence operations, or cyber operations designed to foment an untenable public sentiment in a particular country. A potential modern application can be found in Syria, where Russia and Iran have both invested heavily, signaling their interest in the survival of the Assad regime. Given the United States' unwillingness to commit to a long-term investment and the fragile and fractured population, Syria is a place where U.S. irregular warfare could be used to impose costs on an adversary as it attempts to stabilize its ally. Actions in Syria, as was the case in Afghanistan in the 1980s, could be designed in such a way to limit American direct involvement while also draining Russia and Iran of financial and military resources. This model could be tailored to appropriately fit other situations globally in a coordinated, but decentralized effort, to overwhelm America's competitors in their attempts to roll back the status quo.
Second, the use of irregular warfare can help the United States expand its sphere of influence by strengthening and solidifying partners and allies that are under threat from America's great power adversaries. To accomplish this, the United States can utilize the framework and model of FID which, among other successes, eliminated the communist insurgency in Bolivia in 1967 and significantly reduced the reach of Abu Sayyaf Group in the post-9/11 Philippines. However, instead of focusing on internal threats, this type of irregular warfare would be designed to build "resilience and resistance" within a nation's borders. The intent of these efforts would be to harden a partner nation's population to external subversive efforts designed to weaken the state and separate it from Western influence. Additionally, in areas where the external threat is deemed particularly high, the United States can begin openly developing resistance forces to dissuade that action if possible, and to resist occupation if necessary. In either case, the United States grows its sphere of influence, signals its interest through overt investment in allies and partners, and creates difficult challenges for other great powers by preparing resistance to their subversive or offensive actions.
Third, while executing the two aforementioned versions of irregular warfare, the potential for traditional conflict should be actively recognized; planning for this potentiality will make irregular warfare relevant to the traditional military services and will avoid the mediocrity found during WWII. In light of this, the small units conducting these operations should develop plans and contingencies for the use of their partnered irregular or professional forces to support future conventional operations. In the case of WWII, in both
France and the Philippines, irregular forces were generated after the fact to support the needs of the Allied powers. In France, Jedburgh teams achieved varying degrees of success, but they were inserted too late to truly affect the structure and effectiveness of their resistance organizations. As a result, their success depended upon the degree of development and already established effectiveness within their partnered organizations.
Developing these forces ahead of time, instead of creating them during a crisis in a nonpermissive environment, will make them more easily employed and avoid excessive risk.
By contrast, Russell Volckmann did succeed in creating guerrilla forces in North Luzon, Philippines during World War II, but it took him years in the non-permissive environment of Japanese occupation. Still, his organization succeeded both in disrupting Japanese forces prior to the introduction of American conventional forces, and in operating in conjunction with those conventional forces to defeat the Japanese in North Luzon. While the case of the Jedburghs demonstrate the need for planning ahead of the need for irregular forces, the case of the USAFIP-NL demonstrates that irregular forces can effectively support conventional operations, before and after their introduction to the theater. Even during these initial phases of GPC, all planning for irregular operations should consider a trajectory that includes escalation to war.
As evidenced through historical cases, American irregular warfare has shown itself capable of shaping permissive, semi-permissive and non-permissive environments in positive ways. In the non-permissive environment of Afghanistan in the 1980s, the United States supported resistance activities in an effort to disrupt Soviet activity there. In the end, the Afghan mujahedin, supported by the United States, expelled the Soviet superpower in 1989 and imposed significant economic, political and reputational costs that contributed to the eventual downfall of the U.S.S.R. Through its military and paramilitary organizations which are well-versed in irregular warfare, the United States can achieve similar results in appropriately selected environments. In fact, the U.S. Army Special Forces and the CIA's paramilitary forces were developed during the Cold War for exactly this purpose. However, instead of being asked to solve difficult problems like terrorism and insurgency, they would be asked to create difficult problems that would stifle the progress of America's adversaries. Without getting into detailed planning, this may include sponsoring and directly supporting resistance activities, as occurred in Afghanistan, creating negative perceptions through information warfare, and disrupting partnerships by shedding light on predatory lending practices. Candidate locations for this type of activity range from Syria, where relationships with resistance organizations endure, to Africa, where instability dominates and other great powers appear ready to invest. How these forces can be used, and the problems that they can create in specific areas in order to shape the overall competitive space, is only limited by creativity.
In more permissive environments like Bolivia in 1967 and the post-9/11
Philippines, the United States developed security forces that successfully thwarted irregular threats from a communist insurgency in Bolivia and terrorism in the Philippines, leading to better internal stability. Irregular warfare can be used to develop similar concepts and programs aimed at countering great power subversive or irregular activities within the borders of an American partner or ally. An appetite for such activity has already been signaled in the Baltics and in Eastern Europe, given the creation of preparatory national resistance to external actors' movements. 
181
The special operations community is the one most likely to execute irregular warfare during GPC, and its leaders are debating how best to remain relevant in this era.
Designing irregular warfare in the manner described here will constitute a better way to use this capability. In order to remain a part of the larger plan, some SOF leaders have conceded that a Special Forces Detachments primary responsibility is to "observe and report." Others have argued that SOF will be most useful conducting strategic reconnaissance and, at the appropriate moment attacking hard targets to support greater conventional operations. 182 However, this perspective is short-sighted, and captures only a momentary snapshot of SOF in large-scale combat operations.
Instead, by viewing SOF's role in GPC along the irregular warfare continuum described above, those forces can shape competition and prepare these options for war.
During the competition phase, irregular warfare seeks to maintain the status quo and avoid war by preserving American dominance. However, in recognition of the potential for war, irregular warfare allows for the preparation of irregular options, which have always been desired in war, to achieve victory should that war come. This irregular strategy for GPC will still fit with other parallel governmental and military efforts and, taken holistically, will give the United States a distinct edge in maintaining the advantage during GPC and related conflicts.
(1) Small, Agile, and Purpose-Built Elements
The elements selected to perform irregular warfare missions should remain as small as possible, while still maintaining mission management. Contrary to some of the successful operations in the aforementioned case studies, special operations now have hefty headquarters elements that contribute to inefficiency by holding significant capabilities at higher echelons. Going forward, the United States should avoid cumbersome headquarters 182 Hal Brands and Tim Nichols, "Special Operations Forces and Great-Power Competition in the 21st Century," American Enterprise Institute -AEI (blog), August 4, 2020, https://www.aei.org/researchproducts/report/special-operations-forces-and-great-power-competition-in-the-21st-century/; Brandon Turner and Paul Bailey, "The Joint Force-SOF Relationship: Support Roles in the Resurgence of Great Power Competition," Marine Corps Gazette, January 2020, https://mca-marines.org/wpcontent/uploads/The-Joint-Force%E2%80%93SOF-Relationship.pdf.
(2)
Think in Terms of Campaigns, Not Missions Given that the United States is still at the outset of developing its GPC strategy, it will be important for leaders and policy-makers at all levels to think in terms of campaigns rather than individual missions. As evidenced in the case studies on World War II, Volckmann in the Philippines and the Jedburgh Teams in France, preparation for the use of irregular elements in war is critical for their prospects for success. Because there was no network prepared to resist in the Philippines, Volckmann spent years developing a guerrilla force before truly making an impact at the tactical and operational level against the Japanese in North Luzon. Additionally, the determining factor in the success of the Jedburghs, who were capable operators, rested on the organization of the resistance elements that they encountered on the eve of the Normandy invasion. Instead of repeating these short-sighted mistakes, the United States should consider the trajectory and longevity of its operations as it develops its irregular warfare strategy. It should begin by developing resilience and resistance in its partners, but these preparations should always be focused on the potential utility of those forces in the event of an external invasion or in the event of war between great powers. In the grand scheme of defense spending, investment in a select and appropriate number of these programs can shape the entire campaign of competition and impact future conflict as well.
(3) Identify Appropriate Locations for Each Type of Irregular warfare Moving forward, policy-makers, researchers, and military planners should leverage regional and irregular warfare expertise to determine locations where irregular warfare is viable and would support American strategic goals. As countries or regions are located and deemed appropriate for irregular warfare, a broad intent can be developed by policymakers, who would determine what the United States would gain through irregular warfare in a particular location. Once that intent is determined, the remainder of the planning can be done at lower, operational and tactical levels, in keeping with the previously described recommendation to keep units of action small in number but diverse in capability. Of course, the plan would then need to be approved at the strategic level, where limitations and constraints can be imposed if needed. This determination of strategic intent at higher levels and planning and execution at tactical and operational levels will help keep operations connected to national policy and goals while remaining decentralized and agile in execution.
(4) Capability Focused, Not Unit Focused Frequently, as operations are considered, the question of "Who is going to take the lead?" inevitably arises. However, based on this research, this appears to be the wrong question. Instead, as evidenced from successful irregular warfare case studies, the question should instead be: Which capabilities are required to best accomplish the stated intent?
Commanders and other leaders should be chosen for their ability to identify the intent and create a cohesive team where each of those capabilities is leveraged appropriately. Too often, commanders are chosen because they command a certain or special unit, rather than for their ability to create an effective unit out of personnel from different communities. In many cases, the result has been an organizational structure heavily focused on one capability, rather than on the purposeful application of all capabilities to accomplish the goal. Instead, Special Operations Command should create purpose-built task forces that have been tailored for the operational environment and the intent of the mission. Creating teams built from capability rather than from organizational structure will make them more effective and efficient in the accomplishment of the mission. It will also connect them to the full gamut of national assets, while still allowing decentralized execution in each theater of operations.
(5) Embrace Competition
While the United States typically hesitates in the execution of irregular conflict, a strategy with irregular warfare as a critical component to effectively check great power expansionist efforts and shape the latest iteration of GPC. If the United States fails to demonstrate the same commitment to competing as its adversaries, it will likely have its global leadership and its preferred global order curtailed by the advancements made through the irregular strategies of its chief competitors. Instead, the proclamations made by the NSS and NDS should drive the American military to include irregular strategies in pursuit of competitive advantages.
24 Henry A. Kissinger, "Military Policy and Defense of the 'Grey Areas,'" Foreign Affairs 33, no. 3 (1955): 416-28, https://doi.org/10.2307/20031108; Jeremy Suri, "Nuclear Weapons and the Escalation of Global Conflict since 1945."
This directly challenged the United States during the American occupation of Iraq from 2003-2011, when Iran's Quds Forcesponsored surrogates attacked American interests and sparked violent ethnic conflict to increase Iranian-sponsored Shia influence in the Iraqi government. 62 Iran effectively subverted the American efforts.
This directly challenged the United States during the American occupation of Iraq from 2003-2011, when Iran's Quds Forcesponsored surrogates attacked American interests and sparked violent ethnic conflict to increase Iranian-sponsored Shia influence in the Iraqi government. 62 Iran effectively subverted the American efforts.
Department of Defense, Multi-Domain Battle: Evolution of Combined Arms for the 21st Century, 2025-2040 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2017), https://www.tradoc.army.mil/Portals/14/Documents/MDB_Evolutionfor21st.pdf
Michael J. Mazarr, "Mastering the Grey Zone: Understanding a Changing Era of Conflict," December 1, 2015, 158.
Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2020 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2020), https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/ 2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF.
Kilcullen, The Dragons and The Snakes, 26; Andrew Scobell et al., eds., Chinese Lessons from Other Peoples' Wars (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2011), 153-200.
William Ruger, "Why Americans Want a President Who Ends Endless Wars," (blog), The National Interest (The Center for the National Interest, August 17, 2020), https://nationalinterest.org/blog/skeptics/ why-americans-want-president-who-ends-endless-wars-167041. Though this tends to remain a political issue, the numbers articulated in this poll suggest a desire to curtail troop deployments.
Wendy McElroy, "How America Became the World's Policeman," The Independent Institute, posted March 20, 2015, https://www.independent.org/news/article.asp?id=6336; "Must We Be the World's Policeman?," The New York Times, May 3, 1964. https://www.nytimes.com/1964/05/03/archives/must-webe-the-worlds-policeman.html.
Otto C. Fiala, Resistance Operating Concept (MacDill Air Force Base, Florida: Joint Special Operations University Press, 2020), https://jsou.libguides.com/ld.php?content_id=54216464.
Robert W. Jones Jr., "Beggar on a Throne of Gold: A Short History of Bolivia," Veritas: Journal of Special Operations History, Special Edition: Special Forces InBolivia, 4, no. 4 (2008): 8.   
David S. Maxwell, "Operation Enduring Freedom Philippines: What Would Sun Tzu Say?,[21][22] 
Kilcullen,  The Dragons and The Snakes: How the Rest Learned to Fight the West, 29-30.
Mike Guardia, American Guerrilla:  The Forgotten Heroics of Russell W.Volckmann, 129.   
Benjamin F. Jones, Eisenhower's Guerrillas: The Jedburghs, The Maquis & The Liberation of France (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2016). Prologue;
Benjamin F.Jones. Prologue; Colin Beavan, Operation Jedburgh: D-Day and America's First  Shadow War (New York, NY: Viking Penguin, 2006), 35-36.   
Benjamin F. Jones, Eisenhower's Guerrillas: The Jedburghs, The Maquis & The Liberation of France. Prologue; Will Irwin, The Jedburghs the Secret History of the Allied Special Forces, France 1944, 1st ed. (New York: Public Affairs, 2005), xvii.
Benjamin F. Jones, Eisenhower's Guerrillas: The Jedburghs, The Maquis & The Liberation of France. Epilogue.
Will Irwin, The Jedburghs.   
Irwin. Epilogue.   
Nick B. Israel, "Resistance, Resilience, and Everyday Citizens as an Element of National Power," Special Warfare 32, no. 3 (December 2019): 22-25.
http://www.forthoodsentinel.com/news/csa-discusses-army-s-growth-modernization-readiness-during-2day-visit-to-hood/article_05c2a64a-8aaa-11e8-a32c-ebb36700efba.html; 
Paul McLeary
Flatline: SecDef Esper Says DOD Budgets Must Grow 3-5%
" Breaking Defense
06
2020
3 
Department of Defense, Summary of the Irregular Warfare Annex
National Defense Strategy (Washington, DC: Department of Defense
2020
2020/Oct/02/2002510472/-1/-1/0
Eric Robinson
revolutionaries in Bolivia, they did set favorable conditions and built positive civilian sentiment that contributed to operational success. 
134
Though not specifically countering a peer-state actor, the success of the mission remains an example of how irregular warfare can be used to strengthen capabilities of American partners and can prevent the sprawling influence of adversarial irregular forces.
While this case presents numerous tactical lessons about the conduct of FID, the strategic impact matters most in terms of relevance to GPC. While the immediacy of these results, the Bolivian Rangers captured Guevara within one month of completing their training with U.S. Special Forces, cannot be guaranteed, the mission indicates the broader ability of this form of irregular warfare in hardening allies against potential threats to stability. Similarly, to the Bolivian experience, a more modern example of FID can be seen in the Philippines.
During the early stages of the Global War on Terrorism, as U.S. counterterrorism and counterinsurgency efforts greatly expanded in Iraq and Afghanistan. However, counterterrorism operations in the Philippines remained small and irregular, despite the 134 Briscoe, 74.  of irregular warfare as a key component of U.S. strategy as it relates to GPC. First, inaction against adversarial irregular strategies ignores the strategic effects being attained in that realm. Second, and importantly, this argument also ignores the utility that irregular warfare has played and that conventional forces have needed it to play in even the most traditional of military conflicts. Evidence of such utility can be found in the cases of the American- respectively, indicates that irregular warfare even benefitted the overwhelmingly traditional military power of the Allies before and during the conflict. Though many lessons, both positive and negative, can be gleaned from their efforts, each offers an indication of how irregular forces can support traditional forces in war.
When U.S. forces withdrew from the Philippine Islands in 1942 at the outset of World War II, a small number of Americans remained behind. These Americans were authorized by their respective commands to develop and employ a Filipino resistance network against the Japanese occupiers. preserve combat power and reconsolidate resources for the war in the Pacific. 
152
153
Volckmann, who had served as the Executive Officer for the Filipino 11th Infantry Regiment would, eventually become the commander of the USAFIP-NL. 
154
155
156
162
164
After the Allies landed in Lingayen Gulf, the USAFIP-NL was reassigned to the Sixth Army and turned their operational attention to offensive operations designed to defeat Japanese forces that were now entrenched in the mountains. Such operations lasted from January until August of 1945 and required the decentralized efforts of all of Volkmann's district to achieve strategic results. Because of the collective knowledge within his ranks of the location of enemy positions, Volckmann made arrangements and established rudimentary communication procedures with the 308 th Bomb Wing for his guerrillas to direct aircraft in the bombing of Japanese defenses in the mountains. 
165
166
The USAFIP-NL provided numerous examples of successful operations where U.S. Army conventional units participated in support of or supported by guerrillas. The benefits provided by the Filipino guerrilla forces in retaking North Luzon are but one example and justification for the United States to commit to a more comprehensive and networked irregular approach to GPC.
In no way do Volckmann and the USAFIP-NL's achievements in North Luzon mean that irregular forces will always be successful. Several factors must be understood so that appropriate conditions can be set to increase the effectiveness of the irregular approach. First, the United States Army had been present in the Philippines in advance of the Japanese invasion. Many of the men who remained in the Philippines had worked with Filipino military forces in the past. Second, though Volckmann is critical of the Filipino conventional forces at the beginning of his memoir, the training and military collaboration with American partners cannot be discounted. This should encourage the United States to engage with local forces and populations in important areas during the renewed era of GPC.
Third, no communication method had been preestablished, and it took years for the USAFIP-NL to regain communication with SWPA. Contingency means of communication, especially now in the era of vastly superior communications technology, must be considered when irregular forces are adopted. Such consideration will increase the relevance and value of irregular forces.
General Eisenhower, in need of a way to harness the potential of the French Resistance, sent small teams of American, British and French soldiers, dubbed the Jedburgh teams, into France ahead of the allied invasion of Normandy. His planned use of resistance forces and guerrilla warfare in conjunction with a large conventional campaign further indicates historical recognition of conventional forces' utility for an irregular supporting effort. However, the manner that the Jedburgh teams were employed also provides evidence that irregular forces need time and effective means of communication to be most effectual. In the French case, despite being designed for use from the outset of over single missions, and instead rely on regional task forces to oversee multiple missions.
This allows small, individual missions within individual countries to be purpose-built.
Instead of selecting elements from a single unit, or even a single department, the U.S.
military should adopt the practice of forming teams based on the needs of specific missions.
While difficult, because American irregular units are organized according to line and block charts, all missions are unique and, especially during competition with great powers, require teams that are tailored to succeed.
While simply selecting a company of special operations personnel to tackle a problem is tempting, it would be more appropriate and more beneficial to allow one small team to create its own miniature task force, drawing on capabilities that will prove critical in the future. With the reemergence of information warfare, political warfare, unrestricted warfare, and hybrid warfare, American irregular warfare must expand to include a wider array of these capabilities and be able to leverage them more quickly and efficiently. This occurs by keeping elements small, with no excessive headquarters element, and encouraging them to form cohesive conglomerations of capabilities. Though this will differ according to each mission's needs, this may include capabilities like cyber, psychological operations, civil affairs, legal advisors, and economic and political advisors, to name only a few.
However, the United States military already builds large task force headquarters according to the needs of the mission. These headquarters do not allow the tactical and operational units the flexibility and agility to employ them appropriately. Instead, they labor at larger headquarters and are frequently held up by systems and processes that must filter all the way down the chain of command. In the small, agile, purpose-built model proposed here, those capabilities are pushed down where they can be utilized more quickly and where they will be encouraged to be an important part of the unit of action. Oversight is still necessary and will still be present, albeit at a more strategic level with less organizational infrastructure in the middle.