# ID: 2a5a23e3a4ca4a7fb395dbdd2466966e
# Title: Organizational Identity Bias and Planning: Resistance to Post-Conflict Military Governance
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The US Army boasts a long history of providing governance in the aftermath of combat, from conflicts in Mexico to Iraq. The Army is the only organization with sufficient resources to perform governance, which is required to connect tactical victory to policy objectives. However, this monograph proposes that institutional bias limits the Army's conception of military power to large scale, decisive combat, derived from historical anomalies such as the Second World War. The organization's understanding of the application of military power is challenged by the requirement to provide governance, which is subsequently underrepresented in doctrine, organization, and training. The consequence has been poor preparation, inadequate allocation of resources, civil-military conflict, and often, failure to realize policy objectives following tactical success. This monograph seeks to understand the Army's institutional bias against governance by examining the preparation, execution and response to military governance in Operations Just Cause, Panama, and Operation Iraqi Freedom. The Army must identify bias if it is to overcome it, and the repeated failure to prepare for governance in the past suggests that it is not a question of evidence, but aversion. By understanding the nature of this bias, the organization will be better positioned to objectively assess the causes of success or failure of past operations and
The US Army boasts a long history of providing governance in the aftermath of combat, including after conflicts in Mexico, the Southern States, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Panama, China, the Philippines, Germany, and Japan.0 F 1 This trend has continued since the Second World War with interventions in Central America, Europe, and the Middle East, where the Army provided governance in the absence of a functioning civil authority. In almost every instance, the Army was the only organization with sufficient resources to perform governance, which sought to connect tactical victory to policy objectives. However, in each instance, there was strong resistance to the military performing a governance function, from both the military and civilian leadership.
Resistance to military governance persists, despite repeated evidence that combat alone does not achieve desired political ends. Resistance is evidenced by civil and military commentary during recent conflicts and in the Army's approach to governance in doctrine, organization, and training. The Army embraces a delineation of civil and military responsibility that sees the aftermath of combat as a civilian responsibility. However, conflict rarely ends with a clear and accepted victory, and circumstances often force the Army to provide governance when no civil institution is available for the transition of authority. The consequence of resistance has been poor preparation, inadequate allocation of resources, civil-military conflict, and often, failure to realize policy objectives following tactical success. This monograph proposes that institutional bias limits the US Army's conception of military power to large scale, decisive combat, derived from historical anomalies such as the Second World War and the First Gulf War. Meanwhile, frequent limited-wars and governance 1 US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-57, Civil Affairs Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 2-8.  missions are ignored or seen as distractions from the Army's true purpose of destroying enemy forces in a definitive combat phase. The organization's identity and understanding of the application of military power are challenged by the requirement to provide military government or governance support, and it subsequently excludes governance from doctrine. The result is repeated shock as the institution is forced to adapt during subsequent operations to unexpected and unplanned governance tasks. This monograph will analyze the impact of the Army's institutional bias against military governance. The Army must identify bias if it is to overcome it, and the repeated failure to prepare for governance in the past suggests that it is not a question of evidence, but aversion. By understanding the nature of this bias, the organization will be better positioned to objectively assess the causes of success or failure of past operations and will be more inclined to incorporate governance into operational planning.
The combat phase of operations receives the preponderance of attention in planning because it is perceived as the phase that presents the most existential threat to the force. However, in Operation Iraqi Freedom, before President George W. Bush's 'Mission Accomplished' speech, the US military suffered 139 casualties, a figure which climbed to over 4,000 in the ensuing insurgency until combat missions ceased in 2011.1 
F 2
While predicting future wars is fraught with danger, governance has occurred in past conflicts across the entire spectrum, from peacekeeping to large scale combat operations. Wars are fought to reform the behavior or nature of an adversary's government, making governance an inescapable requirement to connect tactical victory to policy objectives. Barring some 
2
Failure to plan and conduct governance may prove both lethal to troops and terminal to the attainment of policy objectives.
The US Army today is emerging from a long period of counterinsurgency operations and the global war on terrorism. Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (2017), presents military governance as an extreme case, which reflects institutional bias and an effort to return the military to its preferred focus on decisive combat operations.2 
F 3
The US Army wrote FM 3-0, Operations (2017) within the broader context of the 2017 National Security Strategy, signaling a shift in focus for the United States away from counterinsurgency and nation-building in the Middle East, towards great power competition against the potential peer adversaries of China and Russia.3 F
4
However, the Army also acknowledged that combat success did not itself equate to policy objectives, reflecting the experience of recent wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army identified a need for action beyond the destruction of the main enemy force to achieve enduring strategic success. FM 3-0, Operations (2017), therefore, introduced the Army's new strategic role of "consolidation of gains." The manual identified the consolidation of gains as the missing link between tactical victory and strategic success. This monograph contends that the consolidation of gains reinforces the Army's narrow conception of war and does not address the critical role of military governance, which is a distinct concept. While consolidation of gains is an undisputed requirement to prevent enemy resurgence, conflating consolidation of gains with a connection to policy objectives is a critical flaw. It is, therefore, important to distinguish between the definition and scope of these terms.
The proponent doctrine publication, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations (2019), defines the term consolidate gains as "activities to make enduring any temporary operational success and to set the conditions for a sustainable security environment, allowing for a transition of control to other legitimate authorities."4 F
5
1
6
Joint Publication (JP) 3-57, Civil Military Operations (2018) is the proponent doctrine for military government, defined as "the supreme authority the military exercises by force or agreement over the lands, property, and indigenous populations and institutions of domestic, allied, neutral, or enemy territory, therefore substituting sovereign authority under rule of law for the previously established government."6 F
7
8
So if military government and governance operations already reside in doctrine, what is the purpose of this monograph? The problem lies in the treatment of governance in capstone doctrine. By failing to make explicit that the military is responsible for governance once the sovereign authority is deposed or degraded, and by delinking governance from the attainment of strategic objectives, joint and army doctrine remove governance from the organization's consciousness and discount it as a core component of operational planning. FM 3-0, Operations (2017) acknowledges that international law requires the military to provide governance in the absence of a functional host nation government; however, it qualifies military responsibility for governance as an extreme case. In fact, such conditions are both frequent, and potentially inherent, in wars of attrition where the enemy is destroyed or dis-integrated, or where policy aims to reform or replace an adversary's government.
Throughout history, the US Army has found that combat and security have fallen short of achieving policy objectives, and have subsequently provided governance and governance support to achieve the political aim of war. This monograph uses the term governance to encapsulate either military-led, or military-supported, civil administration. It proposes that in successful campaigns, governance is indistinguishable from combat, thus defying classification or separation as a distinct phase or form of war.
There is sufficient historical evidence of the Army's repeated adaptation for governance to consider governance a proven requirement. As such, this monograph does not attempt to justify the requirement for military governance beyond identifying that, historically, decisive battle has proven chimerical; a narrow focus on battle rather than war has squandered early tactical successes, and the failure to consider governance and strategic objectives has resulted in grinding attrition.8 F
9
10
The literature review provides an overview of relevant research, which underpins the subsequent hypotheses and analysis of the case studies. The review commences with an overview of academic theory on the nature of bias and institutional identity, leading to a conceptual overview of the military's identity and conception of war, and finally an empirical overview of the impact of this conception on military operations.
What is known as cognitive bias encompasses elements of the theories of sociology of knowledge, historical method, and scientific revolution. These theories explain the influence of identity and experience on individuals and institutions, and their influence on the interpretation of events. The relevance of bias to this monograph lies in American political scientist James Rosenau's distinction between value and empirical theory, with empirical theory aspiring to isolate bias and provide central tendencies that encompass the highest possible degree of probability.1 0F
11
The first question of fundamental importance to this research is how knowledge comes to be institutionalized. Noted sociologists Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann describe this process as habitualization and institutionalization, by which individual and collective experiences are typified and embedded into the organization's social stock of knowledge. The organization determines which experiences will be embedded and passed to subsequent generations through a process of selective retention, and as the stock of knowledge expands, the organization creates sub-universes to allow for greater specialization of knowledge. The organization tolerates these sub-universes only so long as they do not conflict with the organization's core beliefs.1 1F 12 American Cold War historian John Gaddis pursues the question of what knowledge passes to subsequent generations in his inquiry of historical method. Gaddis describes the representation of past events as "the rearrangement of reality to suit our purposes," enabled through the three frames of selectivity, simultaneity, and scale.1 2F 
13
American philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn argues that our interpretation of new events is contingent upon the existence of a paradigm, which is an incomplete representation of the past.1 3F 14 The paradigm obscures other processes and theories which may better explain events, and only when it consistently fails to explain developments can a competing paradigm replace it.
Kuhn's theory thus indicates that the existing paradigm governs the interpretation of new information and experience, and the absence of competing theories means that only failure serves as the catalyst for change.
The sociologists Berger and Luckmann argue that we must understand the historical processes that produced an institution to understand it truly.1 4F 15 Thomas Builder, a RAND Corporation analyst who conducted a landmark study into service culture throughout a two-year assignment within the Department of Defense, argues that each military service has a unique identity and dominant concept of war, shaped by the memory of a historical experience that exemplifies organizational competence and power.1 5F 
16
14 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1970), 113. 
15
16
Army's identity and conception of war. Builder argues that experiences which do not validate this core conception, no matter how frequent, form secondary and subordinate concepts of war, which are relegated to fringe elements of the organization and not emphasized in organizational development or planning. Rather, the dominant conception of war drives the qualitative development of the force.1 6F 17 American military theorist Antulio Echevarria describes this as a separation of war's first and second grammars, with the first grammar of large scale, conventional warfare embraced as the organization's core purpose, and the second grammar of irregular conflict regarded as a lesser, exclusive, and specialist skill.1 7F 18
The idea of secondary concepts of war is expanded upon by military historian John Lynn, who identifies a divergence between realities of war and discourses on war.1 8F 
19
Historian Edward Drea supports this phenomenon of rejection through his argument that, while military defeat may serve as a catalyst for change, the key determinant of whether a change 
17
18 Antulio J. Echevarria, "American Operational Art, 1917-2008" in The Evolution of Operational Art: From Napoleon to the Present, ed. John Andreas Olsen and Martin van Creveld (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 152. is accepted is how an institution views the defeat through the lens of its military tradition.1 9F 20 Conrad Crane, director of military history at the US Army War College, builds on this thesis to argue that, emerging from the Vietnam War, the US Army viewed counter-insurgency as an aberration from its understanding of war, and an experience it wished to avoid. Crane contends that, instead of adapting to achieve the closer integration of military and political tools indicated by that conflict, the Army responded by a singular focus on large scale combat, and interpreted the Gulf War as a validation.2 0F
21
22
23
Having established a theoretical and conceptual understanding of the Army's identity and conception of war, this next section explores literature addressing the impact upon operations. For instance, historian Max Boot addressed the impact of legacy and paradigmatic war experiences on the war in Vietnam, quoting General William Westmoreland's famous dictum, "we know how to do this war. We're going to put massive firepower down on our targets because that's the way we did it in World War II and Korea. That's the American way of war."2 3F 24 British military historian Hew Strachan argues that the US Army modeled its approach to Vietnam on a preferred template of conventional war in Europe, reflecting the entrenched separation of civil guidance from military operations, and the consequent disconnect of military strategy from policy.2 4F 25 Former Deputy National Security Advisor for Policy Nadia Schadlow contends that the Army's conception of war elevates the defeat of enemy military forces above a connection to policy objectives. Schadlow points to an extensive history whereby the defeat of enemy forces failed to establish the conditions desired by policy, and the Army was subsequently required to lead on the provision of political and economic order. However, Schadlow points to a repeated reluctance to accept responsibility for the planning and execution of governance, the disbandment of governance organizations once they have achieved their immediate purpose, and the separation of planning and expertise for governance from the regular Army. Schadlow argues that the exclusion of governance capabilities from the regular force, and their placement in unresponsive reserve elements or special forces, is evidence that the Army considers governance extraneous to the conduct of war.2 5F 26 American military historian Frederick Kagan argues that the US Defense establishment has accepted a simplification of Carl von Clausewitz's work On War, resulting in a fixation on destruction of the enemy's force, as well as the belief that political success will inevitably follow. Kagan contends that the separation of military and policy objectives is evident in planning processes that focus on Phase III of the Joint Phasing Model -Dominate Activities, as opposed to commencing with Phase IV -Stabilize, which is the phase that achieves overarching policy objectives. 
The literature review supports four hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that the Army sees itself as an organization designed and intended for short, decisive, large scale combat operations, and that governance does not inform this identity. The second hypothesis is that bias causes governance to be ignored when planning combat operations, which can lead combat operations to fall short of achieving policy objectives. The third hypothesis asserts that the Army has been forced to adapt to provide government or governance support because of the absence of suitable institutions. Finally, the fourth hypothesis is that the Army rejects governance as contributing to the operation's success or failure, and thereby fails to codify the centrality of governance in doctrine.
The monograph will use a structured, focused comparison of two case studies involving military governance. The case studies will be analyzed through focused research questions, allowing for a direct comparison of data. The two case studies selected are Operation Just Cause, the 1989 invasion of Panama, and Operation Iraqi Freedom, the 2003 invasion of Iraq. These case studies seek to demonstrate the applicability of governance across the spectrum of conflict, from low-intensity regional interventions to large scale, multi-national combat operations.
The case studies will be analyzed through five research questions to test the four hypotheses. Question one asks, "what were the policy objectives of the conflict?" As detailed in the literature review, the goal of war is to satisfy a policy objective, which must, therefore, be central to the development of the military strategy. The monograph expects to find that, in both case studies, the policy objective extended beyond the destruction of enemy forces to the attainment of a stable environment and the establishment of a government more acceptable to US interests.
The second and third questions are related: "did the planned military objective nest with the policy objective," and "did planning consider the provision of governance and the transition to legitimate authority?" The monograph expects that if the military strategy was nested then planning would consider the transition of authority and the force would be assigned resources and tasks to assume governance responsibility. Fourth, "was the Army required to provide governance or governance support to achieve policy objectives?" The study expects that the defeat of enemy forces would not of itself achieve policy objectives, and governance of the population would be required to stabilize the situation and enable a transition of authority.
Fifth, "if governance constituted a requirement, was this incorporated into subsequent doctrine?" The study expects that, if governance materially contributed to the successful attainment of policy objectives, then it would be reflected in subsequent lessons learned and encapsulated in doctrine.
This section analyzes two case studies: Operation Just Cause and Operation Iraqi Freedom. The case studies will consist of the background, key organizations involved in planning, and overview of the operation. A detailed examination of the role of governance in the operation will follow each case through the use of research questions posed in the methodology.
The monograph will then summarize each case study in preparation for the final analysis in the subsequent section.
In June 1987, Panamanian dictator General Manuel Noriega was publically accused of drug trafficking and the assassination of political opponents, leading to protests and calls for his The Panamanian Defense Force (PDF) consisted of approximately 14,000 troops, of whom 4,000 were combat forces.3 7F 38 US troops in Panama numbered approximately 13,000, and airlifts commencing on 20 December delivered an additional 14,000 troops. XVIII Airborne Corps, forming JTF South under SOUTHCOM, coordinated the near-simultaneous action on 27 
33
34
37
38
President Bush did not articulate the specific policy objective of democracy until December 1989; however, the SOUTHCOM Regional Security Strategy reflected the extant guidance of the Reagan administration to promote democracy in Latin America.4 4F 45 General Woerner possessed extensive civil-military experience, which led him to direct his staff to develop a detailed civil-military plan, known as Blind Logic, for resolution of the crisis and the transition from Noriega to a subsequent government, despite lack of direction from the JCS.4 5F
46
43
47
48
49
50
the assumption that the Presidential authority to call-up the Army Reserve would be enacted, providing the Civil Affairs specialists required to manage a transition.5 0F 
51
The fourth question used to analyze the case study is, "was the Army required to provide governance or governance support to achieve policy objectives?" Before the commencement of combat operations, the United States had arranged for the swearing-in of the President-elect, Guillermo Endara, to allow for a rapid transition of authority to a new Panamanian government.
However, in doing so, the United States had made Endara's government responsible for security and administration without the means to provide it.5 3F 54 Once the Bush administration made the establishment of democracy a policy objective, the success of the Panamanian Government emerged as an explicit requirement. On 20 December, General Thurman ordered the SOUTHCOM J5, Brigadier General Ben Gann, to establish the CMOTF, move his organization 
51
52
53
54
to the Legislative Assembly building, and assist the new Panamanian government.5 4F 55 The JCS subsequently approved Blind Logic as Promote Liberty on 21 December.5 5F 
56
The JTF also discovered that, by disintegrating Noriega's machinery of control, they occupied a country without functioning law courts or prisons, which further complicated efforts to establish security and allow the new government to function. General Thurman hurriedly established a Judicial Liaison Group to support the development of police, courts, and prisons, requiring extensive commitment from the US military and other government departments.5 9F 60 XVIII Airborne Corps, and the CMOTF, lacked specialist Reserve Civil Affairs and Military Police enablers to support reconstruction, due predominantly to the lack of prior JCS approval of Blind Logic or Promote Liberty. The JCS deployed additional conventional and special forces troops to fill the gap. General Thurman immediately asked the Commander of the 
55
56
57
58
59 Ibid., 43; Fishel, The Fog of Peace, 53. 
60
96th Civil Affairs Battalion, arriving in Panama on 22 December, for assistance to "restore basic functions throughout Panama City, establish a police force, provide emergency food distribution, create a night watch using helicopters with spotlights, protect property, supervise Panamanian contractors in cleaning up the city, restore the production and distribution of newspapers, and develop a grassroots organization to "sell" the Endara government to the public."6 0F 61 The first Civil Affairs reservists did not arrive until one week after the commencement of the campaign, and substantial numbers not until 15 January 1990. As Civil Affairs personnel arrived, they supported efforts to restore essential services, distribute food and medical aid, organize camps for displaced persons, and provide support and advice to the Endara Government in the establishment of ministries and national administration.6 1F 62 Despite efforts to extract conventional troops from these responsibilities, in light of ongoing instability and violence, US Ambassador Arthur Davis requested that the troops remain to prevent interference in the Endara Government's efforts to build a democratic architecture and separate national security functions that had been centralized under the PDF.6 2F 63 State Department officials reluctantly accepted the involvement of military personnel in the development of the Panamanian government, recognizing that there was no other source of support available.6 3F 64 The military was only able to commence drawdown on 10 January 1990 once the design of the new government and police architecture was complete and the commander of the Dignity Battalions surrendered.6 4F 65 Operation Just Cause concluded on 11 January; however, assistance to the Endara Government continued long afterward under the framework of SOUTHCOM regional engagement. 
61
62
63
64
65
The fifth question used to analyze the case study is "if governance was a requirement, was this incorporated into subsequent doctrine?" FM 100-5, Operations (1993), incorporating lessons learned from operations since the publication of the 1986 manual, utilized Operation Just Cause as a historical vignette of a coup de main, or the achievement of strategic objectives in a single operation.6 5F 66 The manual included this representation despite the disconnect of the military from the strategic objectives and the lack of attention given to achieving the policy objective of establishing democracy. Overall, the 1991 Operation Desert Storm had an overwhelming influence on the manual, which downplayed the significance of low-intensity warfare.6 6F 67
Several key lessons learned during Operation Just Cause were, in fact, reflected in FM 100-5, Operations (1993). The manual explicitly acknowledged that a gap existed between the termination of combat and attainment of policy objectives, emphasizing early joint and interagency planning to mobilize assets needed to support post-conflict operations and managing the transition to peace. However, the manual did not adequately address several other lessons learned, specifically the intrinsic link between governance and combat planning, and that the army must be prepared to conduct governance in the absence of suitable support from other government departments.
Although Operation Just Cause separated combat and civil-military planning between the JTF and SOUTHCOM, which suggested that they would occur in distinct phases, their execution was, in fact, indistinguishable.6 7F 68 General Thurman requested that forces deployed under Promote Liberty operate under rules of engagement for Just Cause, reflecting the fact that combat conditions continued.6 8F 69 FM 100-5, Operations (1993) separated conflict and post-conflict phases, 66 US Department of the Army, FM 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1993), 3-10. 
67
68
69
with the post-conflict phase consisting of a variety of "Military Operations Other Than War" before the accomplishment of the national strategic goals and objectives.6 9F 
70
The US-led victory over Saddam Hussein in the 1991 Gulf War resulted in the destruction of the Iraqi Army, but left Saddam in power. The subsequent ten years saw sanctions, airstrikes, and support to anti-Saddam uprisings, all designed to foment an Iraqi-led overthrow of the dictator. 73 Ibid., 16. 
74
75
5F 76
79
78
79
80
On 19 March 2003, US surveillance aircraft detected signs that the Iraqis were preparing to fire the oil wells, leading to the decision to commence the ground invasion before the launching of the air campaign and before all forces had completed arrival in theater and preparation. The 3rd Infantry Division (ID) crossed into Iraq on 21 March as the only division ready to fight out of the four identified in the invasion plan.8 0F 81 Coalition troops moved over 400km in the first 72 hours, capturing the oil fields as their primary objectives. The rapid initial movement enabled tactical and operational surprise; however, it resulted in a constant deficiency of troops available to maintain the assault whilst simultaneously securing lines of communication, logistics bases, and rear areas.
Saddam had arrayed seventeen regular divisions and six Republican Guard divisions to defend against the invasion. Instead of the anticipated capitulation, these forces disappeared.
Resistance consisted predominantly of urban defense and attacks against logistics and lines of communication by irregular forces, particularly in major towns and cities such as An Najaf. These unanticipated threats led to the decision to fix and bypass many centers of resistance and proceed to Baghdad, with the consequence that many US forces were tied down away from the main The US policy objectives can therefore be summarized as regime change and the promotion of democracy.8 5F 86
The second question used to analyze the case study is, "was the military objective nested with the policy objective?" Throughout 2002, CENTCOM developed its contingency plan, titled 1003V, which aimed to set the conditions for a ground invasion to isolate Saddam's regime and 
83
84
85
86 Schadlow,
War and Governance,
238.
The third question used to analyze the case study is, "did planning consider governance and the transition of authority?" Although CENTCOM planning for the invasion of Iraq commenced with Secretary Rumsfeld's direction in November 2001, little attention was paid to Phase IV planning, which would encompass the policy objective of installing "an acceptable provisional government" and the broader strategic objective of supporting democracy in Iraq and the region.
In September 2002, Director of the JCS Lieutenant General John Abizaid noted that the CENTCOM plan paid insufficient attention to Phase IV and would not achieve the stated policy objectives. General Abizaid dispatched a substantial planning team, designated Combined Joint Task Force IV (CJTF-4), to assist CENTCOM with development of their Phase IV plan; however, by the time of their arrival in January 2003, planning was at an advanced stage for the invasion, and their efforts were deemed disruptive and not incorporated.9 0F 91 Importantly, the CFLCC plan anticipated handing responsibility for Phase IV operations to CJTF-4; however, the JCS intended CJTF-4's purpose to be planning and designing the Phase IV headquarters.9 
1F 92
91
92
93
The fact that the original CENTCOM plan called for ORHA to enter theater approximately 60 days after the end of the war, which would not put them in a position to influence post-war events, further limited Garner's effectiveness.9 3F
94
Franks infamously informed the JCS and Department "You pay attention to the day after, and I'll pay attention to the day of," highlighting his expectation that CENTCOM and CFLCC would concentrate on removing the regime, after which a new headquarters and Defense civilians would surge into theater to take over post-invasion efforts. Franks assigned responsibility for planning forces occupied Baghdad.9 6F 97 Franks further complicated the transition to Phase IV operations at this time by instructing his subordinates to "be prepared to take as much risk departing as they had in their push to Baghdad," making clear his continued lack of interest in Iraq's stabilization and reconstruction.9 7F 98
The consequences of the lack of Phase IV planning were threefold. Firstly, troops with the requisite skills and training to support the immediate aftermath of combat, specifically Military Police and Civil Affairs, were not available because they resided in the Reserve component which had not been mobilized.9 8F 99 Secondly, as divisions arrived at their final objectives having successfully deposed the Hussein regime, they found themselves armed with a Phase IV plan emphasizing general themes, and no operational detail, resources, or guidance on the specific programs or organizations that would facilitate the attainment of the strategic objectives.9 9F 100 Thirdly, as Phase III and Phase IV plans had not been developed in unison, infrastructure that was vital for Phase IV, such as the national telecommunications grid and government ministry buildings, were destroyed during Phase III, and no plan existed for their restoration.1 00F 101
The fourth question used to analyze the case study is, "was the Army required to provide governance or governance support to achieve policy objectives?" In planning, senior officers had made assumptions about the conditions that would exist on completion of Phase III, particularly with regards to Iraqi institutions and infrastructure, which proved incorrect.1 01F
102
The lack of overall strategic guidance and the civilian organizations' lack of capacity forced the military to provide security, law and order, humanitarian relief, and to re-establish services. The military's role quickly expanded to training the new Iraqi army and police force and conducting reconstruction projects, economic development, and governance. US forces were required to manage courts and prisons, and to work with communities to establish governance structures, in the absence of a central government or Iraqi constitution.1 04F 105 The lack of cohesion between military and civilian efforts rendered these early efforts largely ineffective, and it was only with the creation of a comprehensive civil-military operational plan that linked security and stabilization efforts that the situation began to stabilize.1 05F 106
The fifth question used to analyze the case study is, "if governance was a requirement, was this incorporated into subsequent doctrine?" Although FM 3-0, Operations (2001) had introduced the concept of full-spectrum operations, consisting of offense, defense, and stability, stability tasks were associated with Military Operations Other Than War as opposed to being an integral component of warfighting. The post-Operation Iraqi Freedom update in 2008 dispensed 
103
104
105
106
with the separation of war from Military Operations Other Than War and emphasized that stability operations were co-equal with offense and defense, reiterating that combat alone is unlikely to achieve strategic objectives.1 06F 107 Despite the greater attention paid to stability operations, the 2008 version of FM 3-0, Operations reinforced the theme of previous versions that the core focus of the Army is combat operations and that the number of units destroyed and objectives secured represent the metrics of success.1 07F 
108
In a 2019 article, then Commander of the US Army's Combined Arms Center Lieutenant General Michael Lundy suggested that experience in past campaigns, including Operation Iraqi Freedom, demonstrated that the Army should plan for the execution of military governance as a core part of combat operations and that governance was of such central importance as to demand equal or greater professional forethought than combat operations themselves.1 09F 110 Such an admission from a senior officer responsible for the integration of Army doctrine, training, and leader development suggests that the role of governance in the failure of Operation Iraqi Freedom was known; however, it failed to be codified in doctrine.
This section presents the findings from the two case studies, which were examined through structured research questions, and analysis of the findings against the original hypotheses. The findings are summarized in Appendix A.
The first two research questions were "what were the policy objectives of the conflict" and "did the planned military objectives nest with the policy objectives." Prussian theorist Carl von Clausewitz maintained that the political objective of war must determine the military objectives to be pursued, while Army doctrine affirms that the purpose of operations is to achieve or contribute to national objectives.1 10F
111
The policy objectives of Operation Just Cause included removing the regime of Manuel Noriega, replacing it with a democratic government, and ensuring the security of the Panama Canal. The military objectives included removal of the Noriega regime and protecting US interests, however, did not specifically include support to a new Panamanian democracy. It was not until after the commencement of the ground campaign that the military added the additional objective of supporting the new government.
The policy objectives of Operation Iraqi Freedom were to remove the regime of Saddam Hussein and establish a democratic government. The CENTCOM objectives included removing the regime and providing support to a democratic government; however, at CFLCC, the objectives were to remove the regime and defeat the Iraqi Army. Therefore, the strategic, operational, and tactical objectives were not nested.
The third and fourth questions were, "did planning consider the provision of governance and the transition to a legitimate authority" and "was the Army required to provide governance or governance support to achieve policy objectives?" In both cases, albeit at different echelons and different stages, the military did consider the objective of support to establishing a new democratic government. Therefore, campaign design and planning should have reflected this objective.
For Operation Just Cause, General Woerner did direct planning for support to a new Panamanian government, but the JCS did not endorse the plan, it was not accepted by XVIII Airborne Corps as the executive agent, and it was not addressed by General Thurman when he assumed command of SOUTHCOM. The consequence was a stove-piped planning effort disconnected from the combat plan. XVIII Airborne Corps planned to rapidly disintegrate the Noriega regime and the PDF, thus setting the conditions for a complete breakdown of governance within Panama. The lack of coordination meant that the Army had to provide all governance support, and poorly considered governance decisions undermined the credibility and stability of the nascent democratic government.
For Operation Iraqi Freedom, although the establishment of a democratic government constituted a long-term policy objective, no detailed plan was developed. The ORHA was a belated attempt to coordinate the whole of government effort; however, the organization was not resourced and lacked a specified command relationship with the military. At CENTCOM, General Franks divested responsibility by telling the JCS and Defense civilians that they were responsible for everything after the completion of Phase III. Consequently, at CFLCC, Lieutenant General McKiernan focused his attention on Phase III and gave no attention to planning Phase IV until the operation had commenced. Consequently, the Phase III plan failed to set conditions for Phase IV and the establishment of a new government. Circumstances forced the Army to provide ad hoc governance support, which failed to achieve strategic objectives.
The final question was, "if governance was a requirement, was this incorporated into subsequent doctrine?" The lessons learned process involves collecting observations, analyzing them, and taking the necessary steps to change behavior to improve the capabilities of the joint force.1 11F 112 The force uses doctrine as the predominant mechanism to codify operational lessons learned and change behavior in the force.
In both cases, commanders explicitly acknowledged that planning failed to account for the gap between combat and the achievement of strategic objectives. And yet, FM 100-5,   Operations (1993), deemed Operation Just Cause an exemplar of a coup de main, and FM 3-0,   Operations (2008), referred to Operation Iraqi Freedom as a model for rapid, effective combat operations.1 12F
113
Although this monograph addresses the Army, it is instructive to compare the Army's doctrinal approach to combat operations with that of the Joint Force. Where FM 3-0, Operations (2017) identifies the purpose of large scale combat operations as "defeating an enemy's armed forces and military capabilities in support of national objectives," JP 3-0 Operations (2017) identifies the purpose as being "to achieve national strategic objectives or protect national interests."1 13F
114
Therefore, the Army's current definition is inconsistent with that in Joint doctrine and serves only to reinforce the institution's limited conception of war.
The structured research questions were designed to provide data for analysis against the four central hypotheses of the monograph. Hypothesis one is that the Army sees itself as an organization designed and intended for short, decisive, large scale combat operations, and that governance does not inform this identity. The evidence derived from the two case studies supports this hypothesis unequivocally. In both cases, the Army viewed its role as the destruction of the enemy force, with governance being the responsibility of other elements of national power.
The second hypothesis was that bias causes governance to be ignored when planning combat operations, which can lead to combat operations falling short of achieving policy objectives.
Again, the hypothesis is supported by the evidence. In both cases, the Army ignored governance planning, seeing it as both less important than, and conceptually distinct from, combat operations.
In both cases, governance was deemed to be the responsibility of a separate headquarters, which was neither identified nor involved in the planning process. Consequently, the successful defeat of the adversary force failed to achieve policy objectives, and the design of combat operations contributed to the difficulty of achieving the transition to a legitimate government.
The third hypothesis was that the Army has been forced to adapt to provide government or governance support because of the absence of suitable institutions. In the case of Panama, the Army had failed to involve any interagency organization in planning, ensuring that no other entity was available. The Army was obliged to provide direct support in the establishment of new government ministries, courts of law, security forces, and services. In Iraq, other government agencies anticipated the requirement for governance; however, the Army had failed to integrate and coordinate their efforts. The Army was left to fill the void due to the lack of coordination and worsening security environment.
The final hypothesis was that the Army rejects governance as contributing to the operation's success or failure, and fails to codify the centrality of governance in doctrine. The Army updated doctrine in the aftermath of these operations, including additional guidance on the importance of stability operations. However, doctrine specifically identified both Just Cause and Iraqi Freedom as successful combat operations, with the subsequent deterioration attributed to the politically-mandated deficiency of forces, or unforeseeable changes in the operational environment. In neither case was the failure to plan for governance identified as contributing to the failure to achieve strategic objectives. Current doctrine perpetuates the fiction that other government agencies are responsible for governance and that the Army, through consolidation of gains, is merely required to provide security.
The purpose of this monograph was to uncover how organizational identity affects the interpretation of experience. Specifically, the study asked why the US Army rejects the requirement to plan and conduct governance following combat, despite repeated evidence that governance is the essential component linking success in combat to the attainment of strategic objectives. The study utilized the methodological framework of theory, history, and doctrine, demonstrating the theoretical basis of the Army's organizational identity, the impact of this identity on the planning and execution of operations, and the interpretation of that experience in doctrine. The evidence supported the hypothesis that the Army rejects governance due to an identity based upon large scale combat operations and that this rejection results in adverse operational and strategic consequences. However, it is not enough to simply acknowledge that such bias exists and submit to a fatalistic expectation of further failure. The monograph is presented in the firm belief that bias, once identified, can be overcome. Therefore, the study concludes with several recommendations, drawn from the two campaigns analyzed, which may help to reduce the impact of organizational bias in the future.
Recommendation One -Planning Starts at the End Both of the cases studied featured planning processes that ignored the political and military consequences of military action. In each case, the land component planned and executed the Phase III combat plan with complete disregard for Phase IV, delinking combat plans from strategic objectives. Commanders did not consider the conditions required for success in subsequent phases, which resulted in the loss of initiative as ad hoc arrangements were made to transition.
The cases also demonstrated that a clear and decisive end to combat operations is not the norm. In both operations, the security environment remained uncertain following the destruction of the main force, through the period where essential governance support was required. Further, the evidence suggests that an uncertain security environment is inherent in the aftermath of a rapid disintegration of a regime or security force. The implications are that critical enablers from the Army Reserve, such as Civil Affairs, are unlikely to be available to plan or execute governance operations, and this responsibility will fall to the force executing combat operations.
There are undeniable difficulties in planning for the aftermath of combat, which hinges upon a multitude of unknowable changes in the operational environment. This lack of fidelity causes many to focus instead on the more structured problem of defeating the enemy force, which provides planners a more tangible objective. However, as the well-known aphorism instructs, if we fail to prepare for what might occur, we ensure that some of it will.
Therefore, the first recommendation is that operational planning should begin with understanding the conditions required to achieve strategic objectives. To this end, the Army's capstone doctrine should be updated to reflect the Joint force's broader definition and purpose of combat operations. This change would help ensure that campaign and major operation planning serves the achievement of strategic objectives, with subsequent planning focused on achieving the conditions required to transition between each phase as opposed to a narrow focus on the defeat of the enemy force. Replacement of the deposed governance structure, specifically that providing law, order, and essential services, should be considered a pre-condition for stability operations, not a condition to be established in the aftermath of combat.
In both campaigns, the Joint Force Commander deliberately separated the force executing Phase III from subsequent operations. In both cases, this permitted the land component to conduct combat operations without regard to conditions required in subsequent phases, to avoid planning for governance, and to assume that some other entity was responsible for both the planning and execution of subsequent operations. As seen in both Panama and Iraq, in neither case did this entity exist beyond its establishment on paper.
In both cases, the situation was exacerbated by decisions to develop separate operational plans for governance, as opposed to including it within the campaign plan. In both operations, this decision led to the Combatant Command and land force commanders losing visibility of governance planning, with a concomitant loss of interest.
The second recommendation, therefore, is that the CFLCC Commander owns the planning and execution of both combat and subsequent stabilization. Where the COCOM Commander determines that a separate headquarters will assume responsibility for governance during subsequent phases, he must ensure that this headquarters is identified, established, and integrated into the campaign planning process.
Recommendation Three -Doctrine Should Help Train for an Uncertain Future Although this monograph posits that doctrine should explicitly acknowledge the importance of governance, there is evidence that even the incremental improvements in doctrine following Operations Just Cause and Iraqi Freedom failed to make a significant impact on the force. Although FM 3-0, Operations (2001) stated that all Army units must have the capacity to conduct simultaneous offensive, defensive, stability and support tasks, in reality by 2003 few units were prepared to do so as the Army continued to focus its training on tactical proficiency for large scale combat operations, a trend which has intensified with the publication of FM 3-0, Operations (2017), with its renewed focus on large scale combat against a peer adversary.1 14F 
115
Bias against governance causes it to be ignored when planning combat operations, which causes combat operations to fall short of achieving policy objectives.
The Army has been forced to adapt to provide government or governance support because of the absence of suitable institutions.
The Army rejects governance as contributing to the operation's success or failure, and fails to codify the centrality of governance in doctrine.
US Department of the Army, FM 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), 8-12.
The White House, National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington: DC: The White House, 2017), 2, accessed November 27, 2019, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905-2.pdf   
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1-6.
US Army, FM 3-0, Operations (2017), 8-5.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP)3-57, Civil Military Operations  (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 
US Army, FM 3-57, Civil Affairs Operations (2019), 1-4.
Cathal J. Nolan, The Allure of Battle: A History of How Wars Have Been Won and Lost (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), 6.
Robert Worley, Orchestrating the Instruments of Power: A Critical Examination of the U.S. National Security System (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2015), 246.
James Rosenau, "Thinking Theory Thoroughly," The Scientific Study of Foreign Policy, ed. James N.Rosenau (London: Frances Pinter, 1980), 35.    
Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology ofKnowledge (New York: Anchor Books, 1990), 41, 53.   
John A. Lynn, "What War Should Be, What War Is," in Turning Victory Into Success Military Operations After the Campaign, ed. Brian M. De Toy (Fort Leavenworth, Combat Studies Institute Press,
2004), 45.
Edward J. Drea, "Tradition and Circumstance: The Imperial Japanese Army's Tactical Response toKhalkin-Gol, 1939" in Charles R. Shrader, ed., Proceedings of the 1982 International Military History  Symposium: The Impact of Unsuccessful Military Campaigns on Military Institutions, 1860
-1980
Conrad C. Crane, Avoiding Vietnam: The U.S. Army's Response to Defeat in Southeast Asia (Carlisle: Strategic Studies Institute, 2002), 2.
Nolan, The Allure of Battle,
6.
Ibid., 575.   
Max Boot, interviewed by Harry Kreisler, Conversations with History; March 11, 2003, Institute of International Studies, UC Berkeley, accessed January 13, 2020, https://conversations.berkeley.edu/boot_2003
Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 69.
Nadia Schadlow, War and the Art of Governance: Consolidating Combat Success into Political Victory (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2017), 20.
Fishel, The Fog of Peace,
7.
Public Broadcasting Service, "Interview with General Jay Garner," Truth, War and Consequences, on Frontline, accessed 9 January, 2020. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/truth/interviews/garner.html
Wright and Reese, On Point II, 70.    
Ibid., 72.    
Wright and Reese, On Point II, 73.   
Wright and Reese, On Point II, 79   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press, 1984), 81; US Army, FM 3-0 Operations (2017), 1-2.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), xxv.
US Army, FM 3-0, Operations (2008), 1-16.
US Army, FM 3-0, Operations (2017), 1-1; US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, JP 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), V-5.
This monograph would not have been possible without the continued support and patience of my loving family. Thank you for sharing this adventure with me, and for reminding me to put down the books once in a while. I am incredibly grateful to my monograph director 
Dr. Anthony Carlson
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12