# ID: 2be13974c8014dd08f83bccbe0a1b0c7
# Title: Chaos in the Littorals: Anarchic Wars and the United States Marine Corps
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2000.0
# Fulltext:
The United States Marine Corps is
In the 21 st century, the Marine Corps must be prepared to respond to a wide range of crises and conflicts in the littorals. While the threat of a Major Regional Contingency (MRC) and humanitarian emergencies will continue to be present in the coming decades, Marine Corps expeditionary forces face a future dominated by unconventional and irregular small wars fought by bandits, criminals, and mercenaries in the economically and politically destitute failing and failed states of the Third World.
 Achieving a Balance: The identification of small wars as the prevalent form of warfare in the current strategic security environment in many ways contradicts the view of future war sponsored by JV2010 and OMFTS. Expeditionary small wars have dominated the Marine Corps' past and will likely do so in the future. In preparing for the 21 st century, the Marine Corps can not focus solely on the large-scale conventional wars it wants to fight while ignoring the small wars, specifically anarchic wars, it may have to fight.
 Intervention Strategy: The Marine Corps must develop an effective intervention strategy that reflects the post-Cold War strategic environment. The Marine Corps cannot rely on Cold War counterinsurgency strategy, designed primarily for revolutionary warfare, as its primary means to counter the potential threats of tomorrow's small wars. While this type of strategy may apply to a limited number of "classic" small wars in the 21 st century, it will prove to be useless in future anarchic wars.
 Intelligence: The Marine Corps should seek to gain the intelligence collection capabilities Executive Outcomes exploited in Sierra Leone. Executive Outcomes relied on rural Kamajors tribesman as HUMINT sources, guides, and combat troops. While the Marine Corps does not currently prepare units to train, support, and possibly lead indigenous forces, it has done so in past expeditionary small wars. Even though training indigenous populations is currently the responsibility of the U.S. Special Operation Command (SOCOM), the Marine Corps may look toward obtaining elements of this capability. This could be completed by achieving closer working relationships with the U.S. Army's regional Special Forces commands or by creating an organic capability within expeditionary MAGTFs.
In Sierra Leone, Executive Outcomes employed airborne intelligence collection platforms to identify rebel concentrations, employ supporting arms, and direct the rapid and decisive maneuver of air and ground forces. To achieve a similar capability, a designated number of Marine Corps MV-22 or CH-53E aircraft, which offer exceptional range, speed and loiter time, could be equipped with tactical radios, GPS receivers, infrared/television systems, SIGINT equipment, laser range finder/designators, and possibly a side-firing gun such as the GAU-19. These aircraft would not only act as an intelligence collection platforms but could also assume the role of pathfinders, forward air controllers, command and control aircraft, and possibly air-to-ground fire support systems.
 Small Wars Manual: While many aspects of the Small Wars Manual remain relevant today, it must be revised to reflect the demands and challenges of small wars in the 21 st century, specifically those provided by anarchic wars. The Marine Corps' recent experiences in Haiti and Somalia, as well as case study's of current anarchic wars in Sierra Leone, the Congo, Sri Lanka, and Liberia, can provide the foundation for developing an updated Small Wars Manual.
While anarchic wars do not currently threaten America's economic or security interests, the Marine Corps must prepare now for this challenge. In a future anarchic war, the Marine Corps, as was the case with Executive Outcomes in Sierra Leone, will likely be tasked with creating a stable security environment for the introduction of follow-on U.S. military forces or internationally-sponsored relief and reform agencies. Creating this stable security environment may lead to direct armed conflict with corrupt government officials, warlords, drug and gun traffickers, bandits, and criminals who thrive in the chaotic breakdown of law and order of anarchic war.
As the nation's premier forward-deployed expeditionary force, the challenge for the Marine Corps in the coming years will be to create an expeditionary MAGTF capable of projecting decisive power ashore in both large-scale conventional conflicts and anarchic wars. In pursuing expeditionary concepts such as OMFTS, the Marine Corps must take into consideration the increasingly unique challenges and demands of fighting anarchic wars. 
The United States Marine Corps is not preparing for the full spectrum of armed conflict in the 21 st century. In particular, the Marine Corps' concept of future expeditionary operations, Operational Maneuver From The Sea (OMFTS), fails to adequately address the threat of armed conflict in the seam between large-scale conventional combat operations and Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW). Yet, as the nation's premier forward-deployed expeditionary force, the Marine Corps will likely become involved in one of the many ongoing and increasingly lethal unconventional and irregular "small wars" fought by insurgents, bandits, warlords, mercenaries, and criminals in and around the world's rapidly expanding coastal cities.
The OMFTS concept requires the Marine Corps to maintain the ability to project power ashore against all forces of resistance, ranging from overcoming devastated infrastructure to assisting friendly people in need of disaster relief to countering the entire spectrum of armed threats. 
1
Through the OMFTS concept, future expeditionary Marine Air Ground Tasks Forces (MAGTFs) will seek to leverage advanced technologies to increase operational tempo and tactical lethality through synchronized sea-based precision fires, ship-to-objective maneuver, and "just in time" logistics. 
2
However, today's Marine Corps possibly faces a future dominated not by large-scale conventional campaigns, but unconventional and irregular small wars fought in remote and often inhospitable terrain and climate where the lines of distinction between government officials, military leaders, rebel warlords, and commercial profiteers are blurred. While small wars are neither a 21 st century phenomenon nor new to the Marine Corps, their emergence as the prevalent form of warfare at the dawn of the 21 st century and their evolution in the post-Cold War security environment warrants attention and review.
Maoists, secessionists, and separatists seeking to achieve their goals will continue to fight "classic" small wars in the 21 st century; however, the outbreak of violent small wars in Somalia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Haiti, Colombia, and Sri Lanka signifies the emergence of a darker pattern of internal conflict what will be termed in this paper "anarchic wars." In these anarchic wars, fought in the failed or failing states of the Third World, "insurgents" display little interest in legitimacy or political debate and no remorse or restraint toward the level of violence and atrocities they are willing to commit.
Many may argue that few anarchic wars will threaten the vital national interests of the United States and that the risk of involvement in the post-Somalia era does not justify the price of intervention. While this may be true for the time being, it is a shortsighted view of the future.
As a maritime nation and participant in the "globalization" of the world's economy, the United States must remain internationally engaged in order to prosper. Its expeditionary forces, specifically the Marine Corps, will possibly be forced into an anarchic war while projecting power ashore in support of America's international economic, security, and humanitarian interests.
The Marine Corps therefore must develop strategy and tactics for fighting such anarchic wars in the 21 st century. The purpose of this paper is to aid that process by defining and evaluating the characteristics of anarchic wars and the unique challenges and demands they will place on future expeditionary MAGTFs. This evaluation begins in Chapter I with a review of post-Cold War security environment and the identification of the small war as the prevalent form of warfare at the turn of the century.
Chapter II traces the evolution of small wars in the 20 th century to introduce the origins of anarchic wars. Chapter III defines common characteristics of anarchic wars and highlights a number of factors that possibly will influence their complexity and lethality. A case study of a Sierra Leone's anarchic war in Chapter IV provides details of the complex and increasingly dangerous environment in which intervention forces will have to operate. Chapter V reviews the successful performance of an intervention force, Executive Outcomes, in Sierra Leone's anarchic 
The type of conflict in which this country will generally engage in the first quarter of the 21 st century will require sustainable military capabilities characterized by stealth, speed, range, unprecedented accuracy, lethality, strategic mobility, superior intelligence, and the overall will and ability to prevail. It is essential to maintain U.S. technological superiority, despite the unavoidable tension between advanced capabilities and the maintenance of current capabilities.
-1999 United States Commission on National Security/21 st Century As low-intensity conflict rises to the dominance, much of what has passed for strategy during the last two centuries will be proven useless. The shift from conventional war to low-intensity conflict will cause many of today's weapon systems, including specifically those that are most powerful and most advanced, to be assigned to the scrapheap.
In order to understand the challenges the Marine Corps expeditionary forces will face in the coming decades, the nature of 21 st century war and the post-Cold War strategic security environment should be analyzed. Research revealed two opposing views of future war summarized in the above quotes and in Figure 
1
The second view of 21 st century war is based on the belief that conflict in the next century will not remain in the realm of what is understood as "Clausewitzean war." New wars in the coming century will rise from the disintegration or erosion of state structures. 
6
Prominent authors such as Martin Van Creveld, Robert Kaplan, and Ralph Peters claim our current military is unprepared for a future dominated by an ever-increasing state of global anarchy where the distinction between combat and police actions, and soldiers and criminals will be impossible to determine. Violent internal wars currently raging in countries like Sierra Leone, Colombia, and the Congo appear to reinforce this view of the future. These authors warn of the dangers of becoming enamored and entrapped by the promises of advanced high-tech weaponry while ignoring the realities of the evolving nature of war in the coming decades.
Echoing JV2010, expeditionary MAGTFs, operating within the principles of the OMFTS concept, will leverage technological advances in speed, mobility, fire support, communications, and navigation to seamlessly and rapidly identify and exploit enemy weakness across the spectrum of conflict.
7
The high-tech conventional approach to future war focuses on the upper end of the spectrum of armed conflict against "like" opponents. While the threat of a Major Regional Contingency (MRC) will continue to be present in the coming decades, America's high-tech conventional military forces may face a future dominated by small wars. Such conflicts may be marked by bad weather, inhospitable terrain, and many small engagements in towns and urban areas, where information warfare, sensors, and smart munitions cannot be employed to their full advantage.
8
The incidence of small wars, waged at the lower end of the spectrum, has increased throughout the 20th century to emerge as the prevalent form of warfare currently facing America's armed forces. (See Figure 
2
In designing future expeditionary concepts, the Marine Corps should consider the valid points of both views of future war. The Marine Corps cannot prepare for only one or the other, but must remain capable of responding across the entire spectrum of armed conflict. While many claim the end of the Cold War has led to a "new world disorder" and the rise of "new wars," regional powers such as China, Russia, North Korea, India, and Iran maintain large conventional armed forces capable of challenging American military supremacy in a MRC. The Marine Corps must remain prepared to project expeditionary power ashore in a high-tech conventional war, as part of a joint or coalition force, as well as smaller-scale unconventional contingencies fought in deteriorating Third World nations.
The challenge for the Marine Corps will be to create an expeditionary MAGTF capable of winning decisively in both large-scale conventional conflicts and 21 st century small wars. In pursuing expeditionary concepts such as OMFTS, the Marine Corps must take into consideration the unique challenges and demands of fighting small wars in the coming century. The graph represents a comparison between conventional wars and small wars over the last thirty years  Chapter II
As long as men have resorted to war to settle their grievances, irregular forces within the main armies have practiced guerrilla tactics. Among the first recorded examples are the Scythian "hit and run" tactics against the Persians and the Romans, and Hannibal's counter to their operations -the use of light infantry units -remains one of the best tactics today.
-Leroy Thompson, Ragged War Small wars are not a 21 st century phenomenon. They have posed significant challenges to conventional military forces throughout the history of modern warfare under many different titles and forms such as partisan wars, people's wars, colonial wars, Indian wars, uncomfortable wars, low intensity conflicts, and small-scale contingencies. Small wars and their primary participants, insurgent forces employing guerrilla warfare strategy and tactics, have proven to be extremely adept in maintaining pace with the evolution of modern warfare through the centuries.
Small wars will continue to evolve in the 21 st century. Tribalism, extreme nationalism, religious fundamentalism, and hold-over Marxist ideology all provide fodder for small-scale wars, wars likely to be fought within existing states rather than between them. 
10
Assigning a single definition for all small wars is difficult, given their unique geographic and political characteristics, and many varying titles have been placed on small wars throughout the history of modern warfare. In his 1896 edition of Small Wars: Their Principles and Practice,
Major General Sir Charles Edward Callwell offers a definition of small wars that captures the essence of the British military's 19 th and 20 th century small war experience and remains valid today:
Practically it may be said to include all campaigns other than those where both the opposing sides consist of regular troops. It comprises the expeditions against savages and semi-civilized races by disciplined soldiers, it comprises campaigns undertaken to suppress rebellion and guerrilla warfare in all parts of the world where organized armies are struggling against opponents who will not meet them in the open field.
11
During the early 20 th century, the United States Marine Corps fought a number of expeditionary small wars in Nicaragua, Santo Domingo, Haiti, and the Philippines that mirrored the British imperial and colonial warfare experience. In response to the unconventional demands of expeditionary small wars, the Marine Corps published a Small Wars Manual in 1940 describing the tactics, techniques, and procedures for fighting guerrillas, bandits and criminals in remote theaters. 
12
13
For the United States and other Western nations, low intensity conflicts during the Cold War were primarily fought against disciplined, organized insurgent forces structured along the lines of the Maoist "people's war" model. Success for both the insurgent and the counterinsurgent centered on establishing legitimacy and gaining the support of the population involved. The demise of the Soviet Union signaled the end of the superpower's struggle for control of the Third World and removed the political identifiers attached to small wars since the end of World War II.
Today's small wars resemble the irregular and unconventional conflicts fought on the edges of colonial empires at the turn of the 20 th century, as described by Callwell and the Marine Corps' Small Wars Manual, vice the politically-based bipolar conflicts of the past forty years. Cold War insurgents and guerrillas, who in the past sought a revolutionary transformation of political and economic systems, have been replaced by warlords, criminals, bandits, terrorists, and drug cartels that may seek political, social and economic transformation that is revolutionary in its 13 Douglas Porch, introduction in the 3 rd ed of Sir Charles Edward Callwell's, Small Wars: Their Principles and Practice (Lincoln, NB: Bison Books, 1996), xvii.
extent, but not necessarily revolutionary in the Marxist sense of building a new system. 14 Some future small wars may resemble past conflicts in that they will be fought over control of a state or geographic territory or region, while others may be fought over issues particular to the 21 st century such as the spread of infectious disease or access to fresh water. Steven Metz provides a list of possible insurgencies that may help identify a number of potential future small wars:
Reactionary Insurgency: In which a religious-based group attempts to seize power from a secular, modernizing government.
Defensive Insurgency: Where some subgroup within a state, whether ethnic, tribal, racial, or religious, seeks autonomy or outright independence. Given the extent of the primal conflict in the post-Cold War world, such secessionist -separatist insurgencies may be the dominant form during the next decade.
Commercial Insurgency: Powerful criminal organizations with a political veneer and the ability to threaten national security rather than just law and order. Commercial insurgents probably will not attempt to rule a state but will seek instead a compliant regime that allows them to pursue criminal activity unimpeded.
Subversive Insurgency: Will combine a legitimate, above-ground element participating in the political process of a fragile democracy, and an underground element using political or criminal violence to weaken or delegitimize the government. 
15
14 Steven Metz, "A Flame Kept Burning: Counterinsurgency Support After the Cold War," Parameters, Autumn 1995, 33. 
15
If Marines have become accustomed to easy victories over irregulars in the past, they must now prepare for the increased effort which will be necessary to insure victory in the future. The future opponent may be as well armed as they are; he will be able to concentrate a numerical superiority against isolated detachments at the time and place he chooses; as in the past he will have a thorough knowledge of the trails, the country, and the inhabitants; and he will have the inherent ability to withstand all the natural obstacles, such a climate and disease, to a greater extent than the white man. All these natural advantages, combining primitive cunning and modern armament, will weigh heavily in the balance against the advantage of the Marine forces in organization, equipment, intelligence, and discipline, if a careless audacity is permitted to warp good judgment.
-Small Wars Manual anarchic (a närkik), adj. producing anarchy; favoring anarchy; lawlessness.
There are a growing number of extremely violent small wars fought by bandits, criminals, and mercenaries in the economically and politically destitute failing and failed states of the Third World. The "insurgents" in this type of small war display little interest in political reform, the concerns of the "people," or human life itself. Instead, they seek to create an anarchic state of primal lawlessness where social structure and the "rule of law" is replaced by a warlord, clan, or tribal hierarchy and the "rule of the gun."
Anarchic wars emerged from the definition of "new wars" offered in Chapter I, and the evolution of small wars described in Chapter II. Political Dynamic: The insurgents display no particular interest in gaining control of the political system, while winning the "hearts and minds" of the population is not required or even desired. 17 As Donald Snow states in Uncivil Wars: International Security and the New Internal Conflicts:
In a number of contemporary internal wars…the articulation of a coherent political goal is implicit or derivative, if not missing all together. The internal conflicts in central Africa (Liberia, Sierra Leone, Kenya) are clearly of this nature. In the case of the criminal or narcotics-based insurgency, the basic underlying purpose is political impotency, either to create the lawlessness in which criminal acts can thrive or to facilitate the drug traffic. 
18
External Support: With the end of the Cold War, international interest and external support for the world's small wars rapidly dissipated. This lack of external support forces warring 16 Donald M. Snow, Uncivil Wars: International Security and the New Internal Conflicts (London: Lynne Reinner, 1996), 100-101. 
17
18
Control/Restraint: The combination of the post-Cold War political-ideological vacuum and the international community's reduced involvement leads to a lack of restraint by all warring factions and increased incidents of genocide, imposed mass starvation, ethnic cleansing, and extreme levels of atrocities.
Mode of Warfare: Loosely organized and dispersed groups of paramilitary, criminal, and mercenary organizations, aligned along ethnic, clan, tribal, and opportunistic lines of authority, combine guerrilla warfare tactics and strategy with selected elements of the military technological revolution to create a lethal and potentially sophisticated counter to conventional intervention forces.
As noted by British and U.S. Marine expeditionary forces in the past, opponents in small wars have proven to be very capable in countering the firepower, mobility and conventional battlefield tactics of a foreign intervention force through innovation, skill, will, and endurance. This will remain true in the coming decades as the complexity, destructiveness and incidence of anarchic wars may possibly increase through the introduction of three post-Cold War factors: the emergence of the New Warrior Class, the proliferation of small arms, and the information revolution.
The Emergence of the New Warrior Class: In Fighting for the Future, Ralph Peters identifies what he considers as the primary combatant in 21 st century, the New Warrior Class. While it is doubtful whether Peters' view of future war, which negates the usefulness of conventional soldiers and their armies, will be entirely valid in the coming century, his identification of a new breed of warrior has merit when applied to the study of anarchic wars.
The New Warrior Class can be viewed as yet another addition to the wide range of combatants, from bandits to highly organized insurgent armies, that have fought the world's small wars throughout history. However, the New Warrior Class potentially adds another dimension to the conduct of anarchic wars. Having no stake in civil order and habituated to violence and killing since birth, the New Warrior Class needs war to survive. Peace is the least desirable state of affairs, and the New Warrior is inclined to fight on in the absence of a direct, credible threat to his life. 
19
The hearts and minds of the New Warrior Class cannot be won, their bodies must be physically destroyed. Ralph Peters places the New Warrior Class in five pools:
First-Pool Warriors: The archetype of the new warrior class is a male who has no stake in peace, a loser with little education, no legal earning power, no abiding attractiveness to women, and no future.
Second -Pool Warriors: Young males who might otherwise have led productive lives. For these boys and young men, deprived of education and orientation, the company of warriors provides a powerful framework. These are the foot soldiers of the expanding revolution or insurrection, the masses in the streets.
Third-Pool Warriors: The opportunists and entrepreneurs of conflict. When it is profitable or otherwise advantageous, they may speak beautifully of the greater causebut their real cause is their personal gain in power, money, influence, and security. They are not constrained by faction or even local morality.
Fourth-Pool Warriors: These men are the patriots who fight out of strong beliefs in ethnic, religious, or national superiority, or those who have suffered personal loss in the course of a conflict that motivates them to take up arms.
Fifth-Pool Warriors: Dispossessed, cashiered, or otherwise failed military men form the most immediately dangerous pool of warriors. 
20
21
22
An example of this is Russia's Bazalt State Research and Production Enterprise, which unveiled a new generation of warheads for their rocket-propelled grenades (RPG) in 1999. Designed 
20
21
22
23
24
International reporters, not constrained by media pools, will not have to physically accompany forces in the field to obtain by-the-minute reporting and high-resolution images of combat operations for friend and foe alike. American personnel serving in combat zones will have unprecedented personal communication access through the military's internet system and commercial communication links. The American people will become intimately involved in military operations through immediate, oral accounts of combat actions. Emotional, disjointed and confused reports of 
23
24
success and loss on the battlefield will be quickly transmitted not only to families and friends, but to the media and the enemy. 
25
25
Intra-state wars are characterized by multiple agendas, blurred boundaries between civilians and combatants, unclear lines of military authority and often appalling brutality. Hostilities frequently involve fighters variously termed terrorists, bandits or guerrillas, whose loyalty often stems from a leader's charisma or from the promise of profit, rather than ideology. The armed teenagers, criminals and guerrillas that frequently comprise insurgent forces prosper from instability.
In describing intra-state or civil wars in the 21 st century, David Shearer accurately portrayed the physical characteristics of the tragic war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Few armed conflicts in the world today provide a more distinct example of an anarchic war than this ten-year conflict fought in the nation's rugged interior and the streets of its capital at the cost of over seventy-five thousand lives since 1991. 
27
While the anarchic war in Sierra Leone does not currently threaten America's economic or security interests, the Marine Corps may return to the West African littorals in support of United Nations peacekeeping or humanitarian operations. The Marine Corps deployed expeditionary units to the West African littoral region on two occasions during the 1990s to conduct noncombatant evacuation operations in Liberia's capital of Monrovia, which lies only 100 kilometers from Sierra Leone's southern border. The Marine Corps, mirroring its involvement in Somalia and Kosovo, would likely be tasked with creating a stable security environment for United Nations-sponsored humanitarian or civil assistance operations and programs. Creating a stable security environment may lead to direct armed conflict with corrupt government officials, warlords, drug and gun traffickers, bandits, and criminals who are responsible for ten years of brutal civil war and thrive in the chaotic breakdown of law and order it has produced. The Marine Corps could be forced to fight decisive ground combat actions in an anarchic war for control of Sierra Leone's littoral battlespace.
By reviewing the ten-year history of Sierra Leone's anarchic war, particularly the role played by the South African security firm Executive Outcomes, the Marine Corps can learn valuable lessons in preparing for expeditionary force projection and ground combat actions in future anarchic wars in the littorals. In April 1992, a contingent of junior RSLMF officers angered by a lack of pay and frustrated by the level of support to the military, led a coup to overthrow the APC. President Momoh panicked and fled to Guinea when a 28-year old army captain, Valentine Strasser, took control of the government and formed the National Provisional Ruling Council (NPRC). Despite the end of the APC regime, the RUF chose to continue the conflict even though its stated political objectives had been achieved by a handful of disgruntled army officers.
Concerned with increasing their personal wealth prior to the end of the war, many of the RSLMF officers and their troops began to engage in criminal activity. Looting and illegal diamond mining, instead of actively engaging the RUF, became the focus of many RSLMF units in the interior. By the end of 1992, the RUF pushed from Kailahun into the diamond-rich Kono District. Many villages in the interior began arming in order to protect themselves from both the RUF and the RSLMF. Throughout 1993 and 1994, the RUF and the RSLMF continued to be engaged in combat actions centered on the diamond mines in southeast Sierra Leone. It is difficult to determine who had the upper hand in 1993 but, by 1995, it became clear that the RUF had emerged as the dominant force in Sierra Leone.
By 1994, the majority of the public believed most of the violence in Sierra Leone was the work of government soldiers posing as rebels and engaged in criminal activity. The delineation between rebel and government soldier became indistinguishable, as military and rebel leaders designed power and resource-sharing schemes rather than engaging in combat actions against each other. Desperate to counter RUF gains in early 1995, the NPRC recruited a private security firm from South Africa named Executive Outcomes. The NPRC set four military objectives for Executive Outcomes: secure Freetown, regain control of crucial resource areas, destroy the RUF's headquarters, and clear remaining areas of RUF occupation. 
30
Executive Outcomes not only turned the tide of war against the rebels in a few short weeks, but also created a stable political and social environment in which democratic elections were held for the first time in three decades. 
31
In 1998, the RUF rallied and reorganized for offensive operations. By 1996, the RSLMF had ceased to exist as a formal military organization. Its officers and men had formed splinter rebel factions designed to exploit the diamond mines or directly joined the RUF. A country-wide RUF assault culminated in Freetown on New Year's Day, 1999. ECOMOG forces eventually forced 
30 Shearer,
48. 31
32
With Nigeria's withdrawal of ECOMOG in early 2000, due to financial and political reasons, the situation in Sierra Leone continues to deteriorate. By April 2000, the 11,100 personnel of the UN mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), had to be reinforced by an additional 6,000 personnel in an attempt to counter the continuing destabilizing actions of the RUF and AFRC and secure key locations within Sierra Leone. 
33
34
35
32
33
Review, April, 2000, 40-41. 34
35
War will remain prevalent in Sierra Leone as long as there are diamonds in the mines of the country's rugged interior. While publicly pledging to disarm, the rebels have refused to do so.
They make more money mining diamonds and smuggling them out through neighboring Liberia than they could through legitimate employment in Sierra Leone where there are virtually no jobs to be had. 
36
There is no reason to expect an end to the tragic war in Sierra Leone in the near future.
Through a brutal ten-year civil war, highlighted by massive atrocities and the continued disintegration of Sierra Leone's social structure, the RUF has secured its place as a determining factor in the nation's future. The RUF has proven "war pays." Empowered by an international community, specifically the United States, that has become increasingly wary of intervention in foreign civil wars, particularly African civil wars, the RUF and other insurgent and criminal groups will continue to seek the achievement of their goals through violence, atrocities, criminal action, and war.
The violent and tragic conflict in Sierra Leone provides a definitive view of an anarchic war. The study of this conflict yields many points of interest for the Marine Corps as it prepares for the 21 st century. More importantly, a review of Executive Outcomes actions during 1995 and 1996 reveals many potential tactics for defeating the warriors, criminals and bandits of an anarchic war.
Regardless of the criticism surrounding the use of mercenary organizations in African civil conflicts, Executive Outcomes achieved decisive results in an anarchic war in the 21 st century.
Executive Outcomes has taken advantage of the instability prevailing in some parts of the world, especially in the so-called "failed states" deserted by the international community. Executive Outcomes showed that it could, with total independence, send its well-equipped and professional troops anywhere and make a real difference -Yves Goulet, Jane's Intelligence Review Executive Outcomes performance in Sierra Leone provides an excellent example of how to effectively fight an anarchic war. While it can be argued that Executive Outcomes' success was short-lived and possibly the result of a combination of unique circumstances that may not be duplicated elsewhere in the world, one fact remains indisputable: Executive Outcomes decisively defeated the RUF in Sierra Leone. During its contract with the NPRC, Executive Outcomes removed the RUF from Freetown, stripped it of its access to vital natural resources, and destroyed its sanctuaries in the interior. Executive Outcomes' actions provided the security and stability required to begin the process for democratic elections and the introduction of United Nations peacekeeping forces.
Executive Outcomes is a true mercenary organization; it does not work for ideology or nationalism, but simply for money. 
37
38
Executive Outcomes achieved strong intelligence capabilities in short order, a success that is especially surprising, given its foreign, white officership and its apartheid history. 
39
Executive Outcomes also made extensive use of rural Kamajors tribesman as sources of intelligence, guides, and foot soldiers during combat operations. 
40
40
41
Executive Outcomes operated in Sierra Leone's severely degraded infrastructure without significant host nation support. All supplies were flown in from its support bases in Angola and South Africa. Executive Outcomes maintained a fleet of support aircraft, including two Boeing 727s and a number of smaller fixed and rotary wing aircraft, for logistic sustainment and casualty evacuation within Sierra Leone. Executive Outcomes' procedures stipulated that a physician be available on board one of the Mi-17 troop-carrying gunships during all ground operations in the interior. 
42
Executive Outcome's primary mission in Sierra Leone was to retrain the RSLMF; however, its personnel often conducted independent pre-emptive actions against the RUF and manned key leadership positions at all levels of the RSLMF during significant offensive operations.
Executive Outcomes maintained contact with its dispersed elements in Sierra Leone and its support bases in Angola and South Africa through a dated high frequency (HF) network in which all messages were passed in Afrikaans, as much to confuse the enemy as to keep security at a satisfactory level. 
43
Executive Outcomes operated Mi-17 armed transport helicopters, Mi-24 gunships, a squadron of Swiss Pilatus training aircraft converted to fire air-to-ground rockets, and two jet fighters believed to be MiG-23s. 
44
The Mi-24, reconfirming its status established in Afghanistan as an excellent anti-guerrilla fire support platform, inflicted heavy RUF losses. In late 1995, the RUF offered the equivalent of US$75,000 in diamonds to anyone who managed to destroy one of the Mi-24 employed against them. 
45
46
44
45
46
Executive Outcomes specialized in helicopter-borne strikes and rapid ground assaults against RUF targets. The highly experienced Executive Outcomes operators aggressively sought direct engagements with the RUF on the ground. Multiple guerrilla wars in sub-Saharan Africa provided common training, outlook and combat experience for Executive Outcomes' personnel.
The independent nature and special forces backgrounds allowed them to effectively lead RSLMF combat formations in conventional infantry operations or to perform independent reconnaissance and direct action missions with other Executive Outcomes personnel.
All Executive Outcomes ground maneuver was supported by fixed and rotary wing close air support, indirect fire support, and direct fire from BMP-2s when applicable. However, Executive Outcomes ground forces did not become tied to fire support when actively engaged with the RUF. Lacking formal military training and pre-conditioned by years of mediocre RSLMF pursuit, the RUF were stunned and demoralized by Executive Outcomes' forces who were quick to follow up initial contact by helicopter, vehicle or on foot without waiting for the arrangement of extensive fire support packages.
Executive Outcomes maintained no more than three hundred and fifty personnel in Sierra Leone at any given time. 
47
Executive Outcomes gained valuable internal support and information with generally good behavior towards civilians in Sierra Leone and minimal civic action programs. As one senior Executive Outcomes officer explained, "we train our soldiers to behave with the locals and not to become their enemy…we build trust and acquire more intelligence." 
48
Executive Outcomes' success in Sierra Leone should not be considered as the only way to effectively fight a 21 st century anarchic war, but as one example of how a relatively small expeditionary force conducted a highly efficient combined arms campaign and achieved its assigned objectives in the chaos of a failing Third World nation. Executive Outcomes proved that a small but highly skilled force may tilt the power balance in domestic wars by acting as a "force multiplier" for existing assets. This is especially true in many Third World conflicts, where the insurgents lack significant military strength and a defining ideology. 
49
48
The development of intervention strategy for future small wars must reflect the complexity, destructiveness and incidence of anarchic wars as described in Chapter III. This will not be an easy task due to the violent and unpredictable nature of anarchic wars. For the last half-century, the established strategy employed by many Western nations for fighting small wars was based on the political imperative of "legitimacy." Establishing the legitimacy of a supported anticommunist government or insurgent movement and winning the hearts and minds of the population were seen as the crucial cornerstone in fighting an effective small war in the Third World. This concept, designed to counter a Maoist insurgent movement, would not have worked in Sierra Leone or other anarchic wars fought in failed and failing states by criminals, warlords, and bandits. 
50
(See Figure 
3
The best intervention strategy may be to not intervene at all. Recent experiences in Lebanon and Somalia highlight the potentially disastrous consequences of injecting intervention forces between warring factions or groups in failed or failing Third World nations. Anarchic wars, often lacking a true political dynamic, may not be amenable to intervention strategies that propose a negotiated settlement or the introduction of intervention forces as either peacemakers or peacekeepers. As Donald Snow states, "In such cases the only solution may be to allow the 
50
Fought for the clear purpose of controlling the political system. Insurgents seek to gain control, and the government seeks to maintain its control.
No particular interest in gaining control of the political system. The objective is to maximize anarchy so there is no authority to interrupt insurgent activities and their anarchic lifestyle.
Appealing to the common population as a means to gain or strengthen support is a normal part of the struggle, giving insurgencies their special politico-military mix.
Winning the "hearts and minds" of the population is not a goal or even a concern. Warring factions seek only to control people through terror and atrocities.
Overt/covert military, economic, and political assistance provided by external nations or states seeking to influence the outcome of conflict.
Lacking external interest or support, factions turn to the exploitation of internal natural resources and the sale and trade of drugs and small arms to support military and criminal operations.
Restraint The imposed consciousness of external supporters and the ultimate goal of gaining and maintaining the support of the people restrain the level of violence.
The combination of a political-ideological vacuum and the reduced involvement of the international community lead to a lack of restraint and increased incidents of genocide, imposed mass starvation, ethnic cleansing, and extreme levels of atrocities.
Organized, dedicated insurgents apply a staged approach to achieve their objectives by employing a combination of political and military strategies. Insurgents depend on guerrilla warfare tactics until they reach a point where they can employ conventional military power to destroy government forces or repel an invader.
Loosely organized and dispersed groups of paramilitary, criminal, and mercenary groups, aligned along ethnic, clan, tribal, religious, and opportunistic lines of authority, combine guerrilla warfare tactics and strategy with selected elements of the military technological revolution to create a lethal and potentially sophisticated counter to conventional intervention forces.
Examples China (Mao), Vietnam, Cuba, and the initial stages of the Shining Path in Peru and the FARC in Colombia.
Sierra Leone, Angola, Liberia, Rwanda, Haiti, Somalia, Georgia, Sri Lanka, Colombia, and Afghanistan. contending parties to fight it out until there is no more fight left in them. Somalia may be a perfect example of this dynamic." 52
However, allowing all anarchic wars to rage unchecked in the next century may not be a viable solution. As stated in the introduction, the United States must remain internationally engaged in order to prosper, and its expeditionary forces will possibly be forced into an anarchic war while projecting power ashore in support of America's international economic, security, and humanitarian interests. Intervention in a future anarchic war may be is unavoidable and the Marine Corps must prepare for the development of intervention strategies designed specifically for these conflicts.
If ending an anarchic war is possible, it can only be achieved by a combination of economic, political and military strategies. However, it will be virtually impossible to employ any sort of effective economic or political strategies in the violent and unstable environment of an anarchic war. Stability and security will have to be achieved and maintained by military force alone. In Sierra Leone, Executive Outcomes' decisive defeat of the RUF created a secure and stable environment for the introduction of a democratic process and international peacekeeping forces.
Desperate to counter the gains of the RUF and regain control of the nation's natural resource areas, the NPRC regime hired Executive Outcomes to tactically defeat the RUF. The NPRC was forced to employ a unilateral military approach to Sierra Leone's anarchic war as a means to create a secure environment for the return of peace and stability. 53
52 
Snow,
67. 53
Determining an appropriate intervention strategy for fighting anarchic wars will not be an easy task. Douglas Porch, in the introduction to Callwell's Small Wars, identifies a simple but effective strategy developed for unconventional and irregular colonial wars fought against insurgents, guerrillas and bandits of the late 19 th century that can possibly be applied to anarchic wars. 
54
There is a sad lack of authoritative texts on the methods employed in small wars. However, there is probably no military organization of the size of the United States Marine Corps in the world which has as much practical experience in this kind of combat.
-Small Wars Manual
In the 21 st century, the Marine Corps must be prepared to respond to a wide range of crises and conflicts in the littorals. While the threat of a Major Regional Contingency (MRC) and humanitarian emergencies will continue to be present in the coming decades, Marine Corps expeditionary forces face a future dominated by unconventional and irregular small wars fought by bandits, criminals, and mercenaries in the economically and politically destitute failing and failed states of the Third World.
From storming the coastal forts of the Barbary pirates to eliminating weapons caches of Somalia warlords, the Marine Corps has fought small wars throughout its history. As noted by the above quote and by F.G. Hoffman in Decisive Force:
The Marine Corps has a historical reputation for service in expeditionary environments and crisis…In fact, of all the Services, the Marine Corps is the one most culturally predisposed toward small-scale conflicts requiring extensive and delicate politico-military interaction. 
58
The identification of small wars as the prevalent form of warfare in the current strategic security environment in many ways contradicts the view of future war sponsored by JV2010 and OMFTS. The Marine Corps must find the middle ground between the two views of future war offered in Chapter 1. Advanced technology can be a force multiplier in an anarchic war, as demonstrated by Executive Outcomes in Sierra Leone, but it cannot be exclusively relied on and must be regarded as only one element of an effective anarchic war intervention force.
Expeditionary small wars have dominated the Marine Corps' past and will likely do so in the future. In preparing for the 21 st century, the Marine Corps can not focus solely on the large-scale conventional wars it wants to fight while ignoring the small wars, specifically anarchic wars, it may have to fight.
Today's small wars resemble the irregular wars and unconventional conflicts described in the Marine Corps' Small Wars Manual, vice the politically-based bipolar small wars of the past fifty years. The Marine Corps must develop an effective intervention strategy that reflects the post-Cold War strategic environment. The Marine Corps cannot rely on Cold War counterinsurgency strategy, designed primarily for revolutionary warfare, as its primary means to counter the potential threats of tomorrow's small wars. While this type of strategy may apply to a limited number of "classic" small wars in the 21 st century, it will prove to be useless in anarchic wars like Sierra Leone's.
Nothing can be done to improve or reverse the economic or political future of the world's failed and failing states until their anarchic insurgents are either destroyed or effectively controlled. As demonstrated by Executive Outcomes in Sierra Leone, a unilateral military strategy designed to attack the critical vulnerability of an anarchic insurgent movement may be the best option for successful intervention in future anarchic wars. Executive Outcomes' success can be measured by the tactical defeat of the RUF, the securing of the nation's mineral resource areas for the NPRC, and the creation of a stable security environment. However, military victories create only temporary solutions, and a unilateral military strategy must be quickly followed by the introduction true political and economic reform, neither of which the NPRC or the following regimes instituted. In future anarchic wars, the involvement of the international community will be required if the economic and political reform of a failed state or failing state is expected once a military intervention force has created a stable security environment.
In Sierra Leone, Executive Outcomes' tailored expeditionary force, consisting of highly experienced counterinsurgency personnel, conducted a remarkably efficient combined arms campaign and achieved its assigned objectives amidst the chaos of a failing Third World nation. This could be completed by achieving closer working relationships with the U.S. Army's regional Special Forces commands or by creating an organic capability within expeditionary MAGTFs. 
60
61
The last time the Marine Corps formally addressed the topic of small wars was in 1990 when it reprinted, without updating, the 1940 edition of the Small Wars Manual. This was an attempt to prepare the Marine Corps for the many small wars that appeared to be spreading as the Soviet Union began to collapse. While many aspects of the Small Wars Manual remain relevant today, it must be revised to reflect the demands and challenges of small wars in the 21 st century, specifically those provided by anarchic wars. The Marine Corps' recent experiences in Haiti and Somalia, as well as case study's of current anarchic wars in Sierra Leone, the Congo, Sri Lanka, and Liberia, can provide the foundation for developing an updated Small Wars Manual.
While anarchic wars do not currently threaten America's economic or security interests, the Marine Corps must prepare now for this challenge. In a future anarchic war, the Marine Corps, as was the case with Executive Outcomes in Sierra Leone, will likely be tasked with creating a stable security environment for the introduction of follow-on U.S. military forces or internationally-sponsored relief and reform agencies. Creating this stable security environment may lead to direct armed conflict with corrupt government officials, warlords, drug and gun traffickers, bandits, and criminals who thrive in the chaotic breakdown of law and order of anarchic war.
As the nation's premier forward-deployed expeditionary force, the challenge for the Marine Corps in the coming years will be to create an expeditionary MAGTF capable of projecting decisive power ashore in both large-scale conventional conflicts and anarchic wars. In pursuing expeditionary concepts such as OMFTS, the Marine Corps must take into consideration the increasingly unique challenges and demands of fighting anarchic wars.
JV2010 represents the United States military's plan for fighting the nation's conflicts in the first quarter of the 21 st century through full-spectrum, battlespace dominance. By applying the tenets of JV2010, dominant maneuver, precision engagement, full spectrum protection, and focused logistics, the United States military is projected to be able to fight and win against any adversary at any level of conflict. Supporting tomorrow's military will be a high-tech, space-based system of systems. This system of systems will allow United States forces to dominate the battlespace through the merger of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR), advanced command, control,
57  
57  
United States Marine Corps Warfighting Concepts For the
st  Century, Operational Maneuver from the Sea, (Washington, DC: Headquarters Marine Corps, 4 January 1996), I-5. 2 Operational Maneuver from the Sea, I-5.
A general definition of "war" is an armed conflict including one or more governments, and causes deaths of 1,000 or more people a year. RuthLeger Sivard, World Military Expenditures 1987-88 12 th ed. (New York: World  Priorities, 1987), 28.   
The format for Table 1 was taken from Mary Kaldor's and Basker Vashee's Table 1.2, "The changing nature of war," in New Wars. Vol 1 of Restructuring The Global Military Sector (London: Cassell, 1997), 10.
Operational Maneuver from the Sea , I-22.
Institute for National Strategic Studies, Strategic Assessment 1999: Priorities for a Turbulent World, (Washington, DC: National Defense University, June 1999), 265.
Edwin G.Corr and Stephen Sloan, Low Intensity Conflicts: Old Threats in a new World (Boulder, CO: Westview,  1992), xi.
Sir Charles Edward Callwell, Colonel, Small Wars: Their Principles and Practice, 3 rd ed.(Lincoln, NB: Bison  Books, 1996), 21.
Field Manual (NAVMAC) 2890, Small Wars Manual, reprint of 1940 ed. (Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, Headquarters, United States Marine Corps, April 1987), 1.
Ralph Peters, Fighting For the Future (Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1999), 41.   
Shearer, David, Private Armies and Military Intervention, Adelphi Paper316 from The International Institute for Strategic Studies (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998) 32.
Ian, Smillie, Lansana, Gerbie, and Ralph, Hazleton, "The Heart of the Matter: Sierra Leone, Diamonds and Human Security, " Partnership Africa Canada (PACNET), 1/12/2000(Ottawa, Canada, downloaded 3 March 2000). http://www.web.net/pac/pacnet-1/msg00009.html
Douglas Farah, "Diamonds Are a Rebel's Best Friend," Washington Post, 17 April 2000, Sec. A12.   
Yves Goulet, "Executive Outcomes: Mixing Business with Bullets," Jane's IntelligenceReview, 01 September  1997, 426.   
Elizabeth Rubin, "An army of their own," Harpers, February 1997, 45.   
Al Venter, "Market forces: how hired guns succeeded where the United Nations failed," Jane's International DefenseReview, March 1998, 65.   
Venter, 66.   
Howe, 314.   
Smillie, Gerbie, and Hazleton, 10.   
In Nicaragua, U.S. Marines trained local counter-insurgency forces which tracked and killed the guerrilla leader Sandino.Thompson, 13.   
This could be achieved by sending select Marines to the U.S. Army's Special Forces Qualification course in Ft. Bragg, NC.
Suggestions for the creation of this type of airborne collection/fire support platform for the Marine Corps were taken from a personal interview, via E-Mail, of Mr. Roger Bowers, a senior member of AirScan. AirScan is a private company that has extensive experience in flying day/night airborne surveillance and security missions in Angola, Malaysia, Colombia, and the United States. AirScan's success, documented in the January 1998 edition of Jane's Intelligence Review, is the result of the successful fusion of sophisticated intelligence collection sensors and experienced close air support pilots. Mr. Roger Bowers, AirScan, interview by the author, 26 April 1999.
The origins of the anarchic war in Sierra Leone can be traced to the civil war in Liberia. The National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), led by Charles Taylor and Prince Yormeh Johnson, overthrew Liberian dictator Samuel Doe in 1989. Charles Taylor, who emerged as the dominant leader in Liberia after the coup, expanded his armed conflict into neighboring Sierra Leone.
Through the backing of an armed insurgent movement in Sierra Leone, the Revolutionary United The RUF used diamonds to purchase large quantities of small arms for its expanding rebel army.
Control of Sierra Leone's diamond mines and other vital natural resource centers remained a priority of the RUF throughout the civil war.
The Republic of Sierra Leone's military forces (RSLMF), initially a ceremonial force designed to protect the APC, was rapidly expanded from 3,000 to 14,000. The APC recruited militiamen and mercenaries from the civil war in Liberia and conscripted thousands of local youths. This rag-tag force, under-trained, underpaid, and under-fed, was sent into battle against the rebels in the fertile and diamond-rich South and East of the country.  