# ID: 2c61d828d7fa402fb172f4d3c54a69f8
# Title: Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets and Operational Concepts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
The Russian military is familiar with MDO concept development, although analysts view it through the lends of prior assumptions that the initial U.S. campaign will comprise a large-scale missile and air attack.
Prompt global strike remains more of a catchall term for a strategic intercontinental counterforce attack, using ballistic missiles, long range bombers, and seabased cruise missiles, against Russia's main conventional and nuclear forces.
Conversely, MRAU and IMVU appear to be more operational level discussions, though the strike carries strategic implications.
Below is an example of how Russian military writing often depicts the challenge.
A fixation on the threat of massed aerospace attack from the United States is not a recent trend in Russian military thinking, as it was a staple of late Soviet military thought.
Russian concepts for regional nuclear deterrence, which emerged in the late 1990s, were developed in part as a response to the threat of a US-led aerospace attack.
The conventional military was not in position to effectively deter or counter such a campaign, given its relatively shambolic state after the dissolution of the USSR and the Warsaw Pact.
Russian understanding of the aerospace threat (increasingly linking air and space as one domain) evolved from historical Soviet-era concerns about NATO airpower, which themselves drew strong lessons from Germany's opening air attacks during World War II (particularly on the Soviet Union in the Great Patriotic War).
However, aerospace attacks could now be conducted by advanced technological adversaries from great distances and across the full depth of Russian territory to achieve goals without deploying ground forces to the theater.
And, moving forward, they can be conducted with the support of pilotless (remotely operated) systems at even longer ranges and with faster speeds.