# ID: 2c61d828d7fa402fb172f4d3c54a69f8
# Title: Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets and Operational Concepts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
This paper explores the core tenets of Russian military strategy and associated operational concepts, situating its role within the Russian system of knowledge on military security. Russian military leaders describe the prevailing strategy as 'active defense,' a strategic concept integrating preemptive measures to anticipate and prevent conflict, wartime concepts of operations that seek to deny an opponent decisive victory in the initial period of war, degrading and disorganizing their effort, while setting the conditions to attain war termination on acceptable terms. The strategy emphasizes integration of defensive and offensive operations, maneuver defense, sustained counterattack, disorganization of an opponent's command and control, engagement of their forces throughout the theater of military action, including infrastructure in their homeland. Its theory of victory is premised on degrading the military-economic potential of opponents, focusing on critically important objects, to affect the ability and will of an adversary to sustain a fight, as opposed to ground offensives to seize territory or key terrain. The study also explores the content of Russian strategic operations, associated missions and tasks, the echelonment of Russian military concepts, together with Russian outlooks on the theory and practice of modern warfare.
Russian military leaders describe the current military strategy as one of 'active defense.' This concept has a deep history in Soviet military thought, evolving from an operational discussion towards a strategic framework in the late-Soviet period. In Russia, military strategy represents the highest form of military art, offering general tenets on the theory and practice of war, preparation for national defense, ways of preventing conflict, managing forces in wartime, and delineation of strategic operations. Taken together, the military strategy and associated operational concepts shed light on the 'Russian way of war,' influences, and central thesis. Russian strategy reflects choices in planning, operational concepts, and the force structure or capabilities to realize them. This study interrogates the choices made in Russian military strategy, under the rubric of active defense, their underlying thesis, and expression in strategicoperational concepts.
The notion of activity in Russian military strategy describes both preventative measures taken before a conflict breaks out, to deter it, along with tenets for conducting the war. During a threatened period, or escalating crisis, Russian forces take preventative measures to neutralize threats, which can include preemptive use of limited force in a time of perceived imminent threat. A defensive strategy emphasizes maneuver defense, and counterattack. It is a defensiveoffense that envisions persistent engagement of an opponent throughout the theater of military action, to include critical infrastructure in their homeland, executing strategic operations that affect an adversary's ability or will to sustain the struggle. Consequently, Russian military strategy is comprised of operational concepts that represent defensive and offensive constructs without clear distinction. Active defense devalues strategic ground offensives, privileging the aerospace domain, maneuver defense, and forms of noncontact warfare.
The sense of 'active' within active defense envisions demonstrations or limited use of force, to convince opponents that the costs of aggression would exceed desired benefits. From a Russian perspective, states chiefly use non-military means, and indirect approaches, to achieve political goals. Hence the Russian military seeks to offer answers to what the state perceives as forms of undeclared warfare, containment, and coercion. However, the nature of war is understood as one where non-military means are effective because they are backed by technologically advanced military capability. A strategic conventional offensive remains decisive in the initial period of war. The principal threat envisioned is an integrated massed air strike against critically important objects of military, economic, and political significance in Russia. The strategic nature of long-range precision guided weapons, and other forms of non-kinetic attack, like electronic warfare, are foremost in Russian military considerations.
Active defense seeks to answer this threat, addressing the use of indirect means during a tentative period of danger, or threat, and the military challenge posed by a technologically advanced opponent armed with strategic conventional capabilities. The strategy's general tenets are achieving surprise, decisiveness, and continuity of strategic action. Identifying an opponent's vulnerabilities, finding asymmetric counters to neutralize their advantages, and seizing the strategic initiative. It envisions warfighting defined by fire, strike, and maneuver, where tactical formations engage each other at distances, and recon-strike contours enable warfare at standoff ranges.
The battlefield is seen as fragmented, or non-contiguous, without fixed battle lines, where radio-electronic means integrate with traditional fires and strikes to execute a 'complex defeat' of an opponent's military effort. Ground forces conduct maneuver defense, seeking to sap an opponent's strength, degrade them, and preserve the force. Instead of ground offensives, Russian military strategy accepts the prospect of trading territory to attrit an opponent until a firmer positional defense and counteroffensive can be mounted.
The operative thesis is that an opponent can be effectively degraded, parrying their offensive ground operation and deflecting an initial massed aerospace attack. The goal is to disorganize the opponent's effort, and shape their political calculus via long-range strikes against critically important objects. The calculus is that the center of gravity lies in degrading a state's military and economic potential, not seizing territory. Here the initial period of war, i.e. the first several weeks of conflagration, is seen to be decisive. The overall Russian objective is to prevent an opponent from achieving a decisive outcome, forcing them into a conflict with high levels of attrition. The vision is to inflict damage to military and economic infrastructure such that opponents will seek war termination on acceptable terms, and become preoccupied by the ensuing internal instability.
Military strategy directly informs strategic operations, which involve coordinated tasks, strikes, operations, and combat actions carried out in a unified scheme and plan to achieve strategic goals. These operational constructs include a strategic operation to destroy critically important objects, a strategic aerospace operation, a nuclear forces operation, and a general strategic operation in theater, merging prior continental and oceanic operational constructs.
In a 2019 speech at the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, the Russian chief of General Staff, Valery Gerasimov, described Russia's military strategy as one of 'active defense.' 1 How should we interpret "defense" as it is being used today by senior Russian military leaders, and what is the practical meaning of "active" in Russian military strategy? Military strategy represents the highest form of military art, but it also offers theoretical guidance for the conduct of modern war, and it informs the organization of operations, along with their aims, or intermediary goals, in conflict. Military strategy is also a reconciliation of bureaucratic imperatives, military thought debates, and a management tool that reflects choices in operational concepts, force structure, or posture. This report seeks to shed light on the evolution of the theory and practice of how the Russian military plans to fight, by focusing on military strategy and associated operational concepts. It delves into Russian thinking on the general tenets of warfare, developments from the late Soviet period, and the implementation of military strategy. The study explores higher level operational concepts, such as strategic operations, along with emerging or maturing forms of operational art within the Russian military. Together these can help shed light on the so-called 'Russian way of war,' at the operational and strategic level. This study is not focused on capability development or tactics, but on the higher forms of Russian art of war and relevant discussions in Russian military science.
The findings of this study can form a foundation of knowledge on how the Russian military plans to prosecute a regional or large-scale war, and shed light on the overall Russian system of knowledge on warfare. These insights can help interested researchers and practitioners better interpret the conceptual progression in Russian strategic operations, key tenets, and general principles for the conduct of warfare. Building on a 2020 CNA report, Russian Strategy for Escalation Management, this study explores select Russian military-analytical writings to better understand how the Russian military thinks about its military strategy, and the operational concepts that dominate contemporary Russian military discourse. 2
The research team conducted separate queries across Russian professional military journals and associated literature. The writings consulted were primarily published within the last 10-15 years, with a specific focus on the last 5 years. However, earlier Soviet writing and analysis at the time was also used to help build out the background and evolution of terminology. The report does not intend to be an exhaustive review of this literature. It does leverage Russianlanguage resources intended to be summative and comprehensive, compiling terms, references, and concept definitions.
The journals we reviewed included Voennaya Mysl' (Military Thought), Strategicheskaya  Stabil'nost' (Strategic Stability), Vooruzhenie i Ekonomika (Armaments and Economics), Vozdushko-kosmicheskie sily: teoriya i praktika (Aerospace Forces: Theory and Practice), and Vestnik AVN (Herald of the Academy of Military Sciences). Also included were limited numbers of analytical opinion and commentary from Russian military thinkers in the publications Nezavisimoe Voennoe Obozrenie (Independent Military Review), Voenno-Promyshlennyi Kur'er (Military-Industrial Courier), and Vozdushno-Kosmicheskaya Oborona (Sfera) (Aero-Space Defense (Sphere)). The team also analyzed several books, which were referenced by or debated within some of these articles, and consulted several official and unofficial Russian military dictionaries. Military dictionaries and encyclopedias proved especially useful for parsing complex concepts, offering diagrams, and defining key terms.
We began by identifying key concepts in and terms about threat perception, strategy, and military operations in speeches by Russian military officials and then traced them in professional military literature and military encyclopedias/dictionaries. We hypothesized that there was an evolution in Soviet-era concepts, continuity in debates and conversations, with some new additions or interpretations. We found that this was indeed the case. The team examined Russian military writings focused on warfighting at the regional to large-scale level by querying the Eastview Russian-language military writings database and several journals available online. The articles were grouped into categories, as follows: first, military strategy, operational art, and strategic operations; then, lessons learned, and future warfighting. Some writings, for example those of General Zarudnitskiy, are intentionally over-represented in citations. This is because they were the most current, and also the most comprehensive discussions from authoritative sources. They represented 'best in breed' writing that offered a glimpse of the latest iteration of these concepts or ideas as they are being used in Russian military discussions. A note of caution, we found some definitions of terms to be dated. There are notable changes over the past ten years in how the Russian military discusses theaters of military operations, and strategic operations. This subject is a moving target. The Russian military lexicon continues to evolve, requiring occasional updates to our understanding. 3
In this section we first seek to disambiguate military strategy, from doctrine, and the broader Russian concept of military science. The goal is to describe the core components of military strategy, but also offer a broader lens on how strategy fits into the Russian system of knowledge on military policy and security. Russian military strategy is informed by the formulations in the formally adopted military doctrine, the latest iteration of which (at the time of this writing) is the 2014 "Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation." Military doctrine defines military-political, military-strategic, and military economic foundations for ensuring the country's security. It represents a system of officially accepted views and positions on the goals or character of a potential war, how to prepare for it, how to prevent it, and how to conduct it. 
4
5
Russia's military doctrine also discusses measures to deter conflict and manage escalation. Deterrence and escalation management have together been a focus of Russian military science, growing in significance since the 1990s-hence, the prominent addition of concepts such as strategic deterrence and nonnuclear deterrence in doctrinal texts. These are not just elements of military policy, but involve the employment of nonmilitary means, distinct from traditional forms of military art.
Military doctrine, especially its technical elements, is in turn informed by military science. In Russia, military science represents a system of knowledge about the current nature and laws of war, the preparation of armed forces, and modern methods for the conduct of armed struggle. It integrates the study of war along with social, natural, and technical sciences. In terms of subjects with military theory, its branches typically include military art (strategy, operational art, tactics), structure and organization of armed forces, military education, and preparation. Alongside these, the topics of study (theories) also include civil defense, militaryeconomy, logistical support, military history, types of forces, and study of concepts in other militaries. A distinct place is reserved for and the study of military technology. Military science encompasses a diversity of subjects: because war is seen as a complex social phenomenon, therefore requiring the study of philosophy to understand socio-political causes of conflict, economics, history, geography, political science, education, and psychology. 
6
7
2
When Russian military leaders speak to tasks or missions in the context of a local, regional, or large-scale war, they have distinct contexts in mind which are definable in Russian military thought. Typically, in thinking about a conflict with NATO and the United States, the war type is generally confined to regional or large-scale war. While such a war can come about by way of escalation, beginning as a local war-for example, a crisis in Belarus-it becomes a regional war once a coalition of states is involved.
At this point it is useful to discuss the period of military threat and the initial period of war (IPW), because they feature prominently in Russian military thought. A period of military threat is likely to emerge from an intensifying crisis, or sharply worsening military-political situation, when there is a high chance of war, increased military activity, featuring evidence of readying or buildup of forces. The initial period of war constitutes an especially intense phase of the conflict, when states conduct combat operations with deployed forces, launch initial strategic operations, and seek to attain early war aims. Economies are transitioned to a wartime footing, and reserves or follow-on forces are deployed. This term, and its significance, dates to World War I, when it spoke more to mobilization, concentration, and operational deployment of forces ahead of planned operations or fighting. In World War II it took on a different character, involving offensive strategic operations by forces which were already prepared and deployed. The thrust of the concept has since then defined a period when governments would fight with forces deployed before the war to pursue their initial war aims. 
8
9
Finally, Russian military discourse sometimes features a typology of war types, listing generations of war and their principal features. Table 
1
Russia's Chief of General Staff has described Russian military strategy as one "active defense," most prominently in a 2019 speech to the Russian Academy of Military Sciences. Active defense conceptualizes what the Russian military should do to deter a war before it begins and the general tenets for how it would fight a war against a militarily superior opponent. The strategy is characterized by plans to take anticipatory actions during a threatened period (period of military threat) or crisis. This is not necessarily a preemptive strike, but can be inclusive of direct use of force against a massing opponent. Valery Gerasimov (and others) has described "active defense" as a strategy that involves the "preemptive neutralization of threats to the security of the state." He characterized its tenets as "achieving surprise, decisiveness, and continuity of strategic action." Gerasimov explained, "Acting fast, we must preempt the adversary with our preventive [preventivnymi] measures, engage in the timely discernment of his weak spots and create threats of inflicting unacceptable damage. This allows the capture and the continued possession of strategic initiative."
10
The Russian military considers these to include demonstrations of readiness, deployments, exercises, and weapon tests, or demonstrative actions. These can include military signaling (demonstrations of capability and resolve), demonstrative use of force, and limited strikes (single or grouped) with conventional weapons. 
11
13
14
15
16
Active defense as a military strategy in wartime denotes operations premised on defensive maneuver, and a sustained counterattack throughout the depth of the theater of military action. It places strong emphasis on defensive and offensive strategic operations during the initial period of war. This envisions degrading an opponent's forces via fires and strike systems, while parrying their initial offensive operations. It is not a theory of war that emphasizes positional defense at the outset. The means and ways of Russian military strategy are to inflict disorganization on the opponent via long-range strikes against critically important objects at operational depths and beyond.
17
The intended outcome of these operations is that they will disorganize an enemy's effort, degrade their ability to sustain operations, and affect their political will to continue armed struggle.
Seizing terrain is less relevant, with emphasis placed on the use of standoff weaponry, and precision and massed fires, plus decisive action by flanking formations. 
18
Active defense also stipulates that, unlike military strategies during the Cold War (until 1986), the strategy does not seek to conduct operations to shift the conflict onto the adversary's territory at the outset of the war. The strategy, as devised, recognizes that to a substantial extent classical operational boundaries have been erased by the reach of weaponry and scope of modern combat operations. Therefore, attempting to shift the battle onto an opponent's territory via offensive land operations is of little practical utility given the scope of modern operations, the capabilities involved, and the lack of depth offered by physical terrain. At the same time, strikes against objects important to an opponent's ability to sustain the war effort can be conducted from the outset of the conflict at operational or strategic depths.
The "defensive" aspect speaks to the Russian military's expectation that in the initial period of war their chief task will be organizing a defense against an opponent's massed aerospace attack and missile strikes, both against Russian forces and critically important objects at home. Operations to deflect that aerospace attack have a significant offensive component, hence the integration of Russian air defense, and missile defense, with tactical aviation and long-range aviation (discussed in the Operations section of this report). "Defensive" is a socio-political characterization about the expected political aims, or causes of major war. Consequently, while the military strategy may not envision the need for an initial offensive, it does include counteroffensive operations, retaliatory strikes, efforts at disorganization, and suppression of an opponent's effort. This is of course subject to political considerations: the fact that the military strategy is premised on deterrence and defense does not mean that the Russian military is not prepared to conduct offensive operations if that is what political aims dictate. Political leaders often use force to achieve aims under the conviction that the decision is compelled by adversaries, and they are fighting a defensive war via offensive means, or preemptively striking to attain security for lack of alternative options.
It is worth underlining two tenets within Russian military art that can be considered components of active defense: maneuver defense and noncontact warfare. In maneuver defense there is a strong expectation that the battlefield will be fragmented (ochagovy), and there may be no contiguous front. Maneuver defense in this case means that there will not be a positional defense mounted with a high concentration of forces. Fixed battle lines of the kind that defined World War I and World War II, resulting in a large and continuously manned front, are not seen as a workable approach to modern warfare. If anything, the front is seen as "inverted," allowing both sides to attack the rear of an opponent's forces. Inversion also refers to aerospace attack and defense well behind the front lines, and the ability of maneuverable formations to conduct flanking raids. 
19
Maneuver defense is premised on defeating and degrading an opponent while buying time and preserving forces, at the expense of territory. 
20
21
22
Maneuver defense is intended to destroy an opponent's initial plan of operations, buy time for reserves or follow-on forces to arrive, exhaust an opponent's forces, and subsequently seize the initiative. 
23
In the Russian view, modern warfare features a mix of positional and maneuver defense, not a complete divestment of one of the other. Russian military theorists continue to debate the distinctions between positional and maneuver defense, since they share the goal of enabling a defense against a superior force. 
24
25
26
Turning to noncontact warfare, the term is somewhat muddled, as there is a commonly held Russian military belief that modern warfare will feature forward operating sensors, fires, and precision strike systems. War will be driven by information, command and control systems, and precise means of destruction. However, noncontact speaks more to the employment of longer-range capabilities to attack critical objects at substantial operational and strategic ranges. There will indeed be sustained engagement of an opponent's forces throughout the theater, but not of the kind that characterized major wars of the 20 th century, when most advanced capabilities still required a line of sight to the target. There are also unlikely to be operational pauses, and, because both sides can engage each other's forces in depth throughout the course of the conflict, the center of gravity will not be a critical piece of terrain. This view continues to be debated, as some question the prowess or ability of precision means to alter the need for 'contact' warfare.
From a force structure and organization perspective, active defense means structuring the military around high-readiness combat groupings, manned and equipped in each strategic direction. These are operational-level formations, with supporting tactical units, that are deployed in each military district, and capable of moving to a conflict zone on short notice. This 24 V.V. Trushin, "On the Development of a Theory of Maneuver Defense," О развитии теории маневренной обороны, Military Thought, no. 3 (Mar. 2020). 
25
is a significant accomplishment of the military reforms initially overseen by Chief of General Staff Nikolai Makarov in late 2008 and Minister of Defense Anatoliy Serdyukov. In 2011-2012, Makarov was quite vocal in his belief that the military as a whole had failed to adapt to the requirements of modern wars-that it was unable to engage in noncontact warfare and was ineffective in an information-driven battlefield. Makarov was working to reform a large mass mobilization army, with dated parks of equipment, which in 2008 was still designed to take months to mobilize and deploy. 
27
High level defense concepts have implications as defense management tools, intended to shape the bureaucracy and the military as an institution. They represent choices. Hence, active defense signifies a choice to focus on developing a force that is much smaller but is permanently ready, able to deploy substantial distances, and well equipped to succeed in what Russian military leaders see as the defining features of modern warfare. This can also be seen in the repositioning of tactical formations closer to where they are expected to be called on to carry out combat operations-for example, the reestablishment of divisions west of Moscow post-2014, and the increased logistical support, tactical aviation, rotary aviation, and other capacities to enable maneuver warfare in the western and southwestern strategic direction.
An important additional note: Active defense is not premised on area denial or antiaccess, or on the efficacy of defensive capabilities at the operational level. This is a way to think about potential U.S. military vulnerabilities, but not a correct interpretation of the Russian understanding of contemporary military art or military science. Indeed, such terminology does not appear anywhere in Russian military writing, and 'active' by definition implies the conduct of offensive operations and maneuver defense, rather than betting on denial capabilities. Russian operational concepts are much more dynamic, showing no hard distinction in actions that comprise offensive and defensive operations, or a belief that A2/AD offers a viable theory of victory. The proposition that clear boundaries between offensive and defensive systems have been largely erased actually extends quite far back to the late Soviet period of military thought. 
28
Active defense is not a new term in Russian military thought. As a term, active defense has appeared in debates among leading military theorists since World War I and the Russian Civil War. During the early 1920s, active defense was a tactical concept opposite passive defense. For example, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky disliked active defense because in his view it required having parity of forces with that of the opponent. He saw it as an indecisive form of defense. Activity in his view meant counterattack and having deep echelons of available maneuverable reserves. Yet counterattacks required significant forces, and Tukhachevsky thought that to make active defense viable the defending side needed to have at least as much military power as the attacker. If this was so, then it should be going on the offense, because the offense was seen as generally more advantageous and decisive. Passive defense featured fortifications, entrenchments, and well-developed lines, which allowed a much smaller force to pin down a superior attacker, and buy time for offensives or initiatives elsewhere. 
29
30
Conventional operations in Soviet military strategy saw a resurgence in the late 1960s, after a brief period of domination by offensive strategic nuclear weapons in Soviet military thought.
In the late 1970s it became clear that Soviet policy began positioning nuclear weapons as unusable for achieving political aims; hence, nuclear war was seen as something that "cannot be won and must never be fought." In the late 1980s the Soviet Union revised the political tenets in its military doctrine, and the military-technical dimensions had to catch up. By 1986 a concept of defensive sufficiency was adopted, which reduced Soviet military requirements to a level such that an opponent would see no advantage from launching a surprise offensive.
Defensive sufficiency shifted the debate on correlation between the offensive and defensive in war. Previous Soviet strategy was premised on the primacy of strategic offensive, but was now seen as impractical and reckless, given the associated risks of nuclear escalation. Its tenets prioritized shifting the conflict onto an opponent's territory as soon as possible. The Soviet Union's political leadership established a defensive military doctrine in 1987. By this period in the Cold War the USSR saw no political goals that could be achieved via an offensive war. 
31
Yet the military-technical aspects of the doctrine remained offensive. Soviet generals continued to define operations and the conduct of war in offensive terms. This discord was partly caused by an assessment that defense alone could not defeat or break down the enemy and therefore a counteroffensive would be necessary after the conduct of a strategic defense in order to attain a status quo ante bellum. 
32
An opponent had to be compelled towards peace on favorable terms.
The end of the 1980s saw the emphasis shift towards sufficiency and greater "activity" in defense. Defensive operations emerged as the way to counter an opponent's attack in the initial period of war. Soviet strategy in had come to prioritize the initial period of war as the decisive phase of combat operations. Hence, defensive operations would be conducted alongside counterattacks whose purpose was to frustrate the enemy's offensive, seize the initiative, and create favorable conditions for follow-on operations which would amount to a counteroffensive. An active defense involved offensive operations, and the offensive was seen as counteroffensive to roll back an opponent's gains.
It is at this stage that "active defense operations" begin to emerge as a formulation in the twilight years of the Soviet Union, described in writing by leading Soviet generals, such as A.S. Kulikov and A.D. Nefedov. 
33
Kokoshin, Soviet Strategic Thought 1917
-91, (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1998). pp. 184-186. 32
nuclear balance, there was no discernible benefit to preemptive nuclear use either in theater or at the strategic level. Hence, Soviet military strategy eschewed preemptive nuclear strikes, but did not offer clarity on preventive nonnuclear measures. Activity in military strategy centered on wartime rather than the deployment of forces, or their employment, to deter the opponent during a period of military threat.
As the Cold War faded, Soviet military doctrine reflected the general assumption that there were no political objectives that could be attained via an offensive war; hence, Soviet forces assumed that their war would be defensive in character, but nonetheless require offensive operations to prosecute. The correlation of the offensive versus the defensive in warfare remained the subject of debate, but the emerging trend was a diminishing difference between the requirements of offense versus those of defense. Terrain was steadily eliminated as a central objective, because the USSR did not harbor expansionist goals in a conflict in Europe.
Airpower grew in importance, as did long-range conventional strike systems, making operational maneuver groups and other formations less relevant to the outcome of a war. Growing sophistication and range of conventional strike power meant that the theater of military operations could be shifted to an opponent's territory without the need to introduce ground forces. Similarly, naval forces would operate closer to Soviet coastal waters and maritime approaches, under the assumption that operations in the maritime domain would also be primarily defensive, or retaliatory in character.
Active defense should be viewed in the context of a legacy strategy conceived, debated, and developed in the late USSR. This is not to say that strategy as an art form was influenced entirely in the Soviet period. On the contrary, Russian military thought shows strong influences from Russian imperial strategists before the revolution, and has been rediscovering military thinkers that lived outside the Soviet Union during the Cold War (such as Evgeny Messner). All of these are useful to consider as influences on Russian strategic culture and the development of the art of strategy. 
34
Strategy is typically evolutionary, rather than revolutionary, and active defense clearly evolves from active defense concepts of the late Soviet period. The practical aspects of Russian strategy making, operational concept development, organization of forces, armaments, support, etc., evince a direct lineage from late Soviet period deliberations, influenced heavily by doctrine and outlooks on military science of that time. Contemporary Russian military strategy has perpetuated many of the core assumptions of that period because the trends being observed were borne out as enduring features of modern warfare, as were many of the challenges or problems identified. Arguably, Russian military strategy today offers a much better alignment between political aims, military means, and the socio-economic requirements to support them in this iteration of "active defense" compared to the Soviet version. This is unsurprising: in the late 1980s military strategy was only beginning to adapt to new political realities, a new defensive military doctrine, concepts of defensive sufficiency, and conventional capabilities that were becoming more prominent and would come to shape the evolution of tactics and operational art to follow.
Russian military strategy is influenced by perceptions of adversary strategy-the concepts of operations and technologies being developed by potential opponents. These interpretations can be stylized with a set of overarching assumptions about what an opponent's strategy constitutes in practice. Russian strategy is oriented towards the prospect of a regional or largescale war with NATO. It accommodates a range of conflicts, but nonetheless it is primarily aimed at resolving that higher order challenge. One of the principal challenges the strategy seeks to address stems from the Russian belief that the opening phase of a war with NATO will feature a massed missile-aviation strike. Here we should introduce the main operational concepts or challenges as the Russian military sees them, particularly in the initial period of war: massed missile-aviation strike (MRAU), prompt global strike (BGU), and most recently, integrated massed air strike (IMVU). The latter, IMVU, is now described and interpreted as an evolution of the MRAU problem, and a component of U.S. multi-domain operations.
The Russian military is familiar with MDO concept development, although analysts view it through the lends of prior assumptions that the initial U.S. campaign will comprise a large-scale missile and air attack. Prompt global strike remains more of a catchall term for a strategic intercontinental counterforce attack, using ballistic missiles, long range bombers, and seabased cruise missiles, against Russia's main conventional and nuclear forces. Conversely, MRAU and IMVU appear to be more operational level discussions, though the strike carries strategic implications. Below is an example of how Russian military writing often depicts the challenge. A fixation on the threat of massed aerospace attack from the United States is not a recent trend in Russian military thinking, as it was a staple of late Soviet military thought. Russian concepts for regional nuclear deterrence, which emerged in the late 1990s, were developed in part as a response to the threat of a US-led aerospace attack. The conventional military was not in position to effectively deter or counter such a campaign, given its relatively shambolic state after the dissolution of the USSR and the Warsaw Pact. Russian understanding of the aerospace threat (increasingly linking air and space as one domain) evolved from historical Soviet-era concerns about NATO airpower, which themselves drew strong lessons from Germany's opening air attacks during World War II (particularly on the Soviet Union in the Great Patriotic War). However, aerospace attacks could now be conducted by advanced technological adversaries from great distances and across the full depth of Russian territory to achieve goals without deploying ground forces to the theater. And, moving forward, they can be conducted with the support of pilotless (remotely operated) systems at even longer ranges and with faster speeds.
An aerospace attack could follow efforts by adversaries to internally destabilize Russia through nonmilitary means. Concerns about internal destabilization escalated after the Arab Spring, as evident in Gerasimov's discussion of the growing importance of nonmilitary means in 2013. As one analyst recently noted, a key characteristic of conflicts is the continued growth and increased complexity in nonmilitary means ("traditional-asymmetric-disruptive, scaled and decisive") and the increase in the importance of psychological combat. In turn, nonmilitary means "will allow [us] to prevent an armed conflict or halt it at various phases of development and transition to the resolution of the situation without the use of military force." 
35
Russian military writing also reveals two broad categories of activity in the evolution of a modern regional or large-scale conflict: a pre-conflict period involving nonmilitary means, psychological warfare, subversion, and the like; and an intense initial period of war that features the employment of advanced military technology in air/space, at sea, on the ground, and, most crucially, across the information spectrum. 
36
37
38
The US concept of multidomain operations features prominently in recent military writing and literature. Russian concept development is quite responsive to what Russians believe to be the trending doctrinal and conceptual evolution on this side of the Atlantic. Here, and elsewhere in 35 V.B. Zarudnitskiy, "Character and content of armed conflicts in modern conditions and near term perspective," Характер и содержание военных конфликтов в современных условиях и обозримой перспективе, Voennaya Mysl', no. 1 (2021).
36 Aleksandr Serzhantov, Sergey Mazhuga, and Vladimir Loiko, "Wars of the future: what will they be like?," Войны грядущего: какими они будут?, Nezavisimoe voennoe obozrenie, no. 35 (2019). 
37
38 Ibid.
the text we will feature excerpts from writing by authoritative sources such as Colonel General Vladimir Borisovich Zarudnitskiy, currently the head of the Russian Military Academy of General Staff, and formerly the head of the Main Operations Directorate of the General Staff.
Multidomain operations are interpreted as a much higher-level concept than envisioned by the US Army. For example, some write that a "global multidomain operation using reflexive [control] technologies at the political, strategic and operational-tactical levels" is a potentially new form of military art. 
39
Multi-domain actions in a single combat space will be realized by remotely reducing the enemy's potential at any distance from its territory by simultaneously delivering global strikes from different directions with unmanned high-precision weapons of various basing, as well as functional software and hardware influence. At the same time, it is planned to carry out information-psychological and special operations, as well as to take nonmilitary, asymmetric, and hybrid countermeasures. 
41
Counteraction of multi-domain activities will require coordinated actions of the state in all spheres of confrontation within the framework of an active defense strategy, which, taking into account the defensive nature of the Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, should provide for a set of measures to proactively neutralize threats to the security of the state. 
42
Changes in the methods of initiating and the nature of the conduct of military actions will be based on preempting [uprezhdenii] the enemy by improving the forms and methods aimed at conquering and maintaining dominance in all 39 Ibid. 40 A. G. Sokolov, "Tendencies of development of military art," Тенденции развития военного искусства, Nezavisimoe voennoe obozrenie, no. 36 (2019). 
41
spheres of confrontation using high-tech means of warfare in various spheres, as well as actively conducting information and ideological confrontation. 
43
It is assumed that the beginning of the active phase will be determined by the degree of weakening or loss of the combat potential of the enemy's armed forces, primarily the strike potential. It will represent short-term stages of a massive complex impact, applied simultaneously in all spheres and throughout the entire territory of the state. New-not only physical-spheres of confrontation with new types of weapons are appearing, for which the priority is not physical, but functional defeat of the enemy. For example, a state, which is a recognized leader in the field of high technologies, creates on their basis a complex system of command and control of troops and weapons for conducting military operations. And the more complex the system, the more vulnerable elements in it, the defeat of which will allow to achieve the set goal. 
44
The development of means of warfare determines the transition from physical destruction (suppression) of the enemy only by fire means to complex (functional) impact on the basis of means of destruction (including highprecision weapons), reconnaissance, electronic warfare, information warfare (including software and hardware complexes) integrated into a single system. This comprehensive approach to the impact on the enemy in modern war is becoming an objective necessity, in contrast to the wars of the past, when defeat was carried out exclusively by means of fire. 
45
According to Russian officials and analysts, nonmilitary means broadly include political, information (both psychological and technical), diplomatic, economic, legal, spiritual/moral, and humanitarian measures. 
46
47
According to authors S.G. Chekinov and S.A. Bogdanov, nonmilitary measures offer a number of benefits in peacetime, including deterring armed conflict, stabilizing the international system, bolstering relations among states, and eliminating possible threats from adversaries. Amid a political-military conflict, nonmilitary measures work to strengthen military actions by acting as a force multiplier, serving to weaken and reduce an opponent's forces and capabilities, and even completely eliminating a military threat. 
50
51
53
54
Following the explosion of Russian military thought on nonmilitary means post-2011, the Chief of General Staff has seemingly sought to corral this discussion, and reorient it back to more traditional military strategy considerations. In his March 2019 speech, at the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, Gerasimov noted that the 'emergence of new spheres of confrontation in modern conflicts and methods of warfare increasingly shift towards the integrated application of political, economic, informational, and other nonmilitary measures, realized with reliance on military force.' 56 According to him the military does take into account 'all other non-military measures that affect the course and outcome of a war, provide and establish conditions for effective use of military force.' Yet he emphasized that 'the main content of military strategy is 
52
53 Ibid.
54 V. V. Gerasimov, "Modern Wars and Real Questions in Regard to the Country's Defense," Современные войны и актуальные вопросы обороны страны Vestnik AVN, no. 2 (2017). 
55
56
composed of questions on preparation for war, and its conduct, primarily by the armed forces.' 
57
58
59
60
58 Ibid. 
59
60 N. N. Bolotov, "The Essence and Content of the Concept of 'War in the Information Sphere'," Сущность и содержание понятия война в "информационной" сфере, Vestnik AVN 1 (2017). 
61
Nonmilitary means feature prominently in Russia's strategic deterrence concept. They are also central to actions or measures taken during the pre-conflict phase and to Russia's escalation management strategy. Russian military analysts write that, while information has always been important in conflict, today, nonmilitary means "complement the employment of military force, having an impact directly on the effectiveness of the realization of (military) forceful measures." 62 Information allows for controlling the population, shaping elite perceptions, and inflicting social disorganization that makes the opponent vulnerable. These methods establish favorable conditions for use of military force.
Military writings show concern about the emergence of psychological weapons and the effect of information-psychological combat on populations. 
63
In 2019 Valery Gerasimov outlined that military strategy has evolved from that of annihilation, attrition, to those of global war, nuclear deterrence, and strategies premised on indirect actions. 66 In Gerasimov's view the U.S. has been working on offensive concepts such as 'global strike' and 'multisphere battle,' utilizing technologies of 'color revolutions' and 'soft power.' 
67
68
63
64 Ibid.
65 Ibid. 
66
67 Soft power is often featured in Russian military writing, but as a subversive concept, and an instrument in political warfare. It is not interpreted in the same manner as the Western understanding of the dichotomy between soft and hard power. Multisphere is the Russian term for multidomain, commonly used to discuss multidomain operations, but more as a strategic concept than an operational one. See ibid.
fifth-column movement, and will then take advantage of the instability to deliver a decisive strike with precision-guided conventional weapons against critically important objects. 
69
This evolution of how the Russian military discusses the main challenge fits well with the main features of modern warfare that active defense is meant to address. The Russian military (senior leaders) see forms and methods of modern warfare as having transitioned from traditional to newer ones, sometimes under the catchall term of 'new type warfare,' though they also include a combination of elements of what was had been discussed in the 1990s and 2000s as 6 th generation warfare, noncontact warfare, and the rise of nontraditional wars. The main features or outlooks of this transition were outlined by Gerasimov in his 2013 speech to the Academy of Military Sciences, and well-known article in the Military-Industrial Courier in February of that year, along with prominent articles by other military theorists during that time. 
71
72
This invariably requires the Russian military to have command and control of their forces in a unified information space, and pursue information superiority. 
73
74
Russian articulation of a strategy of active defense continues to evolve, but its thesis in terms of a regional or large-scale war appears to be a strategy that would deny an opponent the ability to conduct a paralyzing offensive and attain decisive victory in the initial period of war.
If successful, the strategy would force a war with high levels of attrition, whereby operations that are both defensive and offensive in nature would help retain the initiative and dictate the course of the conflict. These operations benefit from more recently deployed means of electronic defeat, which can be used to disorganize an opponent. There is a strong desire to shape the cognitive space, placing emphasis on the psychological and not just the material means of warfare. The methods, however, are not based on simultaneity of operations, or shock and awe. Instead, the Russian military emphasizes deception, technical means to shape an opponent's decisions towards desired actions, and functional defeat of the opponent's information systems. The psychological aspect is an important auxiliary to material means in the war effort, and will be discussed further in this report.
Does theory meet practice, and does the Russian military reflect the kind of force designed to effect an active defense strategy? The answer is an unequivocal "yes," although any Russian military leader would consider the current state of the force a work in progress, even though the vision for its evolution is quite clear. First, it is a military designed for relatively high levels of readiness and manning; otherwise, it would be unable to conduct the sort of "active" deployments and demonstrative actions required of it. Therefore, it describes a military that is largely standing, as opposed to a mass mobilization army with cadre formations. Second, it is 
73
a force with advanced capabilities-particularly, precision-guided conventional weapons, automated systems of command and control, and advanced technical means for contesting the information environment. These capabilities are integral in actions that could be taken to neutralize threats before a conflict begins, and in sustaining pressure on an opponent throughout the theater of military operations. Third, the strategy speaks to a military that plans to defend forward, which means that it describes a force with good mobility or a forward defense posture. Active defense assumes that ready forces will be able to engage opponents from the outset of fighting, and conduct a mobile defense, while counterattacking. These considerations point to a military able to concentrate into joint or combined-arms maneuver formations, along key strategic directions. As a management instrument, this describes a force which is weighed more heavily towards capability, high readiness, and mobility, and less to capacity.
Does the Russian military believe it can win a sustained war of attrition? The likely answer is "no," and there is a visible trend towards greater capacity in the size of ground force formations, along with associated materiel deployed. However, there is a sense that the US or other opponents may not have the political will to engage in a prolonged conflict, especially when it is over limited political objectives, with the prospect of high cost and risk of escalation.
In general, the latter is seen as a problem that is easier to resolve after successfully avoiding a decisive defeat in the initial period of war. The first task is to prevent a clear-cut US/NATO victory early on or unacceptable levels of damage to the homeland at the outset of a war.
The inescapable subtext in much of Russian writing is that its military is operating from a position of weakness, where general purpose forces are unlikely to deter a superior technological opponent. Much of the construct for operations therefore follows from the assumption that Russia will be disadvantaged, and will require effective counters or asymmetries in its military strategy in order to prevail. Russian military thinkers regularly articulate the idea of asymmetric approaches, which often involve a strategy of the weaker or perhaps more constrained side that seeks to pull apart the advantages of a superior opponent. 
75
Prevailing arguments on the efficacy of nonnuclear means generally delegate their efficacy to armed conflict and local war, plus the initial phases of regional war, but do not see them as substitutes for nuclear weapons in larger conflict types. 
76
77
Operational art can be thought of as the theory and practice of preparing for and conducting combined or independent operations by large units, such as armies and fleets, or entire "fronts." Historically, fronts were operational-strategic-level divisions of the theater that involved multiple army-or fleet-sized formations operating under a common purpose and command. Armies are the principal operational-level unit (today, combined-arms armies, tank armies, and air and air defense armies). Planning and devising operations consists of delineating functional tasks; organizing and supporting command, control, and communication; meeting organizational and equipment requirements; and fulfilling requirements for preparation of a theater for said operations. 
79
Russian military strategists pay particular attention to the changing dynamics of, and requirements for, managing larger formations. to the creation of a new one. 
80
The historical evolution in Russian military thinking can be roughly broken down as moving from a single decisive battle to successive battles, to the concept of the deep battle and deep operation, followed by a revival of strategic operations. 
81
82
By the mid-1930s, the idea that war at the operational level rested on the successful execution of successive operations evolved into the concept of deep battle and deep operations, culminating in its sanction as doctrine in the Field Regulation (Ustav) of 1936. Tukhachevsky, commenting on and quoting the regulation which he helped write, asserted that the enemy must be "chained to the full depth of his position, surrounded and destroyed" through the proper use of the infantry, supported by aviation and artillery. 
84
85
86
81
The Russian military continues to develop operational art based on the observed trends and developments in military science. Discourse on operational art often positions it as the implementing measures, or ways, by which strategic concepts, such as strategic deterrence, are realized. For example, A.A. Korabelnikov defined the main components of Russian operational art as:
The main content of operational art will be a set of measures for strategic (nuclear and non-nuclear) deterrence and prevention of military conflicts, information operations (actions, campaigns), operations in the information and communication space; covering the land part of the state border; conducting operations (combat actions) in armed conflicts, and in operations to maintain (restore) international peace and security. 
87
88
Operational art, on the one hand, is subject to strategy, and at the same time it occupies a leading position in relation to tactics, determines their goals and directions of development. There is also a feedback. The development of tactics, the emergence of new ways of waging combat has an impact on operational art, and operational art, in turn, affects the development of strategy. 
89
90
Of the three most important components of military operations-maneuver, fire and assault by troops-the skillful combination of which has always achieved and will achieve decisive results, the first two, that is, maneuver and fire, are becoming increasingly important. Assault by troops, which previously predetermined the outcome of the battles, will be used today, and even more so in the future, only to complete the defeat of the enemy. The role of maneuver 
87
88 Ibid.
89 Ibid. 
90
and fire is to prepare the assault and increase its strength, without compelling troops, as in the past, at the cost of heavy losses to overcome the enemy. There is also a direction in the development of tactics as increasing the role of information superiority over the enemy in battle, or, in other words, the transition from being "over-armed" to "over-informed." Advances in automatic computer processing, intelligence, navigation and communications provide the ability to accurately pinpoint in day, night, and other limited visibility environments the location of one's own and enemy troops, as well as in a short time to collect, process, and send relevant data to thousands of addresses. 
91
There is an earnestly held belief that attaining information superiority, better command and control, and decision-making advantage, will further offer an edge over opponents. The trend is towards attaining synergistic effects, but also looking for ways of fighting that are smarter, with less reliance on mass due to the much lower availability of manpower and materiel compared to Soviet concepts of operations. Ironically, these still rely on massed employment of artillery fires, a historical mainstay in the Russian ground forces, with the addition of precision and ability to target at much greater depths. 
91
A strategic operation-a series of operations linked by a common purpose and organizationis the highest form of operational art in the Russian military. Its objectives are strategic, and form a bridge between operational actions and the goals of Russian military strategy. These operations are intended to achieve military-political goals, representing defining constructs within Russian military strategy as it is applied. To better discuss the subject of strategic operations, it would be helpful to establish some key terms of reference, and attain an applied understanding of the Russian military lexicon, which is commonly used to describe operational concepts.
Figure 
5
Russian formations and units can be seen as separated into five levels of echelonment. Tactical formations are divisions and brigades, generally operating within a range of 0-100 km.
Operational-tactical formations are less common, usually Army Corps, most of which are assigned to fleets. These operate at greater depth towards 500km. Armies are operational level formations, the hubs of the Russian military system to which tactical units are assigned, operating at 500-1500km. Fleets are operational, but also work as a strategic-operational formation, i.e. at a higher level. Though typically at this level one can find Joint Strategic Commands, which govern entire strategic directions at ranges of thousands of kilometers.
National level authority has control of strategic and global level matters beyond specified theaters. Geographically, Russian military planning is oriented around five strategic directions: Western, Southwestern, Central Asian, Eastern, and Arctic. Each of these directions is the responsibility of a Joint Strategic Command (JSC) headquarters, four of which are based on military districts and the fifth on the Northern Fleet. Each district is led by a JSC, which is responsible for housing the forces, and retains operational-level control of most of the units in wartime. The command is responsible for a "strategic direction," which consists of operational directions that further subdivide an area of responsibility. The Joint Strategic Command essentially runs the fight, takes in units from other military districts, and assigns tactical units as necessary to operational-level formations, which are armies, fleets, and air and air defense armies. The JSC controls most of the capabilities housed inside its respective military district, except the Strategic Rocket Forces (RVSN), Airborne Troops (VDV), Long-Range Aviation (LRA), Military Transport Aviation (VTA), or special purpose units (SPN). These units may be attached to regular formations or perform independent missions as deemed necessary by the General Staff.
Figure 
6
Source: CNA.
Over the last several decades, the Russian military has spent a considerable amount of time reworking command and control (C2) arrangements. 
92
92 For an extensive discussion, see Greg Whisler, "Strategic Command and Control in the Russian Armed Forces: Untangling the General Staff, Military Districts, and Service Main Commands," Journal of Slavic Military Studies., no. 4 (2019), no. 1 (2020), and no. 2 (2020).
To better understand the echelonment of Russian military concepts, it is important we consider four main constructs. The theater of war (TV), theater of military actions (TVD), strategic direction (SD), and operational direction (OD). The theater of war is a broad reference for a vast geographic theater, such as the European or Asiatic, consisting of several TVDs. The theater of military action, commonly also translated as theater of military operations, is delineated by the General Staff. It can be а temporary or standing designation. The TVD may comprise several strategic directions, and as mentioned above, the job of the Joint Strategic Command is to command and field forces in a strategic direction. One analyst describes this as follows:
Strategic actions in the TVD, as a form of employment of troops (forces), take place as the result of a merger between a strategic operation at the Continental TVD and strategic actions (strategic operations) on the Oceanic TVD. They are a set of coordinated and interconnected actions of troops (forces) in one or several strategic directions and independent operations carried out according to a single concept and plan. 
93
94
Oceanic TVDs have disappeared from regular references in Russian military writing. However, operational zones within oceanic TVDs were typically 1000-1500km for a fleet, and 500km for a flotilla or squadron. 
95
93 O.N. Ostapenko, S.V. Baushev, and I.V. Morozov, Information-space support of RF armed forces groupings, Информационно-Космическое Обеспечение Группировок Войск (Cил) ВС РФ (St Petersburg, 2012).
94 "War and peace in terms and definitions.", p. 280 
95 Ibid.,
96
2
Russian military thinkers highlight the increasing "jointness" and unity of effort within these groupings arrayed in each strategic direction. 
97
The concept of "strategic operations" has become a focal point in Soviet and subsequently Russian military planning. Initially it centered on the complex preparations required before a planned battle, but in time the idea evolved to encompass the operation itself. 
98
99
The term started appearing in works in the 1960s, and began to be applied retrospectively in discussions, initially to the Civil War of 1917-1922, then World War I as well. 
100
101
102
103
105
The theater of military operations (TVD), also often described as a theater of military actions, can be both functional and geographic. Therefore, this operation is one of the more broadly framed concepts as it describes a set of coordinated operations and actions of various types of armed forces carried out within the boundaries of a theater of operations in order to achieve military-political goals. The operation is carried out by Ground Forces and the Air Force, with the participation of a certain part of the Strategic Rocket Forces (in a nuclear war), the forces 
102
103 "Strategic Operation " Стратигическая Операция, Ministry of RF Encyclopedia, Энциклопедия, Undated, https://encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=10378@morfDictionary. 
104
105
Given the nature and content of intended actions, the order of execution is presumed to be first defensive operations, paired with counteroffensives, and then offensive strategic operation in the theater. The goal of a strategic defensive operation, as a rule, is to repel aggression, to hold on to important strategic targets and lines, to defeat the main groupings of enemy forces, and to create conditions for the transition to a strategic counteroffensive (offensive). The goal of a strategic counteroffensive operation is usually to eliminate the consequences of an enemy invasion, restore the situation, defeat groupings of troops (naval forces) in a theater of war, transfer hostilities to enemy territory, capture its most important objects and lines to a limited depth, and create conditions for the transition to a strategic offensive.
Depending on conditions, a strategic operation may develop into a smaller-scale operation of a group of "fronts" and a fleet in the region, in one or several adjacent strategic directions. 
106
Often, Russian military writing can be downright confusing in its use of the term TVD. It is often used to describe a specific area, a vector, or an entire warfighting domain. TVDs are generally assumed to be functional geographic boundaries that include the air above them and relevant littorals. 107 There were also four oceanic TVDs, distinct from the continental, which will be discussed later. Hence, the term continental TVD appears to have become retrograde, even 106 "War and peace in terms and definitions."
107 See for example: Vasily Alishin, "Build strength in all theaters: The present and future of the Naval Fleet of Russia," Нарастить силы на всех ТВД: Настоящее и будущее Военно-морского флота России, Natsionalnaya Oborona, no. 9 (2020).; Aleksandr Khramchikhin, "Northern Ice TVD," Северный Ледовитый ТВД, Voennopromyshlennyi kur'er no. 16 (2010).;Yuri Krinitsky, "The Aerospace TVD To Be," Воздушно-Космическому ТВД Быть, Vosdushno-Kosmicheskaya Oborona, no. 1 (2015).; A. Smolovsky, "Operational-Tactical Events at the Ocean and Marine TVD's of Fleets and Flotillas of the RF Navy," Оперативно-Тактические События на Океанских и Морских ТВД флотов и Флотилий ВМФ РФ, Morskoi Sbornik, no. 5 (2010).
though it still appeared with regularity alongside the oceanic TVD. SOTMO appears to integrate the continental, and oceanic domains of military action.
Although TVDs are assumed to remain a mainstay of operational planning, this is now often framed as something to be replaced or modified by other, newer conceptualizations. Given the receding plausibility of a major continental land war in Europe, large-scale SOTMO analysis has been particularly focused on the maritime and littoral domains, with southern water basinsthe Caspian and the Black Seas-being noted as areas where it is necessary to update older assumptions. 
108
109
108
A strategic operation in the oceanic theater of military action (OTVD) is a system of coordinated military operations in the operationally important areas of the ocean and seas, as well as in adjacent coastal areas and in airspace. It had multiple purposes: to disrupt enemy attacks from sea areas; to gain dominance in the ocean (at sea); to defeat important coastal targets; to defeat the main groupings of the enemy's naval forces and its troops in coastal areas; to disrupt the enemy's ocean transport; and to protect communications, basing points, and coastal facilities. SOOTMO was carried out by the forces of the Navy in cooperation with other types of the armed forces. It could include a number of sequential fleet operations; army operations on the coastal flanks; air, air-sea, and amphibious assaults and anti-amphibious operations; and a system of fire strikes, naval strike-reconnaissance actions, and support measures.
However, there is no such standing operation in practice. So why discuss it? Because the missions, tasks, and roles under SOOTMO still exist, just integrated, and repackaged into a joint operation. The Russian navy has not gone away, nor have many of its requirements or the geography within which it must operate. There is a strong maritime component to Russian strategic operations, but no longer a distinct and separate strategic operation in the oceanic theater. This is now more of a term of art referencing operational-strategic actions of fleets and various groupings of troops and forces interacting with them. 
111
112
113
114
In his discussion of how navies could be used in warfighting, Admiral Kravchenko, who was then serving as the chief of the Navy Staff, described the strategic operation in the oceanic theater as the highest form of warfighting for naval forces. He argued that full-scale strategic Russian naval operations in oceanic theaters were unlikely, because of the lack of available forces in distant maritime zones and the absence of sufficient means of logistic and technical support and control systems. At the same time, given the rapid development of high-precision weapons, even limited-strength fleets operating in remote areas, under certain conditions, would be able to achieve strategic goals. Therefore, he argued, it would be premature for the Russian Navy to abandon strategic operations in the maritime theater. 
115
116
For joint action, the groupings could include some combination of fleets, combined-arms armies and army corps, air force and air defense armies, and airborne units, as well as other forces such as internal and railway troops. Depending on the nature and direction of the military threat, the core of the grouping could be either a naval formation or a ground forces formation. Accordingly, such a grouping might be headed either by a naval commander or a ground forces commander. Other formations would be subordinated to the lead unit. 
118
117
119
In wartime, the Navy ensures the stability of the strategic defense of the state and repulses aggression from the ocean and maritime areas, working toward the defeat of the enemy's naval forces, the reduction of the military, economic and informational potential of the opposing states. It also provides assistance to the troops in adjacent continental theaters in their conduct of military operations.
The main tasks of the Navy in a large-scale war are to preserve the nuclear missile potential of naval strategic and other nuclear forces, to ensure their combat stability and assigned readiness to deliver nuclear strikes in any conditions; participation in repelling enemy strikes from aerospace, ocean and maritime zones; preventing, together with other types of armed forces, of invasion of the country's territory from the sea; inflicting defeat on the main naval groupings of the enemy's naval forces and disrupting their seizure of supremacy at sea; assistance to ground forces in defense and offensive, etc. 
120
121
among various naval forces. It would also include a grouping of rapid-reaction forces, to assist ground forces in the coastal zone, and an air defense component. 
122
123
124
While the Russian Navy has invested heavily in its ability to conduct strikes with conventional or nuclear weapons against fixed targets on land, much Russian military writing reflects a strong recognition of deficits in operational requirements for the near sea and far sea zones. These writings generally acknowledge a poor ability in antisubmarine warfare, or countermine warfare, and a low likelihood of being able to secure the sea-based nuclear deterrent in the near seas. 
125
126
8
124
Source: A.I. Zholobitskiy, "On the means of inflicting damage of vessels from the composition of the carrier strike group of the adversary," Vozdushno-kosmicheskiye sily: teoriya i praktika, no. 12 (2019).
Writing more recently from the Academy of Military Sciences, Vice Admiral Patrushev is especially critical, emphasizing the threat of an integrated massed air strike (IMVU) that includes hypersonic missiles, cruise and ballistic missiles, drones, and piloted strike aircraft. 127 This is a common theme in Russian military writing, but he highlights the contemporary material limitations from a naval perspective. The strike could include 1,000-1,500 cruise missiles, 1,500-2,000 aircraft of various types, and 400-500 carrier aircraft (five to six carriers). An absence of means of reconnaissance, weak availability of land-based anti-ship aviation, failure to replace the Liana space-based system of targeting, and low availability of combat vessels suggests that deployed naval forces will be inferior to opponents by three to five times in most theaters. Notably, his article features the requirement to destroy enemy platforms carrying long-range cruise missiles before they are effectively able to launch missiles and missile-carrying aviation, which is a damage limitation strategy. Furthermore, the article evinces the requirement to conduct a massed warding strike against NATO forces, in line with numerous other writings that suggest the Russian Navy is expected to contribute strike power to strategic operations that feature destroying such objects on land.
Finally, in focusing on the role of space forces in strategic maritime zone operations, some military writers highlight the role of information support from space in increasing the range of naval strike operations to over 1,000 km, which allows for the transformation of tactical operations into strategic operations. When firing from submarines, they argue, space-based targeting is the only reliable source for targeting information, which is consistent with observations by other Russian military analysts and former naval officers. With space-based targeting systems, antiship weapons change from operational-level reconnaissance-strike complexes into higher level information strike complexes that can conduct strategic operations. 
128
At the heart of the strategic aerospace operation (SAO) is the Russian military's concern that US forces could conduct a massed aerospace attack against Russian forces or critically important infrastructure. An operation for the deflection of aerospace attack appears to be an integrated defensive component of this strategic aerospace operation, which consists of offensive and defensive elements. This strategic operation has been described in the Ministry of Defense dictionary as an operation in which the aerospace forces do the following:  Counter (Deflect) an aerospace attack of an adversary.
 Achieve dominance in the air and strategic space zones.
 Inflict damage on opponent aerospace forces and means in the aerospace domain, and on land (and at sea). 
128
129 Here we reference the Pion-NK targeting satellites-not the ELINT satellites already deployed, which permit targeting against cooperative targets.
 Defend main points of state (administrative) and military command, and economic infrastructure.
 Disrupt state and military command of the opponent.
 Thwart a strategic operation and operational deployment of forces.
 Interdict maneuver between theaters of operation.
 Decrease military and economic potential.
The dictionary continues, to say:
A strategic aerospace operation includes: air operations; combat actions by long-range aviation with use of conventional means; combat actions by forces countering aerospace attack, along with information-surveillancereconnaissance (support) and combat actions by other units.…
130
Another authoritative definition describes it as follows:
A set of strategic measures and defensive offensive actions to identify and repel an enemy aerospace attack from all aerospace directions, to protect the armed forces and economic facilities from strikes by ground, air, and space-based strategic strike forces. Its constituent parts are: operations of the Space Forces (early warning systems, missile defense, SKKP), anti-aircraft operations by aviation using groupings of zones and areas of air defense of the Air Force and Air Defense (Air Force and Air Defense armies, Air Force and Air Defense corps, Air Force and Air Defense divisions). In the future, it can develop into a strategic anti-aircraft operation, and then into an operation of 'strategic defensive forces.'
131
The strategic aerospace operation, or стратегическая воздушно-космическая операция (SVKO), is one of the main strategic operations (SO) in Russian military strategy. The concept evolved from its predecessors in the Cold War. Today it is heavily influenced by fears that the United States or NATO could launch a massed air-missile strike (massirovany raketnoaviatsionny udar). In Russian, the acronym is MRAU, though translated into English it could be MAMS. The strike would be designed to paralyze Russian forces, command and control, and critically important civilian infrastructure. These fears grew out of the perceived growing importance of air superiority to the outcome of a conflict, starting with Nazi Germany's bombing campaigns in World War II, then strengthened by the Allied bombing campaign against Germany, and reinforced by US/NATO air campaigns in Iraq, Yugoslavia, and Afghanistan. 
132
133
These events impressed upon Russian military strategists the need for an effective way to defend against such attacks. S.V. Yagolnikov, head of the VKO AVN Department, writes:
In the aerospace sphere, as in no other, there are highly mobile means capable of carrying out sudden single and massive strikes on any object, regardless of its location. Changing and evolving conditions in this area have very different time parameters, fundamentally different from the relevant time data that characterize the actions of on land and sea (ocean) TVDs. Air and space assets carry out global reconnaissance, navigation and communications for the use of all types of armed forces and troop types. Projecting force through air and space has fundamentally changed the nature of armed struggle. 
134
135
9
136
137
Descriptions of a potential "massed missile-aviation attack" (МRАU) against Russia vary, but most include some combination of employment of hypersonic missiles, cruise missiles, ballistic missiles, UAVs, combat aircraft, combat helicopters, strategic aviation, offensive space operations, and the use of electronic warfare. Kruglikov et al. describe the initial attack launched by an adversary:
The most powerful is the first МRАU which is being prepared in peacetime… The first МRAU uses the maximum possible number of combat aircraft, cruise missiles, combat helicopters, and artillery. Coordinated in place and time, forces and means, the first МRАU should include, as a rule, 2-3 echelons: a cruise missile echelon; air defense breakthrough echelon; and a strike echelon.
The cruise missile echelon (sea and airborne) with a conventional warhead (UCH) is designed to strike at targets of the Strategic Rocket Forces and Air Defense Forces, command and control bodies, warehouses of nuclear and conventional weapons, airfields, naval bases and other important objects." 138
A second air defense breakthrough echelon of strike, fighter, and electronic warfare aircraft focuses on the suppression of radar detection equipment, the disturbance of control and communication systems, the defeat of active air defense systems, and the blocking and destruction of aviation at airfields. Finally, 10 to 15 minutes later, this is followed by a third echelon of strike and fighter aircraft aimed at destroying "strategic nuclear carriers, airfields, aviation and air defense command posts, aircraft on the ground and in the air, air defense missile systems, ammunition depots and fuel and lubricants." According to Kruglikov et al., the distinctive characteristics of the initial stage of a military operation will be "the suddenness of the outbreak and the high rate of hostilities, the massive use of aviation and cruise missiles, and the transfer of troops directly to their operational areas from the continental United States." 139 Figure 
10
138 Ibid.
139 Ibid. The Russian response to adversary aerospace attack under SAO is not just defensive but proactive, designed to potentially limit the damage of the attack, parry it, or deflect it. As Podgornykh and Dybov note, "Usually, along with repelling enemy strikes, the defense also includes elements of offensive actions-the delivery of preemptive, oncoming and retaliatory strikes, counterstrikes and counterattacks, the defeat of the attacking enemy in the places of its basing, deployment, or on the initial lines.… The experience of many wars shows that only active defense can guarantee success."
140
The term pervades not only the level of military strategy but, equally, discourse on strategic operations and operational concepts in general.
The wide collection of forces and methods for carrying out such an operation is often referred to as an aerospace defense system (VKO system). As Colonel Yuri Krinitsky, a professor of the military academy of aerospace defense, states, "The set of forces and means designed to combat an aerospace enemy necessitates that a hierarchy of management levels is established, a relationship between subsystems and elements, [and that] other requirements of the general theory of systems are met." 141 An effective execution of an aerospace operation necessitates that all of these moving parts come together to form a swift and effective force that can deflect an aggressor's attack and quickly regain air control. Figure 
11
Within the framework of a single service of the Armed Forces (Air Defense Forces), a unified management of districts and individual air defense armies, a missile attack warning army (PRN), an anti-missile defense army (ABM) and an outer space control corps (KKP) was organized. Their joint use was envisaged within the framework of the general form of military operations-a strategic operation to repel an air and space attack of the enemy. And the Commanderin-Chief of the Air Defense Forces and his headquarters carried out the preparation of this operation, controlled the troops during its implementation and were responsible for the result of the actions of all forces of the aerospace defense. 
142
143
However, few actions were taken to apply the concept in a meaningful way, and the document served less to provide answers and more to raise new questions, such as: "What is aerospace defense (VKO)-a task or a system? Against which countries and in which conflicts should the aerospace defense tasks be employed? What principles should be used as the basis for the functioning of VKO? What are the criteria for the effectiveness of aerospace defense?" 
144
142 Ibid.
143 Yuri Krinitsky, "Objective reality of our time," Объективная реальность нашего времени, Voyennopromyshlennyy kur'yer (2017).
More than two years have passed since the RF Aerospace Defense Concept was approved. But until this point it has only been declared, and the existing experience and developments are not used. They are not even mentioned anywhere. The main problems, without the resolution of which the air defense system of the country cannot be created, are: scientific-the structure of the aerospace defense system has not yet been fully worked out, since the mission of the Aerospace Defense Forces in the country's defense system has not been determined; organizational-the main elements of the aerospace defense system are in different types (branches) of the RF Armed Forces; personnelin the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, specialists are not trained to control the forces of the aerospace defense. 
145
146
Eventually, in 2011, by presidential decree, a new type of troop was created: the Aerospace Defense Force (VKO), which absorbed the Space Forces. From 2011 to 2015, there were debates regarding the most favorable organizational structure for the VKO-whether it should be its own, single command with sole responsibility, or whether it should merge with the Air Force to create the Aerospace Forces (VKS). A VKO working group was created, tasked to recommend the best possible organizational structure for the Aerospace Defense Force. 
147
148
149
The relevance of SAO is that it is an integrated offensive and defensive operation, designed to deflect what Russians believe will be an opening NATO aerospace assault during the initial period of war. Russian integrated air defense is commonly misperceived as part of an antiaccess/area denial strategy, but this is largely capability-based mirror imaging. Russian Aerospace Forces are tasked with deflecting and parrying the blow, but also with conducting counterattacks to suppress an opponent's airpower. The organization combines air defense with missile defense, tactical aviation, and long-range aviation. SAO is perhaps the most important operation within the SO pantheon. The Russian military has long grappled with what they see as the principal US way of war: massed aerospace offensive, destruction of critically important objects, and so-called "shock and awe," which may visit paralyzing levels of destruction on the opponent. These views have strong historical antecedents, given the Soviet Union's own experiences in World War II, and the latter-day Soviet experiences in planning strategic air operations during the Cold War.
It is important to understand how the Russian military views the prospect of a massed airmissile strike, now increasingly referenced as an integrated massed air strike within the concept of multidomain operations. From a planning perspective, this is what the Russian military sees as the decisive initial battle with a technologically superior aerospace power. It colors much of their thinking on what to target and how best to disorganize this type of effort.
The Russian goal would be to disrupt such an attack, and to inflict maximum attrition against an opponent's aviation assets. Significantly, this view also suggests what Russian military planners would be looking for as signs of an impending US attack in an escalating crisis, and could use as markers to consult political leadership as to whether they would order preventive or preemptive measures.
The strategic operation that governs Russia's scalable nuclear employment and retaliation is a strategic operation of nuclear forces (SONF). 
150
Russia's nuclear arsenal consists of a diverse set of strategic and nonstrategic systems in ground-based, air-based, and naval configurations. SONF, according to the MOD dictionary, is a joint operation that includes "nuclear strikes and military actions of strategic nuclear forces; nuclear strikes and military actions of units, which have nonstrategic nuclear weapons that are based in the land, air, and sea, including the employment of nuclear missiles by engineering forces, as well as the actions of Space Forces and other forces." 153
Russian military-analytical writings envision a series of steps in which nuclear weapons are first deployed and utilized for signaling, and are then potentially employed in a progressive fashion at the regional level of conflict and finally are used in a large-scale war until the conflict reaches the "retaliation" of all-out nuclear war. At that level of war, in addition to the mass use of conventional precision strike, military writings suggest the employment of "single and/or grouped use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons on adversary forces" as well as the "demonstration use of nuclear weapons by strategic nuclear forces or nonstrategic nuclear weapons." 154 However, there are strong indications that not all of Russia's nuclear employment appears to be under the rubric of SONF.
Indeed, some definitions and references suggest that SONF is activated only when the conflict has escalated to a large-scale war, in which nonstrategic nuclear forces could be used en masse on adversary forces, with the potential of "single and/or grouped use of strategic and nonstrategic nuclear forces on military-economic targets of the adversary." 
155
[SONF] carries a global character, reaches all strategic aerospace directions, and could be carried out at an intercontinental range. It will likely take place over the course of 3-5 days or more. The foundation of the operation is first a massive nuclear strike by strategic nuclear forces as well as first mass nuclear strikes of strategic units in the theater of military actions (strategic direction), inflicted by all or most of available means. Subsequent nuclear strikes in the context of [SONF] are carried out by the order of the commander in chief as the environment is ascertained, the results of the nuclear strike are assessed, and nuclear forces return to combat readiness. 
156
157
Figure 
12
155 Ibid.
156 "Strategic operation of nuclear forces."
157 "War and peace in terms and definitions." SONF appears to oversee larger-scale nuclear employment scenarios, and significantly, these can include massed use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons for warfighting purposes. Despite successes in recapitalizing Russia's conventional military, there is no intention to eliminate theater nuclear weapons from the significant role that they occupy. These are viewed as having a different psychological and deterrent effect, not to be replaced by precision-guided weapons, and a cost-effective offset to US conventional superiority. While there is a relationship between advanced conventional means and perceived need for nuclear weapons, it is not inverse, and there is every likelihood that the Russian General Staff will continue to invest in both capabilities.
Of all the strategic operations, the strategic operation for the destruction of critical targets, sometimes translated as SOPKVO or SODCIT, has seemingly garnered the most attention.
According to some analysts, the purpose of this operation is as follows:
The purpose of SO[P]KVO is the creation of conditions to counter threats and prevent aggression and, in the case of the beginning of military action, the infliction on the adversary (the coalition) of damage, during which they would give up the continuation (escalation) on conditions beneficial to Russia. The infliction of necessary damage to the adversary could be achieved through damaging key targets of military and military-economic potential of the adversary to a level, the achievement of which the adversary could discontinue (the escalation of) military actions. 
158
160
161
162
163
164
165
SODCIT is a scalable and iterative operation, but likely to precede any nuclear use. The Russian military can carry out this operation at any point in a conflict. However, its most probable phasing is in the initial period of a regional war, or during a transition from a time of imminent military threat to an active conflict. This would constitute preemptive use, to stun an opponent and make clear to them that they would suffer substantial consequences resulting from any aggression. Given the Russian view that the space between peace and war is no longer clear and clearly identifiable, combined with a long-held view that the initial period of conflict is crucial, it is conceivable that a SODCIT operation could take place before Western military and political leaders view a conflict as a foregone conclusion.
The operation appears to be based on conventional capabilities. What are the most probable means of attack? First are VTO-BD, long-range precision-guided weapons, considered to be strategic in Russian military science. These include long-range cruise missiles, hypersonic 164 A. V. Skripnik, "Methodological apparatus for ranking critical enemy targets in order to solve the problem of power strategic deterrence ", Методический аппарат ранжирования критически важных объектов противника в целях решения задачи силового стратегического сдерживания, Vooruzheniye i ekonomika, no. 15 (2011). 
165
weapons, and ballistic and quasi-ballistic weapon systems. The platforms include Russia's long-range aviation, surface combatants armed with land attack missiles, guided missile submarines, and ground force missile brigades. SODCIT also includes forms of radio-electronic attack, offensive cyber capabilities, and the employment of select categories of advanced nonnuclear capabilities such as directed-energy weapons, which can similarly be used to affect critically important objects. The strikes need not be kinetic in nature.
The main strategic operations seem to overlap. For example, Russian analysts discuss employing strategic conventional weapons to compel an adversary towards peace at the same time as countering an aerospace attack.
166
167
168
169
170
171
After a discussion of Russian military strategy, and evolution of key forms of operational art such as strategic operations, in this section we explore additional operational concepts of import. These include the emerging school of thought discussing "disorganizing strike," a composite of offensive information operations and radio-electronic fire operations. Their purpose is to disorganize an opponent's military effort, affect their command and control, or otherwise influence their systems. We also explore the evolution of more traditional concepts such as recon-strike and recon-fire complexes, which evolved from late-Soviet tacticaloperational concepts. Today these are referred to as contours or loops, and are mature operational concepts, with enabling technology diffusing across the Russian military. This section will also discuss the integration of traditional fire and strike missions, with emergent ideas on use of radio-electronic concepts, presenting them as interrelated concepts which can be employed in combination.
The Russian military continues to evolve concepts under the rubric of information confrontation, drawing on historical Soviet experiences with radio-electronic combat, contemporary combat experience with electronic means, and observation of Western use of these technologies. 
172
Russian thinking on how to realize these concepts continues to evolve, but some of the forms and means include an "electronic-fire operation," which can be broadly conceived of as part of radio-electronic combat, emphasizing electronic warfare. This is perhaps more tacticaloperational in nature. A higher-level operational approach is the "information-strike operation," employing different means to functionally defeat or disorganize an opponent, focusing on command and control. The net desired effect is disorganization and attainment of information superiority at a tactical, operational, or even strategic level of war.
Figure 
13
175
being global, since it has no spatial limitations; a wide variety of forms and methods used; continuity regardless of seasonal, weather, and meteorological conditions; secrecy of the conduct, especially in peacetime. This type of operation is of particular importance in the context of highly maneuverable combat operations using reconnaissance and strike systems, high-precision guided weapons, the use of space assets and weapons based on new physical principles. 
176
177
178
14
174 Ibid.
175 Ibid.
176 Ibid.
177 Ibid.
178 S.I. Pasichnik, "On the question of complex damage infliction on the adversary and its methods during disorganization of C2," К вопросу о комплексном поражении противника и способах его осуществления при дезорганизации управления, Voennaya Mysl ', no. 6 (2017). Disorganization effects occur because electronic fires disrupt an opponent's command and control, thereby decreasing their combat potential. 
179
Some posit a larger scale information-strike operation (information weapon) to seize the initiative, gain information superiority, and reflexively dominate the opponent. The disorganization effort could involve electronic destruction, capture, disablement of the means of command and control of troops (forces), adversary's weapons, the means of his reconnaissance, and information support system; affecting the software and hardware of its information and computing systems; electronic suppression of telecommunication channels (communication channels); and misleading him (misinformation, concealment, and imitation). 
181
When developing the main provisions of the theory of disorganization of command and control of troops (forces), the authors proceeded from the postulate, the essence of which is that on the battlefield (tactical and operational level) information confrontation (information war in the old terminology) is transformed into a fight against enemy control systems, the main goal [of] which is to gain superiority in command and control.
182
The goal from their perspective is systemic damage (complex defeat) of an adversary to attain disorganization. 
183
184
Efforts at disorganization involve simultaneous offensive actions as well as actions to defend own systems. 
185
187
188
15
применения формирований радиоэлектронной борьбы в интересах противовоздушной обороны войск и объектов, Voennaya Mysl', no. 10 (2019).
186 Ibid.
187 M.V. Zhirnov, "Organization of the preparation of radio-electronic combat specialists to disorganization of C2 of ground robotic systems of foreign militaries," Организация подготовки специалистов радиоэлектронной борьбы к дезорганизации систем управления наземными робототехническими средствами иностранных армий, Vozdushno-kosmicheskiye sily: teoriya i praktika, no. 14 (2020). 
188
In discussions of Russian tactical and tactical-operational concepts, it is common to see the terms reconnaissance-fire and reconnaissance-strike contours (or loops). These "loops" emerged from Soviet military concepts that used similar names: reconnaissance-fire (ROK) and reconnaissance-strike complexes (RUK). In brief, they speak to the development of kill chains that link sensors, communication systems, and automated systems of command and control, to shooters. Russian forces are thereby able to engage an opponent with standoff capabilities in real time. Soldiers or sensors can be used to mark targets, and these coordinates are transferred to supporting units which provide fires and strikes. There is thus a reconnaissance component, a shooter component, and command and control systems that provide the linking architecture.
Recon-fires employ tube artillery and multiple-launch rocket systems. This is chiefly a tacticallevel concept, although some Russian rocket systems have ranges that can be considered more operational. Recon-strikes speak to precision-guided weapons with longer range, thereby extending the concept to operational depths and applying it to more lucrative targets. The overall approach is the same, and the two terms are increasingly blurred as fires gain extended range to strike at more operational distances with precision means.
Recon fire/strike capabilities can be combined with the electronic warfare concepts described above, integrating both classical fire/strike combinations, and radio-electronic-strikes (REU) in support. Table 
3
As Russian fire systems gain range and precision, it is likely that reconnaissance-fire and reconnaissance-strike will be merged into one concept that integrates both tactical and tactical-operational systems. Technically this can be done, given the proliferation of new MLRS systems, and precision-guided artillery munitions, along with remotely operated systems to enable targeting. The Russian military has benefited from the spread of drones, and their integration via drone companies in brigades and divisions. However, further concept unification would require reconciling echelonment issues, since typically battalions and brigades use the reconnaissance fire systems at the tactical level. Operational-level formations such as armies conduct reconnaissance strike missions at tactical-operational depths, using limited availability assets such as long-range precision-guided weapons and more advanced means of targeting.
In Russia, military strategy remains the highest form of military art, while strategic operations are the highest method of operational art. Strategy has many influences, but ultimately must prove responsive to the policy formulations of the political leadership, which dictate the political character of Russia's military doctrine. However, strategy takes strong note of developments in military technology, and ongoing innovation in battlefield tactics. As Russian analysts write, military actions "will be dictated by the country that is most capable of practically realizing achievements in the military and technological fields."
189
A number of trends continue to influence the development of military art and military strategy in the Russian armed forces:
1. The informatization of the Russian armed forces, based on the diffusion of sensors, and systems of command and control, and increasing artificial intelligence assisted integration.
2. The further development of advanced precision strike weapons, such as hypersonic missiles, and the acquisition of new generations of strike systems across combat branches and arms.
3. The proliferation of remotely operated systems such as UAVs, and the increased automation and robotization of the Russian armed forces.
190
4. The consequent shift in operational art from traditional fires and strikes, towards a "complex defeat" of an opponent by combining different means, including traditional conventional systems, and those that can induce functional defeat via radio-electronic attack. The notion of simultaneity and complex defeat has always been there, and appears in part confirmed by the integration observed in US operational concepts such as multi-domain operations. Perhaps the terminology changes, from "complex approach" to a more mature "complex defeat" of an opponent, but the overall trajectory in Russian military thinking remains clear.
5. The continued prominence of air defense and missile defense as strategic imperatives, especially in the initial period of war, but with the addition of counter-space and counter-UAS missions.
6. Emphasis on non-military means in warfare, and strategic of indirect actions either to advance interests, or defend against an opponent's subterfuge, especially during a tentative time of peace.
7. Finally, the continued emphasis on targeting critical objects as the center of gravity in both warfighting and deterrence concepts, and equally, investing in the defense of Russian critical objects against US strategic conventional capabilities.
There is a general acceptance that ways of fighting that involve mass manpower have given way to more targeted means of struggle that require far fewer human resources. 
191
In the initial period of war, Russian military strategy continues to place strong emphasis on aerospace attack and defense, and information confrontation. The threat posed by a massed US/NATO aerospace assault in the initial period of war, increasingly characterized as an integrated massed air strike, continues to drive Russian operational concept development.
Consequently, Russian military strategy prioritizes strategic operations to deflect or parry massed missile and air strikes. Conversely, combat operations increasingly adopt the rubric of defensive maneuver, dynamic raiding operations along the flanks, and capitalizing on massed fires/strikes. 
192
Active defense remains the guiding formulation in Russian military strategy. While the strategy is defensive in character-eschewing the notion of offensive war, or the need for strategic offensive ground operations at the outset-it presupposes the need to respond to indirect 191 Ibid. 
192
actions prior to the onset of hostilities. This assumes that the US would attempt political subversion, and pair such efforts with an advanced aerospace assault, and strikes against critical infrastructure. Active defense is meant to answer this combined threat, delineating the role of the armed forces during a period of military danger, threat, the conduct of operations in wartime, and the Russian thesis for how to attain war termination on acceptable terms.
Activity emphasizes preventive measures to neutralize threats to the Russian state during a period of "imminent threat," but also the theory and practice of warfare. This can be summarized as defensive maneuver in combination with a sustained counterattack (offensive), and a shift to the counteroffensive to roll back an opponent's gains. Active defense envisions noncontact warfare as the form for how forces are employed, but sustained contact with an opponent throughout the theater of military action as the strategy. This translates into strikes across the theater, successive operations, and strategic operations to attain decisive outcomes. The battle is assumed to be non-contiguous (fragmented) and non-contact in character, with distant strike and fire systems engaging maneuvering forces. Its outcome is unlikely to be determined by seizing terrain. An opponent's ability to sustain the fight, or will to continue fighting, can be shaped by the decisive use of strategic nonnuclear, or nuclear weapons, and through successful execution of strategic operations.
Russian military strategy posits that deterrence should be premised on shaping an opponent's perception of costs, and convincing them that the cost of aggression would exceed any desired gains. In war the goal is to prevent a decisive victory in the initial period of war, and to convince the opponent that the contest will result in costly attrition. In both cases, the military strategy accepts that Russia is the weaker party in a regional or large-scale war against a technologically superior adversary (US/NATO). It is therefore a strategy that approaches the question from a position of military inferiority, seeking asymmetric counters to areas of US superiority, and ways to decisively shape the outcome without presuming the likelihood of victory in a sustained conflict.
Russian military strategy is not premised on positional defense, or on Western concepts such as antiaccess/area denial (A2/AD). Indeed, no such terms exist in the Russian lexicon: they would be anathema to the prevailing understanding of military art and the core tenets of Russian military strategy, which place little faith in standing defense or antiaccess capabilities.
In the context of these larger scope conflicts, deliberate defense is seen as cost-prohibitive or technically unworkable, given the penetrating power of emerging precision-guided weapons.
The defense planning community should be wary of a natural tendency to mirror-image Russian operational concepts based on how a Western military might use the same capabilities. Yet military communities come to dramatically different conclusions about the role and relevance of military technology, along with the operational concepts for fielding it on the battlefield. Their logic is informed by distinct military experiences, divergent practices in military art, organizational and national strategic cultures, or preferences for deductive versus inductive approaches to formulating strategy. Therefore, understanding what Russian military leaders mean when they reference a strategy of "active defense," the respective strategic operations that make up key pillars of this military strategy, and associated operational concepts, can shed an important light on Russian military thought and bring together disparate strands of knowledge or information that presently exist in the field of Russian military analysis.
Active defense strategy (стратегия активной обороны): a strategic concept integrating preemptive measures to prevent conflict, and wartime concepts of operations that seek to deny an opponent a decisive victory in the initial period of war, degrading and disorganizing their effort, while setting the conditions for a counteroffensive or attaining war termination. The strategy privileges a permanent standing force, arrayed as high readiness operational formations in each strategic direction, prepared to execute operations jointly.
Combined-arms (общевойсковые) formations: tactical formations assembled for the purposes of conducting combined arms battle, typically consisting of motor rifle, armor, artillery, airborne, reconnaissance, or airmobile troops.
Interdepartmental (межведомственные) grouping: temporary or permanent combat grouping consisting of forces from different agencies-for example, Russian MoD and Ministry of Interior troops.
Joint (межвидовые) grouping: permanent or temporary combat grouping consisting of different branches or combat arms-for example Russian forces in Syria.
Correlation of forces (and means) (соотношение сил и средств): assessment of the political-military balance between adversaries on various levels and/or theaters.
Critical objects/targets (критические объекты/цели): broad term for important military and civilian infrastructure targets: varies at strategic, operational, and tactical levels. Some distinguish between objects of significant value and vitally important objects, with the latter having more implications for economic and population losses, if destroyed.
Disorganization of C2 (дезорганизация управления): measures aimed at complicating and fragmenting the functioning of an adversary C2 system, preventing effective management of forces, and achieving information superiority.
Forms and methods of warfare (формы и способы ведения войны): forms include operations, engagement, combat, and strikes; methods are understood as the aggregate of forms, modern approaches, and procedures.
Impact with software-hardware (програмно-аппаратное воздействие, ПАВ) and Informational-technical impact (информационно-техническое воздействие, ИТВ): terms related to the infliction of damage with information-technical means to include cyber capabilities.
Information warfare/information struggle (информационная война/информационная борьба): a frequently discussed instrument in the military's toolkit although it sits astride both military and nonmilitary measures, depending on what is being discussed as the means or form of action. Russian thinkers view information warfare as capable of disorganizing an opponent's command and control, deceiving an adversary, sowing instability within an enemy's borders, and demoralizing an opposing population or military to the point that they even lose the will to resist.
Initial period of war (начальный период войны): according to Soviet and Russian military science, this is the most critical and decisive period of conflict when countries launch strategic operations with already deployed forces.
Key geographical units of military action: theater of war (ТV), theater of military action (TVD), strategic direction, operational direction.
Maneuver defense (маневренная оборона): a form of defense predicated on avoiding decisive engagement, withdrawing forces to degrade an opponent with artillery until a positional defense is mounted. Trades territory to preserve the force.
Massed missile-aviation strikes (массированный ракетно-авиационный удар, МРАУ): critical part of an air campaign or air operation-the formulation of Russian understanding of US airpower operational concepts. The recent evolution of this concept is an integrated massed air strike (интегрированный массированный воздушный удар, ИМВУ), described and interpreted as an evolution of the MRAU problem, and a component of U.S. multidomain operations.
Military doctrine (военная доктрина): defines military-political, military-strategic, and military economic foundations for ensuring the country's security. Represents a system of officially accepted views and positions on the goals or character of a potential war, how to prepare for it and prevent it.
Military science (военная наука): a system of knowledge about the current nature and laws of war, how to prepare armed forces, and modern methods for the conduct of armed struggle.
Military strategy (военная стратегия): a branch of military science representing the highest form of military art (art of war), a system of knowledge about modern wars, ways to prevent them using military means, methods and forms of waging war in general, and conducting military action on a strategic scale.
National Defense Management Center (Национальный центр управления обороной РФ): key Russian MOD node for C4ISR.
Noncontact warfare (бесконтактная война): conflict where much of the fighting will take place via standoff precision guided weapons.
Nonmilitary means (невоенные действия): broadly include political, information (both psychological and technical), diplomatic, economic, legal, spiritual/moral, and humanitarian measures.
Operational art (операционное исскуство): theory and practice of preparation and conduct of operational-strategic and operational military actions; component of military art that resides between military strategy and tactics.
Reflexive control (рефлексивный контроль): Russian term and analytical tool that refers to an approach involving strategic manipulation of an opponent's perceptions.
RF military districts: Western Military District, Central Military District, Eastern Military District, Southern Military District, Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command.
Russian Federation (RF) armed forces composition: three branches (vid): the Ground Forces, the Navy, and the Aerospace Forces; two independent arms (rod): the Strategic Rocket Forces and the Airborne Troops; and the Special Operations Forces and, separately, the Material Technical Support system.
Scale of military action: tactical, operational-tactical, operational, operational-strategic, and strategic.
Strategic deterrence (стратегическое сдерживание): Russian military term that refers to integrated military and nonmilitary approaches to deter an opponent, manage escalation, or terminate a conflict, premised on the ability to inflict progressive costs.
Strategic operation (SO) (стратегическая операция): joint operation, integrating operational formations from different branched and arms to project power across the theater of military action with the intent of attaining strategic effects.
Strategic aerospace operation (SAO) (по отражению воздушно-космического нападения противника): a set of strategic measures and defensive offensive actions to identify and repel an enemy aerospace attack from all aerospace directions, to protect the armed forces and economic facilities from strikes by ground, air and space-based strategic strike forces.
SO in a theater of military operations (SOTMO) (на ТВД): a set of coordinated operations and actions of various types of armed forces carried out within the boundaries of the continental theater of operations in order to achieve certain military-political goals.
SO in the oceanic theater of military action (SOOTMO) (на океанском ТВД): a system of coordinated military operations in the operationally important areas of the ocean and seas, as well as in adjacent coastal areas and in airspace to disrupt enemy attacks from sea areas, gain dominance in the ocean (at sea), defeat important coastal targets, defeat the main groupings of the enemy's naval forces and its troops in coastal areas, disrupting the enemy's ocean transport and protecting their communications, basing points, and coastal facilities.
SO of nuclear forces (SONF) (стратегических ядерных сил): operation aimed at deescalation (halt) of aggression, initiated against Russia and its allied states and the destruction of the aggressor, who has employed or is ready to employ nuclear or other types of WMD on Russia.
SO for the destruction of critically important targets (SODCIT) (по уничтожению критических целей): purpose is the creation of conditions to counter threats and prevent aggression and, in the case of the beginning of military action, the infliction on the adversary (the coalition) of damage, during which they would give up the continuation (escalation) on conditions beneficial to Russia.
Strategy of limited actions (стратегия ограниченных действий): conducting military operations with limited political goals, within defined territories, while using only a part of military potential or specific components of the armed forces, and selectively striking objects or enemy forces without pursuing greater military involvement (and avoiding undesired escalation).
Prospective strategic operations: SO strategic deterrent forces (стратегических сил сдерживания); SO space (космическая); SO strategic defensive forces (оборонительных сил).
Types of war according to Russian military doctrine: military danger, military threat, armed conflict, local war, regional war, large-scale war.
Weapons based on new physical principles (оружие на новых физических принципах): a US-derived term that involves directed-energy weapons, electromagnetic weapons, geophysical weapons, genetic weapons, nonlethal weapons, and others.   
Simultaneous effects are achieved against 69 Ibid. 70 V. Suvorov, "Politics of Indirect Action," Политика непрямых действий, Armeyskiy sbornik, no. 4 (2020).
Simultaneous effects are achieved against 69 Ibid. 70 V. Suvorov, "Politics of Indirect Action," Политика непрямых действий, Armeyskiy sbornik, no. 4 (2020).
76  
76  
85  
85  
forces
Source: Ostapenko, Baushev, and Morozov, Information-space support of RF armed forces groupings, p. 203.
Nikolay Tyutyunnikov, "Military thought in terms and definitions," Военная мысль в терминах и определения,(2005)., pp.95-96.
"Military doctrine of the Russian Federation," Военная доктрина Российской Федерации, Rossiyskaya Gazeta, Dec. 30, 2014, https://rg.ru/2014/12/30/doktrina-dok.html. English translation available at https://rusemb.org.uk/press/2029.
D. Rogozin, "War and peace in terms and definitions," Война и мир в терминах и определениях, undated, http://rulibs.com/ru_zar/ref_dict/rogozin/0/j4.html. See alsoTyutyunnikov, "Military thought in terms and  definitions.", 
Tyutyunnikov, "Military thought in terms and definitions.", 
"War and peace in terms and definitions."
Tyutyunnikov, "Military thought in terms and definitions.", 
Anastasiya Sviridova, "Vectors of development of military strategy," Векторы развития военной стратегии, Krasnaya Zvezda, Маr. 4, 2019, http://redstar.ru/vektory-razvitiya-voennoj-strategii/.
A.V. Skrypnik, "On a possible approach to determining the role and place of directed energy weapons in the mechanism of strategic deterrence through the use of force," О возможном подходе к определению роли и места оружия направленной электромагнитной энергии в механизме силового стратегического сдерживания, Vooruzhenie i ekonomika 3 (2012), http://www.viek.ru/19/42-49.pdf.
See ibid.
These are often paired with weapons based on new physical principles, such as directed energy, electromagnetic pulse, electronic warfare, and other emerging technologies. V.M.Burenok and Y.A. Pechatnov,  Strategic Deterrence, Стратегическое Cдерживание (Moscow 2011)., p. 11.    
Kofman, Fink, and  Edmonds, Russian Strategy for Escalation Management: Evolution of Key Concepts.
See Russian military definitions for active defense, and defense activities: "Active Defense," Активная Оборона, Ministry of Defense of RF Encyclopedia, https://encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=2748@morfDictionary.; "Defense Activity," Активность Обороны, Ministry of RF Encyclopedia, https://encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=2750@morfDictionary.
A.A. Korabelnikov, "Relationship between military strategic operational art and tactics in present day conditions," Взаимосвязь военной стратегии, оперативного исскуства и тактики в современных условиях, Vestnik Akademii voennykh nauk no. 2 (2019).
Ivan Vorobyev and Valery Kiselev, "Everything about the Foundational Forms of Tactical Operations," Все об основной форме тактических действий, Armeiskiy Sbornik, no. 12 (2005).
"War and peace in terms and definitions."; "Soviet military encyclopedia[1976][1977][1978][1979][1980]," Советская военная энциклопедия[1976][1977][1978][1979][1980], Militera.Lib.Ru, http://militera.lib.ru/enc/enc1976/index.html.
A. Shelomski and D. Maksimov, "Maneuver Defense: History and Modernity," Маневренная оборона: история и современность, Armeiskiy Sbornik, no. 5 (2020).
S. Buyanovski and V. Runov, "Maneuver Defense: Role and Place in Battle," Маневренная оборона: Роль и место в бою, Armeiskiy Sbornik, no. 1 (2016).
For a good discussion of this by Western analysts see Lester Grau and Charles Bartles, "The Russian Army and Maneuver Defense," Armor Volume 2 (2021).
"Nikolai Makarov's speech at the Academy of Military Sciences: 'A forced path of trial and error'," Путь проб и ошибок вынужденный, Military Industrial Courier (VPK), no. 12 (378) (2011).
For more on these discussions during the Soviet period, see Dmitry Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2010).
M.N. Tukhachevsky, Tukhachevsky M.N. Selected works in 2 volumes Тухачевский М.Н. Избранные произведения в 2-х т, vol. 1(1919)(1920)(1921)(1922)(1923)(1924)(1925)(1926)(1927) (Military Publishing, 1964), http://militera.lib.ru/science/tuhachevsky/16.html#.
For a collection of selected works by Russian imperial military thinkers, see Strategiya: The Foundations of the Russian Art of Strategy, Edited by Ofer Fridman (C. Hurst, May 27, 2021).
Ibid.
Serzhantov, Mazhuga, and Loiko, "Wars of the future: what will they be like?."
A.S. Fadeev and B.I. Nichipor, "Military conflicts of our time, prospects for the development of methods of their conduct. Direct and indirect actions in armed conflicts of the 21st century," Военные конфликты современности, перспективы развития способов их ведения. Прямые и непрямые действия в вооруженных конфликтах XXI века, Voyennaya Mysl', no. 9 (2019).
Sokolov, "Tendencies of development of military art."; Serzhantov, Mazhuga, and Loiko, "Wars of the future: what will they be like?."
"War and peace in terms and definitions."
V.I. Koriavko, "Evolution of forms of employment of the Navy," Эволюция форм применения объединений ВМФ, Voennaya Mysl' (2004). 64-67.
Ivan Kapitanets, "Epoch of the ocean missile-nuclear fleet," Эпоха океанского ракетно-ядерного флота, Voenno-promyshlennyi kur'er (2010).
V. Koriavko R. Golosov, "Development of views on the building and employment of RF Navy," Развитие взглядов на строительство ииспользование сил флотаРоссии, Morskoi Sbornik (2000).
Viktor Patrushev, "The Navy is not ready for a big war," К большой войне флот не готов, Military-Industrial Courier, no. 25 (888) (July 6, 2021).
"Strategic aerospace operation," Стратегическая воздушно-космическая операция, Ministry of RF Encyclopedia, undated, https://encyclopedia.mil.ru/encyclopedia/dictionary/details.htm?id=10372@morfDictionary.; Tyutyunnikov, "Military thought in terms and definitions.", 265.
"War and peace in terms and definitions."
Valentin Dybov and Yuri Podgornykh, "There is no comprehensively developed theory of aerospace defense yet," Всесторонне проработанной теории ВКО пока нет,VKO, no. 6 (2015), http://www.vko.ru/oboronka/vsestoronne-prorabotannoy-teorii-vko-poka-net.
"Actual tasks of the development of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation," Актуальные задачи развитияВС РФ, Krasnaya Zvezda, Oct. 11, 2003.    
S.V. Yagolnikov, "Military-technical aspects of the organization and execution of aerospace defense in modern conditions," Военно-технические аспекты организации и ведения воздушно-космической обороны в современных условиях, VestnikAVN, no. 2 (2017).
Dybov and Podgornykh, "There is no comprehensively developed theory of aerospace defense yet."
V.V. Kruglikov, N.P. Shehovtsov, and S.V. Kruglikov, "Means and ways of repulsing high-accuracy weapons," Способы и пути борьбы с высокоточными средствами поражения, VestnikAkademii voennykh nauk, no. 4  (2009).
Dybov and Podgornykh, "There is no comprehensively developed theory of aerospace defense yet."
A.I. Khiupenen, "Air and space defense of the fatherland -imperative of the time," Воздушно-космическая оборона отечества -веление времени, VestnikAVN, no. 2 (2009).
Dmitry Adamsky, Moscow's Aerospace Theory of Victory: Western Assumptions and Russian Reality, CNA, IOP 2021-U-029278-Final, 2021, https://www.cna.org/CNA_files/PDF/IOP-2021-U-029278-Final.pdf.
S.V. Yagolnikov, "Direction of the Russian Federation's aerospace defense development in modern conditions," Направления строительства воздушно-космической обороны Российской Федерации в совремеммых условиях, Vestnik AVN, no. 2 (63) (2018).
Ibid.   
Roldugin and Kolodko, "General elements of the methodology of selection of combinations of adversary critical objects for strikes."
S.A. Polevoy, "Engineering support of the survivability of critically-important objects in the defense of a motorrifle brigade," Инженерное обеспечение живучести критически-важных объектов в обороне мотострелковой бригады, Voennaya Mysl' (2011).
161 V. V.Sukhorutchenko, A. B. Zel'vin, and V. A. Sobolevskii, "Areas of research into the combat capabilities of longrange high-precision weapons in conventional equipment," Направления исследований боевых возможностей высокоточного оружия большой дальности в обычном снаряжении, Voennaya Mysl', no. 8 (
2009).162  Roldugin and Kolodko, "General elements of the methodology of selection of combinations of adversary critical objects for
strikes."163  This section taken from CNA report on Russian strategy for escalation management, Kofman, Fink, and Edmonds, Russian Strategy for Escalation Management: Evolution of Key Concepts.
Tyutyunnikov, "Military thought in terms and definitions.", 114, 265.    
Andrey Goncharov, "In the future-an anti-space operation," В перспективе-противокосмическая операция,VKO, no. 3 (2014).
Roldugin and Kolodko, "General elements of the methodology of selection of combinations of adversary critical objects for strikes."
"Strategic employment of RVSN," Стратегическое применение РВСН, Ministry of the RF Encyclopedia, http://dictionary.mil.ru/dictionary/Terminy-RVSN/item/141806/.
Sterlin, Protasov, and Kreidin, "Modern transformations of concepts and power tools of strategic deterrence."; "War and peace in terms and definitions."
S.A. Modestov, "Strategic deterrence at the theater of information confrontation," Стратегическое сдерживание на театре информационного противоборства, Strategicheskaya stabil'nost', no. 1 (2009).
I. Ivanov and I. Chadov, "Content and role of radio-electronic combat in XXI century operations," Содержание и роль радиоэлектронной борьбы в операцияхXXI века, Voennaya Mysl', no. 11 (2011).
I. N. Chibisov and V.A. Vodkin, "Information-strike operation," Информационно-ударная операция, Voennaya Mysl', no. 3 (2011).
V.A.Anokhin et al., "Assessment of combat ability of military formations with consideration of effectiveness of C2 disorganization," Оценка боеспособности воинских формирований с учетом эффективности дезорганизации управления, Voennaya Mysl', no. 12 (2019).
Yu.E. Donskov, A.L. Moraresku, and V.V. Panasuyk, "On the issue of disorganizing C2 of troops (forces) and arms," К вопросу о дезорганизации управления войсками (силами) и оружием, Voennaya Mysl', no. 8 (2017).
A.N. Klyushin, D.V. Holuenko, and V.A. Anokhin, "On the elements of the theory of disorganization of C2 of troops (forces)," О положениях теории дезорганизации управления войсками (силами), Voennaya Mysl', no. 9 (2017).
Pasichnik, "On the question of complex damage infliction on the adversary and its methods during disorganization of C2."
V.A. Anokhin and D.V. Kholuenko, "Methodological foundations of the assessment of effectiveness of disorganization of network-centric information-command systems," Методические основы оценки эффективности дезорганизации сетецентрических информационно-управляющих систем, Voennaya Mysl',  no. 12 (2020).
G.V. Konstantinov, A.V. Chizhan'kov, and I.A. Shishechkin, "Development of the theory of employment of formations of radio-electronic combat in the interest of air defense of forces and objects," Развитие теории
Sokolov, "Tendencies of development of military art."
Zarudnitskiy, "Character and content of armed conflicts in modern conditions and near term perspective."
under Federal Government Contract No. 
N00014-16-D-5003
Министерство обороны Российской Федерации (Минобороны России) [Ministry of Defense
0704-0188 (S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10
SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S)
This report was written by CNA's Strategy, Policy, Plans, and Programs Division (SP3).
SP3 provides strategic and political-military analysis informed by regional expertise to support operational and policy-level decision-makers across the Department of the Navy, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the unified combatant commands, the intelligence community, and domestic agencies. The division leverages social science research methods, field research, regional expertise, primary language skills, Track 1.5 partnerships, and policy and operational experience to support senior decision-makers.
CNA is a not-for-profit research organization that serves the public interest by providing in-depth analysis and result-oriented solutions to help government leaders choose the best course of action in setting policy and managing operations. 