# ID: 2cbfb9c918a443979d28bd7c8b5be9cb
# Title: Comparison of the US and German approaches to democratic civil-military relations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
This study compares the basic principles of civil-military relations 1 necessary in a theoretical democratic state with the specific American approach and the German concept of civil-military relations. It will explain which elements of the American approach and the German concept form good foundations for civilmilitary relations in new democratic states, especially when considering an enlarged NATO or multinational units.
Since the fall of the Iron Curtain, the issue of civil-military relations has become critical to the development of the new eastern European democracies.
Both the United States and Germany have long civil-military relations traditions and although all developments have not been successful, the last fifty years have seen substantial achievements that can provide these new democratic countries with needed direction. A comparison of United States and German civil-military relations successes may provide the new democracies with an opportunity to select from the best of both countries.
The understanding of the civil-military relations concept requires a theoretical foundation. However, theory cannot explain all facts at all times and requires abstraction, and abstraction requires the simplification and ordering of reality.
Therefore this paper follows Huntington's methodological assumption, that civilmilitary relations are composed of a system of interdependent elements.
The principal components of such a system are the formal, structural position of military institutions in the government, the informal role and influence of military groups in politics and society at large, and the nature of the ideologies of military and nonmilitary groups. 
2
Huntington's civil-military relations theory in his book The Soldier and the State, proceeding with Morris Janowitz's ideas in The Professional Soldier, 
3
The third Chapter describes the development of civil-military relations in the United States since 1787, with the exception of the Civil War and its special civilmilitary relations, because this is a separate episode in the American history.
Chapter III begins with a description of the intention of the American Constitution to divide the power and control the military and the American liberalism, to refuse a standing army and navy, which leads to a militia system, and the subsequent development of the military profession in the United States after the Civil War.
Tensions in the civil-military relations should have been balanced with the Neo-Hamiltonian compromise (1890-1930), but the long tradition of societal opposition to military ideas lasting until 1941, didn't allow a harmonized relationship between civilian society and the military. The attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and the declaration of war by the Axis powers threatened the geographically isolated nation and changed the patterns of American civil-military relations. During World War II, the military became a mass armed force with a conscript system. The result of the Second World War imposed duties on the United States as a global superpower with worldwide military commitments, which required a new concept of civilian control over the military. The Cold War kept the United States in a constant level of high alert, which had consequences 
3
4
In the fifth Chapter, the study compares the theoretical principles of civilmilitary relations in a democratic state with the American approach and the German concept of Innere Fuehrung and considers the question of whether the American and German concepts meet the democratic requirements. The aim is to explore which elements of both concepts could be used as a foundation of civil-military relations in democratic constitutional states, especially in the new democratic states in central and eastern Europe and, moreover, in the NATO member states as a precondition for development and maintenance of multinational NATO units.
In Chapter VI, the challenges for the 'postmodern military' in a changing environment will be described and an assessment about the flexibility of the American and German approach in adjusting their militaries to changing civilmilitary relations will be done.
Finally, in Chapter VII, conclusions will be drawn between the differences and similarities of the American and German approach to civil-military relations.
A.
A description of civil-military relations principles and a comparison of the evolution of democratic civil-military relations in Central Europe must begin with the character of the absolutist state and the fate of its institutions in the 18 th , 19 th , and 20 th century. In addition, the role of the Prussian army as well as state and society from the point of departure is necessary for any understanding of the subjects at hand. The Prussian reformers of the early 19 th century proceeded from this original civil-military reform of the late-17 th and early 18 th centuries, and all subsequent arrangements of soldiers and politics in Prussia, Austria and Germany likewise emerged from this single source. The rise of the strong state and the standing army upon nobility, aristocracy, court and bureaucracy relied represents the first chapter of the soldier and the state in Prussia/Germany. 
5
The emergence of modern nation states with the dual system of government 6 and the coming up of standing armies in peacetime has developed differently in each country. 
7
5
Personality and Crisis, 1640
-1960
, Monterey: Naval Postgraduate School, Winter Quarter, January 2003. 6
7
8
Carl von Clausewitz 9 considered armies as political institutions, because, "war is not merely an act of policy but a true political instrument, a continuation of political intercourse, carried on with other means." 
10
11
13
14
All armies are inherently predisposed to political activity: what curbs their influence is less their own characteristics and more the context in which they are operating. In countries of (what he dubbed) developed political culture, the civilian authorities, by virtue of longevity, popular acceptance, or constitutional legitimacy do not provide the opportunities for armies to exploit their potential for exercising power. On the other hand, if civilian political culture is low, armies naturally spill over to fill the vacuum. 
15
However, for each country, it was a long and painful process.
In Great Britain, democratic civil-military relations began with the early constitutional developments of the seventeenth century and with the 1689 settlement of dual political control of the army and navy through the crown and parliament. 
16
17
18
19
In the United States, "the experiences of the Colonial Era and the Revolutionary War confirmed the American conviction that civilian control of the 
15
16
Strachan,
p. 11. 17
18
Strachan,
p. 44. 19 Strachen,
p. 44.
20
21
In Germany, "King Fredrick William III of Prussia awarded the first Iron Cross in 1813, during the iron time of the wars of liberation against Napoleon." 22 He awarded the decoration for bravery in battle, without making a distinction for the recipient's rank in society. "The medal signified the democratization of the army and its unity with the nation and the state in the struggle against the French occupier." 
23
24
25
Civil-military relations received great attention in the 1950s with Samuel P.
Huntington's book, The Soldier and the State. One of his students, Eliot A.
Cohen, described this book as a classic work of political science, in which 
20
21
22
23
Huntington "sets out a theory of civil-military relations, to guide both civilians and soldiers in their relationship." 
26
27
• The quantitative issue of the size, recruitment, and supply of the military forces, including the fundamental question of the proportion of state resources devoted to military needs; • The qualitative issue of the organization, composition, equipment, and deployment of the military forces, including the types of armaments and weapons, the locations of bases, arrangements with allies, and similar questions; • The dynamic issues of the utilization of military forces; when and under what circumstances force is brought into action.
These fundamental issues of civil-military relations are always present, continuously redefined and never resolved. The objective of this institutionalized policy is to "develop a system of civil-military relations which will maximize military security at the least sacrifice of other social values." 
28
29
Military institutions which reflect only social values may be incapable of performing effectively their military function. On the other hand, it may be impossible to contain within society military institutions shaped purely by functional imperatives. The interaction of these two forces is the nub of the problem of civil-military relations. The degree to which they conflict depends upon the intensity of the security needs and the nature and strength of the value pattern of society. 
30
Subjective civilian control means maximizing the power of civilian groups in relation to the military, with the aim of denying an independent military sphere.
The end state of this control is civilianizing the military, and making soldiers the mirror of the state. An important prerequisite is military participation in politics.
Therefore, Huntington 31 suggests that subjective civilian control is only possible in the absence of a professional officer corps.
Objective civilian control posits a distribution of political power between military and civilian groups, with the aim of maximizing military professionalism.
The end state of this control is militarizing the military, and making soldiers the tool of the state. As a result, there is no military participation in politics.
Huntington points out that the essence is the recognition of autonomous military professionalism and a politically neutral officer corps. 
32
31
32 Huntington,
34
Cohen referred to this as the "normal" 35 theory of civil-military relations, because this theory explains from his point of view, that this is the most effective form of civilian control over the military, one that maximizes professionalism by isolating soldiers from politics, 36 and gives them as free a hand as possible in military matters. 37
Since the 1950s, when Huntington laid down his view about civil-military relations, additional scholars, politicians and the media have all contributed to the theory of civil-military relations, providing a few novel and essential ideas. In 1960, Morris Janowitz diverged from Huntington, however, he directed the civilmilitary theory in a new direction, away from the strict segregation of the military and the civilian society. Morris Janowitz
38
34
35
Cohen,
p. 273. 36
37
40
41
Strategic and International Studies, 1995, p. 4. 42
43 Finer,
p. 207. 44
45
46
48
51
53
47
48
Praetorians, and Revolutionary Soldiers, New Haven, 1977, p. 8. 49 Strachan, p. 18. 50
Civil-Military Relations, that in contradiction to Huntington's theory, the traditional "subjective-objective" typology as it relates to the division of labor between the military and civilian society has never really been observed. In his view, a delegative control mechanism is a "pattern of control in which civilians respect military autonomy over operational matters in exchange for voluntary military subordination to civilian authority on other matters." 55 Even Huntington's student, Cohen, in the final assessment of his book Supreme Command, came to the conclusion that, "the boundaries between political ends and military means are more uncertain than Huntington suggests, civilian control must take on a form different from that of "objective control", at least in its original understanding. 
56
54 Bracken,
Paul,
" in Snider,
Miranda A.,
(editors)
1. Democratic civilian control of the military, based on the constitution and the rule of law;
2. Civil-military cooperation over security issues during the decisionmaking process and civilian supremacy in the final decisions;
Integration of the military and its soldiers into state and society, including democratic rights for soldiers.
These three principles are further discussed in Chapter V.
As previously mentioned, civil-military relations are defined as the relationships of the military to the state and society as a whole. The term "military profession" exclusively refers to only the military side of the civil-military relations, the attitude of the military society to the state and the civilian society. Military profession can never be seen as independent because it is acting in the socio, political and economic dependency of the state and society. There is a constant change in the military profession in response to the change of the environment.
The nation's "political culture within which the army is operating"
57
A profession is more than a group with special skill, acquired through intensive training. A professional group develops a sense of group identity and a system of internal administration. … This implies the growth of a body of ethics and standards of performance. 
58
61
Corporateness means that the members of a profession share a collective sense of organic unity and consciousness and a unique social responsibility.
"Membership in the professional organization, along with the possession of special expertise and the acceptance of special responsibility, thus becomes a criterion of professional status."
62
59
60
After defining the criteria of the professional status, the question is, does the vocation of officer-ship meet the principal criteria of a profession? 63
First, the expertise of officer-ship is based on a variety of specialists, like engineers, pilots, doctors, as well as ordnance and intelligence experts. These specialists exhibit great differences in their functions, for example from that of a captain of an aircraft carrier to that of a commander of an infantry battalion.
Harold Lasswell explains that there is one common central skill of all officers, "the management of violence." 
64
65
66
Second, the responsibility of officer-ship on practice is the management of violence linked to the purpose of the military's own security and regulated only by the state monopoly. The only client is the society and the officer corps is responsible for military security. Huntington explained: 
63
64
65
The motivations for the officer are a technical love for his craft and a sense of social obligation to utilize thus craft for the benefit of society. … Society, on the other hand, can only assure this motivation if it offers its officers continuing and sufficient pay both while on active duty and when retired. …The behavior within the military structure is governed by a complex mass of regulations, customs, and traditions. His behavior in relation to society is guided by the awareness that his skills can only be utilizes for purposes approved by society through its political agent, the state. 
67
The military profession is facing three main dilemmas. They are the conduct of authority over individuals, the compatibility of skills from the military to the civilian sector, and the relationship of the military to the civilian society.
The military's first unresolved dilemma is its conduct of authority over individuals. The following questions arise: 70 What is the legitimate scope of military authority over the personal behavior of its members? Is this justified as 
67
68
69
70 Janowitz,
p. xviii.
71
72
Transferable skills could be achieved by "advanced schooling, not for military purpose alone, but to acquire civilian skills, which they expect to be important to them in retirement." 
73
The third dilemma is the relationship of the military to civilian society, a dilemma that starts with the recruitment, especially the officer recruitment. For example, the Prussian army opened its "officer corps in 1808 for talented members of the middle class and to make educational qualification the decisive fact in securing a commission." 
74
75
71
72
73
74
75 Janowitz,
p. xxv.
76
78
"Professionalization is a concept which implies an element of desirable behavior. As it applies to the military, it presents an ambiguous topic, for what is the important of ethics and responsibility for the professional combatant?" 79 "The art of fighting is an old accomplishment of mankind. "presence of mind, ready perception, precision, correctness in his duty and propriety in his deportment." 82 "Professionalism distinguishes the military officer of today from the warriors of previous ages." 
83
In The Soldier and the State, Huntington's assumption is that "the principal focus of civil-military relations is the relation of the officer corps to the state." 
85
86
87
88
Even in low intensity conflicts and peace-keeping operations the "willingness to face danger, risk, and casualties is an inherent aspect" of military profession. 
89
A.
The history of the United States at the end of the eighteenth and during the nineteenth century is a struggle between the liberal ideology 91 and the conservative 92 constitution.
In 1787, the Constitutional Convention met in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to draft a constitution for the newly independent United States. 93 "The experience of the colonial era and the Revolutionary War confirmed the American conviction that civilian control of the military was an indispensable attribute of liberty and therefore of democracy." 94 It also reaffirmed the American belief that a militia system was an effective means of dealing with threats to security, whether from within or from foreign countries. Therefore, those assembled sought to strengthen the central government with the power necessary to ensure national security without compromising the liberties for which the nation had fought during the Revolutionary War. 
95
91
92
93 Declaration of Independence in 1776. 
94
95
96 Constitution, Article I, Section 8, "The Congress shall have power to … provide for the common defense … of the United States." A list of specific powers follows, "to declare War, … to raise and support Armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years," and "to make rules for the government and regulations of the land and naval president with the executive power is given the position of Commander in Chief. 
97
• Within the total federal system of government, the militia clauses divide control over the militia between the state and national governments.  
Kohn, 1991, p. 25. 98 Huntington, p. 164. 99
100
101
102 Huntington, pp. 164-185, their approach to civilian control was reflected in their ideas on military officer-ship, military forces and governmental organization. 
103 Kohn, 1991, p. 21, "
104
107
The civil-military relations were a continuous struggle between the 'Liberal American Society' versus 'Military Profession'.
From the beginning of the Republic, liberal ideology on one side and the conservative constitution on the other side, built the framework for the American civil-military relations, between political power and military professionalism.
"Together, they made objective civilian control depend upon virtually total exclusion of the military from political power." 
108
104 Huntington,
106
107
108 Huntington,
p. 143.
109
110
Liberalism dominated the American political mind with little change until about 1917. 
112
The War against Great Britain in 1812-1814, in which the militia system prevailed, demonstrated that the greatest military need of the United States was an education in the principles of strategy for the officer corps. 
113
114
109 Trask,
p. 20. 110
111 Trask,
p. 12. 112
113
like a crusade and "justified as an ideological movement 115 in support of the liberal goals." 
116
118
119
122
"The essence of this policy is sustained opposition to military values and military requirements." 123 "When it was necessary to maintain armed forces, American liberalism insisted upon a rigorous subjective civilian control," 124 so that military institutions were subordinated and integrated into civilian society and lost their military characteristics. Therefore, the concept was developed, that primary military reliance was placed upon the militia, because military defense is the responsibility of every citizen. It should not be delegated to a small exclusive group. This concept of the "citizen-soldier" 125 and the "nations in arms" was dominant until the further development of the military professionalism. 
126
After 1865, when the big Civil War armies and new iron fleets faded away, the United States returned to the ancient scheme of coastal fortifications to protect against foreign invasion and patrolling the Indian frontier with the Army. 128 U.S. civil-military relations after the Civil War were characterized by the isolation of the Army and Navy. Faced with so-called business pacifism,
129
125
England, Oxford, 3 rd ed., 4 vols., 1768, pp. I, 407, 413-414. 126
127 Janowitz, p. 3. Fifteen military men were nominated to compete for the highest office in the land and eleven were able to achieve the highest office, the President, Trask, p. 10. Huntington gives as explanation, that "the successful military hero has been the man either who was a nonprofessional soldier or who, if he was a professional soldier, abandoned his military trappings and adopted the guise of liberalism." Huntington, p. 158. However, in 1952, the election of General Eisenhower signaled a drastically changed condition, because with him a truly professional soldier entered the political stage as soldier-statesmen and became President of the United States. 
128
which they served." 130 This reflected the continuous beliefs that the nation, thanks to the protection afforded by the great oceans, could avoid involvements in Euro-Asian warfare. 
131
132
133
134
135
130
131
132
133
134
others
136
137
148
149
144
145
146
147
148 Weigley, p. 194. One destroyer was built in only 45 days. 
149
152
153
The Regular Army was declared to be one of 'the greatest agencies in the nation in the teaching of good citizenship'."
154
155
156
157
The military effort to bridge the gap to society had been a failure. The triumphs of antimilitarism were not due to Bolshevism, but to the natural apathy of the American people, their inherent dislike for war, they're linking of the military with war, and their faith in a future of peaceful progress. The Neo-Hamilton compromise was impossible in the postwar world. … Rejected again, there was nothing for the military to do, but to retreat back to their prewar isolation and find interest and satisfaction in the mundane duties of their profession. 158
As explained in Chapter II, the degree to which there is civil-military relations conflict depends on the intensity of security. For America this problem of balancing the functional and societal imperatives didn't exist until 1941, 159
because America had, up to this time, little reason to worry about her national security. Huntington describes the situation as follow: 
156
157
158
Security was given of nature and circumstances, an inheritance rather than a creation. When Americans did consider military policy, they dealt with immediate practical issues such as the size of Army's budget or the number of battleships in the Navy. … Civilmilitary relations were limited to the impact of military institutions upon domestic economic and political values and institutions. … The primary question was what pattern of civil-military relations is most compatible with American liberal democratic values? 
160
As Charles Moskos 163 explains, that there are distinctions to be made between the armed services itself and between war and peacetime duty, stateside and overseas assignments 164 in the relationship to the American civilian society. For the assessment he uses his convergent-divergent model of armed forces and society. Affected by technology, organizational structure, and bureaucratic and military values, the Air Force in peacetime tends to converge with civilian structure, somewhat less, the Navy or the Army. The most significant divergence from the civilian society can be seen in the Marine Corps, which tries more than the other services "to sever a recruit's tie to his or her previous life,"
165
161 Goralski, p. 422. 
162
163 
Moskos,
p. 272. 164
and to make them a member of the elite force with self-discipline and deep morale values and the consciousness of military responsibility.
One criterion which shows how the military is integrated into civilian society is the way in which the membership of the armed forces is representative of the broader society.
This relationship between military and civilian structure has changed through several distinctive phases since 1939, which will be shown in the following section.
World War II changed the American civil-military relations patterns that had prevailed since 1865.
166
167
168
Even before the war, in President Franklin Roosevelt, the armed forces found a Commander in Chief willing and able to provide the direction and guidance that army and navy officers so desperately desired. 
169
Roosevelt provided his new army chief, General Marshall, and his new navy chief, Admiral Stark, who were in full command of their field forces and their staffs, with a direct link to him. He transferred the Joint Board from the existing service department to the newly created Executive Office of the President to coordinate foreign policy with national military strategy. With this shift, the Joint Board became a true national strategic board which provided advice directly to the Commander in Chief. 
170
From 1941 on, the military, being directly linked with the Commander in Chief enlarged their sphere of influence 171 and ran the war in "the way the American people and American statesmen wanted it run. 
172
Professional military leaders, like General Marshall 175 , gained political power due to the condition of war and had no choice but to accept. This weakened the civilian control and in Huntington's opinion, also the military professionalism.
"The military attitude toward civilian control changed completely during the war." 
176
170 Stroler,
p. 16. 171
Huntington,
p. 322. 173
Huntington,
p. 315. 175
Huntington,
p. 316. 176 Huntington,
p. 335.
The law created a single civilian position, the Secretary of Defense, who became a member of the President's Cabinet. In addition, the three services 178 were headed by departmental services. "The professional military heads of the services became members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, thereby formalized that ad hoc wartime organization." 179 However, the Secretary of Defense was weak, with a lot of responsibilities, but no organizational power. His office was strengthened by the new Department of Defense (DOD), which came into existence two years later, when the National Security Act Amendments of 1949 was passed. 180
The combinations of technologic developments and a change in international politics after the Second World War have led to security being the final goal of policy. The question became, "what pattern of civil-military relations will best maintain the security of the American nation?" Janowitz describes the situation as follows:
A reversion to the traditional discipline patterns of the interwar years was a real possibility. However, the increased complexity of military technology and the continuous pressure of worldwide 
177
178 Air Force became in 1947 an own independent service. 
179
In summary, the civil-military relations in the post-war era can be characterized by the "heightened and persistence peacetime tensions between military imperatives and American liberal society." 183 However, the Cold War intensified the threat to American national security. "The distinction between war and peace had disappeared in a new era of permanent preparedness that embraced every segment of the nation's society and economy." 184 This shifted the emphasis of foreign policy from one of diplomacy to one of military security policy and its military requirements. A result was that "professional officers assumed nonmilitary roles in government, industry, and politics, and developed affiliation with nonmilitary groups." 185 Despite this, the increased military influence was not accompanied by the acceptance of the professional military point of view about military demands and requirements. The difference in attitudes between that of the professional military and that of the traditional liberal American civilian could be seen in the issues of universal military training (UMT) and the size of military budget.
186
187
The Cold War and the Korean War During the whole 'Cold War Period', with the exception of the emergency build-ups for the Korean (1950 -1953) and Vietnam War (1965 -1973), technical specialization became the persuasive trend throughout the 1950s and 1960s.The proportion of soldiers assigned to non-combat units rose strongly. The NATO doctrine of nuclear deterrence and massive retaliation supported the growth of the Air Force with its electronic and technical specialties. Therefore, by 1960, the Army, Navy and Air Force were equally balanced. 
197
At this time "a convergence in the manager skills required in both the civilian and military organization"
198
However, the military life for enlisted men in the army was still very traditional. They came mostly from working or lower-middle-class backgrounds and only partially represented the American society. The growing number of college-educated enlisted men became more and more a special problem for the old NCOs. Only the upper-middle-class men served as officers.
The Vietnam War (1965 -1973) was the "central professional problem for the military. The Vietnam frustrations further exposed career officers to links between political and military factors in the battle zone." 
199
200
• Recruitment: The all-volunteer force after the Vietnam War significantly reduced the participation of the middle-class population as enlisted soldiers. The entirely college educated officer corps produced an educational gap between the enlisted men and officers. This changed in the 1990s, with higher numbers of enlisted men with college educations.
• Welfare Role: The "Project 100,000" 202 which started in 1966 accepted recruits, which were normally excluded from military service. For example, those with health problems or no high school education. This project opened the lower-class manpower for the all-volunteer force. In combination with "Project Transition", which provides job skills for the 199 Janowitz, p. x. 200 Janowitz, p. x, this did not mean a return to the former self-contained and socially distinct military force, because the requirements of technology, education, and political involvement made that impossible.
201 Moskos, pp. 277-289.  202 Janowitz, p. x, there was opposition from the military about this program.
civilian life before leaving the armed forces, the military was becoming an institution, which was being used to correct America's socioeducational and structural failures. However, this revealed that the lower classes were replacing the middle-class as enlisted soldiers, in a trend from conscription to volunteer forces.
• • Overseas Forces: This extended permanent overseas duty outside of one's own country is "next to combat, the most distinguishing characteristic of the American military, compared to civilian life." 
204
The connection that soldiers have with the host country depends on their own personal attitudes and even more importantly, on their language skills. Overall, the overseas tours reinforce divergence from the American civilian society.
• Citizen-soldier: "From the historical perspective, the concept of the Chiefs -CINCs) over their service components and streamlined the chain of command directly from the President and Secretary of Defense to the CINCs. Overall, the act emphasized joint professional military education and increased the value of joint over service assignments. 
211
The military became an additional task, social engineering for America's underclasses. 
212
213
The operations. 
217
218
216 Kohn, 2002, p. 9.  217 Kohn, 2002, pp. 13 -14.  218 Ricks, Thomas E., The Wall Street Journal, November 11, 1997, p. A20, In 1996, 67% of the military personnel considered itself as Republican instead of 33% in 1976.
219 Fighter spirit can be defined as "psychological motive, which drives a man to seek success in combat, regardless of his personal safety," Janowitz, p. 32. important. However, "the pervasive requirements of combat set the limits to civilianizing tendencies."
220
221
222
Since wave of patriotism, which has diminished the traditional fear of uncontrolled military power. In addition, the bush administration is much more willing to exercise military power in order to accomplish its goals in the war against
Terrorism. The society and the legislature are willing to give the military and other security institutions more power and rights than ever before. 
226
226 Senate and Congress passed the USA Patriot Act in the immediately response of "emergency measures" to the terrorists' attacks of September 11, 2001. The President signed it on October 26, 2001 under extraordinary circumstances that threatened national security. The purpose is, "to deter and punish terrorist acts in the United States and around the world, to enhance law enforcement investigatory tools, and for other purposes. The act gives federal officials greater authority to track and intercept communications, both for law enforcement and foreign intelligence gathering purposes. It vests the Secretary of the Treasury with regulatory powers to combat corruption of U.S. financial institutions for foreign money laundering purposes.
The current officer guide 
227
Officers should take a full part in the life of the civilian community.
Be sociable with your neighbors. Become a member of their clubs, societies, and churches. Take your share in community enterprise.
In short, be a good neighbor, a respected and desired neighbor. 
229
For the issue of civil-military relations the last two points are particularly interesting.
The officer's guide describes professionalism in the following terms: 230
Sure skill and knowledge relative to the particular task assigned to, but with ultimate responsibilities. The job must be performed at maximum efficiency, routinely, prudently, smoothly and calm under all circumstances, without noise or heroic, without unnecessary risk or extravagant use of resources.
All soldiers should constantly seek to heighten and broaden their competence at every level of their career.
One element of professionalism is the customs of the service is the behavior with politic issues:
Stay out of politics. Don't become embroiled in politics. Political activity is contrary to American military tradition. As a citizen, you have right to your opinions and a duty to vote, but keep your opinions to yourself, within your home, or within your own circle of friends. You can do this without being an intellectual eunuch. Also remember that criticism of the president is particularly improper because the president is, after all, the CINC of the armed forces. 
231
232
233
231
It is expected that service in the armed forces is more than a job, it is a way of life. Janowitz described the military profession as "more than an occupation; it is a complete style of life. The officer is a member of a community whose claims over his daily existence extend well beyond his official duties. Janowitz added, that in comparison to the American civilian society, "professional officers think of themselves as bearers of the positive values of American society and as subject to higher standards of behavior than civilians." 
238
240
241
According to the definitions of military honor, the professional soldier is 'above politics' in domestic affairs. Under democratic theory, the 'above politics' formula requires that, in domestic politics, generals and admirals do not attach themselves to political parties or overtly display partisanship. Furthermore, military men are civil servants, so that elected leaders are assured of the military's partisan neutrality. …The party neutrality of the military has been assisted by the social and political consensus of American society. 
248
248
249
When citizens enter military service, their legal status is changing. Some civilian rights are restricted or modified. They take on additional obligations and the risk of sacrificing their lives. That is balanced by additional benefits not enjoyed by civilians. All members of the armed forces are volunteers, who would not join unless the conditions were acceptable. Granting appropriate benefits is necessary to attract good people and hold them in the service.
The following rights are benefits established for military people by federal law: 251
• The Soldiers' and Sailors' Relief Act, passed in 1940, still in effect. The purpose is the relief of some of the pressures of heavy financial obligations that they may have assumed in civil life.
• The 'GI Bill of Right' which ensures that retired members and their dependents receive the following beneficiaries: Servicemen's Group Life Insurance; educational aid; guarantee of loans for the purchase or construction of homes, farms, or business property; readjustment allowances for veterans who are unemployed; disability compensation; and more.
• Most important is the medical treatment for members of the armed forces and their families. 
252
• Every member has the right to complain to the Inspector General of the major command or the branch in general and specially about violation the rights and privileges. 253 250 Benton, p. 209. 
251
252 Military Times, Handbook for Military Life, Health Care, Springfield, Army Times Publishing Co., May 2003, p. 32. This handbook, published every year as a supplement of Army Times, gives an overview about the great variety of different health care programs. Most important is the Tricare Option, which is an individual insurance for the active-duty family members and retirees. 
253
• Purchase of daily-life goods tax-free in the Defense Department Exchange Services, which are supported by civilian companies and organizations. 
254
• It forbids racial discrimination, sexual harassment, fraternization and unprofessional relationships.
• Smoking is prohibited during normal duty hours in all education facilities. Nonsmokers are protected from passive smoking by prohibiting smoking in almost all facilities, including vehicles.
• Additional restrictions in religious accommodation, respect for religious beliefs should not infringe on military readiness, unit cohesion, standards, or discipline.
• For certain higher government officials, a respectful language is to reconcile the civilian society with the military, in order to achieve the nations support for their war aims.
States. The thesis will provide in the following Chapter IV. The development of civil-military relations in Germany.
A.
With the signing of the Peace Treaty of Westphalia 256 in 1648, an era of religious wars and of profound uncertainty drew to an end. "The age of the absolutist state 257 was about to dawn, the power struggle between the monarchs and their estates had been settled, religious confession and the state combined to form an indivisible union." 
258
260
The relatively small numbers of citizens were responsible for delivering the goods that the army needed and in exchange they were given an exemption from the military. The church, the administration and the state treasury built the framework of organization for Prussia. During the eighteenth century, a shift of power from the peasants to the citizens proceeded. The citizens grew in numbers and represented the educated part of the population, which supported the transformation of the Prussian state to a nation. In addition, they delivered the most important weapons for the military, and a growing number replaced the 
256
257
258
259
260
In 1640, Fredrick William, the Great Elector, who had assumed the throne of Brandenburg, had only a few thousand mercenaries as own troops. To replace them with a reliable army became the aim. Therefore, the unfit were purged.
Rebellious, blackmailing colonels and foreign mercenaries were discharged. The result was a tiny force of 2,500 men, "the nucleus of the standing army of the future." 
261
His son, Fredrick William I, assumed the title 'King in Prussia' in 1701 and supported the Electorer's belief, "that military power alone could make a ruler considerable." 
263
264
265
261
262
263
Prussia. 
266
267
268
269
270
273
274
275
276
278
280
The history of Germany in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was one of a long civil-military struggle over the constitution, in which "the opponents of liberalism, democracy and a constitutional reform" 285 were more successful. In this struggle, the Prussian army first played the most decisive role, followed by the Reichswehr and the Wehrmacht. Political developments in Prussia and Germany were influenced by the organization of the army. 
286
France possible and which enabled Prussia to recover as a great power in Europe.
In 1848, when Prussia was "transformed from an absolute to a constitutional state, the military establishment was not forced to submit to any effective measure of civilian control." 287 Between 1862 and 1866, liberal and democratic politicians achieved partial control over the state. Nevertheless, the leaders of the army defeated the demand that the army should be bound to the new constitution and ensured that the army was responsible to the Crown alone.
After Germany's unification in 1871, the imperial Reichstag received the right to question the War Minister. However, by administrative adjustment, only irresponsible army agencies were required to give answers, rather than the important elements of command, organization and personnel. 
288
In 1914, operational plans were adopted which limited the freedom of diplomacy and the courses of action available to the state. 
289
288
289
290
At the end of the First World War in November 1918, the dynasty, which the Prussian Army had served since 1640, was swept away, and the German Reich was transformed into a Republic. The burden to lead Germany was laid on the shoulders of the social democrats. They realized that they had a real insecure position, with respect to the radicals and separatists; therefore they welcomed an offer of military support. The majority of the people in the years 1918-1920 were "far more fearful of communism than they were of an unreformed and unregenerate military establishment." 
291
292
293
294
However, during the 1920's, it became clear that the army recognized no real 
291
292
293 Craig,
295
298
After the Kapp-Putsch, the German army was "transformed from an aggregation of ill-coordinated units with demoralized officer corps into a homogeneous and perfectly disciplined force." 
299
301
295
296 Coup d'etat, lead by a man with the name Kapp. 
297
Craig,
p. 377. 298
Craig,
p. 377. 299 Craig,
p. 382 and p. 393
300
Craig,
p. 382.
303
In 1929, after the stock market crash, Germany was under the double stress of its failing economy and its political trouble coming from the extremists.
The country seemed to be on the point of total collapse. The military leaders regarded themselves as the protectors of the Reich and played an important domestic role in the long series of crises, which lasted until 1933. In the beginning, they justified their activity as "necessary to prevent the victory of the extremist parties," 304 but the result of their intervention was very unfortunate. 
305
303
305 "Indeed, there is no period in German history in which representatives of the army intervened more frequently and directly in the internal politics of the country; but it must be added, there is no period in which the result of this intervention was more unfortunate. In their desire to end a political situation which threatened to degenerate into complete anarchy, the military chiefs rashly took upon themselves tasks of political negotiation and partly manipulation for which they were not qualified." Craig, p. 428.  306 Under the Reichschancellor, the former General, Franz von Papen, who was the war-time military attaché in the United States, Craig, p. 455.  307 Craig, p. 454 
The Nazis realized that they could not overthrow the Weimar Republic 315 Abenheim, p. 12. 316 Gordon A. Craig wrote in the foreword to Abenheim's book "Reforging the Iron Cross" that the German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung gave, on 10 November 1954, an explanation about the strong emotional opposition to military service in Germany. The author Paul Sethe wrote, "the military tradition was broken off in 1945. In the nine years since, memories and sentiments have become overwhelming amongst young people, which make it difficult to link up with this heritage. Two lost wars with their terrible casualties; great parts of our cities will remain in rubble for a long to come; the appeal to idealism and a sense of sacrifice have been brutally abused and arouse today only bitterness among many; the long struggle of the occupiers against German soldierly pride has not been without effect; the division of Germany paralyzes many." the 1920s."
317
On the other hand, the military leaders also worried about the motivation and combat effectiveness of the new army, one which was immediately on the front line between ideological antagonists, with the perspective of a nuclear war fought in their own country against the brothers of the eastern part of Germany together with the former opponents. 
318
319
The Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany
320
321
322
323
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
Four phases in the West German society's experience with military security affairs can be distinguished:
344
a) The first phase of the cold war, until the mid 1960s, in which the citizen understood the society to be 'defense ready' (Verteidigungsbereit).
b) The second phase until the end of 1980, which could be defined as societal 'willingness of deterrence'.
c) The upheaval phase, which consisted of the breakdown of the communist system and German reunification, when society developed a 'far away from war' attitude.
d) The current phase of 'new orientation' in which society accepts peacekeeping for humanitarian reasons under a UN resolution, but not a different form of intervention or even a preemptive strike against a potential aggressor.
The concept of Innere Fuehrung is a dynamic one which has to respond to civil society developments to ensure the integration of the military in state and society. During all of these periods, the basic tasks of Innere Fuehrung were fulfilled, namely to balance the tensions and achieve a level of consent independent from the government ruling coalition. Developments in the civilian society towards more liberalism and socialism influenced the West German Armed Forces with authority problems. 
345
346
347
355
A few changes in the relationship of the military to political activity can be recognized, mostly initiated by the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).
For example, despite a majority of noncommissioned officers (NCOs) and officers with a conservative tendency, the SPD tried several times to encourage the soldiers to take a more active role in public discussions and political activities on military and security issues. For example, soldiers were encouraged to take part in the security policy debate about intermediate nuclear forces (INF) in 1977-1983 to close the armament gap, during the time of the NATO decision to deploy Pershing medium range rockets and cruise missile in Europe and especially in West Germany. Chancellor Helmut Schmidt was looking for support from the professionals of security (i.e., the soldiers) on the deployment decision, one which was very controversial in his own SPD party. This was a time in which the political education (Politische Bildung), which was always linked to Innere Fuehrung, 356 saw a revival in its importance to develop a political educated citizen in uniform, even if the soldiers had different educational levels. 
357
On the other hand, the field-manual (Zentrale Dienstvorschrift ZDv) 10/1, of Innere Fuehrung from 1993 358 in combination with the Soldatengesetz 359 (Law for the soldiers) paragraph 15, states that any political activity is prohibited in the barracks and that a soldier cannot take part in demonstrations or political activities in uniform. If a soldier does so, he has to do this as a civilian, in civilian clothes. The aim is to keep political rivalry out of the barracks.
The most challenging situation since the 1960s to civil-military relations and the Innere Fuehrung concept was the process of German unification in October 1990. It was a question of whether Innere Fuehrung would stand the test 
356
357
358 Bundesministerium der Verteidigung -Fue S I 4 (editor), Zentrale Dienstvorschrift (ZDv) 10/1 -Innere Fuehrung, Ziffer, 220 und Anlage 2/1, Bonn, 1993. (Field manual 10/1 describes what Innere Fuehrung means).
359 Bundesministerium der Verteidigung -Fue S I 3 (editor), Soldatengesetz, Schriftenreihe Innere Fuehrung, Beiheft zur Information fuer die Truppe, Koeln, Berlin, Bonn, Muenchen, 1986.  or fail. The starting conditions were not the best. The Bundeswehr was not prepared for such development. The course of action, reunification, was not on the agenda, because it was seen as most unlikely. 
360
361
362
One month before, in September 1990, the Bundeswehr Chief of Staff wrote that, as the NVA had been, until 9 November 1989, an 'army of the party and the instrument of a dictatorship, … symbols, uniforms, and tradition of the NVA will not be transferred to the Bundeswehr." 
364
The unification came surprisingly, faster than expected and was connected with a take over, of the Communist-indoctrinated armed forces, formerly hostile to us (West Germany) and drilled to hate and be ready to attack. 365 … These soldiers had to be persuaded to co-operate from the first day." 
366
369
370
371
373
374
Therefore, General Schoenbohm explained:
In the Bundeswehr you are serving peace and freedom, and human rights, as laid down in the Basic Law. In the GDR on the other hand, you were serving peace at the price of freedom of the individual. … That concept of peace, with no link to human rights and our Basic Law, is not enough for the future. … If you want to stay in the Bundeswehr, you must cast off the past of the Socialist armed forces without any ifs and buts! 375 One of the main reasons why Innere Fuehrung became successful was that the principles were being lived by soldiers who came from the west part of the Federal Republic of Germany, like General Schoenbohm, Commander of the BKO, who dealt with great openness and frankness on all issues of the former NVA. 
376
of Innere Fuehrung. 377
These developments were viewed carefully by the German neighbors, especially the east European countries which became free after the crash of the Warsaw pact. Their decisions to become democracies are partially based on new civil-military relations and leadership concepts in the armed forces. The German concept has proven to be successful in a transition country and was used in bi-lateral education from the beginning as an example in the new democratic countries of east Europe. Since Partnership for Peace (PfP) was institutionalized, western concepts of civil-military relations have been transferred to these new democracies. The Marshall-Center in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany is one of the main institutions where developments in civil-military relations are analyzed and explained to the civilian and military elites of these countries.
The unification had left open questions regarding Germany's role in the world. "Preoccupied with managing the smooth transition to unification, Bonn suddenly found itself confronted with demands to assume greater international responsibilities in relation with a united Germany's new status." 378 Moreover, the German population had a deep-seated aversion to the idea of greater military responsibility. However, Volker Ruehe, the German Minister of Defense during this time (1992-1998), explained that "German participation in multilateral military actions is part of the process of restoring normality to a united Germany and to grow into greater responsibility." 
379
380
381
An unsolved issue is the role of Innere Fuehrung in multinational units. At the same time as the Innere Fuehrung concept was developed, the idea of a integrated in NATO. Since 1982, with the German-French Brigade, and especially in the 1990s, Germany has intensified the approach to multinational units. 
383
The principles of Innere Fuehrung are hardly comparable with the French leadership concept. The inviolable dignity of the citizen and the soldier are guaranteed in the 'Basic Law' (Grundgesetz) of Germany, but not in all other states of the multinational units. Different levels of leadership could endanger combat readiness and effectiveness. To first discover this during a combat mission would most likely be too late. Therefore, during peacetime, education
and training of the partner-nations of multinational units have to occur, in order to adjust leadership concepts under the mutual aim of military efficiency and the greatest possible democratic rights for soldiers. 384 
385
No other officer corps achieved such high standards of professionalism, and the officer corps of no other major power was in the end so completely prostituted. … World War I illustrates the disastrous results when military men assume political rules. Nazi rule illustrates the equally catastrophic results when military warnings are unheeded and political leaders ride roughshod over the soldiers. 
386
In 1957, Huntington's description about the future of German civil-military relations was very pessimistic and incorrect. His critique was, that the 'inner order'
388
389
But the changes of the Bonn government were not for the better." 391 This paper will show that the German concept of Innere Fuehrung was not an imitation of the American concept during and after the Second World War. Moreover, it was a creation of an unique military concept in a democracy, with the citizen in uniform model as the point of main interest, which can be used as a foundation for a common understanding of future military profession in democratic states.
The German military profession is based on history, Innere Fuehrung and a second cornerstone, the principle of Auftragstaktik (mission oriented command). "Innere Fuehrung is today inseparably linked with Auftragstaktik.
Both were considered at the beginning as a threat to military discipline." 392 Both, the concept of Innere Fuehrung and the principle of Auftragstaktik are based on the liberal-democratic ideas of the free democratic constitutional structure and 
387
the basic law which have the common image of a man as a soldier as a free person. His individual dignity is respected just as well as his basic rights and rights of liberty. This respect and liberty harness the soldier to achieve superior strength. "Only the responsible citizen will act out of his own free will and the responsibility he feels toward the community. He recognizes that the values of the community have to be defended even at the risk of his own life." 393
Auftragstaktik enables the soldier to achieve professional military success by exploiting the available sophisticated technology in combination with all of the skills of the soldiers to fulfill the order and tasks of the complex challenges of the 21 st century. "Innere Fuehrung is the commitment of German soldiers to moralethical standards and the German Armed Forces corporate culture." 394
In October 2000, the commission on Innere Fuehrung gave a subcommission the task to provide an analysis about the common understanding of professional military skills, especially from officers. This sub-commission identified the following elements of the common understanding of professional military skills with spheres of authority and the description of skills and tasks: 
395
Second, he should have social capabilities, like working well with others, fostering teamwork, ability to convince and motivate, tolerance, communication skills (listening, speaking, writing), able to deal with media.
Third, he should exhibit leadership skills and professional qualities, like the ability to set and enforce standards, ability to give mission oriented tasks, to make timely and accurate decisions, emphasizes logic in decision making, 
393
394
Fourth, he should have organization skills, like expert knowledge, ability to plan, coordinate and organize, and use recourses effectively and efficiently.
The main elements of this skill list can be found in the German as well as in the American officer evaluation system. 
396
397
398
With this, the question of conscripts appeared again. 
399
397
Berlin, 21. Mai 2003, pp. 3-22. 399
the soldiers' pension and retirement age came up, with uncertainty for the future planning of the soldiers' families.
The German military profession is based on the concept of InnereFuehrung, the principle of Auftragstaktik and the model of citizen in uniform (Staatsbuerger in Uniform). However, none of the three pillars of the military profession are static, as the current change of political attitude to Bundeswehr tasks and missions shows. They are interrelated to developments in the political environment and society. 
400
The constant change of military warfare to smaller independent units with more technological support requires the self-responsible soldier, who acts and not only reacts to orders. Soldiers are needed who know their duty and are willing to take over responsibility for their own acts under consideration of the task from the higher level of command. Military efficiency can be achieved with the German type of mission order tactics instead of detailed order tactics. As a prerequisite for this type of order, an army needs good education and in addition, soldiers who know for what they are fighting and the conviction of will to take action. 
401
401
402
In conclusion, the aim of the Innere Fuehrung concept is to achieve a citizen in uniform who is able to combine all three functions in one person: to be a professional soldier, a good citizen and a free person. 
403
404 Ilsemann, p. 9.
Civil-military relations in a democracy signify a special application of representative democracy, with the unique situation that designated political agents control designated military agents. This requires the acceptance of civilian supremacy and control of the military, as well as mutual respect as the core principle of civil-military relations. 
405
1. Democratic civilian control of the military, based on the constitution and the rule of law;
2. Civil-military cooperation over security issues during the decisionmaking process and civilian supremacy in final decisions;
3. Integration of the military and its soldiers into state and society, including democratic rights for soldiers.
The question is, do the American approach and the German concept of
Innere Fuehrung satisfy the main principles of civil-military relations and can they therefore be used as a foundation for civil-military relations in democratic states?
This question becomes especially significant, when considering the current process of NATO enlargement. The integration of the new democratic states in eastern Europe, after a short and sometimes stormy period of transition form communism to democracy, into NATO and its multinational structure, must be built on stable and balanced civil-military relations. The difficult transformation process in the eastern part of Germany, from an isolated military entity, the NVA to individual members in the Bundeswehr, as citizens in uniform, 406 can be seen 405 Ulrich, Marybeth P., "Infusing Civil-Military Relations Norms in the Officer Corps," in Matthews, Lloyd J. (editor), The Future of the Army Profession, United States Military Academy, The McGraw-Hill Companies, 2002, p. 245.  406 Scheven, pp. 486-503.  as a successful example of civil-military relations development, as explained in Chapter IV.
This chapter compares the American approach and the German concept as to how they met the three main principles of civil-military relations. The aim is to conclude where the advantages and disadvantages of both are and give recommendations for the development of the civil-military relations in the new democratic countries.
During the state building phase in the Federal Republic of Germany, between 1948 and 1955, after the painful experience during the Weimar Republic and Third Reich, the topic of democratic civilian control was one of the most important. The Weimar problems were first, the lack of civilian-control over the army. This, for example led to secret military foreign affairs policy with Russia, to bypass the Versailles Peace Treaty and its limitations of weapons, and a secret military budget to finance illegal weapon programs and units. 
407
411
412
413
The Budget Committee has to review and authorize the Federal Budget. Its decisions must then be approved by the Bundestag in plenary session. The Basic Law prescribes that the strength, organization and armament of the Bundeswehr be listed in detail in the federal budget. The Parliamentary Commissioner of the Bundeswehr has to observe the guaranteed protection of the soldiers' civil rights and principles of Innere Fuehrung. 
414
In the United States, the Constitution provides the framework for civilian control of the Armed forces. The power is subdivided into the three branches, the legislative, the executive, and the judicial branch. "Although the executive branch plays the predominant role in maintaining civilian control, the legislative branch has a strong influence in military affairs, reflecting the principle of separation of power." 
417
418
419
420
424
In the United States, the National Security Act of 1947 and its Amendments of 1949 established the Department of Defense (DOD) with its three sub-departments of the Army, the Navy, 427 and the Air Force with the Joint 424 As a consequence, a code of law to govern the conduct of the military personnel was developed in 1951. The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) "civilized and liberalized the military's criminal laws and procedures, and extended certain rights of citizenship to service personnel." Major revision occurred in 1968 with the passage of the Military Justice Act and most recently in 1983. 425 Trask, p. 5.  426 Tschentscher, Axel, The Basic Law, (Grundgesetz), The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany, may 23rd, 1949, Wuerzburg, Jurisprudentia Verlag, 2002, Art. 65a and  115b, Presse-und Informationsamt der Bundesregierung, p. 25.  427 The Marine Corps is a part of the Navy Department as result of the fear of the Navy, "that unification of the services would come at the Navy's expense … in scrapping the Marine Corps in favor of the Army or curtailing naval aviation in favor of an new independent air force" and its Secretary of the Navy Forrestal intervention against this considerations, who drafted a plan in 1943, which kept the Marine Corps included in the body of the Navy. Hogan, p. 32.  Chiefs of Staff (JCS), in order to unify the armed forces under a single department. 
428
431
German soldiers do not have the privileges of the American soldiers, like tax free shopping in the Commissary and the PX, military housing areas or any military discounts which are often provided by American merchants. On the other hand, they have the right to take part in all elections and can also be candidates for a political party at any function. 
433
434
Schoenbohm. 436
438
Officers and enlisted personnel are encouraged to vote. They may contribute money to political parties or directly to a candidate. However, active -duty military personnel may not run for office or be involved in the campaigns of others running for office. 
439
440
When comparing the German rights of political participation with the Americans' lack of participation, the conclusion must be that a German military member has many more rights of participation in politics. The overall emphasis to integrate the military in the civilian society is much more encouraged in Germany.
In conclusion:
The concept of Innere Fuehrung harmonizes the principle of freedom held by a democratic constitutional state and the principle of order and function that armed forces must observe to accomplish the mission assigned to them under the constitution. The principles and fundamentals combine the demands of the military mission and duty with the dignity and rights of the citizen. They are designed to balance the tensions that arise from the military obligations of a member of the armed forces and the rights and liberties of a citizen. … The model of citizen in uniform stands for the citizen who is prepared to defend his country as a willing member of the armed forces and who assumes responsibility for the freedom and human dignity of others. He is a politically educated and responsible citizen who recognizes and is a firm advocate of the political cause, conditions and consequences of the military action he takes. 
441
The American approach meets the first and second criteria of civil-military relations very well. With the institution of the Armed Forces Policy Council, the United States has a civil-military policy decision making board with the function of giving advice to the highest level of the nation, the Secretary of Defense, the National Security Council and the President. This ensures that coordinated advice from the military is given to the civilians who are responsible for decision making. Criteria three, the integration of the military and its soldiers in state and society, could be better met if the military members would have more rights in political participation. However, in the tradition of the U.S. military, soldiers on active-duty remain political neutral as part of their understanding of military professionalism.
Abenheim, quoting Craig, describes the following difference between the American and German approach to war:
The American approach to war is focused on combat, removed from its political dimension, and on machines in battle that are supposed somehow to supplant the human element of war or to make it unnecessary; the tradition of the German soldier emphasized the role of men in battle and traditions of command and obedience and good judgment handed down from each generation of German officers to their successors and transmitted by them to the units they commanded. 
442
These differences can be explained by history and tradition. Both military systems try to achieve superiority over an outnumbered enemy, each with his own strengths and capabilities. Germany is historically short in natural resources but has an advantage in soft power like education, culture and methodology. 
443
The German approach to professionalism was to create a sense of fighting spirit in combination with the corps de esprit. To be successful against a superior enemy, efficiency in battle is necessary. This could be achieved through "inner cohesion" or "inner structure" 444 of the army. "That is the union of moral, social, and political factors in the ranks and in the different institutions of an army that holds together in war." 445 Therefore, Fredrick the Great offered the German soldier the "sense of individual and regimental honor that inspired fortitude under fire and made retreat unthinkable." 446 From Scharnhorst, the Prussian and later German army took "the concept of discipline, not as robot-like obedience, but as willing subordination to the common interests of the fighting unit to which one belonged." 447 Helmuth von Moltke, in his concept of strategy and operations in war, demonstrated that "adherence to a battle plan must not be allowed to crush the initiative of individual commanders and that the Feldherr must have the courage and the wit to change his dispositions as the situation required." 
448
450
Today, what is even more important than in Clausewitz's time, is the concept of officers' education. This has been enlarged over the last few decades to include the education of all soldiers (not just officers), so that they achieve independent judgment and can initiate actions in war and on other missions. The uncertainty and frictions of war require a military character which exhibits initiative after an independent professional judgment. 452 bravery, and courage, but it also described how a soldier could make a complaint." 
454
Since 1948, when the development of the concept of Innere Fuehrung in Germany first began, there have been discussions over the basics of the concept and ideal type of soldier. From the theoretical point of view, there are two different types of ideas. On one side, there is the classic type of soldier, who is only a fighter, a homogenous warrior, and a complete military professional. On the other side, is the new idea of the soldier as a citizen in uniform in a pluralistic society and heterogeneous armed forces. To explain the difference between both ideal soldier types short term, the members supporting the former fighter type are called "traditionalists", the later as "reformers". These expressions seem to be not very fair, because the connection of reform is mostly positive and in connection with progress, while tradition is often associated with something being outdated and old. Nevertheless, it summarizes the difference. However, there are a lot of different intermediate variations between both extremes and the difference is not so black and white. 
456
Huntington, on the other hand, favored more the traditional idea of the military as a history of the fatherland, as "a subject that highlighted the heroic role of the army in the unification of Germany. It depicted opponents of the Prussian-dominated order -left-liberals, "Catholic-particularists, and social democrats -in an unflattering light." Abenheim, p. 25. Behind this stood the threat from left, especially the socialists, that the crown and republic, would be swept away in another revolution, like in 1848. The aim was a military education, for in the case of a civil war, the soldiers would be willing to shoot upon their own brothers. 454 Abenheim, p. 25.  455 Benton, pp. 8 -11.  456 Simon, p. 28.  457 Moskos, p. 272.  profession. In the struggle over the German concept of civil-military relations and the idea of the professional soldier, Count von Baudessin was more successful, with his reform concept of Innere Fuehrung, than the traditionalists, like General Karst. 
458
459
Innere Fuehrung requires the respect of the soldier as a free person. The soldier is self responsible as a free individual, bound to his conscience, values and norms as a military professional. 
460
Although, the current military profession is facing a number of new dilemmas in postmodern warfare:
1. Rapid changes in technology and weapon systems and political change (this is not new however, this trend became more intense) 2. Asymmetric warfare 3. Crucial decisions to support national interests or even the survival of the nation have to be made. Decisions today have an impact on the future, which cannot be rapidly changed.
4. The use of force in international relations has been so altered that consequences for the military profession system are necessary. For example, the use of minimum forces rather than total victory and the protection of military tasks in peace operations.
5. The new continuing threats of terrorism eliminate the distinction between peacetime and wartime establishments and challenge the military professionals and their families to always be operational ready.
To meet the dilemmas, the requirements for a professional military must be reconsidered and redefined, with a new set of concepts. The unique characteristics of the military profession which have to be reconsidered, are military authority, education and skills, recruitment and social heritage, and political attitude. 
461
462
463
The American armed forces are relying heavily on enlisted personnel as a source of officer personnel, the German armed forces on their conscripts. 
467
The selection of persons with social backgrounds from military families or rural areas has a tendency to keep a conservative attitude in the military, which is enforced by a military education, discipline, and military lifestyle.
This leads to the fourth and last characteristic of the military profession, the political attitude. A prerequisite to developing one's own political viewpoint is a basic political education and a continuous information supply about political matters. Political basic education should provide the democratic regulations, the institutions of the republic, and the system of international affairs. Higher military education, with a background in military experience, has to connect the political knowledge with the topics more relevant to the military, national security, and international relations. In the upper military jobs of senior officers, there is encouragement from the military profession to become more interested in the relationship between political objectives and military means related to his job.
The professional officer must be able to judge alternative political goals and give military advice to politicians.
Under the changes of the postmodern military and considering the unique characteristics of a military professional, the question is: how can the aim, to guarantee military effectiveness in a "postmodern" war be achieved, with the prerequisite, to give the soldier as many citizen rights as possible?
To achieve this aim, the superior must be a team-leader of specialists.
Fighting in small independent specialized units requires a self-responsible soldier who is able to make the decisions on his level, on his own. This is something different from absolute authority. Since the speed of operations has increased tremendously with the new capabilities of technology, decisions now have to be made faster and at all levels.
467 About 25% of the officers have been conscripts before they became officer candidates.
The American answer is to provide the state of the art in equipment and the best training for their professional soldiers, which have enough experience 
468
469
1. The trend of mergence between the civilian and military spheres has increased;
2. The change in military purpose, from fighting wars to conducting missions, which have not traditionally been considered; concept, Christopher Dandeker describes the involvement of senior military personnel in the political decision making process:
"In managing the military and political interface of an operation whose political logic is dynamic and ongoing, the role of senior military personnel necessarily becomes more politicized. Given the complexity of the linkages between military, political, civil affairs, humanitarian, and other agencies … the political and diplomatic skill requirements of military commanders have increased greatly." 
478
How does the American approach to civil-military relations serve the complex demands of contemporary social values, operational and combat effectiveness, modern business effectiveness, and media and public support?
• The American understanding of the military profession demands more sacrifice from their soldier than from the normal citizen. As compensation the military member gets a few privileges.
• A longer time of active duty of an all volunteer force, with education and the highest level of training, this ensures fighting capabilities.
• Modern bureaucracy technical developments are transferred to the military, outsourcing of all semi-military tasks to private companies and concentration on military core functions ensures monetary efficiency.
• The War against Iraq in April 2003 showed a new concept of 'embedded reporters', which was very successful. In addition, the appearance of military personnel in front of the camera after specific training was convincing.
478 Dandeker, pp. 41-42.
• A high level of patriotism in the civilian population 479 ensures the military support from the beginning of military action, at least, as long as the main body of the population is convinced that it is going well.
How does the German concept of Innere Fuehrung serve the complex demands of contemporary social values, operational and combat effectiveness, modern business effectiveness, and media and public support?
• It balances the tensions between the civil society and military, because the soldier is a part of the society and public life.
• Conscription brings social developments directly into the military.
• The military ethos is not based on an overextended patriotic value, but on one's duty as a professional soldier that serves his country and guarantees human rights based on the Charter of the United Nations.
• The mission-oriented order gives the soldiers the necessary flexibility to achieve efficiency under given peace time conditions and in war time combat effectiveness.
• Market testing, outsourcing and incentive measures guarantee business effectiveness.
• Based on education and training and his perception as a civilian, the soldier is able to manage the balance of information between secrecy necessary in the military and the public demand for information.
How is the American system dealing with an increasing merger of the civilian and military spheres in the government?
The Goldwater-Nichols Act from 1986, with the main purpose to enhance joint war-fighting capabilities, 480 additionally, shaped the civil-military relations at 479 In the United States this is a fragile attitude, as it is in every democracy more uncertain than in an authoritarian state. The example of the Vietnam War showed how support for a war can change during the time of a mission, if it is too long or seems to get unsuccessful.
480 Bill Nichols stated on September 11, 1986, that this bill fulfills the aims of President Eisenhower, who almost three decades ago said, "separate ground, sea, and air warfare are gone forever. … Strategic and tactical planning must be completely unified, combat forces organized into unified commands…" Congress rejected President Eisenhower's appeals in the How is the German concept dealing with an increasing merger of the civilian and military spheres in the government?
The German concept of Innere Fuehrung is able to provide an integrated approach: it prevents the isolation of separate civilian and military spheres, and it demands the presence of politically educated soldiers, 482 especially all of the staff-officers who have to pass an examination in policy at the command and General Staff College (Fuehrungsakademie) before they get promoted to the rank of a major. The military has to provide advice and guidance, institutionalized through the Generalinspekteur, before the politicians make the decisions about national security and defense issues.
Nations which recognize the global challenges, the changes of missions and international interdependencies, are moving towards changed capabilities, increased interoperability and multinational forces. In addition they have to modify and adapt their concepts of civil-military relations and military leadership concepts.
1950s. Today, 36 years later, we can now report: mission accomplished. Printed in Joint Force Quarterly (JFQ), The Goldwater-Nichols Act, ten years later, Autumn 96, p. 17.
481 Locher, James R. III, in Joint Force Quarterly (JFQ), Autumn 96, p. 11. The management and administrative capabilities of the Department of Defense (DOD) were improved. The Secretary's of Defense span of control was reduced. Supervision of defense agencies were delegated to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and field activities had to report directly to the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff. JFQ, p. 16.
482 Bundesminister der Verteidigung, Fue S I 4, ZDv 12/1 -Politische Bildung in der Bundeswehr, Bonn, 1988.  The concept of Innere Fuehrung ensures the comprehensive integration of armed forces into a democratic state, and it helps to preserve internal stability. 
483
The concept of the United States ensures that their Armed Forces can keep their values and morals, and holds military duty for the nation as the highest form of patriotism. The institutionalized decision making process secures the highest level of efficiency, even in a rapid changing technical and political environment.
Constant planning, transformation and a decreased time of reaction will guarantee military supremacy in a new century. 
484
Vietnam and Iraq, and overseas assignments especially in South Korea and Germany kept the military busy and required a draft-selected system. A big change in the civil-military relations took place during and after the Vietnam War, with the change of the conscript system to an all-volunteer force. This was a reaction to the lessons learned during the Vietnam War with heavy losses of drafted young men that died for a war that didn't get full support from the American population, because the war was not seen as necessary for national survival. In addition to this emotional reason, the increasing high tech forces, especially Air Force and Navy, calls for experts and professionals who know what duties they have and what risks they must take as soldiers. Smaller Armed Forces with full professionals are producing very efficient security from the military point of view. However, they are in danger of losing contact with the American population if the recruitment policy is targeted to the lower classes and the National Reserve and National Guard shrink in their numbers.
The German system collapsed in the climax of the Second World War and until 1948, all ideas about rearmament were rejected. The most important first step was a reconciliation of the population with any form of German military. As explained in Chapter IV, the result was the concept of Innere Fuehrung and its Citizen in Uniform model. It became essential to convince the population that the ability of survival depended on national responsibility and the capability to defend themselves. The education of the young conscripts was a precondition to achieve the understanding of democratic values and the necessity to defend the country.
The aim of the German Federal Armed Forces was self-defense of their own border, with a mass army to protect the nation from the threat of the Warsaw Pact. The majority of the society in West Germany generally accepted this task and a balance of civil-military relations were achieved. After the fall of the Berlin wall and the reunification in 1990, the main task of the Bundeswehr was still to defend the country against any threat from outside. In addition, since 1993, outof-area missions and peace-keeping operations have been accepted step by step, as long as they are conducted under the auspices of the United Nations (UN). The Kosovo case in 1999, without a UN resolution, produced a heavily controversial debate; however the German Armed Forces took part in the mission. As a consequence of the end of the Cold War, there was a shift in national interest and therefore in the national budget, to increases in social welfare benefits and the hope for a peace dividend; which could only be realized by a reduction in the military budget and strength of the Bundeswehr. This decrease took place over a few steps, beginning with over 500,000 soldiers in 1990, to 285,000 soldiers in 2003. The trend to a high tech military and more peace-keeping operations is calling for professional soldiers and questioning the conscript system, which has been reduced from 15 months to 9 months.
Currently there are considerations to further reduction of the military time for drafted members to 6 months. From the political point of view, the conscript system with the possibility of conscientious objection is ensuring the integration of the Bundeswehr into state and society and is preventing the idea of an intervention force with a warrior's caste, which fights wars for political reasons and opportunities.
One development that the United States is facing now that the era of mass armies with mass civilian mobilization is over, is that the dividing line between the military and the organization of the society is becoming bigger. Smaller armed forces with extended training periods away from home and out-of-area operations do not allow soldiers to keep their ties to the civilian society. 
490
491
Central issues in the military profession are leadership, authority, discipline, morale and military effectiveness. Janowitz describes a shift in authority, beginning in 1940 and lasting over three decades, from a formal military system to a "mixture of official regulations, scientific experience, and mutual trust, plus a strong component of personal authority."
494
There had been a change in the basis of authority and discipline in the military establishment, a shift from authoritative domination to greater reliance on explanation, expertise, and group consensus. Although there is powerful ideological and institutional resistance to change in the military
495
496
497
45    
45    
59    
59    
97
180  
180  
common European Defense Community (Europaeische Verteidigungsgemeinschaft -EVG) was predominant.
common European Defense Community (Europaeische Verteidigungsgemeinschaft -EVG) was predominant.
"Out-of-area" means beyond the territory of the NATO Allies. Article 6 of the Washington Treaty defines the geographical scope of Article
Craig, Gordon A., The Politics of the Prusian Army 1640
-1945
Craig, p. 121, at the very out set, the Prussian constitution repudiated all doctrines of popular sovereignty and reaffirmed the principles of divine-right monarchy. Moreover, the Crown was given a right of absolute veto over all legislation, and the army was left outside the constitution, subject only to the king's control. However, the parliament had one important power, the control over the budget.
Cohen, Elliot A., Supreme Command: Soldiers, Statesmen, And Leadership In Wartime,  New York: The Free Press, p. 226.   
Huntington, p. 1.    
Huntington, p. 2    
Huntington, p. 2.   
Janowitz, 1964.
Strachan, p. 19.   
Huntington, p. 10.   
Huntington, p. 14   
As much freedom as possible for the individual, with laws only when necessary. However, Freedom without regulation is anarchy.
For business pacifists, the military was destructive, a consumer of goods and living from other men's labor. War was a thing of the past, made obsolete as a result of industrialism and it disturbed the growing prosperity. "War was ethically wrong, economically ruinous, and incompatible with modern civilization. … Eventually, international courts would replace wars just as municipal courts replaced duels."Huntington, 
Huntington, p. 230.   
The process of military professionalism begun with General Sherman and Upton, and Rear Admiral Luce in 1868,Weigley, A second generation of reformers carried the professionalism at the turn of the century. Their major figures were Bliss, Wagner, Young and Carter in the Army and Mahan, Taylor, Fiske, Sims in the Navy,Weigley,. "Just as Scharnhorst, Gneisenau, Clausewitz, and Moltke set the tone and direction of the German military tradition, these two generations of reformers determined the nature of the professional strand of American militarism."Huntington, p. 233.   
Huntington, p. 231.   
Huntington, p. 282.    
Huntington, p. 283.    
Huntington, p. 284.    
Huntington, p. 284.    
Huntington, p. 285.    
Huntington, 
Ricks, Thomas E.,  The widening gap between the military and the society, The Atlantic Monthly, July 1997, p. 68.
With the exception of the end of the First World War, when the United States went to war inApril 1917 until November 1918.   
Goralski, p. 422.    
Moskos, p. 274.    
Stroler, Mark A., Allies and Adversaries, The Joint Chiefs of Staff, The Grand Alliance, and U.S. Strategy in World War II, Chapel Hill and London: The University of North CarolinaPress, 2000, pp. 15-16.   
Janowitz, p. xvii.   
Hogan, Michael J., A Cross of Iron, Harry S. Truman and the Origins of the National SecurityState, 1945-1954. Cambridge: University Press, 1998, p. 100.   
Huntington, p. 345.   
Hogan, p. 209.   
Huntington, p. 354.   
A balanced budget raised again the question of guns or butter.Hogan, 
Janowitz, p. 439.   
Hogan, p. 312.   
Hogan, p. 313, in the United States was led by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin, who also made President Truman responsible, for not being prepared for War on the Korean peninsula.
Hogan, p. 313.   
Hogan, p. 317.   
Hogan, p. 318.   
The traditional citizen's duty to defend the state through wartime should now become a permanent obligation.
Hogan, p. 319.   
Hogan, p. 320.   
Hogan, 
Moskos, p. 275.   
Moskos, p. 275.   
Moskos, p. 279.   
Moskos, p. 285.   
Moskos, p. 286.   
Moskos, 
Janowitz, pp. 33.   
Military profession is a profession which performs a crucial 'life and death' task,Janowitz, p. 175.   
Like in the special forces, ranger, navy seals and marine corps members, where moral values have the highest level within the armed forces, Ricks, Thomas E., The Widening GAP between the military and society, The Atlantic Monthly,July 1997, pp. 66 -78.   
Each service has a own Officer's Guide to help officers in their professional careers. The first Army Officer's Guide appeared in 1930. It sets a code of principles to which all officers aspire, both in official duty and their personal behavior.
Benton, 
Benton, p. 13.   
Article 88 UCMJ, the provision about contemptuous words against the highest civilian officials.
Kohn, p. 11.   
Janowitz, p.  xxxviii. Compare Sueddeutsche Zeitung dated 8 th of April 2003, only 9% of the German population considers the profession as an officers as a job with high prestige., www.sueddeutsche.de/index.php?url=/lebenstil
Poll about prestige jobs by CNN Money, 21th, October 2002, Money&Business, Cathryn Conroy, showed that the military officer is one of the most prestige jobs in the United States, ranking on number three after scientists and doctors.
CNN Money, 21th, October 2002, Money&Business, Cathryn Conroy    
The military-industrial complex represents an important percentage of national resources which has been placed at the disposal of the military.
Janowitz, p. xlvii.    
Janowitz, p. xlvii.    
Janowitz, p. xlviii.   
In 1724, King Fredrick William I stated, "always keep up a large efficient army; you cannot find a better friend and without that friend you will not be able to survive."Craig, p. 7.   
Recruitment meant, in the middle of the eighteenth century, pressing his own subjects and kidnapping from neighboring states.
The negative attitude of the colonialists in the United States against a standing Army is not surprising, considering this background of reasons for emigration.
It was a universal obligation to serve by law, but in practice liberal exemptions were made in the interest of trade, industry and public service and the burden felt to the peasants.
Craig, 
Craig, p. 464.   
Craig, p. 466, speech of 23 September 1933, quoted in Wheeler-Bennett, Nemesis  of Power, p. 285.   
Craig, p. 467.   
Craig, p. xviii.   
Craig, p. xix.   
Abenheim, p. 35.   
Abenheim, p. 44.   
The West Germans insisted upon a NATO strategy of allied forward defense of Central Europe to protect the main body of West Germany against an attack from the East and to get the U.S. forces involved as soon as possible.
Abenheim, p. 6.   
The Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany were, from 1956 on, referred to as the Bundeswehr.
Abenheim, p. 3., the President of the Federal Republic of Germany, Richard von Weizsaecker, stated in a speech in the Ministry of Defense in Bonn, on 12 November 1985, that the West German Army was "founded on the traditions of the Prussian reformers of the early nineteenth century and of the military resistance to Hitler."
Scharnhorst, the leader of the Prussian military reform, spoke of "Buerger in Waffen (citizen in arms) filled with a liberal spirit",Abenheim, p. 98.   
With the decision to have their own West German Army, the politicians made a final decision about the integration of the West and the diversion between East and West Germany.
A term that can't be translated directly into English, nevertheless sometimes it is translated as 'inner leadership'. The official White Paper 1994, p. 132, from the German Federal Ministry of Defense, speaks about "Leadership and Civic Education".
Abenheim, p. 122.   
Abenheim, p. 58.   
Abenheim, p. 128.   
Abenheim, p. 158.   
Simon, Ulrich, Die Integration der Bundeswehr in die Gesellschaft, Heidelberg, Hamburg: R. V. Decker's Verlag, G. Schenk, 1980, p. X.
Basic law (Grundgesetz), Law of the ombudsman (Wehrbeauftragtengesetz.)
Ebeling, Klaus; Seiffert, Anja; Senger, Rainer, Ethnische Fundamente der Inneren Fuehrung, SOWI-Arbeitspapier Nr.: 132, Sozialwissenschaftliches Institut der Bundeswehr, Strausberg, Mai 2002.
The abuse of military symbolism during the regime of National Socialism was a heavy burden for the West German Armed Forces, which had lost all positive meaning.
With the decision to close the armament gap of intermediate nuclear forces (INF) and the deployment decision of Pershing and cruise missiles, the policy of détente under the social-liberal coalition was finished.
Bundesministerium der Verteidigung (BMVg), Fue S I 3 -Az 35-08-07, (editor), Richtlinen zum Traditionsverstaendnis und zur Traditionspflege in der Bundewehr (Richtlinien),Bonn, 1982.   
Abenheim, p. 282, BMVg, Richtlinien zum Traditionsverstaendnis, p. 3, Nr. 16.    
Generalinspekteur der Bundeswehr, Rede anlaesslich der Umbenennung der "General-Schwartzkopf-Kaserne" in "Generalleutnant-Graf-v.-Baudissin-Kaserne" am 07.Juni 1994 in Hamburg-Osdorf, Fuehrungsakademie der Bundeswehr, Pressestelle,Hamburg, 1994.   
Kelleher and Fisher, Germany, p. 168.   
The translation of Innere Fuehrung into English as 'inner order' is a mistranslation. On the other side, during the first years of the Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany the term "Inneres Gefuege" (inner structure) was some times used instead of "Innere Fuehrung", and Huntington may have translated this into inner order, which is still not a valid translation.
At the Center of Innere Fuehrung, a Council with civil members who gives advice for the development of the concept is attached.
Constitution, Article II, Section 2,Kohn 1991, p. 25.   
Trask, p. 9.   
Trask, p. 12.   
However, Post Exchange (PX) and commissary are remnants from the time of isolated forts in the west, far away from the civilization, to support the troops and their families with common goods.
Trask, p. 29.   
Kohn, 1991, p. 21.   
Federal Ministry of Defense, WhitePaper, 1994, p. 132.   
Abenheim, p. 18 and Rosinski, Herbert, Craig, Gordon A. introduction to, The  German Army, New York, 1966, p. 7.    
Nye, Joseph S. Jr., The Paradox of American Power, Why the World's only Superpower can't go it alone, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 129.
Craig, introduction to Rosinski, German Army, p. 7.   
Abenheim, p. 17.   
Abenheim, p. 17.   
Simon, p. 31, even the traditionalists were not against the concept of Innere Fuehrung, however, they tried to give the concept a different interpretation and approach to the military profession.
The basic law (Grundgesetz) Article 17a allows the limitation of the basic rights during the time of active duty, this limitations are specified in the soldier law (Soldatengesetz) and gives limitation to the freedom and liberty, for example, Paragraph 11, obedience, if the order is not violating the human dignity or will imply a crime, Paragraph 18, the duty to live in barracks if he receives this order.
Simon, p. 33.   
Janowitz, p. 422.   
Janowitz, p. 423.   
Heeresdienstvorschrift (HDv) 100/100, Fuehrung imGefecht, Bonn, 15. Oktober  1998, Nr. 302.   
Federal Ministry of Defense, WhitePaper, 1994, p. 132.   
Secretary of the Navy, NPS Guest lecture, May 16 th , 2003.
Janowitz, p. xiii.   
Janowitz, p. 440.   
Janowitz, p. xvii.   
A sizeable number of officers are convinced that the shift in regulations has been excessive and represents undue civilization.Janowitz, p. xvii.   
Janowitz, p. xvii.   
Janowitz, p. 422.   
reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
Department of the Army, the Navy (including U.S. Marine Corps), and the Air Force. Furthermore, specified and unified Commands, defense agencies, and DOD field activities are under the head of the DOD.
The Secretary of Defense is the principal assistant to the president for military matters; he has the right to report directly to the president and the authority to exercise direction and control over all elements of the DOD. The line of operational command goes from the Secretary of Defense directly to the specified and unified commanders. The JCS are not in the chain of command, they are responsible for strategic and tactical planning in the true sense of the word 'joint'. The three military departments have responsibility for training, administrative, and logistic support of the specified and unified commands.
The Deputy Secretary of Defense is the chief of many assistants and advisors during the decision making process. This begins with his position of chairman the most important advisory body, the Armed Forces Policy Council, 
223
On the other side of the dual control, the President, as the head of the The Constitution did not mention judicial oversight of the military, but by 1803, the courts successfully claimed the power of judicial review -including the authority to decide the constitutionality of legislative and executive actions. Judicial review led to important decisions that upheld the civil liberties of the American peopleincluding members of the armed services -both in peacetime and wartime. 
423
464
465
Both the U.S. and Germany's concepts of military authority are linked to leadership, with emphasis on who gives the orders. "Leadership requires competence, strength of character, trust, initiative, judgment, assertiveness, and decision-making ability at all command levels." 
466
The third challenge is found in the recruitment and social heritage of the soldiers. The aim is to achieve greater heterogeneity through a broadened recruitment, which provides social representation from all classes in the military.  These developments have effects on two dimensions of civil-military relations, first, between the military and the wider society, and second, between the military and the government.
Several changes in the organizational structure of the postmodern military are effecting the civil-military relations.
First, between the military and the wider society; an increased trend 476 of "tensions between the civilian values of a democratic society and the unique structure and culture of the military must be expected." 477 Therefore, to meet these challenges, the postmodern military has to create a new military ethos which fulfils the demands of contemporary social values, operational and combat effectiveness, modern business effectiveness, and media and public support.
As second change, between the military and the government, namely an increasing merger of the civilian and military spheres, must be expected.
Therefore, the formulation and implementation of security policy and the erosion of the boundary between political and military decisions, calls for a politically educated officer corps. In an extension of Janowitz's pragmatic constabulary 476 The tensions of values between the civilian society and the military were considered even before 1990. Guenter Wachtler explained in 1983, that the military is a integrated component of the developments in the society and the process of change. Military, policy, economy, state and society are in close connection to each other. Wachtler, Guenter, Militaer, Krieg, Gesellschaft, Texte zur Militaersoziologie, Frankfurt am Main, New York: Campus Verlag, 1983, p. 19. However the paradigm change after the end of the Cold War increased this trend to a new dimension. 477 Dandeker, p. 42.
The traditional American liberal ideas, based on the U.S. Declaration of Independence, written by Thomas Jefferson, the third President of the United States, form the roots of America's attitude on liberty, freedom and citizenship. 
485
486
One of the basic elements is that every citizen should be educated 487 to know and enjoy his rights of the Basic Law, 488 especially when he has to defend them as a member of the German Federal Armed Forces.
My conclusion is that the basis of the American and German concepts of civil-military relations is similar. When comparing the Neo-Hamiltonian concept with the German approach to civil-military relations, similarities can be discovered, especially the integration of the military into the state and society.
Despite this, the American and German civil-military relations are heavily influenced by the history of their constitutions 489 and the result of the Second World War; but in different directions.
After the Second World War, the United States became a superpower with global national interests. Therefore, an Armed Force with strategic capabilities and sufficient troop strength became necessary. Major commitments in Korea, 485 Peterson, Merrill D., Thomas Jefferson, Autobiography, The Library of America, New York, 1984, p. 19.  486 Peterson, pp. 459-460.  487 This kind of education over the liberal-democratic basic order and the Basic Law is done in the German Armed Forces during political education, called Staatsbuergerlicher Unterricht.
488 The German Constitution. 489 The failure of the Constitution in the Weimar Republic, with no real control over the military, and the consequences of the emergency laws determined the German concept of civilmilitary relations after the Second World War.
1933. This historical experience of a small professional army continues to be considered as a trauma in the German military mindset, and explains the resistance against a full professional army, even in the 21 st century.
Since 1991, with the out-of-area missions and peacekeeping operations, the Bundeswehr has incorporated a number of elements of the Janowitz constabulary concept. This concept is that "the military establishment becomes a constabulary force when it is continuously prepared to act, committed to the minimum use of force, and seeking viable international relations rather than victory because it has incorporated a protective military posture 
The attitude that differ the most between the American and German civilmilitary relations is the approach to political activity during the time of active duty.
In the United States it is the citizens' duty to vote, but to become elected, a soldier must first leave the Armed Forces and become a reservist. In Germany, to run for a political public office is encouraged, even during the time of active duty. Nevertheless, political education is required for the officer corps in the United States and in Germany. As Jannowitz describes:
It is impossible to isolate the professional soldier from domestic political life and it is undesirable to leave the task of political education completely to the professionals themselves, even though they have been highly responsible in this assignment. The goal of political education is to develop a commitment to the democratic system and an understanding of how it works. Even though this task must rest within the profession itself, it is possible to conceive of a bipartisan contribution by the political parties. 
498
499
Finally, it should be considered that civilian supremacy in politics could be supported by well-balanced, mutual respected civil-military relations in a healthy political culture, based on a democratic constitution, like it is in both the United States and in Germany. However, in every democratic country, civilian supremacy must prevail over different destroying forces in the daily struggle.
Civil dominance, regardless of how securely grounded it may be in the Constitution and in the statutes, is not self-implementing. Like any other principle, it must be cherished in the public mind if it is to prevail. Like any other policy, it requires translation into effective administration. 500 500 Smith, Louis B., American Democracy and Military Power: A Study of Civil Control of the Military Power in the United States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951, p. 11 and  Trask, p. 29  