# ID: 2e8a5df97c1f436cb9fc7eebc1e9759a
# Title: Strategy for the Long Haul. Special Operations Forces: Future Challenges and Opportunities
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
One of the critical shortfalls of the 2006 QDR is that it did not include an expansion in AFSOC's fleet to accommodate the roughly one-third expansion in SOF ground forces.
The small aging fleet cannot meet anticipated future demand without significant expansion.
Most urgently, it must recapitalize its aging fleet of C-130 derivative aircraft, all of which are well beyond their planned service life.
Unscheduled maintenance rates have ballooned and a significant portion of the fleet will be grounded in the next few years for safety reasons, owing in part to structural fatigue in the center wing box.
As will be detailed below, however, this does not mean that AFSOC should necessarily replace its fleet with newer models of the C-130.
Rather, as AFSOC has already started to investigate, it should also modify a range of smaller, more versatile aircraft such as the C-27 Spartan and even single-or dual-engine "civilian" aircraft to satisfy immediate to mid-term needs.
DoD must also invest in a stealthy SOF transport for AFSOC both to conduct clandestine operations as part of the war against violent Islamic extremism and to prepare for possible special operations (primarily unconventional warfare, information operations, special reconnaissance, and direct action) against a future, more openly confrontational China armed with modern integrated air defenses.
Currently, the vast majority of UCAS operated by AFSOC (and the Air Force more broadly) are concentrated in Iraq and Afghanistan.
There is a clear need for additional UCAS capacity to provide persistent airborne surveillance-strike coverage over key terrorist operating areas.
The need to train and advise foreign security forces in the use of air power against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups, as well as other threats to the internal security of partner nations, warrants a major expansion of the 6th Special Operations Squadron.
Finally, additional Special Tactics capacity is required to support proactive, sustained "manhunting" and disruption operations (both unilaterally and with US partners); conduct overt unconventional warfare against state sponsors of terrorism and transnational terrorist groups globally; and prepare for potential high-end direct action missions against authoritarian capitalist states such as China or Russia, and nascent nuclear-armed states such as Iran.