# ID: 2e8a5df97c1f436cb9fc7eebc1e9759a
# Title: Strategy for the Long Haul. Special Operations Forces: Future Challenges and Opportunities
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
This report is one in a series comprising CSBA's Strategy for the Long Haul intended to inform and shape the next administration's defense strategy review.
the ChaLLengeS to uS nationaL SeCurity. Translates the principal challenges to US security into a representative set of contingencies in order to determine what resources will be required, and how they should be apportioned among forces and capabilities.
uS MiLitary Power and ConCePtS of oPeration. Provides the connective tissue between the threats to US security and the capabilities and force elements needed to address the new challenges confronting the nation. the defenSe Budget. Overviews the budget environment and explores a range of options to make the Services' plans more affordable.
the defenSe induStriaL BaSe. Addresses the US defense industry's role as a strategic asset, and how it can best serve in that role. ManPower. Examines recruitment and retention of quality people in sufficient numbers at an acceptable cost. training, oPerationaL art, and StrategiC CoMPetenCe. Assesses the need for an overhaul of training and education of America's service personnel and the importance of strategic thinking in senior leaders. reStruCturing the uS aLLianCe PortfoLio. Considers the nature and type of alliances the United States needs in order to meet existing and emerging security challenges. ground forCeS. Explores how the US Army and Marine Corps might best be organized, structured, modernized, and postured to meet existing and emerging challenges to US security. SPeCiaL oPerationS forCeS. Addresses the expansion and growing role of US Special Operations Forces. MaritiMe forCeS. Addresses how US maritime forces might best be organized, structured, modernized, and postured to meet existing and emerging challenges to US Security. air and SPaCe forCeS. Explores how Air and Space Forces might best be organized, structured, modernized, and postured to meet existing and emerging challenges to US Security. StrategiC forCeS. Examines the circumstances under which nuclear strategy and force posture decisions must be made today. Modernization StrategieS. Explores potential modernization strategies that can best support the US defense posture in an era of great geopolitical uncertainty and rapid technological change. organizing for nationaL SeCurity. Assesses how the United States Government can best organize itself to ensure effective strategic planning and execution of strategy. a grand Strategy for the united StateS. Synthesizes the findings and insights of the study series.
about CSba
The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSBA) is an independent, nonpartisan policy research institute established to promote innovative thinking and debate about national security strategy and investment options. CSBA's goal is to enable policymakers to make informed decisions on matters of strategy, security policy and resource allocation.
CSBA provides timely, impartial and insightful analyses to senior decision makers in the executive and legislative branches, as well as to the media and the broader national security community. CSBA encourages thoughtful participation in the development of national security strategy and policy, and in the allocation of scarce human and capital resources. CSBA's analysis and outreach focus on key questions related to existing and emerging threats to US national security. Meeting these challenges will require transforming the national security establishment, and we are devoted to helping achieve this end.
Robert Martinage, Senior Fellow, is an expert on defense strategy, military modernization, special operations, military revolutions, and advanced technology and future warfare. He has over fourteen years of experience designing, conducting, and analyzing wargames for the Department of Defense (DoD). He has written several research papers that have been circulated widely among senior DoD officials. He recently authored The Global War on Terrorism: An Assessment, which was highlighted by the Council on Foreign Relations as a "must-read," and co-authored Dissuasion Strategy (with Andrew Krepinevich). He has served as a consultant to the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) for seven years. The United States faces three primary existing and emerging strategic challenges that are most likely to preoccupy senior decision-makers in the coming years:
> Defeating both the Sunni Salifi-Takfiri and Shia Khomeinist brands of violent
Islamist radicalism;
> Hedging against the rise of a hostile or more openly confrontational China and the potential challenge posed by authoritarian capitalist states; and
> Preparing for a world in which there are more nuclear-armed regional powers.
Addressing these specific challenges should be at the forefront of the incoming administration's strategic calculations, particularly during the 2009 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), which will help shape US defense strategy, planning, and force structure over the next twenty years.
Although none of these strategic challenges, individually, rivals the danger posed by the Soviet Union during the Cold War, they are certainly graver than the types of threats that prevailed immediately after the Cold War, during the period referred to by some as the "unipolar moment," when the power of the United States was at its peak and its dominance had not yet been put to the test. They are also quite different from the threats the United States confronted throughout the twentieth century (Imperial Germany, Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, and the Soviet Union), all of which possessed militaries that, by and large, were very similar to the US military both in terms of their structure and their modi operandi. For example, both the German and Soviet executive SuMMarY title > Subtitle uS deFenSe budget > options and Choices for the Long haul Special Operations Forces (SOF) are elite, highly trained military units that conduct operations that typically exceed the capabilities of conventional forces. They have figured prominently in US military operations since 2001 and have become central to the implementation of US national defense strategy with respect to the war against violent Islamic radicalism. During the unconventional war against the Taliban and al Qaeda in Afghanistan in Operation Enduring Freedom, SOF played a pivotal role by integrating US precision air power with the operations of irregular Afghan opposition forces to achieve rapid regime change and eliminate al Qaeda's primary sanctuary. Since the fall of the Taliban, SOF have played a critical role in training and advising elements of the Afghan National Army, providing personal security for senior Afghan officials, and capturing or killing scores of senior Taliban and al Qaeda leaders and lower-level operatives. They are also currently conducting operations along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border and training elements of Pakistan's Special Service Group. In the early phases of the war with Iraq, SOF again played a central role in a special-operations-intensive campaign, providing the primary ground force element on two of three fronts, and performing a number of special reconnaissance, direct action, and unconventional warfare missions in support of the conventional campaign. Over the past five years, they have been instrumental in training and advising Iraqi security forces, as well as in hunting down high-value al-Qaeda targets in Iraq. In the broader war against violent Islamic radicalism, to the extent their constrained capacity allows, SOF are building partner capacity, collecting intelligence, hunting high-value targets, and conducting other counterterrorism operations in multiple countries across several continents. The operations tempo currently being sustained by SOF is the highest in its history. 2 2 Admiral Eric T. Olson, Commander, SOCOM, Speech at National Security Leaders Forum, Center for a New American Security, March 3, 2008.
OperatiOnal iMplicatiOnS OF the Future SecuritY envirOnMent SOF face several challenges, as well as opportunities, in adapting to a future security environment that will likely be dominated by the continuation and possible intensification of violent Islamic radicalism, the potential rise of the People's Republic of China as a more aggressive military competitor, and the global proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and nuclear weapons, in particular. 
3
> Build partner capacity in relevant ground, air, and maritime capabilities in scores of countries on a steady-state basis.
> Help generate persistent air and maritime surveillance and strike coverage over "under-governed" areas and littoral zones.
> Employ unconventional warfare against state sponsors of terrorism and transnational terrorist groups globally.
In the event that future US-Sino relations become characterized more by competition and periodic conflict than sustained cooperation, the US military will need to be shaped, sized, and postured differently than it is today. If done wisely, these changes could dissuade China from investing in capabilities that threaten US and allied interests in East Asia, improve crisis stability in the region, and deter future Chinese aggression. In the event that US efforts to shape Chinese behavior and bolster deterrence fail, however, there are at least four missions that SOF may be called upon to perform as part of a conventional campaign: > Large-scale, overt unconventional warfare operations on China's periphery to open up additional fronts.
> Information operations focused on accessing "closed" communications and computer networks.
> Clandestine special reconnaissance missions to locate hidden or mobile high-value targets for precision attack.
> Direct action against key targets that cannot be disabled by other means.
3
In addition to the potential threat posed by China, the US military must also be prepared to confront the prospective rise of authoritarian capitalist states, such as Russia. It is assumed here, however, that the latter challenge is in large part a lesser included case of the former. Andrew Krepinevich, Robert Martinage, and Bob Work, The Challenges to US National Security (Washington, DC, CSBA, 2008).
To help prevent the spread and potential use of WMD, globally distributed SOF units involved in the war against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups could not only provide a valuable source of intelligence collection, but could also serve as an in-situ, highly responsive force to interdict the movement of WMD-related materiel over land or sea. In addition, SOF could potentially conduct unconventional warfare to bring about regime change in states aspiring to develop WMD. They will also need to be prepared to conduct counterproliferation operations against critical WMD-related infrastructure that cannot be reliably or safely targeted by other means. Finally, a handful of specialized SOF units will be relied upon to "render safe" improvised nuclear devices or nuclear weapons that have fallen out of effective state control.
In addition to these manifold challenges, emerging strategic and operational environments could also provide SOF with a number of significant opportunities. The coupling of precision air power with SOF ground forces should dramatically increase the effectiveness and attractiveness of small-footprint unconventional warfare as a future option for US policy makers. Emerging technologies will likely allow SOF to conduct persistent surveillance over very large areas, gain access to targets that were heretofore very difficult to penetrate, and enable standoff strikes with tailored effects and great precision.
When the new administration takes over the reins of the executive branch in January 2009, its national security team will need to begin work immediately on the next Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR). The purpose of this report is to assist them in determining how SOF should be shaped, sized, organized, and postured to address the challenges and exploit the opportunities likely to be associated with the future strategic and operational environment. While the 2006 QDR represented a major stride forward in terms of preparing SOF for the future, there is much work that remains to be done. In order to address the three core strategic challenges -the continuation and possible intensification of violent Islamic radicalism, the potential rise of the China as a more aggressive political-military competitor, and the global proliferation of nuclear weapons -this paper recommends the following steps be considered by the next administration:
uS Special Operations command > Establish a Joint Irregular Warfare Command to ensure an appropriate balance, in both strategy and resources, between direct and indirect approaches to special operations.
> Examine the possibility of increasing the rank of selected Theater Special Operations Commanders, and increasing their staffs accordingly.
> Forge a closer relationship between US Special Operations Command and the Central Intelligence Agency.
uS army Special Operations command > Meet the objective specified in the 2006 QDR of standing up twenty active Special Forces (SF) battalions by 203.
> Reorient SF force structure geographically to better reflect requirements associated with the war against violent Islamic extremism and the shift in US national security interest toward Asia.
> Enhance SF proficiency in relevant foreign languages.
> Create an additional Ranger regiment.
> Stand up an additional Special Operations Aviation Regiment by 205 to close the current rotary-wing capacity gap and keep pace with the ongoing expansion of SOF ground forces.
> Direct the Navy and the Marine Corps to either stand up special-operations-capable helicopter units of their own or provide pilots to fill the training pipeline for US Army Special Operations Command's 60th Special Operations Aviation Regiment.
> Create three additional Civil Affairs Brigades and Psychological Operations Groups.
naval Special warfare command > Enhance the foreign internal defense capabilities of SEAL and Special Boat Teams.
> Consider assigning regional responsibility for Southeast Asia to a Naval Special Warfare Group and staffing it sufficiently to serve as a Joint Special Operations Task Force headquarters. > Expand Special Boat Team capacity to help provide persistent reconnaissance and interdiction coverage over littoral and riverine areas that are already or could potentially be exploited by terrorists.
> Procure additional, next-generation SEAL Delivery Vehicles for SEAL infiltration and exfiltration in denied areas.
> Develop a new version of the Advanced SEAL Delivery System and procure at least three vessels for each of Naval Special Warfare Command's two SEAL Delivery Vehicle Teams.
Special Operations Forces > future Challenges and opportunities xv Joint Special Operations command > Expand current special mission unit capacity and capabilities for distributed counterterrorism and counterproliferation operations, to include additional human intelligence capability and increased capacity to "render safe" improvised nuclear devices and nuclear weapons intercepted overseas.
air Force Special Operations command > Recapitalize and expand the fixed-wing fleet.
> Aggressively pursue the fielding of a stealthy SOF transport based upon the airframe of the Air Force-developed Next Generation Bomber.
> Create additional unmanned combat air system (UCAS) squadrons.
> Expand the number of trained UCAS pilots, sensor operators, and mission coordinators, and invest in enhanced capacity for processing, exploiting, and disseminating the information collected by these platforms.
> Expand the 6th Special Operations Squadron into an irregular warfare wing.
> Stand up at least three additional Special Tactics Squadrons to provide steady-state support to each Special Forces Group, Naval Special Warfare Groups One and Two, the Rangers, and MARSOC.
> Shift the mission of Marine Special Operations Advisor Groups even further toward extended partner capacity building and foreign internal defense deployments in high priority countries -and away from routine, short-duration rotational activities that general purpose forces could readily handle.
> Stop diverting resources toward the development of an unconventional warfare capability, concentrating instead on the foreign internal defense mission and, to a lesser extent, on direct action and special reconnaissance.
In comparison to the modernization programs of the conventional joint force, nearly all of the investments recommended in this paper are modest. Given that the operations and personnel tempos of all SOF units are extraordinarily high at present and are likely to remain that way for the foreseeable future, one is hard pressed to identify significant divestment opportunities. Several of the initiatives recommended above, however, will require sizable outlays. Given the relatively small size of SOCOM's budget and scant SOF divestment opportunities, it will be necessary to offset the cost of these investments with cuts in conventional forces, including scaling back or terminating procurement programs that are a poor fit with the challenges posed by the future security environment and reducing force structure that has either been retained in excess of anticipated demand or is likely to wane in operational utility in the years ahead.
This paper does not purport to provide the definitive answer for how SOF should be shaped, sized, organized, and postured for the future, but rather to identify the critical issues that the next administration must debate and expeditiously address. To be sure, many of the detailed recommendations made in this paper will need to be modified based on operational experience and to adapt to unanticipated changes in the future security environment. Special Operations Forces (SOF) are elite, highly trained military units that conduct operations that typically exceed the capabilities of conventional forces. They have figured prominently in US military operations since 200 and have become central to the implementation of US national defense strategy with respect to the war against violent Islamic extremism, which is likely to be increasingly fought indirectly and in countries with which the United States is not at war.
During the unconventional war against the Taliban and al Qaeda in Afghanistan in Operation Enduring Freedom, SOF played a pivotal role by integrating US precision air power with the operations of irregular Afghan opposition forces to achieve rapid regime change and eliminate al Qaeda's primary sanctuary. Since the fall of the Taliban, SOF have played a critical role in training and advising elements of the Afghan National Army, providing personal security for senior Afghan officials, and capturing or killing scores of senior Taliban and al Qaeda leaders and lower-level operatives. They are also now actively engaged along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border and training elements of Pakistan's Special Service Group. In the early phases of the war with Iraq, SOF again played a central role in a special-operations-intensive campaign, providing the primary ground force element on two of three fronts, and performing a number of special reconnaissance, direct action, and unconventional warfare missions in support of the conventional campaign. 
5
6
7
8
9
In addition to these manifold challenges, emerging strategic and operational environments could provide SOF with a number of significant new opportunities. The coupling of precision air power with SOF capabilities should dramatically increase the effectiveness and attractiveness of small-footprint unconventional warfare as a future option for US policy makers. Emerging technologies will likely allow SOF to conduct persistent surveillance over very large areas, gain access to targets that were heretofore very difficult to penetrate, and enable standoff strikes with tailored effects and great precision.
To address these emerging challenges and opportunities, the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) asserted that SOF should be re-oriented from a force that focuses primarily on short-duration, episodic missions and reactive counterterrorism missions, to one that is shaped, sized, and postured for long-duration, steady-state operations critical to the war against violent Islamic extremism such as intelligence collection, foreign internal defense (FID), and unconventional warfare; reactive and proactive counterterrorism and counterproliferation missions; and high-end theater warfare as part of a joint force. 0 It argued that SOF will need to: increase their capacity to perform "long-duration, indirect and clandestine operations in politically sensitive and denied areas;" expand their "organic ability to locate, tag, and track dangerous individuals and other high-value targets globally;" expand their ability to "detect, locate, and render safe WMD;" and develop the capability and capacity required to conduct FID and unconventional warfare operations in "dozens of countries simultaneously." As a step toward realizing that vision, the 2006 QDR called for a one-third expansion of active Special Forces (SF) battalions, a significant increase in Ranger and SEAL capacity, increased Special Mission Unit (SMU) capacity, a doubling of active-duty Civil Affairs personnel, the standing up of five additional Psychological Operations (PSYOPS) companies, the establishment of Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command (MARSOC), the creation of a single UCAS squadron, and a doubling of current capacity to train and advise foreign security personnel in the use of modern airpower. 2 SOCOM is already implementing most of these changes and expects to complete them, at least in part, by 203. Several initiatives, however, will take a decade or more to carry out and will require substantial additional resources. When the new administration takes over the reins of the executive branch in January 2009, its national security team will immediately need to begin working on the next QDR. The purpose of this report is to assist them in determining how SOF should be shaped, sized, organized, and postured to address the challenges and exploit the opportunities likely to be associated with the future strategic and operational environment. While the 2006 QDR represented a major stride forward in terms of preparing SOF for the future, there is much work that remains to be done. A better balance needs to be struck between direct and indirect approaches to special operations with respect to strategy and resources. In several cases, the 2006 QDR did not go far enough in terms of increasing SOF capacity. A significant increase in both fixed-and rotary-wing aircraft capacity, for example, is required to transport and support already-expanding SOF ground forces. To engage effectively in the "war of ideas" against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorists, additional Civil Affairs and Psychological Operations capacity is needed. There are also major shortfalls with UCAS capacity, as well as in aviation and maritime foreign internal defense capacity. Moreover, there are many areas where existing and projected capacity should be re-focused -both in terms of capabilities and global posture -to better align with anticipated demand. The current regional orientation (and thus language and cultural training) of the seven SF groups (active and reserve), for example, arguably places far too much emphasis on Europe and South America, and not enough on the Muslim World and Asia.
Chapter of this paper explains why SOF are "special" and what sets them apart from general purpose forces. It then provides an overview of the core tasks routinely performed by SOF, describes how US Special Operations Command (SOCOM) is organized, and explains what differentiates SOF units in SOCOM's five major subordinate commands: US Army Special Operations Command (USASOC), Navy Special Warfare Command (NAVSPECWARCOM), Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC), Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC), and MARSOC. While some readers may already be intimately familiar with the composition and capabilities of these commands, this section provides a solid grounding for those who are not. Chapter 2 characterizes the myriad operational requirements for SOF in responding to the challenges and opportunities of the future strategic and operational environment. It is organized around the three strategic challenges mentioned earlier: violent Islamic radicalism, the potential rise of China as a more aggressive military competitor, and the global proliferation of WMD. Chapter 3 explores SOCOM-wide organizational and policy changes for addressing those requirements and delves into the force-planning ramifications for each of SOCOM's subordinate commands. It concludes with a brief discussion of SOF-relevant investments within the conventional joint force.
what MaKeS SOF "Special"?
The short answer to this question is: carefully selected, highly trained personnel that can conduct challenging missions -including in hostile, denied or politically sensitive environments -that often exceed the capabilities of general purpose forces. As a general rule, they score higher on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery and physical fitness tests than general purpose forces. Most have significant prior military experience. The schools run by SOCOM's subordinate commands rigorously screen and assess candidates before subjecting them to arduous and lengthy training; washout rates often approach or exceed 70 percent. Afterward, candidates typically proceed to more specialized training (such as weapons, medical and language courses). Operators then spend several years with their units before achieving full proficiency. As a result, SOF units are smaller and comprise more senior personnel than their conventional counterparts. Because of their advanced training, they can also use specialized equipment and employ tactics, techniques and procedures that are unavailable to general purpose forces. SOF units typically carry out missions with much smaller numbers of personnel than conventional units, making it possible to operate clandestinely in semi-permissive or denied areas. Their higher level of training (particularly linguistic and cultural expertise), combined with their relatively higher maturity and experience, also make them the preferred force for training and advising foreign militaries, especially in politically sensitive areas.
While conventional forces can conduct elements of the core SOF tasks described below (particularly in relatively low-threat environments and when a small US "footprint" on the ground is not necessary), there are many skill sets that are unique to SOF. US Army Special Forces, for example, are specially organized, trained, and equipped to conduct unconventional warfare. Similarly, only JSOC's Special Mission Units (SMUs) have the specialized training and equipment needed to conduct high-risk hostage-rescue missions, as well as to find and "render safe" nuclear weapons.
The rigorous and lengthy selection, assessment, and training required to create SOF, however, has a downside: small force size. A truism within the SOF community is that special operators cannot be mass-produced. Reflecting this, total SOF force structure, including active and reserve forces, accounts for only two percent of the overall joint force. Although SOCOM is slated to grow by more than 3,000 additional personnel by 203, the general purpose forces are slated to expand by more than seven times that amount.
what dO SOF dO?
The Department of Defense defines special operations as "operations conducted in hostile, denied, or politically sensitive environments to achieve military, diplomatic, informational, and/or economic objectives employing military capabilities for which there is no broad conventional force requirement." 3 They differ from conventional operations in the "degree of physical and political risk, operational techniques, mode of employment, independence from friendly support, and dependence on detailed operational intelligence and indigenous assets." More specifically, SOF are currently organized, trained, and equipped to conduct nine core tasks: > CiViL affairS (Ca): CA missions create a link between the commander and the local population or government by providing key social and governmental services when the local government cannot; by keeping civilians safely away from combat operations; by establishing programs to build trust between the US military forces and the local population; and by supporting information operations. 
5
6
> CounterterroriSM (Ct): CT missions are offensive actions to "prevent, deter, preempt and respond to terrorism."
7
> foreign internaL defenSe (fid): FID missions build the capacity of partner nations to provide for their own internal security. SOF's primary contribution to FID is to organize, train, advise and assist host-nation (HN) military and paramilitary forces. It includes SOF support to any programs taken by another government to free and protect its society from subversion, lawlessness, and insurgency. 9
> inforMation oPerationS (io): The integrated employment of the core capabilities of electronic warfare, computer network operations, psychological operations, military deception, and operations security to influence, disrupt, corrupt or usurp adversarial human and automated decision-making while protecting the joint force's information capabilities. 
20
22
23
Almost seven years to the day after the tragic failure of Operation Eagle Claw/Operation Evening Light at a temporary airstrip in Iran, dubbed Desert One, SOCOM was created by an act of Congress, over the strenuous opposition of the Armed Services and the Joint Staff, to improve the capabilities, readiness, and command and control of SOF. The key impetus for the creation of SOCOM was the Holloway Commission report on the failed Desert One hostage-rescue mission, which among other things highlighted poor command and control, interoperability, and readiness within and among the Services' respective special operations units. 2 SOCOM, located at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida, is responsible for organizing, training, equipping and deploying SOF to geographic combatant commanders. Furthermore, SOCOM is the "lead combatant command for planning, synchronizing, and as directed, executing global operations against terrorist networks in coordination with other combatant commanders." 
25
1 below
united States army Special Operations command 
With nearly 2,000 personnel (8,300 active duty and 3,00 reserve), US Army Special Forces Command accounts for over 60 percent of USASOC and is itself about the same size as AFSOC. It is responsible for training, organizing and equipping five active and two National Guard SF groups, each with a regional focus (see Table 
below
Until recently, SF groups each contained a headquarters company, a support company and three battalions. As a result of the 2006 QDR, however, the number of battalions in each active SFG is slated to increase to four (for a total of twenty active battalions) by 203. Each battalion consists of a headquarters detachment, a military free-fall detachment, a diving detachment, and three SF companies. Each SF company contains a headquarters element and six 2-man Operational Detachment Alphas (ODAs) or "A-Teams." 27 By the end of 2008, there are scheduled to be 306 active-duty ODAs in the force, building to 360 by 203 (twenty battalions, each with eighteen ODAs). While capable of conducting almost any core SOF task, ODAs specialize in foreign internal defense and unconventional warfare. No other force within SOCOM can match the level of cultural and linguistic training of SF operators. The small size of the ODAs combined with their sophisticated training allows SF to work flexibly and autonomously in hostile and politically sensitive environments. Traditionally, SF have drawn their manpower from experienced soldiers (often Rangers) and trained these 27 SF ODAs are commanded by captains, with SF warrant officers serving as the detachments' executive officers. The remainder of the detachment consists of senior non-commissioned officers who specialize in operations and intelligence, light and heavy weapons, engineering and demolitions, communications or medical areas. There are two specialists in each area per ODA. SF companies can deploy as operational "B" detachments, and SF battalions as "C" detachments. SF companies are commanded by majors, battalions by lieutenant colonels, and groups by colonels. ta BLe 1. SF g rOup p eacetiMe b aSing and regiOnal OrientatiOn recruits extensively before sending them to groups. 
28
The 75th Ranger Regiment consists of three Ranger Battalions and one Ranger Special Troops Battalion, which provides combat service and support. Each battalion currently contains a headquarters company and three rifle companies (expanding to four rifle companies at the direction of the 2006 QDR). Additional reconnaissance, military intelligence, communications, and other support functions are also being added to existing Ranger companies. 
29
The 60th SOAR contains four battalions based in the continental United States and two forward-based companies (one assigned to Pacific Command and the other to Southern Command). The battalions contain varying numbers of companies, but each contains at least two aviation companies and a maintenance company. 
3
Regiment serves as a gateway into SOF for junior soldiers.
In particular, the Rangers serve as a "farm team" for JSOC.
specifically, the 1st Battalion operates AH/MH-6 "Little Birds" and several variations of the MH-60 Blackhawk utility helicopter. The 2nd and th Battalions operate MH-7 Chinook long-distance, heavy-lift helicopters, while the 3rd Battalion operates a mix of MH-7s and MH-60s. The 60th SOAR specializes in conducting nighttime air assaults in hostile and denied locations. Using highly modified helicopters, the 160th can refuel in flight, allowing for long-range penetrations. The AH-6 Little Bird and MH-60L Direct Action Penetrator (DAP) provide fire support (primarily for SMUs and Rangers) and direct-attack capabilities.
The 95th Civil Affairs Brigade consists of a headquarters company, a command section, a civil-military operations center, a Civil Affairs planning team, and the 96th Civil Affairs Battalion. The 95th Civil Affairs Brigade will expand to four battalions by 2009. 
32
Each battalion contains a headquarters company, a command section, a civil-military operations center and a civil affairs planning team along with four CA companies. Each company has an HQ element, a civil-military operations center and five civil affairs teams, each containing four members. Feickert, "U.S. Special Operations Forces (SOF): Background and Issues for Congress," p. 2. Civil-military operations centers and Civil Affairs planning teams are responsible for planning and organizing civil-military operations in the joint command, while fourperson Civil Affairs teams conduct "civil reconnaissance" and carry out missions among the local population, including humanitarian aid projects. With their linguistic and cultural skills, CA team personnel often serve as liaisons between military and civilian populations, reducing friction between them. 
33
35
36
naval Special warfare command NAVSPECWARCOM (or WARCOM), headquartered at Naval Amphibious Base (NAB) Coronado outside of San Diego, is responsible for training, organizing and equipping Naval Special Warfare forces, including Navy SEALs and Special Warfare Combatant-craft Crewmen (SWCC). As illustrated in Table 
3
The regional POBs are the st (SOUTHCOM), 5th (PACOM), 6th (EUCOM) and 8th (CENTCOM). 36 Headquarters, Department of the Army, "U.S. Army Field Manual No 3-05.30: Psychological  Operations," April, 2005, chapter 3.   37   In addition, NSWG-and NSWG-2 have forward-deployed command and control organizations called Naval Special Warfare Units (NSWUs). SWG-has two NSWUs, NSWU-in Guam and NSWU-3 in Bahrain; NSWG-2 has NSWU-2, located in Stuttgart, Germany. SEAL (SEa Air Land) Teams primarily perform counterterrorism, direct action, and special reconnaissance missions, especially those that originate from, and return to, a swamp, delta, river, or ocean. Although there are currently eight SEAL Teams, the 2006 QDR directed that SEAL capacity be increased by roughly two SEAL-team equivalents by 203 so that they may take on additional direct action missions, especially those associated with the war against violent Islamic extremism. 
38
39
> Naval Special Warfare Development Group (also known as DEVGRU or SEAL Team 6) at the Training Support Center, Hampton Roads, Dam Neck, Virginia.
> An Intelligence Support Activity (ISA) that focuses on clandestine operations, including human intelligence and signal intelligence collection.
> 2th Special Tactics Squadron at Pope Air Force Base.
> Joint Communications Unit (JCU).
In addition, elements of both the 75th Rangers and the 60th SOAR are frequently under the operational control of JSOC. 3 JSOC units also work closely with the Central Intelligence Agency and the Hostage Rescue Team of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
While the exact size and organization of these units are classified information, publicly available sources suggest that Delta contains approximately one thousand personnel, with over three hundred of those being actual "shooters." This latter number 2 See, for example, Feickert, "U.S. Special Operations Forces (SOF): Background and Issues for Congress," pp. 4-5; and Sean Naylor, "More than Door Kickers," Armed Forces Journal, March 2006.   3   This is a matter of some confusion. USASOC still lists both the 75th and 60th as its subordinates, while numerous sources suggest that, at the very least, these two units are under the operational, if not administrative control of JSOC. See Feickert, "U.S. Special Operations Forces (SOF): Background and Issues for Congress," p. 4; and Sean Naylor, "More Than Door Kickers," Armed Forces Journal, March 2006.
JSOC is, in theory at least, responsible for ensuring that joint special operations work seamlessly.
is further divided into at least three operational squadrons of approximately seventyfive to eighty operators, each organized into three "troops." DEVGRU is smaller than Delta and does not have the same number of support personnel. All three SMUs are extremely well-resourced, possess state-of-the-art capabilities, and comprise personnel who have undergone extensive selection and training. 
5
air Force Special Operations command (aFSOc) Located at Hurlburt Field, near Pensacola, FL, AFSOC is responsible for operating and maintaining tilt-rotor and fixed-wing aircraft, as well as training, organizing and equipping Air Force SOF personnel. As indicated below in Table , it comprises six major active operational commands. 
6
Sean Naylor, Not a Good Day to Die: The Untold Story of Operation Anaconda, Penguin: New York, NY,  2005, pg. 3-36.   5   Andrew Feickert, "U.S. Special Operations Forces (SOF): Background and Issues for Congress," CRS Report RS208, June 28, 2007, p. 5; and Sean Naylor, "JSOC to Become Three-Star Command," Army  Times, February 3, 2006.   6   Major subordinate commands in the Air National Guard include the 93rd Air National Guard SOW at Harrisburg, PA; the still-forming 23rd and 25th Special Tactics Squadrons; the 209th Civil Engineer Squadron (CES) at Gulfport-Biloxi MS; and the 280th Combat Communications Squadron. AFSOC's fixed-wing fleet is currently composed mainly of variants of the aging C-30 airframe (see Table 5 below). In low-to-medium threat environments, AC-30H/U Spectre/Spooky gunships provide air support and interdiction for ground forces with their advanced targeting sensors and side-mounted weapons. 7 MC-30E/H Combat Talons and MC-130W Combat Spear transports provide SOF with infiltration, extraction, and resupply (and some aerial refueling), while MC-30P Combat Shadows are specially designed for aerial refueling of SOF rotary-wing assets. 8 AFSOC's 39th Special Operations Squadron operates a small fleet of modified Pilatus PC-12 singleengine turboprop aircraft, renamed U-28As, for transport and resupply to small, unprepared airfields, as well as other missions such as ISR and communications support. The tilt-rotor fleet consists of a handful of CV-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft,
The AC-30H is armed with 0-mm gun and 05-mm howitzer, while the AC-30U is being upgraded to a twin 30-mm single-barrel chain gun and 105-mm cannon configuration. who are specially trained and equipped to conduct conventional or unconventional rescue operations; and combat aviation advisors who train and advise foreign security personnel on the use of air power. Special Tactics Squadrons contain a mixture of Combat Controller Teams, Special Operations Weather Teams, and PJs. 
50
5
52
53
5
MARSOC, headquartered at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, is responsible for training, organizing and equipping special operations marines. MARSOC is divided into four main operational units: the Marine Special Operations Advisor Group at Camp Lejeune; the st Marine Special Operations Battalion, at Camp Pendleton, California; the 2nd Marine Special Operations Battalion at Camp Lejeune; and the Marine Special Operations Support Group, also at Camp Lejeune. 
55
56
57
58
The Marine Special Operations Support Group provides crucial organic support for Marine SOF. It contains three companies: support, intelligence and logistics. The support company provides planning, command and control, and fires coordination. The intelligence company provides signals, human and counter intelligence capabilities, as well as the capability to fuse intelligence. The logistics company provides supplies, maintenance, engineering (including explosive ordinance disposal), transportation and medical support. 
59
60
What we need to continue to work very hard on is the unconventional warfare piece . . . There's certain training that you've got to have and it's experience based, language-based, culture based . . . That will take us a little bit longer. I would see us being proficient in UW in the next five to ten years, somewhere in that timeframe. 
6
As mentioned in Chapter , the three core challenges that are likely to characterize the future security environment are the continuation and possible intensification of violent Islamic radicalism; the potential rise of China as a more aggressive politicalmilitary competitor (or the possible emergence of aggressive, authoritarian capitalist states); and the global proliferation of WMD, especially nuclear weapons. Each of these challenges has significant operational implications for SOF.
There are two branches of violent Islamic radicalism today: heterodox Salafi-Takfiri groups within the Sunni Muslim community and "Khomeinist" Shiite groups. Both strive to impose their brand of sharia justice on the entire world. 62 Al Qaeda is an example of the former, while Iranian-backed Hezbollah is an archetype of the latter. Terrorist cells are active in more than sixty countries around the world. Moreover, there are radical Islamist insurgencies of varying stages underway in nearly a score of countries around the globe -most notably in Pakistan, Afghanistan, countries in the Maghreb and Horn of Africa, and Lebanon. The operating environment spans from Europe to the most underdeveloped parts of the world, and ranges from densely populated urban areas and mega-cities to remote mountains, deserts and jungles. For the United States, it encompasses permissive, semi-permissive, and non-permissive environments, as well as hostile or denied areas. The ability of US allies and partners to address the threat ranges from sophisticated to almost non-existent, but even in the most capable partner areas (i.e., Europe), Islamist terrorist cells have repeatedly demonstrated their ability to operate. 
To prevail in this war, the United States, along with its allies and partners, will need to conduct a sustained, multifaceted, global "smother campaign" to deny terrorists sanctuary whether in under-governed areas or state-controlled territory, sever the transnational links upon which they rely, impede recruitment and fundraising, track them down wherever they may be hiding and plotting, and disrupt their operations. The United States cannot successfully wage this campaign alone. It will be essential to build the security capabilities and capacities of as many partners -both nations and disaffected non-state actors -as possible. Conversely, it will be necessary to put additional pressure on state sponsors of terrorism. The US government will also need to shore up weak or failing states to prevent them from becoming terrorist sanctuaries. In particular, the United States will need to ensure that the "key terrain" of Saudi Arabia and Pakistan does not fall into the hands of violent Islamic radicals. 
63
6
63 Saudi Arabia is "key terrain" because it contains the two holiest sites in the Muslim world, Mecca and Medina, and possesses 25 percent of the world's proven oil reserves (about 262 billion barrels of oil). The propaganda value and fundraising-recruitment potential of controlling Mecca and Medina for the Salafi-Takfiri movement would be incalculable. Control over Saudi oil, moreover, would give violent Islamic radicals a practically inexhaustible source of revenue for ramping up "jihad" operations globally and could be leveraged to conduct strategic economic warfare against the West. Pakistan represents "key terrain" for two reasons: first, as a Sunni-dominated Islamic republic with a population of roughly 165 million, it would provide an ideal state-sponsored sanctuary for the Salafi-Takfiri movement; and second, it is currently the only majority-Muslim state armed with nuclear weapons. In the event of serious internal instability, the United States would have strong incentives to, at a minimum, secure > Help generate persistent air and maritime surveillance and strike coverage over "under-governed" areas and relevant littoral zones; and > Employ unconventional warfare against state sponsors of terrorism and transnational terrorist groups globally.
These four operational tasks are critical to the formation of what is sometimes referred to as a global combating terrorism network (GCTN). SOCOM, for example, describes the GCTN as a "loosely organized affiliation of people and organizations and capabilities that are generally connected by a common desire to contribute to a global environment that is inhospitable to terrorist activity." 
65
In close cooperation with the other government agencies (primarily the CIA), SOF will help locate, track, and capture or kill terrorists and their leaders in hostile, statecontrolled territory (e.g., Iran and Syria), under-governed areas (e.g., the tribal areas of Pakistan), and densely populated cites from Beirut to Mindanao. They will also be relied upon to interdict the movement of critical supplies and destroy terrorist infrastructure (e.g., training camps, communications, and weapon/supply caches).
These operational tasks have two major implications for SOF posture. First and foremost, SOF will need to build and maintain a persistent, low-visibility ground presence in several known or suspected terrorist operating areas around the world, as well as in expansive, under-governed areas that are vulnerable to terrorist exploitation (e.g., the Trans-Saharan region of Africa, the Sulu/Sulawesi Seas littoral, and large swaths of Central Asia). Second, SOF will need to be prepared to conduct clandestine operations (most likely unconventional warfare) and support CIA-led covert activities against state sponsors of terrorism, including those armed with significant anti-access capabilities.
An on-the-ground presence is essential not only for collecting tactical intelligence and developing local situational awareness, but also for supporting partner security forces and responding rapidly (either unilaterally or in a combined operation) if and when high-value terrorist targets are identified and located. Currently, however, over 80 percent of SOF capacity is allocated to just two countries: Iraq and Afghanistan. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has indicated that the SOF commitment to those countries will probably not decline significantly over the next several years, even as conventional forces withdraw from Iraq. As he remarked in May 2008:
The eventual drawdown in Iraq is not the end of the mission for our elite forces. Far from it. Even as our regular troops reduce their presence and are replaced by Iraqis, special operations force levels will remain fairly constant and be the connective tissue for the overall mission. They will be in Iraq and Afghanistan for an extended period of time -a force to hunt and kill terrorists, and also as a force to help train Iraqis and Afghans. 
66
In countries willing to host SOF to train, advise, and equip their security forces, this expanded presence could be generated relatively easily. Personnel assigned to the overt foreign internal defense mission could leverage their in-country access for collecting tactical intelligence, making contacts with local government officials and civilians, and conducting a host of other preparation-of-the-environment activities. Additional SOF and other government personnel (i.e., CIA officers) could be embedded with foreign internal defense units, as necessary. This in-situ force could respond quickly to counterterrorism tasks, either with or without the host nation's approval, within its assigned area of influence. A large number of relatively small, overt foreign internal defense teams distributed around the world would make an important contribution to the above-mentioned GCTN. To support these teams adequately, DoD will need to invest in logistical infrastructure, additional ISR collection and TPED (tasking, processing, exploitation, and dissemination) capacity, intelligence analysis, secure communications capabilities, and "on-demand" precision fire support.
Developing a low-visibility ground presence in countries that are not willing to host SOF will, of course, be more problematic. To support expanded clandestine military operations, SOF will need to invest in myriad capabilities to enable specially trained personnel to infiltrate into, exfiltrate from, and conduct operations within semi-permissible and denied areas. Among other things, they will require new cover mechanisms and means for defeating modern biometric identity verification technologies. It will also be necessary to develop new tools, as well as supporting tactics, techniques, and procedures, in order to collect relevant tactical intelligence, especially with respect to locating and tracking high-value terrorist targets (and possibly WMD-related material) in what may often be very cluttered environments.
Finally, SOF must be prepared to conduct clandestine military operations against state sponsors of terrorism such as Iran. In addition to unconventional warfare operations, which will be discussed below, this could entail manhunting operations against key terrorist leaders/operatives, as well as direct action against critical terrorist support infrastructure (e.g., training camps).
Given finite US counterterrorism capacity, the impracticability of conducting US military (or even covert) operations in several relevant places around the world, and the political/diplomatic need to avoid the perception of a unilateral American war against Islam, it is essential to train, equip, and advise foreign security forces -including air and maritime forces as well as ground forces -in as many countries as possible. If the United States is successful in this regard, more and more partner states will, in time, become fully capable of suppressing or eliminating terrorist threats within their own territory. Not only will this create the conditions for a gradual reduction of the US military's commitment abroad, it could also facilitate more effective counterterrorism operations since these partners have unmatchable advantages with respect to cultural intimacy and language proficiency. As Secretary of Defense Robert Gates testified to Congress in April 2008, "As borne out by Afghanistan, Iraq, and in other theaters large and small, success in the war on terror will depend as much on the capacity of allies and partners in the moderate Muslim world as on the capabilities of our own forces." 
68
69
Elements of this mission, however, could and should be performed by general purpose forces, freeing up SOF for missions that exploit their "special" capabilities. With modest training and basic language instruction, for example, conventional Army and Marine Corps units could train and advise conventional military forces in basic counterinsurgency tactics, techniques, and procedures in partner states that are politically willing to accept what is likely to be a relatively large American "footprint" on their territory. In countries where the disclosure of a US military presence would be politically risky for the host nation, SOF will likely be relied upon for the foreign internal defense mission. Unfortunately, given falling favorable public views of the United States over the past several years, more and more states want to keep their involvement with the US military as discreet as possible. Moreover, SOF will also be required for training and advising foreign special operations forces. This is now happening in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Philippines, among other places. In short, while the general purpose force may reduce the foreign internal defense workload for SOF at the margins, one should harbor no illusions that it will be possible (or desirable) for SOF to divest the bulk of the foreign internal defense mission; it will unquestionably remain a major operational focus for SOF in the years ahead. This assessment is shared by the SOCOM Commander Admiral Eric Olson, who remarked recently:
We'd like to hand off a number of [FID] tasks to the conventional forces as they develop the capability to do it, but the reality is striking me that there are really very few countries in the world where you can put a brigade combat team to do a train and assist mission. In most countries of the world, access is gained through low-profile operations, keeping it out of the newspapers, working in small unit to small unit level kinds of engagements. We woke up in 58 countries of the world this morning, and only a couple of those where we're engaged in a fight or where a brigade combat team could perform a significant train and assist kind of missionThat said, I'd like to see Special Operations get in the business of training Special Operations a little bit more, and in the business of training new recruits how to march in straight lines and shoot on seven-meter ranges a little bit less. But I think that the reality is that, given the skills to which Special Operations trains, the global demand will still be mostly for us. As is the case when creating a low-visibility network for global manhunting and disruption operations, the primary challenge associated with the closely-linked requirement of building and leveraging partner capacity is a lack of available SOF force structure. While SOF conducted "hundreds of FID" missions in some fifty-six countries in 2007, they generally lasted for only a few weeks and involved a relatively small number of personnel. 7 With more than 80 percent of forward-deployed SOF tied down in Iraq and Afghanistan -and 99 percent of those forces committed to combat operations, Theater Security Cooperation Plan missions worldwide have fallen by about 50 percent. 
72
Developing and maintaining the global combating terrorism network will likely require the capacity to conduct training and advisory activities on a steady-state basis in at least a score of high-priority countries and carry out more episodic training activities on a rotational basis involving Mobile Training Team deployments, Military Education and Training Team programs, Joint Combined Exchange for Training exercises, and other Theater Security Cooperation Plan activities in another twenty to forty countries. 
73
7
contributing to persistent reconnaissance-Strike coverage over "under-governed" areas and littoral zones Airborne and naval platforms can contribute to the global combating terrorism network by providing persistent reconnaissance-strike coverage over "under-governed" areas and littoral zones that currently are or are likely to be exploited by terrorist groups. This air-maritime force should be shaped, sized, and postured to accomplish the following core tasks: > Monitor ungoverned land areas, as well as littoral zones and maritime chokepoints, for suspicious activity.
> Locate, track, and strike time-sensitive, high-value targets, including those in defended/denied areas.
> Enable US and partner operations by providing actionable intelligence, communications links, and fire support, as needed.
In addition, naval assets may be called upon routinely to board and inspect suspicious vessels in cooperation with partner states; to seize vessels by force when necessary; to conduct small, quick-reaction raids against ground targets in coastal regions; and to secure critical offshore infrastructure.
Given that currently available UCASs have significantly longer unrefueled range and mission endurance than manned surveillance platforms, they appear to be the preferred platform for providing wide-area persistent, airborne surveillance and strike coverage. As will be examined in Chapter 3, it may make sense to complement them with small, affordable, easy-to-operate manned aircraft that can be more easily acquired, flown, and maintained by US partners. Meeting the need for dramatically increased maritime surveillance and strike/interdiction coverage in littoral zones will likely require a relatively large number of platforms to be permanently stationed at several regional operating bases or "fleet stations" around the world.
Unconventional warfare is defined here as operations conducted by, with, and through irregular forces against non-state actors or in support of resistances, insurgencies, and major combat operations. Irregular forces or surrogates can be controlled directly by US forces in permissive environments or indirectly in hostile or politically sensitive environments. An important characteristic of unconventional warfare is that the involvement of the US government can, in theory, remain covert or at least plausibly deniable, as was the case with US support of the mujahedeen in Afghanistan in the 980s. Even when the involvement of the US government is overt, the footprint of the US military is typically small in comparison to conventional operations. During the first phase of Operation Enduring Freedom, for example, less than three hundred SOF from several countries were on the ground in Afghanistan in the weeks leading up to the fall of Qandahar. In addition to training, organizing, and equipping indigenous forces (e.g., Northern, Southern, and Eastern Alliance factions), widely distributed SF units were very successful in locating and designating Al Qaeda/Taliban targets for precision attack. 
75
76
77
78
79
As evidenced by the dramatic changes in Iraq over the past two years, unconventional warfare can also be a potent, cost-effective tool for attacking hostile non-state actors such as Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups. 
80
SOF unconventional warfare capabilities, especially in denied areas, almost atrophied out of existence in the decade following the end of the Cold War. Fortunately, since 200, those skills have been resuscitated. As will be discussed in Chapter 2I, however, several steps should be taken to enhance unconventional warfare capabilities and expand current capacity. Improving unconventional warfare capabilities will require additional investment in languages, area knowledge, advanced special operations training, clandestine infiltration capabilities, and low-signature support infrastructure. To ensure that unconventional warfare gets the attention it needs within SOCOM, it might also be necessary to create a sub-unified irregular or indirect warfare command to counter-balance institutionally the direct-action advocacy of JSOC.
A critical question for US defense strategists is: how will China exploit its growing economic strength and military power? Opinions in the national security community vary widely on this question and, in particular, on whether conflict with China is inevitable. 8 China claims that it will rise peacefully; if that is the case, it will be in the national interest of United States to develop closer ties with China. 
82
83
> Information operations focused on accessing "closed" communications and computer networks.
> Clandestine special reconnaissance missions to locate hidden or mobile high-value targets for precision attack.
> Direct action against key targets that cannot be disabled by other.
While Han Chinese comprise just under 92 percent of the PRC's population, the remaining eight-plus percent includes groups of Zhuang, Uyghur, Hui, Yi, Tibetan, Miao, Manchu, Mongol, Buyi, and Korean extraction. 
85
In the unlikely and undesirable event of a large-scale conventional war with China, SOF could be called upon to help organize, train, and equip insurgents from these disaffected communities in order to open up additional fronts and potentially tie down a substantial number of People's Liberation Army forces in manpower-intensive, 83 That being said, China's rise could be derailed by the collapse of its fragile economy or by internal fragmentation along regional lines. Chinese economic interdependence with the West and increased participation in various international organizations may also discourage military competition and confrontation. counter-insurgency operations. 
86
China has developed an extremely robust internal fiber-optic network for military command, control, and communications. In all likelihood, it has several dedicated, stand-alone communications and computer networks that are not connected to commercial networks, and are thus practically impossible to access remotely. Accordingly, SOF may be called upon to gain physical access to these networks -both in peacetime for intelligence-collection purposes and in wartime to spoof, exploit, or disable them.
During peacetime, this mission would probably be assigned to the Central Intelligence Agency. However, in remote, difficult-to-access land areas, or for cables on the seabed, SOF could play an important role. During wartime, the network-access mission could become a core responsibility for SOF.
This mission has several important implications for SOF. First, SOF need to master the skills necessary to tap into fiber-optic or other communication lines, as well as to hack into protected computer networks. This will require the creation of new information operations training programs, as well as the development and procurement of specialized network-access "tool kits." It could even provide the impetus for the reshaping of SF ODAs and SEAL Teams -expanding or reconfiguring them to include one or more information-operation specialists. Second, it highlights once again the requirement for a stealthy SOF insertion and exfiltration aircraft. Third,
In the event that US-Sino relations deteriorate into a Cold War-like competition, the United States could attempt to compel Beijing to expend a greater fraction of state revenue on internal security in "peacetime" by helping to foster and intensify ethnic unrest within China. While fraught with escalatory risk, American involvement might range from offering verbal and diplomatic support for internal movements espousing improved human rights and self-determination, to making covert financial contributions to dissident groups and, at the extreme, to providing various levels of non-lethal and lethal aid to insurgents involved in armed rebellions or proxy wars. Although such activities would be both politically controversial and difficult to implement operationally (especially in a covert manner), they could provide US policy-makers with an important option for engaging in long-term competition with a hostile China.
the potential scale of the wartime mission suggests that WARCOM's current fleet of one, semi-operational Advanced SEAL Delivery System mini-submarine is wholly inadequate. Although flooded SEAL Delivery Vehicles could also be used to transport SEALs clandestinely from submerged submarines to fiber optic cables in China's littoral waters, they would be far less desirable operationally. SEALs that could come and go repeatedly from the warm and dry environment of the pressurized Advanced SEAL Delivery System using its rapid lock-in/lock-out chamber would be much better able to perform the technically challenging and time-consuming task of clandestinely tapping into fiber-optic cables on the cold sea floor.
In the event of a military conflict with China, SOF would likely support conventional operations by finding and, in a more limited set of cases, attacking high-value targets. They might be relied upon, for example, to locate cruise and ballistic missile launcher "hide sites," including in deep inland areas, as well as coastal anti-ship cruise missile and surface-to-air missile launchers. To avoid revealing their location, hidden SOF units would either provide the GPS coordinates of confirmed targets using low-probability of detection communication systems or laser-designate them for precision air and missile strikes launched from orbiting aircraft and offshore ships. In rare circumstances, however, SOF might be called upon to conduct direct action missions against targets of high strategic or operational importance that cannot be reliably or safely neutralized by other means. Examples of the former could be a deep-underground command and control node or a super-hardened submarine pen; examples of the latter might be a WMD storage site or a critical target located in a densely populated area. JSOC's SMUs might also be tasked with conducting "snatch and grab" operations such as rescuing and extracting imprisoned political opposition leaders.
These are all "bread and butter" SOF tasks. During Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom, for example, SOF routinely performed similar special reconnaissance and direct-action missions. The major difference, of course, is the extremely high-end threat environment in China. The implications for SOF echo those already mentioned -the requirement for the development and fielding of a fleet of stealthy SOF transports to replace the aging and vulnerable MC-30 Combat Talons, and the need to field a larger Advanced SEAL Delivery System fleet.
Preventing the spread and potential use of WMD, especially nuclear weapons, by state and non-state actors alike is likely to become an increasingly important -and increasingly difficult -national security challenge. 87 SOF could potentially conduct unconventional warfare to bring about regime change in states aspiring to develop WMD. In rare circumstances, they might be called upon to undertake counterproliferation operations against critical WMD-related infrastructure that cannot be reliably and safely targeted by other means, including sites in denied, deep inland areas. SOF would likely also play a role in retaliatory attacks against those who employ WMD. Their primary contribution to the US government's response to this challenge, however, will likely be in tracking down and rendering safe "loose" WMD material or devices.
The same globally distributed network of forward-deployed/forward-based SOF units that are conducting partner-capacity building, manhunting, and other missions associated with the war against Salafi-Takfiri/Khomeinist terrorist groups could simultaneously support the counterproliferation mission. They could not only provide a valuable source of intelligence collection, but could also serve as an in-situ, highly responsive force to interdict the movement of WMD-related materiel over land or sea. The development and fielding of improved sensors for the stand-off detection of WMD-related materiel would be extremely beneficial operationally.
Only selected JSOC units are equipped and trained in the requisite tactics, techniques, and procedures for conducting "render safe" missions overseas. Accordingly, if the US government intercepted a device, JSOC would, by necessity, be called upon to disarm it. Given the prospective need for additional capacity in this area, the 2006 QDR called for an expansion in the "number of U.S. forces with advanced technical render-safe skills," as well as an improvement in their "speed of response." Since the details are classified, it is impossible to say whether or not this slated increase in capacity is adequate to meet anticipated demand for this unique SOF skill set.
The operational implications of the future security environment sketched out in Chapter 2 have important ramifications for the shape, size, and posture of SOF. This chapter begins by highlighting a handful of SOCOM-wide organizational and policy changes that could help SOF address future challenges and exploit emerging opportunities. It then highlights specific high-priority areas for investment or reorientation for each of SOCOM's subordinate commands. It concludes with a brief consideration of steps the conventional joint force could take to better support SOF in the years ahead.
In general, as highlighted in the 2006 QDR, SOF will need to shift from an episodic deployment force to a persistent-presence force -with more forces forward, in more places, for longer periods of time. The fight against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups will increasingly be fought outside of Iraq and Afghanistan in countries with which the United States is not at war. Consequently, the dominant modes of operation will be indirect (working with and through allies) and covert (conducting operations in which the involvement of the US government is concealed). Accordingly, SOF will need to place increased emphasis not only upon unconventional warfare and foreign internal defense, but also upon working more closely with the CIA's National Clandestine Service. To hedge against the potential emergence of China as a more aggressive military competitor, SOF will need to acquire a few niche capabilities, such as a stealthy airlifter, and expand current capacity in a handful of areas, such as undersea SEAL delivery platforms. To prepare for a more proliferated world, the specialized search and "render safe" capabilities of JSOC's SMUs may need to be expanded beyond that directed by the 2006 QDR.
In comparison to the modernization programs of the conventional joint force, nearly all of the investments recommended in this chapter are modest. SOCOM accounts for less than 2 percent of the national defense budget. The defense budget request for fiscal year 2009, for example, includes $9 billion in funding for SOCOM out of a total DoD base budget of $58 billion. 
88
89
Lightning II multirole fighter, and the Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle) and reducing force structure that has either been retained in excess of anticipated demand or is likely to wane in operational utility in the years ahead (e.g., short-range ground-attack aircraft squadrons and heavy brigade combat teams).
Several organizational and policy changes within SOCOM could better prepare SOF for emerging operational and strategic challenges. 
90
> Achieving an appropriate balance, in both strategy and resources, between direct and indirect approaches to special operations, which may necessitate the creation of a Joint Irregular Warfare Command (JIWC).
> Elevating the rank of selected Theater Special Operations Commanders.
> Forging a closer operational relationship between SOF and the CIA.
establish a Joint irregular warfare command (Jiwc) This imbalance could be addressed by creating a three-star, sub-unified operational command under SOCOM focused on indirect warfare -a Joint Irregular Warfare Command (JIWC). 9 This command could be created by converting US Army SF Command from a Title X administrative headquarters into an operational command focused on providing sustained unconventional warfare, foreign internal defense, civil affairs, PSYOPS, preparation of the environment, and other support to regional combatant commanders. In addition to centralizing the management of doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership, personnel, and facilities associated with these SOF tasks, the JIWC would also be better able to compete for resources and advocate indirect warfare strategies at the senior-most levels within SOCOM and DoD more broadly. The JIWC would not only serve as a needed counter-balance to the growing influence of JSOC within SOCOM, but also as a proponent for special operations approaches to irregular warfare more broadly. It could provide strategic and conceptual alternatives to irregular warfare approaches promoted by general purpose forces. 9 Sean Naylor, "More than Door Kickers," Armed Forces Journal, March 2006. 92 SOCOM's direct capabilities benefit immensely in the allocation of resources from their designation as special mission units, and their inclusion in a national mission force, sub-unified command. Owing to their critical importance and command advantage, SOCOM's direct capabilities also produce the preponderance of SOF officers selected for high command. Using US Army Special Forces Command at Fort Bragg as the foundation, the JIWC would absorb all seven active and reserve Special Forces Groups, the JFK Special Warfare Center and School, as well as the 95th Civil Affairs Brigade and the th PSYOPS Group. It would also absorb a support brigade, including rotary-wing aviation capacity, from the Army. The Marine Corps component would be the Marine Special Operations Advisory Group and associated support assets. The Air Force component would be the 6th Special Operations Squadron and possibly some additional lift and ISR support assets. The JIWC would be responsible for all IW-related activities within SOCOM, including managing military liaison element (MLE) deployments, training and equipping MLEs, securing/providing cover support, and integrating MLE activities into Country Team plans.
The JIWC could be organized, staffed, and equipped to serve as a deployable, three-star command for conducting special-operations-intensive irregular warfare operations. It would also dovetail nicely with efforts to create indirect warfare career paths within SOCOM by providing more opportunities for individuals with that background to serve in senior ranks.
Theater Special Operations Commands (TSOCs) are subordinate unified commands that advise geographic combatant commanders (GCC) regarding SOF capabilities, integrate special operations into GCC plans, provide SOF units for operational taskings, and coordinate and support in-theater special operations activities. Since operations against Salafi-Takfiri/Khomeinist terrorists are likely to be special-operations intensive, the 2009 QDR should examine the possibility of increasing the rank of selected TSOC commanders, and increasing their staffs accordingly, to give the special operations community a stronger voice in GCC deliberations and more influence relative to general-purpose force components. For example, given the high operations tempo of SOF in the Central and Pacific commands, Special Operations Command Central and Special Operations Command Pacific might be elevated to three-star commands.
A key objective in the war against violent Islamic extremism is to keep terrorist groups from regaining state sanctuary. To the extent that the United States and its partners succeed in that regard, the principal battleground in that protracted struggle will occur in states with which the United States is not at war, and the principal US involvement will be indirect and low-visibility or covert. This poses a number of challenges for the effective integration of all elements of national and international power. Outside of Iraq and Afghanistan, the Department of State and CIA dominate. As a result, military capabilities that might be brought to bear are often denied country clearance, or have their operational freedom severely restricted if clearance is granted. The current interagency system for operations in countries with which the United States is not at war too often defaults to pre-9/ modes of thinking and ways of operating, and is very much dependent on the risk profile and policy priorities of individual US Chiefs of Mission and Station.
At its core, the war against Salafi-Takfiri/Khomeinist terrorist groups is an intelligence and special-operations-intensive war. Getting this aspect of interagency organization right and making full use of special authorities to the indirect and clandestine fight is essential. This will entail not only integrating CIA capabilities with those of both "black" and "white" SOF, but regularly leveraging the CIA's Title 50 foreign-intelligence authority for SOF operations through the flexible detailing of SOF personnel to the Agency. This could begin with the SMUs, which currently enjoy the closest relationship with the Agency, and then be extended to Special Forces and SEALs. In addition to the operational advantages of such detailing, SOF would also benefit professionally from being exposed to National Clandestine Service tradecraft. Conversely, selected CIA case officers should participate in various SOF training programs to make them more "ruggedized" and proficient in using the latest SOF equipment. Such training would make them better able to defend themselves, organize irregular forces, support paramilitary operations, and conduct other covert activities in dangerous operating areas. Finally, SOF and CIA personnel should not only be able to move back and forth from assignments in CIA stations and SOF ground units, but also to compete for selected mid-tosenior level leadership positions in either organization.
Operationally, designating certain regions as "war on terrorism operational areas" and then establishing joint CIA-DoD Joint Interagency Task Forces (IATF) aligned with those areas would go a long way toward achieving unity of effort between DoD and CIA. There are a number of areas of the world (e.g., Pakistan-Afghanistan and the Maghreb-Pan-Sahel) where an integrated sub-regional approach to operations is vital. These joint task forces could be commanded by a military officer or a CIA officer, depending on the dominant character of the operations involved. Either the senior Chief of Station in a sub-region or the regional TSOC commander, for example, could be dual-hatted as an IATF commander. The IATF commander would, of course, work closely with the ambassador-led Country Teams in the sub-region, as well as geographic combatant commanders with responsibility for the sub-region.
Although the 2006 QDR launched several important initiatives to better prepare SOF for the future security environment, it fell short in a number of areas. Looking across SOCOM's subordinate commands, the most critical shortfalls are within USASOC and AFSOC. For the former, it is imperative to expand special operations rotary-wing capacity, as well as increase civil affairs and PSYOPS force structure. For the latter, high-priority investment areas include recapitalizing, modernizing, and expanding the aging MC-130 fleet; developing and fielding a stealthy airlifter; expanding UCAS force structure; increasing the number of Special Tactics Squadrons; and increasing the number of Combat Aviation Advisory flights available to train foreign security forces in the use of modern air power.
As Michael Vickers, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations, Low Intensity Conflict, and Interdependent Capabilities (SOLIC/IC), recently remarked, "to build a global counterterrorism network of persistent presence rather than episodic presence, we're going to need more special operators." 
95
As discussed in Chapter , the number of active SF battalions is slated to increase by five, growing from fifteen in 2006 to twenty by 2013. The demand for SF battalions for the full array of missions associated with the ongoing war against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups, especially building partner capacity and conducting unconventional warfare, is almost certain to remain high and could increase significantly. Moreover, SF units also need to be prepared to conduct potentially large-scale unconventional warfare, information operations (such as network exploitation and denial), special reconnaissance, and direct-action operations against nuclear-armed states equipped with anti-access capabilities (e.g., China or Iran). The opportunity cost of concentrating roughly 80 percent of available SF capacity in Iraq and Afghanistan is that too few forces are available for critical operations in other parts of the world. The personnel tempo, or the amount of time the average operator spends away from home station, of SF is unprecedented; most units are deployed at least seven months out of every year. While these personnel tempo rates have not yet caused retention problems, they are not likely to be sustainable. The only way out of this conundrum is either to reduce the SF commitment in Iraq and Afghanistan dramatically or increase SF end strength. The former is unlikely (and probably imprudent). Admiral Olson remarked in May 2008 that "nothing I've been told leads me to believe that there will be a reduction" in SOF deployment levels in Iraq over the next few years and more revealingly, that "the door is always open for an increase in demand." 
96
97
98
99
In terms of recruitment, USASOC has not only stepped up efforts to target individuals within the traditional Ranger recruiting pool, but has also taken full advantage 96 Ibid. Similarly, Lieutenant General Robert Wagner, commander of USASOC, observed that "When the conventional forces pull out, we're not pulling out. We'll be left there and become more visible and of the 8-X program, which was re-activated in 2002 to recruit talented individuals "off the street." While many SF personnel feared that 8-X recruits would lead to an influx of poorly qualified enlistees that would dilute the force, this has turned out not to be the case -at least thus far. As General Downing testified in June 2006, "I think we have got over 300 of these [18-X enlistees] now in the force, of these men, and I understand that they are performing extremely well. So that has worked very, very well." 00 In fact, the program has worked so well that approximately one-third of newly formed ODAs are 8-X recruits. Another option for increasing the recruiting pool is to make it easier for personnel in the other Services who are interested in taking the SF qualification course (or Q-course) to transfer to the Army. Over the past several years, USASOC has increased its historic average of 00-50 active-duty enlisted graduates per year to more than 750 by expanding the trainer corps and redesigning the Q-course curriculum. 0 Increased recruitment and training throughput, while necessary, could lead to an over-population of the ranks with junior personnel unless SF can retain mid-career and senior personnel. Accordingly, SOCOM has authorized an array of retention bonuses and compensation incentives targeted at the most senior operators. 
02
In addition, the Department of Defense should seek relief for SOCOM from Section 57 of the US Code (Title 0) that limits the number of active duty E-8s and E-9s in a service to 2.5 and .25 percent, respectively, of the total end force of any given Service. Since SF enlisted personnel typically reach the pay grades of E-8 and E-9 relatively quickly and remain at those levels for many years, Section 57 has the pernicious effect of pushing out experienced operators with years of valuable service left to give and obviously runs at cross-purposes with SOCOM's need to retain senior personnel to counter-balance the influx of new operators. An exception to Section 517 has already been made for elements of JSOC and should be expanded to include all SOF personnel.
The respective geographic orientation of the current five active SFG headquarters is poorly aligned with emerging strategic challenges. Responsibility for Africa, a key region in the war against violent Islamic radicalism, is divided among the 3rd, 5th, and 0th SFGs. The 5th SFG not only has responsibility for the Middle East and Persian Gulf, but also for Central Asia and the Horn of Africa. One option to better align force structure geographically would be to stand up two additional SFG headquarters, each comprising two to four active SF battalions (see Table 
6
The primary advantage of this approach is that, with seven active SFGs, it would be possible to assign one SFG to each of seven critical areas in the world: Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Central and South Asia, Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia, and Latin America. This re-orientation would focus additional SF capacity where it is most needed: the Islamic world and Asia. The downside of this approach is that it would require a large number of headquarters slots to be filled, potentially draining manpower from combat units. As an alternative, one could retain the current five SFGs and use two SEAL Naval Special Warfare Groups (NSWGs) as the headquarters for two of seven JSOTFs. Given the prominence of the maritime environment in Southeast Asia, for example, it might make sense to assign responsibility for the region to a NSWG and staff it to serve as a JSOTF headquarters.
improve Sf Proficiency in relevant foreign Languages
Currently, foreign-language proficiency within SF is skewed toward the Romance languages, Slavic languages, and German. While this mix is slowly changing, the overhang of the half-century-long Cold War remains. Given the current and emerging strategic challenges facing the United States, more language proficiency will be needed in Chinese dialects (as well as in the languages of neighboring states such as Kazakhstan and Mongolia), as well as in languages spoken in critical "front line" areas in the war against Salafi-Takfiri/Khomeinist terrorists, most notably Arabic, Pashto, Farsi, Dari, Punjabi, Balochi, Bahasa, and Filipino. As Assistant Secretary of Defense for SOLIC/IC Michael Vickers observed, "Even with a larger force, we're going to need more Pashto speakers and Dari speakers and Arabic speakers than we did in the past." 03 According to Admiral Olson, "the sense that all Special Forces soldiers are fluent in some other language and can operate transparently in some other culture is a flawed one. We're better than the rest of the Services writ large by a long shot, but we still have a long ways to go." 0 There are at least two options for expanding SF proficiency in relevant foreign languages that should be explored in the 2009 QDR: 
With respect to the war against violent Islamic radicalism, Rangers could provide a rapid-response capability for medium-to large-scale, counter-insurgency contingencies or other situations that cannot be handled by forward-deployed/forward-stationed ODAs, SEAL Teams, or Marine Special Operations Advisor Group/Marine Special Operations Battalion units in conjunction with host-nation forces. With significant direct-action capabilities, Rangers could provide a quick infusion of combat power until conventional ground forces arrive. As in Iraq and Afghanistan today, Rangers will also be frequently called upon to provide security for SMU operations, including global manhunting and counterproliferation missions. To support these operations, it might make sense to forward-station some Ranger elements (all are currently based in the continental United States). Among many other operational benefits, standing up a second Ranger regiment would provide additional high-end, site-seizure capacity, which could be important in "loose nuke" or other counter-WMD scenarios. If it were necessary, for example, to secure WMD-related material by force in a hostile location, JSOC's SMUs would secure and remove the material itself, while Rangers would be critical for seizing an airfield for infiltration and exfiltration, securing the site, and maintaining perimeter security. By far the most important reason for expanding Ranger force structure, however, is the fact that it serves as a critical feeder organization for SF ODAs and SMUs. As the Downing Commission explained to Congress:
Rangers become the prime source of candidates after 3 years or years in the Rangers to go in to regular Army special forces and into the Delta force. And so what it does is it gives you a better pool to draw from, or it gives you a larger pool, so that you could build those forces The Delta force is probably 70 percent Rangers who have come out of either a Ranger special forces track or directly from a Ranger regiment to Delta 06
To expand Army SF and JSOC, as directed by the 2006 QDR, it will be necessary to have a much larger recruitment base. Accordingly, in the 2009 QDR, DoD should consider standing up an additional Ranger regiment. The 2006 QDR, which directed that a Ranger company be added to each of the three battalions of the 75 th Ranger Regiment, in effect, created the force structure needed for one of the three battalions in a new regiment. The remaining two battalions and regimental headquarters might be formed by converting elements of an existing airborne brigade. The risk in creating an additional Ranger regiment, however, is that it would siphon off some of the most skilled and capable soldiers from the conventional Army, which is already struggling to maintain performance standards, especially within its non-commissioned officer corps. Increasing active-duty Army infantry, Ranger, and SF force structure simultaneously without sacrificing quality will likely prove a daunting challenge. The high operations tempo of SOF ground units in Iraq and Afghanistan has already overwhelmed the lift capacity of the 60th SOAR. Conventional Army aviation units currently provide lift support for about two thirds of SOF ground units. Given the ongoing expansion of Army SF and SEAL force structure by one third, as well as the standing up of the Marine Special Operations Advisor Group and two Marine Special Operations Battalions under MARSOC, the demand for rotary-wing aviation is certain to expand. Simply put, more helicopters will be needed to move and support these additional SOF ground forces whether they are engaged in combat operations, building partner capacity, or training at their home stations. Supporting the new Global SOF Posture, which calls for one quarter of the force to be deployed overseas on a steady-state basis, could further stretch already over-taxed 60th SOAR force structure. 
07
Recognizing that the 60 th SOAR has had trouble meeting annual goals for graduating new MH-7 and MH-60 helicopter pilots, the 2009 QDR should examine options for having the Navy and Marine Corps contribute to the special operations 
07
08
09
The senior leadership of al Qaeda is keenly aware of the importance of the "media war" in achieving their strategic goals. In a letter to Mullah Mohammed Omar, for example, Osama bin Laden observed that propaganda is one of the jihadist's most powerful weapons. "It is obvious," he says, "that the media war in this century is one of the strongest methods; in fact, its ratio may reach 90% of the total preparation for the battles." In Ayman al-Zawahiri's letter to the late Abu Musab al-Zarqawi in July 2005, he asserted that "we are in a battle, and that more than half of this battle is taking place in the battlefield of the media" and that the Salafi-Takfiri movement is "in a race for the hearts and minds of our Umma." 0 SOCOM's Civil Affairs and PSYOPS units are on the front line of this battlefield. By providing social services and conducting other programs that build trust between US government and local populations, Civil Affairs units are critical not only for winning over the "hearts and minds" of Muslim populations, but also for building popular support for partner governments and US policies around the world. These efforts help improve the internal security situation in partner states and shrink under-governed areas that could be exploited by terrorist or insurgent groups. PSYOPS are critical 08 In 2005, for example, SOAR graduated only 58 percent of its goal for the former and 7 percent for the latter. GAO, Special Operations Forces -Several Human Capital Challenges Must Be Addressed to Meet Expanded Role (Washington, DC: GAO, 2006), p. 23. 
09
Civil Affairs and PSYOPS units should routinely accompany SOF ground units involved in partner-capacity-building missions and, to a lesser extent, sustained manhunting operations in countries around the world. While they could augment SF cultural expertise, they would be especially useful for providing Rangers, SEALs, and selected MARSOC units with the cultural and linguistic expertise they lack. Finally, Civil Affairs and PSYOPS units could also lead independent operations focused on winning over the hearts and minds of populations in more permissible areas.
Although the 2006 QDR directed a major expansion in active-duty Civil Affairs and PSYOPS capacity, additional growth is necessary. The 95th Civil Affairs Brigade is slated to reach 900 personnel by 2011, but that figure includes a significant amount of administrative overhead, support staff, and planners. Only about 320 personnel will be assigned to on-the-ground Civil Affairs teams (80 personnel per battalion). That number could easily be absorbed just in Iraq or Afghanistan. The capacity shortfall with respect to PSYOPS is similar in scale.
To conduct global Civil Affairs operations in support of the war against violent Islamic radicalism, as well as counter-insurgency efforts more broadly, the 2009 QDR should direct a major expansion in active-duty Civil Affairs and PSYOPS capacity.
A reasonable goal would be to field an additional Civil Affairs Brigade and PSYOPS For an expanded discussion of this topic, see: Martinage, The Global War on Terrorism -An Assessment, pp. 259-275.
Latin America 1 --
ta BLe 7. r egiO nal allOcatiO n OF active civil aFFairS and pSYOpS capacitY
Group for the CENTCOM, AFRICOM, and PACOM AORs -for a total of four Civil Affairs Brigades and four PSYOPS Groups. Using the new regional orientation suggested earlier (Table 
6
7
navSpecwarcOM
In what is likely to be a protracted fight against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups, SEAL Teams will be increasingly relied upon for widely-distributed manhunting and other counterterrorism operations, as foreshadowed by current operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. WARCOM, which has had difficulty recruiting enough qualified enlisted personnel to fill available slots in the SEAL training program for the past several years, will need to redouble its efforts to meet the 2006 QDR's direction to field two additional SEAL team equivalents by 2013. 2 Beyond that, WARCOM's highest priority should be expanding undersea infiltration/exfiltration capacity.
enhance the foreign internal defense Capabilities of SeaL teams and Special Boat teams WARCOM should takes step to enhance the foreign internal defense capability of SEAL Teams, as well as Special Boat Teams, by more vigorously cultivating relevant language proficiency and cultural expertise. By training and advising their foreign counterparts, SEAL Team and Special Boat Team operators could make a more significant contribution to the broader capacity-building mission. As mentioned in Chapter , NSWG-is currently oriented on PACOM and CENTCOM, while NSWG-2 is oriented on EUCOM and SOUTHCOM. Given the much greater anticipated demand in the CENTCOM and PACOM AORs for counterterrorism and foreign internal defense missions, as well as other special-operations-intensive contingencies, realignment of SEAL Team orientation should be examined in the 2009 QDR.
expand Special Boat team and SeaL delivery Vehicle Capacity
The 2009 QDR should seriously consider significantly expanding Special Boat Team capacity to help provide persistent reconnaissance and interdiction coverage over littoral and riverine areas that are already or could potentially be exploited by terrorists. Special Boat Teams could provide a very low-signature option for conducting coastal/  riverine patrols in high-threat areas and interdicting suspicious ships. This counterterrorism presence could be leveraged for counternarcotics and counter-piracy operations, as well as to interdict the movement of nuclear or other sensitive WMDrelated materials by sea if given the requisite intelligence cueing. Special Boat Teams could also train and advise foreign maritime security forces. They might, for example, concentrate their effort on "training the trainers," cultivating a cadre of well-trained partner-nation personnel with the skills needed to run their own maritime security training courses.
With respect to the potential military threat posed by China, WARCOM's SEAL Teams and SEAL Delivery Vehicle Teams could conduct myriad special reconnaissance, information operations, and direct-action missions in littoral areas. Clandestinely inserted by SEAL Delivery Vehicles or Advanced SEAL Delivery System mini-submarines, SEALs could: > Tap into or disrupt fiber-optic lines and sensors on the seafloor; > Plant beacons or limpet mines on high-value warships prior to the onset of hostilities; > Conduct underwater demolition operations against critical ports (including submarine pens that have been carved into the sides of mountains to reduce their vulnerability to air and missile attack) and supporting infrastructure; and > Conduct on and off-shore intelligence collection, including locating time-sensitive, high-value targets such as anti-ship cruise missile launchers, air defense radars, and surface-to-air missile launchers hidden in China's cluttered littoral landscape.
Given China's maturing anti-access capabilities and the potential scale of the mission described above, WARCOM's inventory of ten MK VIII SEAL Delivery Vehicles and one semi-operational Advanced SEAL Delivery System is almost certainly inadequate. 
3
5
The long-term goal of the Navy should be to transition from the "wet" MK VIII SDV to a "dry" follow-on system that would fit vertically inside a seven-meter diameter SSGN or SSN payload tube. flooded SEAL Delivery Vehicles in which combat swimmers are exposed to water during transit (often making the process physically and mentally fatiguing), a pressurized JMMS mini-submarine would allow them to remain warm and dry, enhancing their tactical readiness. This factor, along with the increased submerged endurance of the JMMS relative to the flooded MK VIII SEAL Delivery Vehicles, would make it possible to insert SEALs from a host submarine from a much greater stand-off distance.
While the design of key Advanced SEAL Delivery System subsystems will need to be revisited, and different builder arrangements worked out, it is highly likely that additional hulls will be needed to meet requirements for clandestine maritime infiltration and exfiltration. While more analysis is needed, it certainly would be reasonable to equip WARCOM's two SDV Teams with three vehicles each. This recommendation is consistent with Admiral Olson's assertion that "we have a standing requirement for a small fleet. It's somewhere between four and six." 6 These mini-submarines could not only provide SEALs with clandestine infiltration and exfiltration capability in denied areas, but could also be used to conduct clandestine "close-in" surveillance missions; emplace coastal sensors and fiber-optic networks; exploit, manipulate, or disrupt enemy undersea networks; or even conduct submarine ambush operations near an enemy submarine base.
DoD capacity for high-end counterterrorism, counterproliferation, and direct action operations in politically sensitive or denied areas is currently limited to JSOC's SMUs. While there are limits to how quickly and how extensively JSOC capacity can be increased, the 2009 QDR should explicitly consider options for doing so.
During the course of the war against violent Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorists, while the Army and Navy SMUs are likely to find themselves involved in continual intelligence-intensive, distributed, proactive counterterrorism operations (primarily global manhunting), they will still have to maintain operational readiness for reactive counterterrorism operations (e.g., responding to hostage-rescue situations). Currently, JSOC reportedly lacks sufficient capacity to maintain a robust manhunting presence in both Iraq and Afghanistan. 7 JSOC's readiness for reactive counterterrorism missions globally has likely suffered owing to the extremely high operations tempo in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Looking ahead, one could designate the Army (Delta) and Navy (SEAL Team 6) SMUs to be fungible substitutes for reactive counterterrorism operations, but this 6 "ASDS Mini-Sub Program Taking on Water," Defense Industry 
Daily, April 29, 2008. 7
The potential global diffusion of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction over the coming decades could dramatically increase demand for JSOC's highly specialized "render safe" capability. Given the time it takes to train operators to locate, characterize, and disarm nuclear weapons or, more likely, improved nuclear devices, it might be prudent to anticipate this potential demand and begin investing in additional capacity in this area now. To improve JSOC's speed of response for reactive CP missions, consideration should be given to forward basing a small number of personnel in Europe, Central Asia, and/or East Asia. While serving in this capacity, JSOC units, possibly augmented by Department of Energy personnel, could train selected foreign partners in "render safe" tactics, techniques, and procedures.
One of the critical shortfalls of the 2006 QDR is that it did not include an expansion in AFSOC's fleet to accommodate the roughly one-third expansion in SOF ground forces. The small aging fleet cannot meet anticipated future demand without significant expansion. Most urgently, it must recapitalize its aging fleet of C-130 derivative aircraft, all of which are well beyond their planned service life. Unscheduled maintenance rates have ballooned and a significant portion of the fleet will be grounded in the next few years for safety reasons, owing in part to structural fatigue in the center wing box. As will be detailed below, however, this does not mean that AFSOC should necessarily replace its fleet with newer models of the C-130. Rather, as AFSOC has already started to investigate, it should also modify a range of smaller, more versatile aircraft such as the C-27 Spartan and even single-or dual-engine "civilian" aircraft to satisfy immediate to mid-term needs. DoD must also invest in a stealthy SOF transport for AFSOC both to conduct clandestine operations as part of the war against violent Islamic extremism and to prepare for possible special operations (primarily unconventional warfare, information operations, special reconnaissance, and direct action) against a future, more openly confrontational China armed with modern integrated air defenses. Currently, the vast majority of UCAS operated by AFSOC (and the Air Force more broadly) are concentrated in Iraq and Afghanistan. There is a clear need for additional UCAS capacity to provide persistent airborne surveillance-strike coverage over key terrorist operating areas. The need to train and advise foreign security forces in the use of air power against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups, as well as other threats to the internal security of partner nations, warrants a major expansion of the 6th Special Operations Squadron. Finally, additional Special Tactics capacity is required to support proactive, sustained "manhunting" and disruption operations (both unilaterally and with US partners); conduct overt unconventional warfare against state sponsors of terrorism and transnational terrorist groups globally; and prepare for potential high-end direct action missions against authoritarian capitalist states such as China or Russia, and nascent nuclear-armed states such as Iran.
All five of these investment areas should be high priorities. Realizing them, however, will pose different challenges. Recapitalizing and expanding the fixed-wing fleet, developing a stealthy transport, and expanding the UCAS fleet will require a sustained financial commitment by the Air Force and SOCOM. The primary obstacle to expanding the 6 th Special Operations Squadron and Special Tactics Group capacity is recruiting, training, and retaining highly skilled personnel.
recapitalize and expand afSoC's Legacy fixed-wing fleet AFSOC's motley fleet of C-130 variants started showing its age at least a decade ago. The MC-30P Combat Shadow and MC-30E Combat Talon I aircraft, for example, have an average age of over forty years and the AC-130H gunship fleet is not far behind with an average age of thirty-seven years. 
8
9
In fact, at current flying levels, portions of the AC-130 fleet and MC-130H fleet will likely be grounded for safety reasons before their center wing box can be replaced. 
20
22
23
2
SOCOM currently plans to modify thirty-seven variants of the Air Force Combat Command's replacement for the HC-30 combat search and rescue aircraft, which will be sufficient to replace AFSOC's Combat Talon Is and Combat Shadows on a onefor-one basis. 
25
26
27
28
29
Taking the small-aircraft logic another step further, it would also make sense for AFSOC to expand its current fleet of small "civilian" aircraft. The 319th Special Operations Squadron is already flying nine modified, single-engine Pilatus Porter PC-2s in Iraq and Afghanistan, reportedly with fantastic results. 
30
Week & Space Technology, July 23, 2007, pp. 52-52. 28
29 Comer, p. 28. 
30
Taking the smallaircraft logic another step further, it would also make sense for AFSOC to expand its current fleet of small "civilian" aircraft.
ant. 
3
> Twenty to thirty modified versions of the C-27J Spartan, to include at least ten gunships; 32 and > Ninety single-and dual-engine aircraft in the U-28A class.
As these aircraft are being fielded over the next decade, the mix could be adjusted to reflect actual operational requirements and employment experience.
As modern integrated air defense systems diffuse over the next two decades, it will become increasingly difficult to conduct clandestine operations or penetrate into denied areas with an acceptable level of risk using today's fleet of Combat Talon/Spear transports. The Air Force should begin immediate development of special operations aircraft that exploit stealth. Consistent with this recommendation, the 2006 QDR directed the Department to "enhance capabilities to support SOF insertion and extraction into denied areas from strategic distances." 33 Unsurprisingly, various "mission needs" documents for this type of aircraft have been circulating within AFSOC and SOCOM for fifteen years. 
3
3 AFSOC, U28A Fact Sheet, accessed on-line at: http://www2.afsoc.af.mil/library/factsheets/factsheet. asp?id=226.
32 AFSOC currently plans to procure at least nine and as many as sixteen C-27 variants. 
oPtionS and ChoiCeS for the Long hauL > Carefully mapping out routes so as to avoid known air defenses (e.g., fixed and mobile ground-based radars and surface-to-air missile (SAM) firing units), as well as to exploit terrain masking opportunities. 
35
36
> Taking advantage a wide array of electronic countermeasures systems (e.g., radar and infrared jammers) and passive defenses (e.g., towed decoys, chaff ejectors and flares).
Although these measures are demonstrably useful for evading detection and enhancing aircraft survivability under some circumstances, their effectiveness and applicability are limited today and certain to decline over time. Prospective adversaries are already using commercially available networking and data-processing technologies to link disparate air defense sensors into more effective multi-static networks. Exploiting the exponentially increasing computational power of microprocessors and more advanced signal-processing algorithms, air defense systems are becoming more resistant to jamming and better able to handle "clutter," meaning that sensor "floors" will fall ever lower. 
37
Given these and related trends, the effectiveness of all of the tactics, techniques, and procedures that MC-30 aircraft rely upon today to avoid detection will wane significantly over the coming decades. Pre-mission flight planning to exploit terrainmasking opportunities and "thread the needle" through ever smaller coverage gaps in multi-static air defense networks will become increasingly difficult, especially against networks comprising mobile air-defense radars and passive sensors; lowlevel, nighttime flight will afford progressively less protection as sensor "floors" drop 
35
36 Radar transceivers are typically set with a minimum elevation angle to minimize excessive returns from ground clutter. Consequently, there is an altitude "floor" beneath which aircraft can operate without being detected. 
37
and long-range IR sensors are fielded in greater numbers; and the effectiveness of electronic countermeasures and "last ditch" self-protection systems (e.g., chaff, flares, and DIRCM-like systems) will erode substantially with the spread of more capable "end-game" sensors and onboard signal-processing systems for interceptor missiles. Aside from these limitations, it is also worth noting that traditional penetration tactics, techniques, and procedures are not universally applicable: there are many areas of the world where there are no terrain features or clutter in which to mask or hide an aircraft with signatures as large as the MC-30's.
In short, the air defense threats that are expected to emerge over the next two decades will effectively preclude the current fleet of Combat Talons/Spears, even with all of the planned upgrades in ECM and self-protection systems, from clandestinely infiltrating, resupplying, and exfiltrating SOF in many areas of the world. As AFSOC warned a few years ago in its Way Ahead planning document:
The next 25 years will see the proliferation of infrared (IR), radar-guided, and directedenergy (DE) threats that will render many existing aircraft obsolete by the end of this period. Between DE and radar-guided threats current AFSOF aircraft will have survivability challenges in the years 206 and beyond. This evolving threat has the potential to significantly challenge the capability for Special Operations Forces (SOF) to achieve tactical surprise through clandestine air mobility due to the increasing technological capability of passive aircraft detection at further distances. 
38
While AFSOC continues to modify its Combat Talon aircraft with enhancements to increase mission effectiveness and survivability, it just won't be able to make the radar detectability of such a huge aircraft with a large RCS any better. Couple that with the fact that aircraft and crew can't fly any lower or any faster; night can't become any darker; adverse weather isn't something one can conjure up when needed; there are areas in the world where AFSOC may need to go where there is no terrain to hide in; and one quickly comes to the conclusion that AFSOC needs a new LO aircraft to remain relevant in the future. To address this widening capability gap, the Air Force should begin immediate development of a stealthy SOF transport and strive to reach an IOC by 2020, at the latest. While more analysis is needed to discern the optimal blend of performance characteristics for the M-X, the following would be reasonable goals: an operational range of over ,500 nm, a payload of between 5,000 and 20,000 pounds, a speed in the high sub-sonic range, and service ceiling of at least 0,000 feet, preferably higher. 2 Using low-observable design techniques and materials (e.g., radar-absorbing materials) that are already on hand or under development as part of the Next Generation Bomber (NGB) program, it would be possible to reduce the RCS -as well as infrared, acoustic, and visual signatures -of the M-X well below that of the B-2. With that level of stealth, the M-X would, of course, be far more difficult to detect than the MC-130. What may be less obvious, however, is the synergistic relationship between stealth and the traditional evasion tactics described earlier. The volume of air space in which sensors can detect and track a stealthy aircraft is much smaller than that for nonstealthy aircraft. As a result, it would be easier to plan and fly routes, often referred to as "blue lines," that avoid known enemy air defenses. A stealthy M-X would also be better able to hide in clutter and exploit terrain-masking opportunities. The synergy between stealth and sensor evasion would not only enhance tactical surprise, but also enable clandestine operations under conditions that would be impossible today.
From a programmatic standpoint, the most daunting challenge in developing and fielding a stealthy SOF transport is the way SOCOM's MFP-11 process typically works. MFP-funding is used for research, development, testing, evaluation and acquisition costs associated with SOF-unique equipment and upgrades. In the case of fixed-wing aircraft, this almost always means that the Air Force pays for the development and procurement of the basic airframe and SOCOM pays for the SOF-unique modifications. As a practical matter, however, this means that AFSOC is locked into modifying whatever aircraft are already in service with the Air Force, such as the C-30. While in theory MFP-funds could be used to develop and acquire a stealthy transport from the ground up, because it is arguably "SOF unique," such an undertaking would not only overwhelm SOCOM's total budget, it would also be beyond the professional With ,500 nm range, the M-X could refuel 300-plus miles away from Chinese borders, penetrate some ,800 nm into the Chinese interior, loiter for a short period, and then return to a refueling orbit outside of Chinese airspace prior to returning to base; alternatively, it could fly one-way missions across China, which spans about 2,500 nm at its widest point, with enhanced persistence in designated target areas. 
2
For that reason, as well as to hedge against the diffusion of SAMs capable of high-altitude intercepts, the M-X should have a service ceiling of at least 0,000 feet, and preferably closer to 50,000 feet. competence of SOCOM to manage such a complex, large-scale acquisition program. 
3
The only hope at present for vaulting over those hurdles is the Air Force's Next Generation Bomber (NGB), which is slated to have an IOC in 208. It is projected to have a range of ,500 nm (or radius of 2,000 nm plus loiter), a payload of at least 28,000 lbs, and a speed in the high subsonic range. Moreover, it will incorporate very advanced signature reduction features. 
5
6
advanced stealth would certainly be diminished for the relatively short period of time while the gunship was actually engaged in fire support, stealth could be essential for getting to and from the area of operations. 
7
As mentioned in Chapter 2, AFSOC clearly needs additional UCAS capacity to provide persistent airborne reconnaissance and strike coverage to support what is likely to be a global, protracted war against transnational terrorist groups. These aircraft could be used to monitor under-governed land areas, as well as littoral zones; to locate, track, and strike time-sensitive, high-value targets; and to enable US and partner operations. Demand for full-motion video, which has grown by an eye-popping 300 percent over the past several years, is now four times that supplied by available aircraft. 8 Currently, SOCOM and CENTCOM each claim to require approximately thirty UCAS combat air patrols for operations in Iraq and Afghanistan -for a total of sixty combat air patrols just in the CENTCOM area of responsibility. 9 7 Given the low-altitude vulnerability of the stealthy gunship, it might make sense to invest in a slightly lower tier of stealth technology to bring down its unit cost. As AFSOC's Colonel Billy Montgomery explained in this regard, "The level of stealthiness and LO technology is not the same degree that you'd want a take-down-the-door next-generation bomber or F-22 to have."Amy Butler, "Future Bomber a Foundation for Next-Gen Gunship," While the development and fielding of a stealthy M-X would be expensive, the strategic benefits would be immense.
AFSOC's 3rd Special Operations "Dragons" Squadron currently operates a fleet of twenty-eight MQ-Predators. 
50
5
52
53
50
5
55
56
57
58
59
60
A major capability shortfall of the proposed hunter-killer fleet is that neither the Predator nor the Reaper is stealthy. For conducting surveillance and, in some cases, strike missions in denied areas (e.g., Iran) and sensitive areas (e.g., countries with which the United States is not at war, and which possess modern air surveillance systems), it would be highly desirable to have a stealthy, long-endurance UCAS. While this is admittedly a niche capability in the war against transnational terrorist groups, it could be a critical one in many plausible contingencies. As air defense systems proliferate and become more capable over the course of the coming decade, the need for stealthy UCAS will grow more pressing. This requirement, moreover, overlaps with the need to develop and field a stealthy, persistent surveillance-strike capability to hedge against the rise of China as a military competitor. expand 6 th Special operations Squadrons into a full irregular warfare wing Airpower is a major source of American advantage in foreign internal defense. Lieutenant General Michael Wooley, then commanding general of AFSOC, asserted in 2007 that to make the greatest possible contribution to US irregular warfare efforts, the Air Force must focus on "conducting support to counterinsurgency operations and training and enabling partner nations through aviation foreign internal defense activities." 6 Currently, however, American capacity for aviation foreign internal defense, which resides almost exclusively within the 6th Special Operations Squadron, 
60
66
62
Combat Controller Teams, one of the core elements of AFSOC Special Tactics Squadrons, are in short supply. By conducting local air traffic control and coordinating precision fire support while embedded with SOF ground units, Combat Controller Teams can significantly increase overall combat effectiveness, leveraging US precision air power to its full effect. As part of the war against Salafi-Takfiri/Khomeinist terrorist groups, globally distributed teams of SOF conducting unilateral counterterrorism operations, combined operations with partner nations, and unconventional warfare operations with irregular forces will all require Combat Controller Team support. 
67
68
69
Teams can significantly increase overall combat effectiveness, leveraging US precision air power to its full effect.
Currently, AFSOC has six Special Tactics Squadrons, one of which is permanently assigned to JSOC. Given the growing importance of Combat Controller Teams in linking small teams of ground operators with air power, sufficient capacity is required to provide steady-state support to the Special Forces Groups, Naval Special Warfare Groups One and Two, the Rangers and MARSOC. Accordingly, the 2009 QDR should seriously consider standing up at least an additional three Special Tactics Squadrons. Achieving that goal, however, will likely prove challenging. Over the past several years, AFSOC has had recruitment and training-throughput shortfalls, especially with regard to combat controllers. 
70
7
Given that the demand for partner capacity-building is expected to grow, it is not clear that MARSOC should divert scarce resources to the development of an unconventional warfare capability. Rather than attempt to duplicate a capability that has been nurtured over decades at considerable cost within SF, it might make sense for MARSOC to focus on the foreign internal defense mission and, to a lesser extent, upon direct action and special reconnaissance. 
Although this chapter has focused exclusively on the force planning implications for SOF of the operational requirements discussed in Chapter 2, there are many crosslinkages with the conventional Services that will be discussed briefly below. In summary, the Army and Marine Corps need to take on irregular warfare, and the partnercapacity building mission more narrowly, as a core competence; the Navy needs to help generate persistent maritime surveillance and interdiction coverage of critical littoral areas, provide insertion and support platforms for SOF, and take on the maritime foreign internal defense mission; and the Air Force needs to help generate persistent airborne surveillance and strike coverage, support the development of a stealthy SOF transport, and take on part of the aviation foreign internal defense mission.
reorient ground general purpose Forces toward irregular warfare
As part of a broader reorientation toward irregular warfare and away from conventional, combined-arms mechanized warfare, the Army and Marine Corps must develop the capabilities and capacities needed to train and advise foreign security forces in multiple, widely dispersed countries simultaneously. As Secretary Gates observed, "Looking forward, tasks such as standing up and mentoring indigenous armies and police -once the province of the Special Forces -are now a key mission for the military as a whole." 
72
73
72
73 DoD may not only be called upon to provide and build capacity for internal security and law enforcement, but for other "non-military" areas critical to the stability of the state (e.g., electrical power generation and distribution, water treatment and distribution, provision and distribution of food, sanitation, and medical care). institutional competence in counterinsurgency strategy and operations, as well as on developing and refining IW focused tactics, techniques, and procedures. To accomplish this across the force in a reasonable timeframe, it will likely be necessary to create new training infrastructure. Increased investment in simulation tools to facilitate mission planning, rehearsal and execution at the small-unit level is warranted. It may also make sense to create specialized, standing IW units, especially for training and advising missions in relatively benign threat environments. By taking on a portion of the capacity-building mission, even if it is a small one because of host-nation political reluctance to invite in relatively large conventional US military units, the general purpose forces could free up SOF for other tasks that more fully leverage their unique capabilities. 7 SOF would, however, remain responsible for training, equipping, and advising missions in politically sensitive areas where a low-visibility presence is essential, as well as for instructing foreign special operations units.
refocus the lcS Fleet, expand the coastal patrol Fleet, and Stand up additional riverine Squadrons It is well established that Al Qaeda Associated Movement (AQAM) is exploiting commercial shipping to move personnel, materiel, finances (i.e., currency, gold, and jewels), and contraband (e.g., opium and heroin). According to one source, al Qaeda possesses a "phantom fleet" of twenty-three dozen cargo ships around the world. 
75
> Monitor and, if necessary, secure critical chokepoints globally.
> Board and inspect suspicious vessels routinely in cooperation with partner states.
> Seize vessels by force, when necessary.
> Conduct small quick-reaction raids against ground targets in coastal regions.
7 While both the Army and Marine Corps are taking steps to enable the deployment of smaller units for partner-capacity building missions, they are unlikely to do so below the company level, which is still much larger than a twelve-man SF ODA.  > Secure critical offshore infrastructure -both on the surface and undersea (e.g., oil rigs and fiber-optic cables).
The Navy's recent decision to stand up three riverine squadrons, which can be used to deny terrorists inland maritime sanctuaries, is a promising first step toward meeting these requirements. To create a maritime surveillance and interdiction fleet, however, the Navy should also shift the mission focus of its littoral combat ship (LCS) program to the missions listed above, significantly increase its coastal patrol boat fleet, and stand up at least four additional riverine squadrons. 
76
Aside from small elements of the NSWGs, the only unit organized, trained, and equipped to train foreign maritime security personnel is the Naval Expeditionary Combat Command's Expeditionary Training Command, which comprises seventyfive personnel, about fifty of whom are on active duty. 77 Given the likely demand for training, advising, and equipping foreign maritime security personnel -especially from countries in the littoral of Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia -the capacity of Expeditionary Training Command is at least an order of magnitude too low. The potential demand from just Nigeria or Indonesia, for example, would easily overwhelm its current capacity. To take on the steady-state maritime foreign internal defense mission as a core mission, the Navy needs to get serious about staffing and resourcing the Expeditionary Training Command and Naval Expeditionary Combat 76 Mission packages for the LCS are currently focused on three different "asymmetric" littoral challenges: swarming boat attacks, mines, and submarines. Many of the modules and offboard systems being developed for the first two missions have direct relevance to operations against transnational terrorist groups, including various types of UAVs, USVs, and precision-guided missiles. Myriad sensor and weapons systems tailored to the counterterrorism mission, moreover, could be developed to fit into the LCS's payload stations such as specialized SIGINT and communications intelligence (COMINT) sensors; equipment for detecting chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons aboard cargo vessels; UAVs equipped with biometric identification systems; various types of tagging and tracking systems; and SF/SEAL mission planning tools and equipment. Command more broadly, which also includes units responsible for explosive ordnance disposal, maritime civil affairs, maritime expeditionary security, naval coastal warfare, naval construction, and expeditionary logistics. While elements of many of these missions could be performed by SEAL Teams or other NSWG units, it would be extremely useful to lessen demand for very limited SEAL capacity by having conventional Navy units shoulder more of the burden in these areas.
expand the SSgn Fleet
In addition to providing a potent counter to China's ongoing development and fielding of increasingly sophisticated capabilities for finding, tracking, and attacking surface combatants, expanding the nuclear-powered conventional guided-missile submarine (SSGN) fleet would also provide additional platforms from which to conduct clandestine maritime infiltration and exfiltration. The Navy has already converted four Ohioclass fleet ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) to SSGN configuration, which includes conversion of the two forward-most missile tubes into lock-in/lock-out trunks that allow SEALs to enter and exit the submarine while submerged; interior modifications that provide working, berthing, and command and control space for sixty-six or more SEALs for about ninety days; and the addition of hull fittings to accommodate up to two ASDS/JMMS mini-submarines or Dry Deck Shelters (DDSs). 
78
Today, the Air Force provides nearly 25 UCAS combat air patrols, nearly all of which are MQ-Predator orbits in Iraq and Afghanistan. This has required an all-out effort with crews flying the ever-expanding UCAS fleet on a 24-hour rotation. So many personnel are flying combat operations that keeping the training program on the rails has been problematic: trainers, for example, have been pushed into "flying" combat sorties. As General Blair Hansen, director of Air Force ISR commented recently, "we are going whole hog" with about 88 percent of Air Force UAVs deployed and operators flying them around the clock. 
79
In addition, as mentioned above, both the Predator and Reaper are non-stealthy aircraft. As modern air-defense systems continue to diffuse and mature, these UCASs are going to become progressively more vulnerable to detection and attack. In order to be able to generate persistent ISR and strike coverage in denied areas (e.g., China's eastern coast), it is imperative for the Air Force to develop and field a stealthy UCAS. This same aircraft could be modified by SOCOM to support clandestine special operations in denied, semi-permissive, and politically sensitive areas around the world in support of the war against Salafi-Takfiri/Khomeinist terrorist groups and counter-WMD operations.
It is imperative for AFSOC to field a stealthy SOF transport to provide clandestine mobility and support to SOF ground units in denied, semi-permissive, and politically sensitive areas. It appears that the only feasible path ahead is to develop a SOF transport variant of the NGB. Without the active support of the Air Force, both in terms of integrating fundamental performance parameters for SOF applications into the initial NGB design and willingness to procure additional airframes for SOCOM-funded modification, a stealthy SOF transport is unlikely to be realized.
The expansion of the 6 th Special Operation Squadron should be accompanied by the creation of aviation advisor squadrons in the regular Air Force. Not only would this mean selecting high-quality personnel to serve in these squadrons, but also investing in the construction and professional staffing of an air advisor training school to 8 USAF, "MQ-1 to MQ-9 Transition Plan," Briefing Slide, no date. 
82
In order to be 
Special Operations Forces have figured prominently in US military operations since 200 and have become central to the implementation of US national defense strategy with respect to the war against violent Islamic radicalism. They are building partner capacity, collecting intelligence, hunting high-value targets, and conducting other counterterrorism operations in multiple countries across several continents. To ratchet up ongoing operations against Salafi-Takfiri and Khomeinist terrorist groups, SOF will need to overcome several major challenges, including the very high concentration of available SOF manpower in Iraq and Afghanistan; poor alignment between current cultural/linguistic expertise and anticipated operational demand; capacity and capability shortfalls in several critical areas; and an organizational structure and institutional ethos that tend to favor direct over indirect action.
In the event of a future conflict with China, SOF may be called upon to conduct unconventional warfare operations in border areas; penetrate into internal areas and littoral zones to gain access to closed communication and computer networks; and conduct a wide array of special reconnaissance and direct-action missions, including in denied, deep-inland areas. To prepare for these prospective missions, it will be necessary to field a stealthy transport and expand clandestine undersea infiltration and exfiltration capacity. In addition, SF ODAs and SEAL Teams will need to develop new information operation capabilities (e.g., clandestine network penetration and exploitation), as well as expand the number of operators with proficiency in relevant languages.
To address future counterproliferation requirements, SOF may not only need to develop new means of penetrating into heavily defended airspace and locating sensitive WMD-related materiel, but also to increase JSOC's limited capacity to render safe improvised nuclear devices or nuclear weapons that are no longer under effective state control. To improve JSOC's speed of response to reactive counterproliferation contingencies, it may be worthwhile to base a small number of personnel in Europe, Central Asia, and/or East Asia. cOncluSiOn
* Graphic based on data from GAO, Defense Acquisitions-An Analysis of Special Operations Command's Management of Weapon Systems Programs (Washington, DC: GAO, 2007), p. 6; and USSOCOM Posture Statement 2007, p. 2.
* Graphic based on data from GAO, Defense Acquisitions-An Analysis of Special Operations Command's Management of Weapon Systems Programs (Washington, DC: GAO, 2007), p. 6; and USSOCOM Posture Statement 2007, p. 2.
3
unit location primary aircraft/capability 23rd air force hurlburt field, fL > global special operations command and control > intelligence coordination 1 Special operations wing hurlburt field, fL > Predator uCaS (Creech air force Base, moving eventually to Cannon air force Base) > aC-130h/u Spectre/Spooky gunships > CV-22 tilt-rotor transport > MC-130P Combat Shadow refueler > u-28a > 6th Special operations Squadron (aviation fid) > 22nd Special tactics Squadron (McChord air force Base, wa) > 10th Combat weather Squadron * The 352nd Special Operations Group (SOG) and 353rd SOG are currently under the operational control of Special Operations Command Europe (SOCEUR) and Special Operations Command Pacific (SOCPAC), respectively. Under the new Global SOF Posture (GSP), however, control over these units will return to AFSOC and they will be home stationed in CONUS. United States Air Force Special Operations Command, "Units," available at: http://www.afsoc.af.mil/units/.
9
9
56
56
73
73
80 8
8
8
89
89
05  
05  
06 Downing, Testimony to House Armed Services Subcommittee on Terrorism, Unconventional Threats, and Capabilities, June 29, 2006, p. 22.
06 Downing, Testimony to House Armed Services Subcommittee on Terrorism, Unconventional Threats, and Capabilities, June 29, 2006, p. 22.
39 0 Col William E. Saier, "The Advanced Special Operations Air Mobility Platform (M-X) -The Time is Now," Air and Space Power Journal, Spring 2005, p. 29.
As Lt Col Matthew Bannon, chief of unmanned aerial systems at Langley Air Force base put it, "If you asked me if we had enough people -pilots, sensor operators, mission coordinators, etc -I would tell you no." Tom Vanden Brook, "Drones' Supply, Support Lacking," USA Today, March 20, 2007, p. . 6 Michael Wooley, forward in Colonel Billy Montgomery, "Air Force Special Operations Command White Paper -USAF Irregular Warfare Concept, May 2007, p. 2. falls
6 advising" was "the single most important initiative USAF can take to enhance its own counterinsurgency capabilities." See Alan J. Vick, Adam Grissom, William Rosenau, Beth Grill, and Karl Mueller, Air Power in the New Counterinsurgency Era-The Strategic Importance of USAF Advisory and Assistance Missions (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2006), pp. xviii, 25, 36-3. 65 Montgomery, "Air Force Special Operations Command White Paper -USAF Irregular Warfare Concept, p. 3. 66 Ibid., p. 20. internal
79  
79  
teach
Ibid., p. II-0.
Joint Pub 1-02, p. 3.
As will be explained later, while both the 75th Ranger Regiment and 60th SOAR are administratively under USASOC, they are operationally assigned to JSOC.
Zachary M. Peterson, "Capability Increases As Marine Special Operations Forces Grow," Inside the Navy, April
7, 2008, p. .   
Zheng Bijian, "China's 'Peaceful Rise' to Great-Power Status," Foreign Affairs, September-October 2005.
Krepinevich, Martinage, and Work, The Challenges to US National Security, pp. 3-55.
The ASDS is a 65-foot long, battery-powered mini-submersible that can transport a SEAL squad in a dry environment from a host platform, typically a submarine, to an objective area. It has a two-person crew and includes a lock out/lock in diving chamber.
The MC-130E Combat Talon I transport, AC-130H Spectre gunship, and MC-130P refueler were first deployed in
966, 972, and 986, respectively.   9  Lieutenant General Donald Wurster, "AFSOC Update," speech/briefing at National Defense Industrial Association, 9th Annual SOLIC Symposium, February 3, 2008; and Magnuson, "Slow Delivery," p. 25.20 At current utilization rates, AC-30U aircraft will start grounding in the spring of March 2009, roughly one year prior to the first scheduled CWB delivery date.2 Comer, "Strategic Directions for Special Operations' Fixed-Wing Capabilities," p. 28
Comment by Captain James May as quoted in "Gunships Under Stress," Air Force Magazine Daily Report eNewsletter,March , 2008.    
AFSOC's C-130 variant fleet of roughly one hundred aircraft includes eight different types; the most common of which accounts for only twenty-three aircraft. 2 A total of eight should be delivered by the end of 2008. The remaining four are slated for delivery in 2009. AFSOC has already expressed an interest in procuring an additional five MC-130Ws -for a total buy of seventeen. Olson, Speech at National Security Leaders Forum, Center for a New American Security, March 3, 2008, p. 20. 25 As with most AFSOC procurement, the Air Force will pay for the basic airframe and all common equipment, while SOCOM pays for all the unique SOF modifications. Major General Richard Comer, "Strategic Directions for Special Operations' Fixed-Wing Capabilities," in Clark Murdock et al, Special Operations Forces Aviation at the Crossroads (Washington, DC: CSIS, 2007), p. 28. 26 Major General Donald Wurster, then AFSOC Vice Commander, AFSOC -Challenges for the Long War," Speech at National Defense Industry Association SO/LIC Symposium and Exhibition, February 27, 2007; and Andrew Feickert, "U.S. Special Operations Forces (SOF): Background and Issues for Congress," CRS Report RS208, January 28, 2008, p. 3.
Managing large-scale development programs has not been one of SOCOM's strengths. See GAO, Defense Acquisitions -An Analysis of Special Operations Command's Management of Weapon System Programs (Washington, DC: GAO, 2007). Anthony Murch, CRS Report for Congress -The Next Generation Bomber: Background, Oversight Issues, and Options for Congress, Doc. No. RL306, March 7, 2008, pp. -5. 5 Bill Sweetman, "Ultra Stealth: Northrop Grumman has a Secret: USAF's Next Generation Bomber," Defense Technology International, June 2008, p. 6. 6 The 24 figure would be for two 12-aircraft special operations transport squadrons. The 96 figure would be for four 2-aircraft special operations transport squadrons (8 aircraft); two 2-aircraft special operations aerial refueling squadrons (2 aircraft); and two 2-aircraft special operations gunship squadrons (2 aircraft).
Acknowledgments I would like to express my appreciation for the work of Chris Dougherty who made numerous substantive contributions, provided invaluable research support, and painstakingly reviewed several drafts of this paper. I would also like to note that in several respects this paper builds upon earlier work conducted jointly with 
Michael Vickers
Senior Vice President for Strategic Studies at CSBA
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations/Low-Intensity Conflict and Interdependent Capabilities
Andrew Krepinevich
Steve Kosiak
Bob Work
Special thanks also go to 
Charlotte Brock
Eric Lindsey
Cutting Edge
The analysis and findings presented here are solely the responsibility of the 
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Although the 2006 QDR launched several important initiatives to better prepare SOF for the future security environment, it fell short in a number of areas. Looking across SOCOM's subordinate commands, the most critical shortfalls are within USASOC and AFSOC. For the former, it is imperative to expand special operations rotary-wing capacity, as well as increase Civil Affairs and PSYOPS force structure. For the latter, high-priority investment areas include recapitalizing, modernizing, and expanding the aging MC-130 fleet; developing and fielding a stealthy airlifter; expanding UCAS force structure; increasing the number of Special Tactics Squadrons; and increasing the number of Combat Aviation Advisory flights available to train foreign security forces in the use of modern air power.
When the next presidential administration takes over the reins of the executive branch in January 2009, serious consideration should be given to the organizational and policy changes, investments, and reorientation of SOF detailed in Chapter 3. This paper is not meant to provide the definitive answer for how SOF should be shaped, sized, organized, and postured to better prepare for the challenges posed and opportunities afforded by the future security environment, but rather to identify the critical issues that must be debated and expeditiously addressed. To be sure, many of the detailed recommendations made in this report will need to be modified based on operational experience, as well as to adapt to unanticipated changes in the future security environment. 