# ID: 2f1b2a15133145cbbcbf54f1e66b32bc
# Title: Russian Organizational Learning in the Context of the Afghanistan and Chechnya Counterinsurgencies
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The Russian way of war focused almost entirely on the offense.
To the Russians, offensive operations include the violent deployment of massive mechanized forces employing combined arms in echelon against a foe irrespective of the opponent's size or the circumstances surrounding the operation.
This view of warfare arose primarily out of the Marxist-Leninist dogma of aggressively stamping out uprisings in a constant fight against the expansion of capitalism.
Additional factors included the successes the Red Army experienced in the latter stages of the Second World War, the creation and expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the impact Stalin had on squelching any creative or innovative thought, the Russian successes in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and the introduction and subsequent rise in influence of nuclear weapons.
All of these factors contributed to the Russian belief that external factors were suppressing them and they needed to act aggressively to counteract them.
These firmly held beliefs were effective in World War Two scenarios -because they were fighting a conventional force -and the limited engagements in Czechoslovakia and Hungary -because the opponents were not completely dedicated to defeating the Russiansleading up to the invasion of Afghanistan.
However, they did not serve the Russians well as they attempted to devise an effective operational approach against the Afghan insurgents.
The reason was that the Afghan opponents neither were a conventional force nor easily cowed by the Russian show of force.
The following paragraphs further describe how these different factors explain the Russian way of war.