# ID: 2f1b2a15133145cbbcbf54f1e66b32bc
# Title: Russian Organizational Learning in the Context of the Afghanistan and Chechnya Counterinsurgencies
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Russia, like the United States, has experienced its struggles with counterinsurgency warfare. In Afghanistan, the Russian General Staff chose to approach the operation with a violently offensive mindset. This mindset prevented them from achieving their desired outcomes because they initially alienated the populace they needed to succeed. Then, when they realized their approach was not achieving the desired outcomes, they made only minor adjustments to their approach because they did not view this as a significant challenge to their military model. Then, when presented a similar situation in Chechnya, instead of approaching the operation using the lessons learned from Afghanistan, the General Staff chose to use the same violent tactics employed during the invasion of Afghanistan. This monograph seeks to understand this phenomenon. This monograph is applicable to the United States in that it demonstrates that a nation must not become wedded to a specific approach in order to succeed in future war. During the post-Vietnam era, the United States chose to put aside the lessons learned from counterinsurgency warfare and focus on a comfortable and conventional form of warfare. It seems America is doing the same thing again with respect to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, by focusing on evading such wars altogether.
The United States is nearing completion of more than a decade of conflict in the Middle East. This period of warfare has strained both the American public and the military in terms of time, resources, and intellectual energy. The reason for the long duration and enormous resources invested in this war stems largely from two factors: a failure to envision an insurgency developing following an invasion and a general misunderstanding of the level of commitment required by both the military and the civilian population inherent in fighting a counterinsurgency war. While it is important to recognize that the United States' understanding of unconventional war is limited because it chose to ignore the lessons learned from previous experiences (Vietnam, Panama, Somalia, Bosnia, Kosovo), it is not the only superpower nation to have struggled with such a problem.
Russian experiences in unconventional warfare after World War Two -specifically in Afghanistan and Chechnya -highlight the difficulties in developing and employing a successful operational framework for unconventional operations. 
1
However, it chose to proceed with the invasion of both nations under a comfortable and conventional paradigm rather than tailoring their approach to the specific situation. Basing their plans on these ingrained paradigms, which partially resulted from the residual effects of Stalin's 1937 Purge, caused them to commit a number of fatal errors as they progressed from Afghanistan to Chechnya.
First, they chose to re-frame their approach too late in the operation to ensure a successful outcome. Instead, by the time they transitioned from an aggressively violent approach that alienated a significant portion of the Afghan population to a tailored and more focused approach that included training local leaders and attacking the opposition forces with smaller forces, they had already lost the support of the Afghan populace. Then, they did not incorporate the lessons learned from their experiences in Afghanistan and apply them to operations in Chechnya. Instead, they approached these operations with the view that their military might and political structure would prevail. This monograph seeks to understand why this occurred.
This paper will answer the question how did the Russian General Staff react to and subsequently learn from the operational challenges posed by its involvement in irregular wars in Afghanistan (1979 -1989) and Chechnya (1994 -1996 and 1999 -2010)? From this main question, several minor questions arise. What level of influence did the Russian General Staff have over the forces conducting operations in both Afghanistan and Chechnya that would allow it to drive institutional change? What lessons did the Russians take from their operations in Afghanistan? To what degree did the Russians employ these lessons in the development of the Chechnya operation? Did the fall of the Soviet Union change the manner or level of influence the General Staff had with regard to the development and management of military operations?
The Russian General Staff reacted too slowly to the challenges posed by the irregular conflicts by making minor adjustments to its operational approach while adhering to the belief that they could win decisively by massing armored and mechanized forces against their opponent.
The Afghanistan invasion provided the Russian General Staff with its first major challenge to its unconventional warfare paradigm since their nineteenth century operations in the North Caucasus against the Chechen irregular forces. In response, the Russian General Staff attempted to adjust its operational approach by focusing on the employment of mobile forces such as aviation assets and special forces. However, despite these minor adjustments, the General Staff remained wedded to the idea of the decisive operation that allowed it to concentrate its forces and annihilate its opponents. This staunch belief in the primacy of conventional forces and violent offensive methods led the Russians to discard many of the lessons learned from Afghanistan and approach the Chechen wars with the same operational approach they employed during their invasion of Afghanistan.
Using historical doctrinal publications and the military writings of key leaders in the General Staff and the Russian military, this monograph analyzes keys aspects of the Soviet way of war. These key aspects serve to give the reader a sense for the way in which the Russians viewed -and continue to view -warfare and how they saw themselves operating in war. Then, this paper argues that the Russian General Staff was the body within the military that was responsible for operational decisions during the conduct of war. Additionally, this paper argues that the General Staff's role in warfare did not change after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Finally, using key aspects of the Russian way of war, this paper analyzes two case studies to determine how the unique aspects of the two wars influenced their view of unconventional war.
Determining this allows an assessment of whether or not those changes were the right ones to take.
The theoretical approach applied in this monograph follows the ideas found in Thomas L.
Kuhn's book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Specifically, Kuhn emphasizes the stiff resistance given to theoretical anomalies when they arise. According to Kuhn, theoretical   anomalies are of two sorts. First, there are anomalies that are simply puzzling and therefore require no significant changes to the procedures and theories that underpin the scientific profession. An example of this is the response to an unexpected outcome in an experiment. Since the multitude of potential variables that could have contributed to the unexpected outcome is so immense, the scientist simply discards the anomaly as an aberration and continues to run the experiment. Additionally, anomalies of this sort tend to occur so often that if the scientist were to stop and examine every one he would never get any work accomplished. The second type of anomaly is one that gains general recognition by more of the profession's pre-eminent members and its resolution becomes the "subject matter of their discipline."
2
3
4
The scientific community is composed of human beings who think, decide, and act within a structured grouping. The structure is composed of laws and norms that enable the individuals to operate in a predictable manner. Additionally, within the scientific community there exists a desire to understand the world. This understanding is rooted in solid scientific principles that have existed for a significant length of time. A nation -especially its military component -operates in a similar fashion.
Rules and social norms guide a nation's actions. Well-established principles of governance and the application of military power enable it to understand the world and operate effectively in the international environment. Therefore, because of the similarities between the scientific community and a nation, Kuhn's scientific principles are applicable to a social environment and can help explain social phenomena, such as how the Russians reacted to the challenges posed by counterinsurgency warfare.
In evaluating the Russian response to the challenges posed in Afghanistan to its understanding of warfare, this monograph applies this theoretical approach to determine if the Russian General Staff viewed the challenges posed by irregular forces as a refutation of their theory of war or just an anomaly to be explained by making minor adjustments to their theory. This binary framing of the problem -Afghanistan was either an anomaly or a crisis -while simplistic, suffices for this monograph. The various nuances of rejecting certain aspects of the Russian way of warfare vice the entire framework were certainly present in the deliberations following the departure from Afghanistan; however, the impact these nuances had on the Russian military was negligible. Additionally, as this monograph will elaborate, the Russians viewed their way of warfare as supreme because of its effectiveness during the Second World War and during their interventions into Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Therefore, any adjustments would require a great investment in people -primarily the education and advanced training of conscripts -and resources, assets they did not have in great supply.
The Russians' view of warfare stemmed from their historical experiences. In order to understand this particular view of war, one must understand the following factors: the development of operational art after the Russo-Japanese War, the impacts of the Russian experiences in the Second World War, the influences of Russian operations in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, the rise of nuclear weapons after World War Two, and the role Marxism-Leninism played in the Russian view of war. Beginning with the development of operational art after the Russo-Japanese war, this section seeks to shed some light on the mind-set of the Russian military leading up to its intervention into Afghanistan in 1979.
Sparked by the Russo-Japanese War and seriously studied after the October Revolution in 1917 was the idea that there needed to be changes in the way that the Russian military was organized and operated. One of the key agents for change was a man by the name of Mikhail Vasilyevich Frunze. Frunze believed that in order for the military and the state to progress, the military needed a unified military doctrine. 
5
The state should, ahead of time, determine the nature of the general, and in particular, military policy, set the possible object of its military aspirations in accord with it and work out and establish a definite plan of statewide activities which would take into account the future clashes and which would ensure their success by the efficient use of the people's energy. 
6
7
The Russian realization of an additional component of war between strategy and tacticsspecifically operational art -was an emergent concept that arose from the writings of Russian thinkers such as Colonel Aleksandr A. Neznamov (1878 -1928), Vladimir K. Triandafillov   (1894 -1931), Georgii Samoilovich Isserson (1898 -1976), and Aleksandr Svechin (1878 -1938). 
8
Gareev, M.V. Frunze: Military Theorist (McLean, VA: Pergamon-Brassey's International Defense Publishers, Inc., 1988), 101. 6
7 Ibid., 103.
World War. Neznamov, as an instructor at the General Staff Academy in 1907, provided lectures on strategy that linked tactical and operational actions to higher strategic objectives. 
9
10
11
12
13
The Russian way of war focused almost entirely on the offense. To the Russians, offensive operations include the violent deployment of massive mechanized forces employing combined arms in echelon against a foe irrespective of the opponent's size or the circumstances surrounding the operation. This view of warfare arose primarily out of the Marxist-Leninist dogma of aggressively stamping out uprisings in a constant fight against the expansion of capitalism. Additional factors included the successes the Red Army experienced in the latter stages of the Second World War, the creation and expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the impact Stalin had on squelching any creative or innovative thought, the Russian successes in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and the introduction and subsequent rise in influence of nuclear weapons. All of these factors contributed to the Russian belief that external factors were suppressing them and they needed to act aggressively to counteract them. These firmly held beliefs were effective in World War Two scenarios -because they were fighting a conventional force -and the limited engagements in Czechoslovakia and Hungary -because the opponents were not completely dedicated to defeating the Russiansleading up to the invasion of Afghanistan. However, they did not serve the Russians well as they attempted to devise an effective operational approach against the Afghan insurgents. The reason was that the Afghan opponents neither were a conventional force nor easily cowed by the Russian show of force. The following paragraphs further describe how these different factors explain the Russian way of war.
In 1974, then Minister of Defense Marshal A. A. Grechko wrote in a leading Party journal that the Russian Armed Forces should be prepared to counter the actions of the imperialists wherever they arise. 14 This re-invigoration of the influence of Marxism-Leninism in the military's application of force in times of war was an interwoven theme throughout Russian doctrine. Additionally, it underlined all of its views on warfare.
In 1848, Karl Marx wrote his Communist Manifesto in which he advocated the rise of the proletariat against the bourgeois -represented by the capitalists. 
15
16
From the Russian perspective, the period following the Second World War was a time of solidifying the Russian periphery vice territorial expansion past their immediate sphere of influence. Because of this view, they sought only to protect from capitalist greed what they already owned. One key aspect of maintaining what they owned was retaining the ability to protect their socialist comrades from the uprisings incited by capitalist nations. With respect to these insurgencies, Marx and Lenin taught that when counter-revolutionary forces rose up they should be attacked swiftly, violently, and decisively in order to prevent their infection of the 14 Alex P. Schmid, Soviet Military Interventions Since 1945 (New Brunswick:  Transaction, Inc. 1985), 59.
15 Karl Marx, Communist Manifesto (Chicago: Henry Regnery Co., 1954), 13. 
16
World War Two, Stalin, and the Offense During the reforms that followed the Second World War, the Russian view of warfare reflected lessons learned from action during the latter portion of that war, namely, success relied on "the offensive, characterized by widespread maneuver and judicious use of massed armor, artillery, and airpower." 18 Furthermore, the military believed that it could achieve success by conducting a series of violent offensive operations successively in order to achieve intermediate objectives that led to the final strategic objective. Additionally, at the strategic level, the Russians placed much focus on how to successfully transition from the defense to the offense. 
19
18
19
20
In the post-World War Two era, the Russians viewed Western powers as a continuous threat. The United States' enactment of the Marshall Plan and the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization further intensified this belief. This expansion, which the West viewed as a necessary step to contain the perceived communist growth, posed a threat to the Russian sphere of influence. In response, Russia further solidified the buffer zone between themselves and the foreign aggressors and their ideas. This led to the development of the Warsaw Pact coalition, which intended to compete with the threat posed by the Western alliance. 
21
However, Stalin's death in 1953 reinvigorated dialogue within the Russian military. One of the main themes that came out of the post-Stalin discussions was a focus on surprise as a primary ingredient to successful operations. 
22
In the immediate aftermath of World War Two, Stalin and the Russian military significantly downplayed the existence of nuclear weapons.
23
Specifically, he noted that future war would include deep nuclear strikes aimed at strategic centers. In order to combat this, Russia would continue to develop nuclear weapons in order to meet and exceed the threat posed by the United States. Additionally, since the nuclear weapon was so devastating Russia would need fewer numbers of soldiers within its military formations. 
24
In 1968, a small yet profound revision was beginning to emerge in Russian doctrine. emboldened anti-Russian elements within Hungary to revolt against their government and the emplacement of Russian troops within Hungary's borders. 
27
25
26
27
Understanding that a limited show of force was not an effective deterrent to the rebels' efforts, Russia conducted a second intervention that was extremely heavy-handed and violent.
Casualty estimates from the second intervention were 20,000 dead and nearly 13,000 wounded Hungarians. Russian casualties amounted to only 7,000. 
28
29
In 1962, the Czechoslovakian economy entered a period of severe stagnation. Despite Russian-type economic reforms, the economy continued to stagnate and public discontent grew.
In response, Russia -who had no troops stationed in Czechoslovakia at the time -inserted troops into Czechoslovakia under the guise of military maneuvers and maintained them there past their redeployment date as a show of force. As in the 1956 Hungarian Uprising, this limited attempt to quell a political uprising had little effect. Realizing it must act more forcefully in order to stamp out the uprising, Russia called upon its communist allies in the Warsaw Pact and entered Czechoslovakia in force in 1968. Their main aim was to secure major cities and airports. 
30
In summary, the Russian way of war grew out of its understanding of operational art after its defeat in the Russo-Japanese War, its Marxist-Leninist dogma, its experiences from the 28 Alex P. Schmid, Soviet Military Interventions Since 1945 (New Brunswick:  Transaction, Inc. 1985), 27. 
29
30
Second World War, the rise of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and nuclear weapons, and its interventions into Hungary and Czechoslovakia. The result of these factors was that offensive operations executed violently and successively would guarantee Russian military success. Stalin's "permanent factors" of warfare coupled with his inability to adjust his principles to a changing environment and the Marxist-Leninist tradition of violently attacking separatist movements kept the Russian military in a singular mindset. However, once Stalin passed in 1953, Russian military leaders began to challenge Stalin's beliefs in restricting dialogue. The result of this dialogue was that the Russian military needed to re-focus on surprise in the execution of its military operations in order to compensate for its qualitative disadvantage against Western powers.
The advent of nuclear weapons challenged Russian thinking about how they conducted war in that a single strategically placed nuclear warhead could lead to decisive victory. This negated the perceived Russian advantage of reliance on large mechanized and armored formations to win decisively on the battlefield. Coupled with the rise of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Russians felt the need to defend their territory and the territories of their communist brethren. This manifested itself through the creation of the Warsaw Pact and increased production of nuclear weapons in order to maintain the impression of nuclear parity with its Western opposition. This need to maintain a military balance with the West because it posed the greatest threat to the Russian way of life locked the Russians into an offensively focused mindset. This mindset, as a fundamental component of the way Russia viewed war, was so ingrained into the Russian military and political system that it hindered the military from adjusting to any military situation -i.e. Afghanistan -that did not conform to that paradigm.
Prior to the rise of the Imperial Russian General Staff, the Russian armed forces employed the Russian Army's General Headquarters as its organizing body. 
31
33
34
35
36
General of the Army V.G. Kulikov, in an article written in the Russian journal Military Thought in November 1974, highlighted the many accomplishments of Marshal B.M. Shaposhnikov (Chief of the General Staff). Specifically, Kulikov highlighted Shaposhnikov's successes in the realms of organizing the Russian Armed Forces, the training of its leaders, and the writing of military studies that formed the basis for the Russian way of war. 
37
38
The invasion of Afghanistan provided the Russian military with its first real test of fighting a determined irregular force since its clashes with the guerrilla forces in Ukraine and Lithuania after World War Two. The mountainous environment of Afghanistan proved to be exceedingly challenging to the Russian forces that were trained and equipped to fight on the steppes of Eastern Europe. Additionally, the indomitable Afghan opposition forces were more determined to oppose the Russians than the relatively ineffectual Hungarians and Czechoslovakians that the Russians engaged with in the 1950s and 1960s. Yet, given these apparently obvious differences, the Russia military continued as if their existing military framework accounted for these variances. This section seeks to discover the reasons behind this phenomenon.
Despite numerous senior military leader reconnaissance missions inside Afghanistan in the months prior to the invasion and a significant advisory mission in Afghanistan after the agreement to increase economic aid in the 1950s and 1960s, Russian military and political leaders assessed the Afghans as backward and illiterate. Because of this view, they inferred that the Afghan insurgents did not have the will to resist Russian aggression. 
39
40
Russians had approached all of their operations post-World War Two. Therefore, they would attack with speed and violence, paying very little attention to how their operations affected the local populace. The minimal preparation time afforded to the subordinate commanders only added to this reliance on previous approaches. As an example of the hurried nature of the operation, Colonel General Iu. V. Tukharinov, commander of the Fortieth Army, which was the major command in charge of the invasion, received the operational plans only two weeks prior to the invasion. 
41
42
43
There" -The Soviet Approach in Afghanistan 1979 -1989 (Fort Leavenworth: Combat Studies  Institute Press, 2011), 5-6. Democratic Party of Afghanistan killed Taraki and replaced him with Hafizullah Amin. The assassination of Taraki convinced the Russians that involvement was necessary. 
44
45
This transition proved to be overwhelming to Russian conventional forces, challenging their operational approach throughout the remainder of the war.  Additionally, due to the political limitations associated with a massive deployment of military personnel in support of a limited war, Russia adjusted its operations to include more airpower. This transition to the predominance of airpower enabled the Russians to attack the opposition's lines of communication, isolate its rear area, and attack the agricultural sector that supported it. 
47
Russian efforts to strengthen the Afghan defense forces advanced in earnest in late 1985 to early 1986 after their combat power had reached its peak of 108,000 personnel in theater. In this role, Russians worked with the Afghan government to establish relationships with previously ostracized segments of the population in an effort to bolster the legitimacy of the Afghan government. The Russians conducted all of these activities while subsequently and slowly backing away from direct actions with the enemy. By the end of 1986, the Russians had begun withdrawing combat forces. 
48
46
47
Afghan war and a speedy withdrawal of Russian armed forces. Finally, on February 15, 1989 the last Russian troops departed Afghanistan. 
49
The lessons Russians gleaned from their experiences from Afghanistan were many -the need for a coherent counterinsurgency doctrine, the success of establishing a local national training program, the ineffectiveness of heavy armor in mountainous terrain, and the need to maintain control over an area after combat operations. 
50
51
In December 1988, Mikhail Gorbachev announced to the world that Russia would remove itself from its satellite positions and adopt a politically defensive stance. While this helped Russia gain support from the West, it posed a problem for the General Staff. Specifically, the General Staff, whose responsibility it was to develop a coherent view of how the Russian military would fight in the future, had to devise a strategy that would enable Russia to maintain an effective, offensive capability while supporting the political leadership's vision of a defensive posture for the military. 
52
The reduction of the Russian military and the subsequent restructuring of the military force were the key products of the new defensive strategy. 
53
54
52
According to Lenin, there are four broad categories of war:
1. Wars between states or coalitions of states of the two opposing social systems, i.e. wars between imperialists and social states. 2. Wars between antagonistic classes within the confines of one state, i.e. civil war (which could, however, include limited outside support or intervention). This category covers wars of progressive revolutionary movements against ruling traditional or bourgeois classes. 3. Wars between imperialist states and peoples defending their freedom and independence or striving to achieve independence. This category includes wars of national liberation. 4. Wars between different capitalist states. 
55
56
55 Scott R. McMichael,
Stumbling Bear: Soviet Military
56
insurgent tactics employed by the mujahedeen, they could not fully understand the dynamics involved in the war. 
57
The majority of the changes that the General Staff envisioned as integral to successfully executing warfare in the future were contingent upon a sharp technological leap -high-precision weapons, electronic warfare systems, and improved helicopter systems and forces. Unfortunately, the General Staff understood that the Russian political leadership would not support such a recommendation because of the need for an increase in Russia's economic capability to develop such advancements. 
58
Russia simply did not have the capital to invest in the development of high-tech military equipment that would enable it compete with the United States.
Struggling with the above-mentioned political, economic, ideological, and military obstacles precluded any serious examination and implementation of the lessons that arose out of operations in Afghanistan. However, despite all of the internal challenges posed to the General Staff, there were a few areas that the lessons in Afghanistan influenced Russian military policy.
The biggest lesson learned from the invasion of Afghanistan was that Russia should not engage militarily with the Third World or other areas that required a significant commitment of Russian resources.
57 Paul Dibb, "The Soviet Experience in Afghanistan: Lessons to be Learned?" Australian Journal Of International Affairs 64, no. 5 (November 2010): 499, 501-502. 
58
In engaging with these portions of the world, Russia risked overextending itself and, consequently, weakening its military to an unacceptable level. 
59
A second lesson from the Afghanistan campaign was the belief that the Russian military "had neither the quality of troops, tactics, officers, and operational art … needed to conduct conventional operations in the Third World under the conditions of the 1980s."
60
The proponents of a professional military argued that a smaller, more competent military would decrease the technological gap between Russia and the West and address the management issues inherent in running a massive military. The supporters of a conscript military contended that a conscript military gave them a mobilization advantage over the West and it ensured that the military continued to represent the people that they defend. Despite the fact that a more professional military would solve two of Russia's overarching problems -namely the need to reduce the size of the force and the need to increase the force's competence in order to shorten the gap between Russia and the West -the Russian government maintained its massive conscript 
59
61
Finally, since Russia was able to withdraw from Afghanistan relatively unscathed -it had only lost approximately 13,000 service members and the Afghan government was supportive of the Russians -it appeared that the Afghanistan war did not present itself as a Kuhnian crisis to the Russian way of war. Rather, it presented itself more as an anomaly that did not require a massive change in doctrine or policy. The social implosion of the country further distracted them from the view of a Kuhnian anomaly by forcing the Russian government to focus on social rather than military reforms. This view persisted through the next two engagements with Chechen forces.
Case Study: First and Second Chechen Wars (1994-1996, 1999-2010)   In 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed economically, politically, and militarily. Its satellite nations had declared independence, its decreased military force was living in squalid conditions receiving little pay, and the government was anxiously searching for ways to make democracy 61 Harry Gelman, Adelphi Papers #258: Gorbachev and the Future of the Soviet Military Institution (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1991), 36-38.  work. This led to a significant restructuring of the military into three types of forces: permanently ready forces, mobile and rapid reaction forces, and a one-million man strategic reserve. Russia adopted this organizational structure because the General Staff deemed that future war, with its emphasis on fragmented operations employing high-precision weapons, would require a highly flexible force.
This idea arose out of the discussions the General Staff had during the 1980s with respect to reacting to a nuclear strike by having dispersed and maneuverable forces. 
62
First Chechen War (1994-96)   Russia was involved in the North Caucasus with varying degrees of success since the 1800s. The region, which includes Chechnya, remained a source of constant aggravation to the Russians because of its peoples' refusal to submit to Russian rule. Therefore, Russia viewed Chechnya as nominally a part of the Soviet Union via the occupation of the area with Russian forces. Finally, after the fall of the Soviet Union fractured the federation into semi-autonomous territories, Chechnya -as a belligerent territory -intensified its efforts to break away from the grasp of the Russian Federation. Viewing this attempt to sever ties with Russia, the Russian government decided to attempt a political coup over the Dudayev Regime in Chechnya. When this attempt failed, the Russian government decided to forcefully overthrow the self-proclaimed government and install a pro-Russian regime.
highlighted the fact that Russian planners had not taken from their time in Afghanistan the lesson of understanding their opponent and would negatively affect the Russian operation as it unfolded over the next two years.
Eventually, the Russians were able to seize and control Grozny. However, the Chechen rebels were able to force a negotiation after they attacked the Russian town of Budennovsk and took hostages in June of 1995. Despite attempts by Russian Spetsnaz troops to retake a key Chechen rebel stronghold -the city hospital -they could not defeat the enemy forces. After two failed attempts, the Russian Prime Minister decided to negotiate. The negotiations -which served to increase the Chechen rebels' legitimacy -resulted in the rebels' safe passage out of the city.
Over the next year, Chechen rebels conducted similar attacks in Gudermes -Chechnya's second oldest city -and Grozny that would eventually wear down Russian forces. Finally, the Russians yielded and departed Chechnya under a negotiated settlement.
The time between the First and Second Chechen Wars -1996 to 1999 -was too short of a period to realize any significant changes and subsequent implementation of Russia's doctrine.
However, the fact that the Russians foresaw a return trip almost as soon as they left Chechnya in 1996 provided them the rare opportunity to plan to re-fight the last war. Consequently, they made two key operational changes: increased interoperability between different ministries within the Russian government and new solutions for the lack of urban training.
In an attempt to increase interoperability between the disparate ministries -Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Federal Security Bureau, and others -the Russians placed these independent ministries under the control of the military district commander. 
67
68
As mentioned previously, the Russian forces that attacked Grozny in 1994 received minimal, if any, training on urban operations prior to the attack. In order to address this issue, the General Staff focused on a siege of urban areas consisting of airstrikes and artillery shells rather than assaulting with troops. 
69
Second Chechen War (1999 -2010)   The selection of Vladimir Putin as Prime Minister in August 1999 and his subsequent election to President in March 2000 resurfaced talk of engaging Chechnya a second time. Putin vehemently opposed the idea of a separate Chechnya and subsequently took actions to re-engage 
68
Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994
-2000
(Santa Monica: RAND, 2001), 14. 69 Ibid., 41.
70
The spark for the beginning of the second Chechen War occurred when Chechens, Wahhabis, and other Muslim soldiers attacked into Dagestan in August 1999. In response, Russia sent elements from its Interior forces to meet the aggression. 
71
72
By the end of October 1999, Russian forces were conducting over 150 air strikes a day on targets in Grozny. 
73
74
74
75
Russia's problems with joint command stemmed from its failure to devise a comprehensive strategy to deal with uprisings from its interior. Upon the Chechen invasion of Dagestan in August 1999, the initial forces to react to the threat were Interior forces. The reason for their involvement in the beginning was that the Russian government viewed this attack as a terrorist threat. However, as the situation developed, the Russian government realized that the Ministry of Defense forces would be better equipped to deal with the Chechen forces. This transition created tension between the forces. As the General Staff, at the time, did not have control over all of the nation's forces, they could not effectively coordinate between the elements. 
76
77
If Golts' accusation was true, then it was doubtful that the Russians were any closer to developing a comprehensive counterinsurgency strategy that included all branches of Russia's defense forces. 
This monograph sought to explain how the Russian General Staff reacted to the challenges posed by the Afghan insurgent forces following the Russian invasion into Afghanistan in 1979. Then, it examined how those identified challenges shaped how the Russians conducted two separate operations against the Chechens. In understanding Russian actions, this monograph used the scientific theory proposed by Kuhn. This theory states that in order to maintain a unified understanding of the world, scientists tend to view challenges to their beliefs as mere anomalies instead of as a crisis that requires a significant shift in thinking. With respect to the Russians, this theory proved to be a plausible explanation for the lack of organizational learning on the part of the Russian between Afghanistan and Chechnya.
The Russian military, as a representation of the Russian government and people, was wedded to the notion that massive mechanized and armored formations, conducting large offensive operations, was the only effective way to conduct military operations. This notion arose out of their experiences in the latter portion of the Second World War and their experiences in Hungary and Czechoslovakia. However, once they realized that this paradigm of warfare was no longer applicable in the environment in Afghanistan, they grudgingly adapted their methods to focus less on large formations and more on mobile and specialized troops. Unfortunately, their transition occurred too late in the operation to produce any significant results because their heavyhanded approach had alienated large portions of the Afghan population. Once they realized this, the Russians began looking for a way out of the conflict.
Upon their exit from Afghanistan, the Russians had a decision to make. Either they could view their experiences in Afghanistan as a challenge to their way of war and adapt their doctrine as necessary or they could view the Afghanistan campaign as an aberration and continue to train and educate their forces using their old paradigm of employing overwhelming firepower in an offensive nature against their adversaries. They chose the latter for a myriad of reasons. First, while some elements of the Russian military -namely aviation and special forcesunderstood the importance of their experiences in Afghanistan, the majority of the forceincluding the General Staff -desired to forget the war in Afghanistan and continue with the old ways of operating. Secondly, immediately following the conclusion of the war in Afghanistan, the Soviet Union collapsed. This turn of events had a damaging effect on the Russian military by reducing its numbers, placing the military in neglected barracks, and by inadequately paying them. This increased pressure on the military prevented the force from implementing radical changes because such changes would require intensive time and resources to train the force for counterinsurgency operations.
Finally, the Russian government and military held onto the belief that the military should be primarily composed of the working class -a Marxist-Leninist and communist belief. This ensured that the military did not lose its tie to the population it protected. Additionally, under Russian beliefs, maintaining a force of this composition enabled a more fervent national mobilization. However, having a conscript army composed of people who were generally not highly educated precluded the Russian military from developing a force that could effectively operate in a counterinsurgency environment. These challenges would plague the Russian army in their operations in Chechnya.
As with its previous operations in Afghanistan, the Russian military approached their engagement against Chechen forces in 1994 with an offensive and violent mindset because they did not fully understand their Chechen adversary. This lack of understanding led them to view the Chechens as weak, incompetent, and unwilling to stand up to the Russian military. Therefore, the Chechen forces proved capable of employing guerrilla tactics to defeat the main Russian force.
The second war with Chechnya provided the Russians with an opportunity to adjust their approach. Instead of conducting the operation with an approach that recognized the importance of reducing the effects on civilian lives and property, they were more violent in their application of force. This allowed them to achieve a relatively quick victory by taking Grozny, but the adversaries escaped to conduct guerrilla tactics. By transitioning to guerrilla warfare, the Chechens were able to bleed the Russian forces over the next decade. Despite this dismal outcome, the Russians did take steps to transform its military. While this monograph does not advocate strictly preparing for the next war based on the previous war, it does caution that a tendency to remain wedded to a specific approach to warfare that one is comfortable with can have serious repercussions in future operations. A military must be agile and adaptable if it wants to be successful in war.
Today we have seen the Russians operating in much the same way as they had in Afghanistan and Chechnya. They invaded Crimea under the auspices of protecting Russian nationalists from Ukrainian governmental oppression and because they viewed Ukraine's vie for North Atlantic Treaty Organization membership as a threat to the Russian sphere of influence.
What has changed is their tactics. Instead of deploying large formations into the area, they chose to employ a lighter force. However, they still massed large formations on the Ukrainian border as a show of force. Therefore, it is apparent to the author that the Russians are still operating off their old concepts of forcible entry with a few added twists.
For ease of reading, the author will use the term "Russian" in this monograph to describe the Russian government both pre-and post-breakup of the Soviet Union. The main assumption and risk inherent in this use of the term "Russian" is that the government was similar both pre-and post-breakup.
Thomas L. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 82-83.
Ibid., 10.   
Thomas L. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 67, 77.
Richard W.Harrison, The Russian Way of War: Operational Art, 1904-1940 (Lawrence,  KS: University of Kansas Press, 2001), 35.   
Bruce W.Menning, Bayonets Before Bullets: The Imperial Russian Army, 1861-1914  (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1992), 207.
Vladimir K. Triandafillov, The Nature of the Operations of Modern Armies (Portland: Frank Cass, 1994), xxx.
Georgii Samoilovich Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art (Ft Leavenworth: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2013), 48.
Milan Vego, Joint Operational Warfare:  Theory and Practice (Newport: US Naval War College, 2007), I-3.
Aleksandr A. Svechin, Strategy, ed. Kent D. Lee (Minneapolis: East View  Publications, 1991), 69.
Alfred L.Monks, Soviet Military Doctrine: 1960 to the Present (New York: Irvington  Publishers, 1984), 15.    
David M. Glantz, The Military Strategy of the Soviet Union: A History (Portland: International Specialized Book Services, Inc., 1992), 169-172.
Alfred L.Monks, Soviet Military Doctrine: 1960 to the Present (New York: Irvington  Publishers, 1984), 17.    
Harriet Fast Scott and William F. Scott, The Armed Forces of the USSR (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1979), 47.
Ibid,[42][43] 
David M. Glantz, The Military Strategy of the Soviet Union: A History (Portland: International Specialized Book Services, Inc., 1992), 178.
Department of the Army. FM 100-2-1, The Soviet Army: Operations and Tactics (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. July 1984), 1-1.
Ghulam D. Wardak, The Voroshilov Lectures, Materials from the Soviet General Staff Academy: Volume II -Issues of Soviet Military Strategy Edited by Graham Hall Turbiville, Jr. (Washington: National Defense University Press, 1990), 33.
United States Air Force, Selected Soviet Military Writings 1970-1975: A Soviet View  (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, May 1977), 185-186.   
Michael D. Krause and R. Cody Phillips, Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 2007), 277.
Johanna C. Granville, Soviet Decision-Making: A Comparative Analysis of the Interventions inHungary (1956), Czechoslovakia (1968), and Afghanistan (1979)  (Ann Arbor: UMI, 1992), 293.
Robert F. Baumann, Leavenworth Papers Number 20: Russian-Soviet Unconventional  Wars in the Caucasus, Central Asia, and Afghanistan (Fort Leavenworth: Combat Studies  Institute, 1993), 135.    
Ibid., 138.   
Lester W. Grau and Michael A. Gress, eds., The Soviet-Afghan War: How a Superpower Fought and Lost: the Russian General Staff (Lawrence: University Press ofKansas,  2002), 26-27.   
Ibid., 9.   
Michael D. Krause and R. Cody Phillips, Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 2007), 278.
Military preparations in advance of the invasion of Chechnya resembled the preparations for the invasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Specifically, troop training and preparation equipped them to conduct conventional warfare against a weak opponent. 
63
64
The two most prominent errors made by the General Staff in its development of the plan was to underestimate the capabilities of the Chechen forces and the failure to account for the opponent's use of the mountainous and urban terrain as safe havens and base camps. 
65
66
Robert Seely, Russo-Chechen Conflict, 1800
-2000
: A Deadly Embrace (Portland: Frank Cass Publishers, 2001), 221-222. 64
65
Seely, Russo-Chechen Conflict, 1800
-2000
: A Deadly Embrace (Portland: Frank Cass Publishers, 2001
), 222. 66 Olga Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994
-2000
(Santa Monica: RAND, 2001), 8.