# ID: 30213caf712b4f46a7d3c2ad0a3ed96f
# Title: Morality of Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Case Study of the Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
While widespread until the 1990's, discussions on the morality of weapons of mass destruction have rapidly declined in recent years. However, nuclear weapons remain an issue in U.S. national security and a key player in international relations, providing a nation with an elevated status and powerful deterrent against external aggression. This paper analyzes Just War Theory and applies the criteria to evaluate the morality of modern weapons of mass destruction in hypothetical situations. The criteria are also applied to the sole employment of a nuclear bomb in warfare, the U.S. against Japan in World War II, to determine if this was a moral action.
Acknowledging war is inevitable in civilizations, Just War Theory provides structure to moral arguments in the form of jus ad bellum (just reason for going to way), jus in bello (just actions in war), and jus post bellum (justice after war). Just war criteria were applied to situations in which weapons of mass destruction (chemical, biological, and nuclear) might be used in warfare. With few exceptions, the jus in bello principles of discrimination and proportionality would be violated, thereby making the employment of these weapons unjust.
Morality of nuclear deterrence has the most variance in opinions, ranging from immoral from the threat of indiscriminate destruction to sanctioning by Pope John Paul II as morally acceptable "as a step on the way toward progressive disarmament."
Finally, the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as evaluated against just war criteria appears to be immoral. However, when given the overall context of the situation leading up to that event, the bombings may be considered as excusable in that particular state of affairs.
Overall, weapons of mass destruction will continue to play a role in U.S. policy, with deterrence against external aggression by state actors being the most effective use of nuclear weapons.
Weapons of mass destruction (WMD) are a topic that can be viewed daily in the news, ranging from the proliferation in countries such as North Korea and Iran to nuclear warhead arsenal reductions between Russia and the United States. Since the end of the Cold War, nuclear weapons are no longer deemed as necessary among many leaders, giving the impression that nuclear disarmament may finally be possible in ways never before envisioned. While reduction and non-proliferation of these weapons is an honorable goal, the unfortunate reality is ownership of a weapon of mass destruction provides a nation with an elevated status, granting security and a deterrent against external aggression. In addition, terrorists' organizations seek to acquire weapons of this type in an attempt to push their own agenda or hold hostage a nation through the fear of employment against the civilian populace. Because of the status and power granted to those with weapons of mass destruction, it is likely these weapons will continue to play a role in national strategy for many years.
Through the decades, the morality of WMDs has been discussed in depth following the United States use of the atomic bomb nearly sixty-five years ago over the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In the 1990's, morale issues surrounding nuclear weapons seemed to disappear from public discussion, although the weapons themselves remain. Although there have been instances in the past when nuclear options were considered, no nation has ever violated the nuclear taboo and used them, yet the reluctance of nuclear nations to completely disarm and the desire of new nations to acquire them remains. Because of this, it is important for military officers to understand the impacts and moral implications of these weapons and their potential role in military operations. This paper discusses the morality of weapons of mass destruction as determined through the criteria established in Just War Theory, and concludes that by following a strict set of guidelines, there may be morally acceptable uses for these weapons in warfare. Despite this, the taboo of weapons of mass destruction will persist; therefore, their primary purpose will be as a deterrent to prohibit other nations from using them in warfare. A case study of the atomic bombings over Hiroshima and Nagasaki is used to provide a real-world example of the United States' use of that WMD, with the factors leading up to that decision to determine if it was a justified action and if it could be again in the new century.
Theories of just causes and proper moral conduct in war have been discussed since the days of ancient Greek philosophers. Through the years the idea of just war developed a strong foundation in Christian theology, and war was ultimately deemed a matter of necessity. St.
Augustine (354-430 A.D.) believed war could be used to restrain evil and protect the innocent, specifically by employing an army to stop an enemy force that would willingly injure innocents in pursuit of their own interests. 
1
2
Opinions on just war have ranged from the Pacifists who believe all war is immoral to the Realists such as Thucydides and Hobbes who maintained war is unavoidable and aggression is necessary to defend interests, which is more of a non-moral stance (do whatever is necessary).
Just War Theory dominates the middle of the two extremes, acknowledging war will happen but seeking to apply moral criteria to guide conduct when it does. Two basic tenets have provided the groundwork for Just War Theory: jus in bellum (just cause for going to war) and jus in bello (proper conduct in war). Recently, a third criterion has been suggested, jus post bellum or justice after war.
Various criteria are applied to Just War Theory to provide a structure to the moral arguments for jus ad bellum and jus in bello. A basic understanding of these criteria is required to present a moral argument for or against weapons of mass destruction. In The Morality of War, Brian Orend states that the just war categories must be morally linked, with jus ad bellum setting the tone for everything else that follows. This is to ensure a "check list" approach to Just War Theory is not used for all situations without regard given to the overall context of a particular conflict. 
3
First I will begin with a brief description of each of the jus ad bellum principles. These rigorous conditions must be met if the decision to go to war is to be morally permissible. 
4
B. Next, only legitimate authorities may initiate a just war. This would include the governing authority of a nation or possibly the Security Council of the United Nations, but would exclude independently operating organizations such as the terrorist group al-Qaeda.
C. The good intentions principle means a nation enters a war and conducts itself strictly in line with the just cause that prompted it to go to war. For example, if a nation is victimized, it may defend itself to stop the aggression, but cannot use this as an excuse to gain new territory it has coveted. In addition, this principle includes avoiding unnecessarily destructive acts or imposing unreasonable conditions such as unconditional surrender. 5 D. The fourth and fifth jus ad bellum principles of likelihood of success and proportionality are interrelated in that a nation should have a reasonable chance of success and the costs of the war should not outweigh the good expected by taking up arms. This is particularly relevant in the age of weapons of mass destruction where damage can be great.
These two principles are very subjective but in general, if a nation has no hope of success without great loss, the leaders should not initiate war. E. Finally, the last resort principle implies all further diplomatic efforts would be meaningless, and is included in jus ad bellum to encourage cool heads to prevail over triggerhappy responses. 
6
Even when jus ad bellum criteria have been validated, the conduct of war remains subject to continuous scrutiny. This is especially relevant today because of the destructive capability of modern technological warfare. 
7
8
9
It is important to consider the types of weapons used when evaluating the principle of discrimination. For example, the key difference between a nuclear weapon versus a conventional bomb is due to the damage caused by radiation. This becomes a moral issue because the effects of radiation are difficult to control geographically and may endure generationally, testing the limits of discrimination. 11 Therefore, it is generally assumed that nuclear weapons cannot be employed if one is to fully adhere to the principle of discrimination; however, exceptional circumstances can be hypothesized. For example, a low yield tactical nuclear weapon being used on a remote military location such as a ship at sea with no threat to non-combatants may not violate the discrimination criteria. 12 However, a case like that would be highly improbable since most potential targets of value would likely be located in or near populated areas, where the effects from the blast or fallout would be disastrous.
The principle of proportionality was one of the criteria for jus ad bellum and is revisited in jus in bello as the proportion of force used against legitimate targets. This principle requires that the destruction needed to fulfill the goal is proportional to the good of achieving it. 
13
14
15
However, in reference to nuclear weapons, Walzer seems to make an exception to his previous statement on the requirement for a proportionality rule by declaring nuclear arms "explode the theory of just war." 
16
17
18
19
The close proximity of legitimate targets such as a weapons factory near illegitimate ones like houses or schools raises a complex issue known as the doctrine of double effect. This doctrine assumes that when carrying out military operations on a legitimate target, there may be some unintended collateral damage, which results in a good and a bad effect. Ultimately, if the act, intentions, or direct effects of a military action are essentially good and moral, and the resulting evil effect is not one of the desired ends, it is permitted to perform an act likely to have negative consequences. 
20
21
However, once those supreme emergency conditions cease to exist, i.e. the victim nation is no longer under the threat of imminent extermination, the justification for deliberate civilian targeting dissolves. 
22
23
Now that a basic overview of Just War Theory and associated exemptions has been accomplished, the application of these principles will be applied to determine the morality of weapons of mass destruction. The generally accepted definition for those that are weapon of mass destruction is chemical, biological, or nuclear. A brief overview of capabilities with each of these weapons is required when considering moral implications.
First, chemical weapons are those which produce their effects on a living target (man, animal, or plant) by virtue of their toxic chemical properties. In military operations, their primary purpose is to kill, seriously injure, or incapacitate people through physiological effects. 
24
25
26
27
28
The disparity between the destructive potential of chemical and biological as compared to nuclear weapons raises questions on whether they should legitimately qualify as weapons of mass destruction. Authors Hashmi and Lee raise several interesting points on the destruction caused by conventional weapons not classified as WMDs, citing the aerial bombings of German and Japanese cities in World War II which caused more deaths than the atomic bomb used in Japan. They even discuss how the genocide in Rwanda resulted in the deaths of hundreds of thousands via a simple machete. 
29
Because the nature of chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons generally prohibits discriminating between combatants and non-combatants, they are classified as weapons of mass destruction.
If used correctly, the effects from chemical or biological weapons would be felt not only in the initial strike, but later through biological mutations or environmental pollution. 
30
In addition, chemicals in the groundwater destroyed much of the plant and animal life in areas near the attacks. 
31
Unlike nuclear weapons which are highly destructive at almost any yield, there is a vast range of effects from the lethal to non-lethal for chemical and biological weapons which result in interesting moral debates. A non-lethal biological agent such as the encephalitis virus would have the ability to incapacitate an enemy force while producing low mortality rates, which would seem to be more humane than bombing by conventional weapons which could result in high deaths and destruction of infrastructure. An agent like this may not violate the principle of proportionality since the enemy force would be out of the fight for a period to allow a military objective to be accomplished; however, they may suffer no long term consequences and the local infrastructure could remain mostly intact. On the other hand, based on what is known about the transmission of biological agents, it is likely even a non-lethal agent would violate the principle of discrimination, ultimately leading to negative effects at the strategic political levels. At the lethal end of the scale, a 1993 study suggested a plane delivering anthrax spores over Washington, D.C. could kill as many as 3,000,000 within a few weeks. 
32
Chemical weapons also vary significantly in their effects, with many not intended to be lethal such as tear gases or various mind-altering substances. Similar to the argument applied to biological weapons, there is still the risk of violating the principle of discrimination with employing these weapons which make their use difficult to justify. Ultimately, even though some chemical and biological weapons are non-lethal, Francis Harbour warns against callously using these agents due to the risk of what he calls the "slippery slope." He states there is always a risk of escalation as evidenced from uses of chemical agents in World War I and Vietnam, with every reason to believe this escalation would happen again. 
33
34
A hypothesized use that may not violate the principles of discrimination or proportionality might be a space-based employment. As discussed by Michael O'Hanlon, nuclear weapons could be an effective means of targeting satellites in space. A nuclear detonation on or near a satellite could destroy or degrade its performance, impacting the victim nation's communications as one example. I argue this action would not violate either the proportionality or discrimination principles as defined by just war theorists, and could be a morale use of a nuclear weapon in warfare.
The strength of a nuclear weapon is required for a sufficient explosion in space, as well as providing the particles necessary for destroying satellites in low-earth orbit, which may not violate the proportionality principle. There would be no direct human casualties from the kinetic explosion, with the effect of inconvenience to the technologically advanced victim but not death or destruction. On the other hand, the effects of the nuclear detonation on the Van Allen radiation belt may result in the indiscriminate destruction of more than the intended satellite. If the common understanding of the principles were to be adapted to reflect our technologically advanced society, the morality of this situation may change. Non-combatants would obviously be affected by loss of satellites with a disruption of way of life, even if not by loss of life itself.
Personally, I choose not to place moral constraints on the inconvenience of losing satellites, but retain moral standards for living organisms.
Overall, any use of a nuclear weapon in warfare as it exists today seems highly improbable, to include a space-based use. In that example, a nation capable of performing an attack on a friendly satellite likely has a satellite as well, which could be targeted in retaliation. This leads to a deterrent effect between nuclear powers, which I argue has been the most useful aspect of nuclear weapons since 1949. As mentioned already, the morality of deterrence has been a highly debated over the years.
Weapons of mass destruction have been used in two ways; action in warfare (atomic bomb and chemicals) and to deter an opponent. Nuclear deterrence holds that an aggressor will not act if faced with the same retaliation. The plethora of material concerning deterrence is too vast to elaborate in detail here, but in summary the argument concerns the morality of threatening to do something that is considered morally abhorrent. The theorists' opinions on this topic vary, from the secular, realists, pacifists, and positions among others. The only part they agree on is how complex the subject is.
One paper published by the U.S. Bishops in 1983 posits that the primary moral duty is to prevent nuclear war from ever occurring and preserving values of justice, freedom and independence necessary for national integrity. While advocating the deterrent threat to attack military targets as acceptable, they acknowledge those targets are often interspersed with civilian population centers, and feel limited nuclear war is a fiction. 
35
From the Vatican, Pope John Paul II judged nuclear deterrence as morally acceptable "as a step on the way toward progressive disarmament." 
36
To conclude, any use of a nuclear weapon is likely to violate the jus in bello principles of proportionality and discrimination. Excluding improbable scenarios of limited tactical employment that does not escalate the conflict, most uses of a nuclear weapon would be immoral. The proven value of nuclear weapons is deterrence, which is morally acceptable.
Now that there is a basic understanding of Just War Theory, the principles will be applied to the only case where a nuclear weapon has been used to determine if this action was morally justified. Prior to debating the morality of any action, the situation must be evaluated based on conditions which exist at the time, which leads to the study of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. As stated by Orend, jus ad bellum sets the tone for all else that follows. In this case, the United States had justly entered World War II after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, meeting the criteria of just cause and legitimate authority. Before the development of nuclear weapons, high civilian casualties had already occurred from aerial bombardment in both theaters during World War II; therefore, more than just casualty rates associated with the atomic bombs will be studied when considering the morality of using the weapon. 
37
38
40
It was not until 1995 that declassified messages from the "MAGIC" Diplomatic Summary were released to the public, indicating intercepted conversations that Japan fully intended to continue the fight. 
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
Four cities were initially selected as possible targets: Kyoto, Hiroshima, Yokohama and Kokura. Due to its cultural significance, Kyoto was removed from the list, with Hiroshima and Nagasaki being the final two targets, with a preference being locations which had not previously been heavily targeted. 
49
50
51
The political and military situation between the U.S. and Soviet Union was also a factor for President Truman during the decision process. It was originally hoped that Soviet participation against Japan would help during a planned invasion by pinning the Japanese forces between the two powers. However, as relations between the Soviet Union and Western Allies grew tense in Europe, concern developed over Soviet expansion in the Pacific. In an effort to avoid Soviet entry into the conflict and the potential consequences for Asia, Truman felt the need to end the war quickly, which was a factor in considering a weapon as devastating as the atomic bomb. 
52
53
Another political factor of significance was the U.S. term of unconditional surrender, which some believed resulted in the reluctance of Japan to capitulate. A factor of utmost significance to the Japanese was the Emperor and safeguarding the National Polity. 54 Some of Truman's advisors were in favor of modifying the unconditional surrender demand to induce a speedy Japanese surrender, but this was a decision not made in time for the Potsdam Conference, at which point the first atomic bomb had been successfully tested. 
55
56
57
58
Taking the jus in bello principles into consideration, the atomic bombings clearly violated the principles of discrimination and proportionality. Van Damme and Fotion apply the conditions of the doctrine of double effect towards this scenario, and ultimately rule the atomic bombing did not meet the criteria because it was known the cities would be destroyed and other options were available to the United States. 
59
The bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, while not the sole factor for surrender, forced the Japanese leaders to consider that massive destruction could occur without the planned land invasion they hoped would break American morale. In my opinion, it may be difficult to argue the morality of the atomic bombings based on jus in bello, but the situations in the Pacific at least make the bombings excusable. After months of study, I find I cannot be swayed from that opinion and will continue to stand by it.
The dropping of the atomic bombs has been a topic of controversy and discussion for decades, and will probably continue to be so for years to come. Overall, WWII is unrivaled in the numbers of civilians killed and the overall scale of mass destruction. It was not strategic bombing (to include the atomic bombing), but Nazi genocide, the German invasion of Russia, and the Japanese slaughter of rural Asians that exacted the heaviest price on human lives. 
60
In summary, Just War Theory provides a foundation with moral guidelines on the just causes for going to war, and just conduct while engaged in military operations. In his paper "A Moral Framework for War in the 21 st Century," Colonel Leaphart states that changes in the strategic environment require a new moral framework for examining modern war. 
61
There are not many situations that exist today where a state can claim moral legitimacy in using weapons of mass destruction. Upon analyzing the events surrounding the atomic bombings in World War II, there were so many factors which led to the decision and provide a legitimate excuse for the decision made by President Truman. Despite this, it is still difficult to justify that decision on pure moral reasons. The nature of these weapons has effects that make it difficult to claim any moral grounds for employing them because they will violate the principles of discrimination and proportionality. Up to now, no war has occurred between two nucleararmed states, supported by the deterrent threat of retaliation. It will be interesting to see if this unwritten rule established by Caplow on nuclear states persist should North Korea and Iran become armed with nuclear weapons.
As mentioned, Colonel Leaphart believes a new moral framework is necessary for nonstate actors such as terrorists. It is true these organizations may acquire these weapons and could employ them against military or civilian targets. However, because a terrorist organization is not a legitimate governing authority, from the onset they will be acting unjustly according to the jus ad bellum principles, and can claim no moral foundation. An issue in this situation is the deterrence which worked so well during the Cold War may be useless; there would not be an easy target upon which to retaliate. Even in the event a terrorist acquires and uses a nuclear weapon against American interests, the U.S. would be justified to respond to the aggression, although it is unlikely the U.S. would do so with nuclear weapons.
Although the strategic situation has changed dramatically since the days of the Cold War, nuclear weapons have not gone away and it is important to reiterate the moral discussions from time to time. In the past, these weapons were intended to be used against other states which were the basis for most moral arguments. However, new uses such as against satellites in space may be considered, so the moral implications of such actions will need to be evaluated. It must be understood that despite the desires of some nations for nuclear disarmament, nations who already possess them will not completely give them up, nor will issues of morality prohibit other nations from acquiring them. Weapons of mass destruction will continue to play a role in U.S. policy and our military officers will need to be familiar with the moral considerations of these forms of warfare.
The views expressed in this academic research paper are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US government or the Department of Defense. In