# ID: 327959496e5f4951bead902578b0ccbd
# Title: The Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 and the Evolution of Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
On the news that the Tsar had sent the troops icons to boost their morale, General Dragomirov quipped: "The Japanese are beating us with machine-guns, but never mind: we'll beat them with icons."
-Orlando Figes 1
In all the schools of the country military training had an important place, and children and young men took part in the pleasure. Military walks involved problems of fieldcraft, deployments, surprise attacks, movements at the double. In every school the study of Japanese history must have helped strengthen patriotism and the conviction that Japan was invincible.
-General Kuropatkin 2 2 J.N. Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5: A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 1. Note from General Kuropatkin, who was the Russian war minister paying an official visit to Japan in 1903. His memoirs describe a positive view of Japan, unlike the Tsar, who viewed Japan's inhabitants as puny yellow men from whom Europeans had little to fear. 1 decades, Russian policy was was predicated on the acquisition of a Far East ice-free sea port to support their navy and maritime trade. Since the Port of Vladivostok froze during the winter, Port Arthur provided the opportunity for year round operations. During negotiations Russia and Japan could not agree to terms. Japan proposed recognizing Russian dominance in Manchuria in exchange for Russia's recognition of Japanese dominance over Korea. Russia did not agree to the terms proposed, and Japan began to plan the use of military means to remove Russian influence from the Far East. Russia came to an agreement with China to lease Port Arthur to harbor its Pacific Fleet. Relations soon deteriorated between Japan and Russia leading to the Imperial Japanese Navy attack on Port Arthur. The Japanese were able to defeat the Russian forces over the 18-month campaign, stunning world observers. The war would check Russian expansion eastward and elevate Japan's power and influence in East Asia.
The Russo-Japanese War provides insight to Western and especially Russian military theorists on the operational level of war. World opinion was almost unanimous that the Japanese could not wage and win a war against Russia. This is based upon the premise that the overwhelming numerical superiority of the Russian Army and Navy would inevitably lead to Russian victory. 
3
4
The concept of operational art was developed in the late 18th century. 
5
5 G.S. Isserson, translated by Bruce Menning, The Evolution of Operational Art: Brigade Commander Georgii Samoilovich (Combat Studies Institute Press, U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 2013), viii-16. Explains operational art as the movement from old concepts towards a new understanding of contemporary war and military art. During the Napoleonic Wars, the development the Corps d' Armée gave Napoleon a distinctive advantage over his opponents until at least 1807. 
6
The exact definition of operational art proves to be somewhat elusive even today as it is influenced by political, economic, social, intellectual, and technological factors. How each factor affects time, space, and purpose feeds a complex framework on the exact understanding of the conduct of war at the operational level. Theorists today who look at operational art history take into account these characteristics to define the birth of operational art.
The Russo-Japanese War was potentially the first 'modern' war that included fleet battles at sea in conjunction with enormous scope and logistics in land battles. There were many warfare patterns tested on a large scale for the first time, only to reappear in full maturity a decade later. 
7
1
Understanding the complexity of war at the turn of the century, the fundamental pieces can be measured to determine a quantifiable measurement of victory and the sequencing for the next battle. The Russo-Japanese War provides an excellent model of understanding the use of operational scale and reach as armies were now separated geographically from their home bases of operations by either long expanses of land which applied to Russia or for a sea divide experienced by the Japanese. the operational level of war has been introduced as a level of conflict between strategy and tactics. Since the inception of the operational art concept, there has been an intellectual debate on how the phenomenon is defined as a military theory. Not until the turn of the 20th century was there any study of a level of war that is goes beyond a tactical battle but does not readily define itself as a strategy. Operational art is a bridge that fills the gap between tactics and strategy.
Thus it permits an operational design that is shaped by strategy which affects the tactical level, in particular, a series of tactical actions that will achieve operational level outcomes from the sum of those actions. 10
The 'art' of the operational warfare is the synchronization of military actions in a campaign in relation to time, space and purpose to achieve strategic objectives. Certain critical elements are found in military scholars' varying definitions of operational art. These common threads provide several distinct features in identifying elements of operational level activities, which are used in the analysis of the Russo-Japanese War. Two clearly distinguishable characteristics are scale and reach. No longer were armies bound to one decisive action; instead, there was a series of actions combined with controlling and maintaining the large scale armies seen during the time of Napoleon. Now operational war was determined by moving large scale armies over vast territories, which required the planning of multiple actions, i.e. possessing key terrain, delaying the enemy, capture of strongpoints or cities, and operations against the enemy centers-of-gravity. Also, a military has to maintain the ability to project its power over distances without culminating. The distance and duration across which a unit can successfully employ military capabilities is known as operational reach.
(London: Brassey Defence Publishers, 1998), 24. 10 Edward N. Luttwak, "The Operational Level of War," International Security, Vol.5,  No. 3 (Winter 1980-1981): 178.
As later pointed out, scale and reach are common elements in modern war. But the art comes from the employment of military forces within the bounds of those constraints. Early concepts of operational art have roots from the Soviets with A.A. Svechin and M.N.
Tukhachevsky being the foremost military theorists. Taken from experiences in the Russo-Japanese War, they proposed that operational art was the "totality of maneuvers and battles in a given part of a theater of military action directed toward the achievement of the common goal, set as final in the given period of the campaign." 11 Further, they established the relationship between operations, tactics, and strategy: "tactics makes the steps from which operational leaps are assembled; strategy points the way." 
12
13
Establishing a framework to examine the characteristic of operational art requires the grouping of scale and reach of armies to the implied definition. Combining the two elements requires the use of maneuver in time, space, and purpose. Maneuver facilitates the ability to conduct tactical actions. Jacob W. Kipp points out that, in 1922, Svechin defined operational art 11 Jacob Kipp, "Mass, Mobility, and the Red Army's Road to Operational Art, 1918-1936" (monograph, Command and General Staff College, 1987), 17.
12 Davis M. Glantz, Soviet Military Operational Art: In Pursuit of the Deep Battle  (London: Frank Cass, 1991), 23.
13 Shimon Naveh, In Pursuit of Military Excellence: The Evolution of Operational Theory (London: Frank Cass, 1997), 7-23. as a critical conceptual linkage between tactics and strategy. In this manner, senior commanders transformed tactical successes into operational 'bounds' to achieve strategic objectives. 
14
15
16
15
16 Jacob Kipp, "Mass, Mobility, and the Red Army's Road to Operational Art, 1918-and control a large number of soldiers on the battlefield. Operational reach is an army's ability to maneuver from each successive tactical action, incorporating logistics and timely command and control. James Schneider explores this in his thesis "Vulcan's Anvil," with the use of operational reach during the American Civil War. The rise of maneuver as a form of operational reach is seen as a force moves from one battlefield to quickly build a favorable combat ratio at the next.
Schneider's understanding of operational reach includes the use of logistics to sustain the forces in battle and the ability to quickly give commands through rapid command and control systems. 17
During the Russo-Japanese War there was an element of operational art through the use of both operational scale and operational reach. The evolution described by Russian theorists also incorporated Schneider's concepts of operational reach. But as Kipp presented, that operational scale in an ever expansive and complex campaign incorporated both mass and the mobility of forces. Both authors stress the importance of troop movements over space and time.
Thus the operational art utilized by both the Russian and Japanese forces in the complex Far East theater required the incorporation of both operational scale and reach to achieve their strategic aims. This was increasingly important as the necessity to move, maneuver, and communicate with massive troop numbers over limited lines of communication put a constraint in both time and space.
Operational Scale (Mass + Mobility)
Clausewitz gave a clear understanding of the three levels of war when he wrote about time and space. 
18
18 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. and ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (New are parallel to those of space -country, theater of operations, and position -and so bear the same relation to our subject." 
19
Jacob W. Kipp, a Soviet Army studies expert, examines the development of the Russian operational art through the development of mass and mobility during the turn of the 20th century.
Works from Tukhachevsky, a Soviet military theorist, provide clues learned from the experiences of the Russo-Japanese War, which focused on the mechanization of the massed army as a way to conduct decisive operations. 
20
22 Ibid., 4.
Russia's ability to conduct complex maneuvers to neutralize or destroy its enemy. One segment was devoted by Kipp to point out this observation when the Russians were conducting their Civil War in 1928. 
23
Kipp further states, "Veterans of the Russo-Japanese War undertook reform measures to make the army ready for what they called 'modern war' and began to study the conduct of operations, debate military doctrine, and create the command and control to conduct the operations by fronts controlling multiple armies." 24 Russia took away many lessons and Japan enjoyed the benefits of developing its ability to generate a large military and project its power across the Far East. In the lead up to the Russo-Japanese War, Russian general H. A. Leer taught strategy at the Nikolaevskaia Academy of the General Staff, which did not help the cause. He looked to past leaders like Moltke and Napoleon, extracting their principles and laws of war rather than evolutionary concepts. 
25
24 Jacob W. Kipp, "The Evolution of Operational Art: From Napoleon to the Present 1853-1991," in Evolution of Operational Art: From Napoleon to the Present, ed. John A.Olsen and Martin van Creveld (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 64-95.
25 Jacob Kipp, "Mass, Mobility, and the Red Army's Road to Operational Art, 1918-1936" (monograph, Command and General Staff College, 1987), 4.  with both low-and high-end innovations. 
26
During the nineteenth century the ability of nations to field armies of a scale never seen before combined with the need to mobilize and maneuver these forces. The conduct of warfare changed, and military theorists started to see an art in the ways these armies conducted themselves within a theater to achieve the strategic goal. No longer did conflict encompass one ruler or commander directing the battle. Warfare had evolved beyond the commander coordinately tactical action, logistics, and movement of troops. Napoleon proved to be the catalyst of bringing both scale and reach together, creating a revolution in command. What was to be achieved by the Japanese during the war would coalesce the accomplishments of Napoleon.
The organization of the army to have general staffs and the development of the corps transformed the massive scale of manpower into a maneuverable and devastating tool. Van Creveld points out that the most influential single characteristic of the new corps, and what made a critical revolution in the operational art, was the sheer size of the formation. 
27
Its ability to sustain a battle for several days provided sufficient time for other corps to arrive. The staff allowed the corps to function as a small army allowing a coordinated response to a single commander. 
28
During the 18th century, the use of command and the staff was in a transitional period. "On the one hand, there persisted the tendency to concentrate all intelligence and operational matters in the hands of the commander in chief…" 
29
Napoleon organized his armies for easy control over vast terrain. Napoleon was an exception to leading massive forces, as he was able to rely less on his general staff and more on his own operational planning. He developed a balance of effort that the general staff could efficiently manage during an operation, which was based on four principles. They were the creation of the corps, the operational command and control of passing orders, the creation of the headquarters 27 Martin van Creveld, Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton, 2nd ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 80.
28 Ibid., 60.
staff, and the use of his aides to observe, obtain information, and issue orders at any time. 
30
31
With scale and reach innovations creating a modern warfare stage during the Russo-Japanese War the complexity would have been overwhelming even for Napoleon. Japan adopted the Western general staff model used by the French and Prussian armies to ensure effective management of armies at the operational level of war. Both the Russian and Japanese Western general staff models leveraged the advantage of improved communications through telegraph and rapid wire-transmitted information. The development of the staff is not the absolute means to the evolution of the operational level of war, but it is a necessity in coordinating military forces within the complex geography of the Far East. The Russians had adopted Napoleon's methods well before the Japanese, and this contributed to the sense that the Japanese military was an inferior force. In 1885, Prussian General von Meckel arrived in Japan and lectured the Japanese on the organization of a general staff. Japan also sent their most promising officers for training in Prussia. By 1904 the divisions were stocked with highly competent, brave, and dedicated officers. 
32
Though Japan had armies located throughout East Asia, the armies operating in the Korean and Manchurian theaters acted independently of each other. Field Marshall Oyama Iwao, who had been an observer of the Franco-Prussian War, took command of the Japanese armies in Manchuria which consisted of four separate armies operating independently. It took considerable effort to create coordinating efforts between them all. 
33
34
35
Although both militaries had a general staff, the Russo-Japanese War highlighted the slack bureaucratic Russian system. Russian officers were matched in courage but lacked energy and initiative. Some were trained in academies, others were the incompetent sons of nobility.
36
There were some reforms that allowed middle-class men to earn commissions. This allowed technical talent to develop competent engineer and artillery units. But, officers with bureaucratic 32 J.N. Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5: A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 28.
33 Ibid., 51.
34 Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defense, "Official History (Naval and Military) of the Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I" (London: Harrison and Sons, 1910), 412; W.D. Bird, Lectures on the Strategy of the Russo-Japanese War (London: Hugh Rees, 1909), 65. 
35
temperament reached the highest ranks, and the majority of Russian generals in the war could be described as 'bureaucratic.' 37 This fostered a culture among officers to avoid criticism and take minimal risks in order to avoid failure. A loss in a defensive action was easier to justify when compared to a loss in offensive action, which could be linked to deficiency in one's decisions. General Kuropatkin was an example of a bureaucratic leader who was not willing to take risks.
General Oyama on the other hand had observed the Prussian army encirclement and defeat by the French at Sedan. 
38
Leading up to the Russo-Japanese War, there were examples of militaries successfully exploiting the use of railroads, e.g. the Franco-Prussian war, the Austro-Prussian War, and the American Civil War. Ironically, the Russo-Japanese War would be fought because of the existence of a railway. Eastward expansion by the Russia became a clear threat to Japan's interest from the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway which linked Western Russia with the Far East. The railway network provided a dynamic element to the Russo-Japanese War. The Russian forces, however, approached their railways in a passive way, regarding them mainly as a logistical support capability, and purely as a means of transport for their human and material supplies. In contrast, the Japanese saw their railways as a factor to be integrated into their overall strategy, using lines as a support facility, but also integrating them into broader plan of attack. 39 37 J.N. Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5: A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 29.
38 Ibid.
39 Felix Patrikeeff and Harry Shukman, Railways and the Russo-Japanese War: Transporting War (New York: Routledge, 2007), 96.
Initially, Russia had various advantages. The Russian Empire took advantage of China's incapacity to secure Chinese territory by treaty. By the time of the war, Russia had created a new Russian navy and the Trans-Siberian Railway (begun in 1891), which provided a two-armed pincer surrounding the weakly-held territories of China, Manchuria, and Korea. But, the Japanese analyzed the operational environment to develop an approach of utilizing the captured rail systems to support a series of tactical actions through the use of the Korean railway network to put considerable pressure on Russian forces. This allowed Japan to achieve a position of relative advantage. As the campaign continued, the Russian Army supplies dwindled and the Russian military was faced with a multi-faceted threat and few options at their disposal. 
40
41
Another logistical challenge was the voyage of the Russian Baltic Fleet to the Far East, which involved enormous difficulties of refueling along the 33,000 kilometers covered by this armada from its departure point to the location of its defeat. The logistical challenges faced by both sides served as a catalyst for further improvements and new fields that fully materialized in the two subsequent world wars. 
42
43
44
The distance over which a campaign is fought has grown dramatically throughout history, creating challenges in moving large armies. This change increased the importance of time when 42 Rotem Kowner, The Impact of the Russo-Japanese War (New York: Routledge, 2007), 14.
43 Robert E. Smith, "The Evolution of the Operational Level of Warfare" (monograph, Naval War College, 1992), 34. 
44
conducting operations. Furthermore, the importance of technological revolutions leading up to the Russo-Japanese War influenced command and control structures through the use of communication by telegraph and the development of general staffs educated in the application of operational art. The rapid growth of armies on the battlefield also contributed to the development of operational art, but size alone would over simplify this discussion of scale. The operational reach of such armies required the resources and manpower to move along the vast theater.
Perhaps most critical of all is the function of sustainment. Competent operators must organize and sustain the force as well as employ it. The growth of logistics as a staff function reflects its importance in operational art. 
45
Napoleon was successful in raising large armies and logistically maintained the reach and durability needed to wage a campaign throughout Europe. The ability to supply enormous armies is just as vital as the size of the formations. Michael Howard points out, "In the 18th century, it was generally accepted that there was a strict limit to the size of armies that could usefully be deployed in the field-a limit fixed by problems of supply." 
46
45
46
nevertheless Napoleon developed an understanding of the sustainment of massive armies over an ever expanding battlefield. 
47
48
49
50
48 William T. Sherman, Memoirs (New York: De Capo, 1984), 8.
49 Ibid., 9.
50 Felix Patrikeeff and Harry Shukman, Railways and the Russo-Japanese War: Transporting War (New York: Routledge, 2007),103.
51 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. and ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret, (New York: Everyman's Library 1993), 97. Discusses the central element of the remarkable trinity concerning that 'there is an interplay of possibilities, probabilities, good luck and bad that weaves its way throughout the length and breadth of the tapestry.' Commanders who overlook chance as an internal element of the nature of war may culminate their forces. Proper planning in sustainment of forces within the campaign allows the forces to absorb the blows of unforeseen actions upon their forces.
In the Far East, both Russia and Japan faced limitations to organic support for their forces. "The Japanese supply system was better organized than the Russian's and enjoyed the additional benefit of a short line of communication." 
52
53
54
55
56
53 Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defense, "Official History (Naval and Military) of the Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I." (London: Harrison and Sons, 1910) Prussian general staff under Moltke's supervision became an extremely capable organization for the efficient planning and execution of the mobilization and deployment of mass armies. Japan's adoption of the Prussian staff model allowed it to sustain and move large scale armies within a theater. Just as important as technological advances were the organizational advances necessary for managing the growing complexity of modern armies. As Michael Howard notes "the greatest military innovation of the nineteenth century was not technological, but rather the organizational institution of the general staff." 
57
In James Schneider's theoretical study of operational art during the American Civil War, Vulcan's Anvil, he proposes that both the railroad and the telegraph provided the technological leap forward into modern warfare. In 1863, America saw the rise of operational maneuver through the four corps of Union General Joseph Hooker's Army of the Potomac. With the use of the telegraph and railway network, Hooker was able to maneuver from one battlefield to the next 
57
58
59
60
The notion of operational art developing from maneuver and communication through the application of railways and telegraph seems plausible. The art is performed through the ability to plan actions to achieve the strategic aims while utilizing these revolutions in military affairs.
Maneuver to conduct deep operations only is not sufficient against a thinking enemy who could interrupt maneuver or worse, cut lines of communication and isolate the army. Having a general staff that understands the operational level of war is paramount to a successful campaign. They provide the ability to synchronize military actions in time and space to achieve strategic objectives. Schneider later highlights the importance of general staff planning at the operational level. There is a need to connect a series of deep actions throughout the battlefield and operational reach achieved by the railway network and telegraph. Under the structure of operational art Schneider highlights eight elements. 
61
60
61 Ibid., 35-58. The structure of operational art consists of eight key attributes. The fullest expression is manifested through 1) the distributed operation, 2) the distributed campaign, 3) continuous logistics, 4) instantaneous command and control, 5) the operationally durable formation, 6) operational vision, 7) the distributed enemy, and 8) distributed deployment. 
62
The commander along with his staff must process information rapidly and make timely decisions, but there is no further discussion on the processes of operational planning.
The Russian ability to challenge Japanese operational reach was dismal. Despite the Cossacks' excellent reputation at home and abroad, the performance of the Russian cavalry was disappointing and they achieved little. They lacked the capability to adequately conduct reconnaissance and attack enemy supply lines. The Japanese cavalry, although technically inferior, threatened to cut railway lines north of Mukden and was able to exploit weaknesses in the Russian deep areas. 
63
Westwood stated the possibility that the Russians' study of Leo Tolstoy's 1869 novel War and Peace was the origin of their addiction to defensive tactics and strategy. 
64
65
Peter Paret's book, Makers of Modern Strategy, expands on the proof of the military value of railways during the American Civil War. Armies were able to utilize this technology to make smaller armies appear larger than they were by quickly mobilizing them. Friedrich List, an international political economist of that period, predicted that the impact of railways in modern strategy would bring a shift in power. He saw the use of the railway system in Germany and its 63 J.N. Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5: A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 129.
64 Ibid., 129.
65 Ibid., 130.
ability to rapidly transport troops to increase defensive or offensive capability, believing it could provide a multiplicative factor of ten-fold during an offensive war. 
66
The continuing improvement to logistics in warfare needs to be considered in the use of operational artistry within the Russo-Japanese War. Advances in technology with shipping and transport extended the operational reach of the military. In "Vulcan's Anvil," Schneider argues that the rise of operational maneuver forever changed the nature of warfare. He goes on to claim that the art of war that was characterized by Soviet military theorist G.S. The Union Army's use of railroads in 1865 enabled efficient maneuver from one battlefield to the next. This ability to rapidly project power and the need to move large armies to achieve strategic aims would characterize modern warfare. Schneider presents an argument that the framework of operational art is characterized by distributed operations. This offers freedom of action through movements over vast distances and the organization's durability is provided by its logistics. 
70
A level of war linking tactical to strategic would seem to be on the horizon. The increase of the scale of armies and operational reach was evident in Europe's development. Construction of new roads and canals facilitated travel over vast distances. 
71
77
During the American Civil War, the Federal Government enacted on 31 January 1862 two legislative acts. First, it "…set up machinery for an agency to control the operations of captured Southern railroads…" Second, it gave the Government the authority to order the nation's railroads to transport troops and the necessities of war to the exclusion of all other business. 
78
Up to the time of the Russo-Japanese War, wars in the West best demonstrated the impact of railroads at the operational level in its expansion of the boundaries of time and space. During the American Civil War, the Union's advantage of population and industry was mitigated by the South's expansive geography. The North America theater of war was considerably larger than any European theater to date. The Union would hold a significant advantage since the majority of 83 William T. Sherman, Memoirs (New York: De Capo, 1984), 399.
weapons and the size of armies, no longer could one conduct flanking movements at the tactical level, but the solution was to be found at the operational level of war. 
84
In the years before the war, Russia and Japan were determining how to deal with each other in regards to their Far East policy. There were for some years driving forces at work that were destined to result sooner or later in war. Russian Admiral Alexiev's had stated, "A war with
Japan is inevitable…It may be postponed, but it cannot be prevented." 
85
Saint Petersburg was unable to make timely decisions on the intentions or actions of the Japanese. With the limited intelligence gathered on the Japanese, Russia underestimated the strength of its opponent. The Russian leaders did have knowledge of a pending mobilization of Japanese forces as "the sheer visibility of Japanese naval assets, the majority of which were concentrated in a handful of naval bases that might be kept under direct observation." 88 But the lack of urgency and preparation for a Japanese attack can be faulted by the belief of the superiority of the Russian military and the unwillingness of the Japanese to engage in conflict against them. The observer bias continued until the outbreak of war. Because the Japanese Army could not be directly observed like Japan's naval ships in the yards, the Russian underestimated the Army's capabilities. With increased Japanese secrecy, there was no way to confirm Japanese troop strength. In the 1903-version of the Russian Army's threat book, Japan's wartime mobilized strength was estimated at 358,809 officers and men. The French gave Japan a higher estimate of 634,000 because of their observation of increased financial allocation and reorganizations. In reality, Japan had successfully mobilized 1,185,000 troops by the end of April 1904. 
89
Admiral Togo Heihachiro, Commander of the Combined Fleet that attacked Port Arthur and led Japan to victory after the decisive Battle of Tsushima, faced opposition to his plans.
Comparison of total national force or power of Japan and Russia showed that Russia's forces
Global Perspective: World War Zero (Netherlands: Leiden, 2007), 87. 88 Bruce W. Menning, Miscalculating One's Enemies,vol 2 of The Russo-Japanese War in Global Perspective: World War Zero (Netherlands: Leiden, 2007), 148.
were clearly greater. However, a comparison limited to naval forces deployed in the Far East in 1903 showed both naval forces being quite evenly matched. Japanese naval planners understood that as time progressed Russia would gain the advantage as Nicholas II kept building ships. 
90
In the end, the Japanese understood the importance of being stewards of their limited resources. They planned and executed operations with as many logistical preparations as were possible. The Russians squandered multiple opportunities to leverage their superiority in both reach and scale of their military. Kuropatkin's memoir pointed out many of the planning shortcomings within the Russian politico-military system that sealed their fate. 
93
94
95
I do not suggest that Schneider is correct in his proposal of the Civil War being the first conflict to express operational art as we understand it today. Napoleon was able to achieve many successes without the benefit of the telegraph or railway system. He was able to master the ability to utilize his resources and available technology to augment his strategic genius. With the scale of the large French armies, he was able to use operational reach more efficiently than his opponents. Napoleon used a form of long distance communication to direct command and control by the masterful use of economic and technological backwardness of the time. 
96
97
in Global Perspective: World War Zero (Netherlands: Leiden, 2007), 111. 
95
The question still remains: how was Japan able to beat Russia? During the review of the literature, we learn that the evolution of operational art comes from both operational scale and reach. Kipp claims that mass and mobility 98 of the Russian army was the evolutionary element of the development of operational level of war. The scale of the operational level of war in terms of both size of maneuvering forces and the size of the theater was answered by mechanization.
Through lessons learned during the Russo-Japanese War, and subsequent trial and error process, the "Soviet commanders achieved the skill necessary to handle the massive, mechanized forces that Marshall Tukhachevsky championed." 99 Thus, the mastery of the scale in battle both in maneuver of forces and the conduct of multiple operations over a campaign theater provides one of the pillars to the evolution of operational art.
In the view of Schneider, the application of operational art in the West was achieved during the Civil War. Operational maneuver provided the new dimension needed to conduct the reach in a vast open theater of war. With the industrial revolution providing the railway and telegraph and its use during war, it psychologically shrank the theater of operations.
"…a furloughed soldier from Wisconsin fighting with the Army of the Potomac could expect to reach home in no more than three days time. The swift rail movement of mail also tended to cement the soldier at the front with the home he had left behind. The rapid movement of information, provided for by the electric telegraph and the emergence of news wire services, brought a new kind of immediacy about the war to those on the home front. The psychological unification of front and rear also began to erode the distinction between soldier and civilian."
100
99
The unification of the base of operations to the war front allowed for continuous mobilization. As Kipp points out, the speed of movement of troops within the theater to the front to support operational maneuver is the detail needed in conducting operational level of war, but these two elements combined do not produce operational level of warfare. As discussed earlier, the ability to plan these elements in both space and time is the factor needed to create the art below strategic and above the tactical realm.
The study looks at the campaign of both sides, the Russians and Japanese, in the ability to adapt and employ operational art (or lack thereof) to achieve their strategic objectives. The research will be conducted as a qualitative approach to inquiry via two case studies. According to
Stephen Van Evera in his book, Guide to Methods for Students of Political Science, "A large literature on the case-study method has appeared in recent years, but that literature remains spotty. No complete catalog of research designs for case studies has emerged." 
101
Second, the intent of the case study is to determine if the use of operational scale and operational reach equals operational art. Third, the case study presents an in-depth understanding of the case.
Fourth, it develops a method of data analysis. Fifth, it identifies themes or issues or specific situations to study in the case study. And last, its use of organized chronology to analyze across cases for similarities and differences between the cases.
102
The first of the cases examined will be the Battle of Port Arthur, the starting point of the war. Second is the Battle of Tsushima, a decisive naval battle for the Japanese that is considered the turning point of the war. Evaluation of doctrine, planning, political situation, and the potential of war will be reviewed. There will be an analysis of the themes of scale and reach to determine if there was an operational level of warfare and how the two themes contributed to either the victory or defeat of the armies. The qualitative case study development attempts to recognize the problem each side faced and the methodology of utilizing the three themes to achieve the tactical advantage in the operational scheme of the war. The focus of looking at each case study is to determine the application of operational art in the Japanese and Russian campaign.
During analysis, an evaluation of operational reach in the context of mass and mobility will be conducted on a scale from outstanding, excellent, good, fair, and poor. This method of qualitative scoring will be conducted for operational reach of maneuver, logistics, and command and control.
Admiral Alexiev, the Russian Emperor's viceroy in the Far East stated, "A war with Japan is inevitable…It may be postponed, but it cannot be prevented. Russia's heartland to the Far East was broken at lake Baikal. In the interest of economy, the railway had not been extended around the lake meaning troops and supplies had to be ferried in the summer or transported over the thick ice in the winter. Supply halted during the spring and fall. The Russian knew of the importance of the mastery of the railways from their observers of the Japanese campaign during the Sino-Japanese War. Observer General Vogak noted that the Japanese was effectively able to use rail and sea for mobilization and transport as very well, noting that any European power might envy them. Vogak stated, "the Japanese General Staff can be proud of the results achieved." 112
Strategically, Russia looked towards Korea and Manchuria as the only areas where expansion was possible without precipitating a war. But Russia expansionist policy would bring the Russian government into conflict with Japan, England, and the United States. Though there were attempts by the Japanese to come to an understanding with Russia, the Russians saw no reason to compromise. Russia assumed if it would come to war with Japan, it would be able to quickly dispatch its military and put down the Japanese.
Geographically the Far East was a major problem for Russia and this was a significant factor in its defeat. There was a lack of joint efforts to coordinate between the three. 
117
118
Japan had its challenges, too, in assuring naval superiority while supporting land operations in Korea and Manchuria. While forced to pursue tactical victories against the Russians, its resources of men were growing thin and the forces needed to take Port Arthur, one of the primary objectives, proved challenging. The growing scale of warfare in time, space, and manpower presented challenges the Japanese mastered only marginally better than the Russians. 
119
120
122
120 Jacob Kipp, "Mass, Mobility, and the Red Army's Road to Operational Art, 1918-1936" (monograph, Command and General Staff College, 1987), 2.
121 J.F.C. Fuller noted that General Nogi was limited on time and had to ensure a timely assault upon Port Arthur before the arrival of the Russian Baltic fleet. General J.F.C Fuller states, "Though such a decision is understandable, for this was the first attempt in history to storm a fortress held with magazine rifles, machine guns, and quick-firing artillery, there was little justification for General Nogi to suppose that it was likely to succeed against so determined an enemy as the Russians had proved themselves to be."
122 J.M. Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and Tumbling Bear: A Military History of the Russo-Japanese War 1904-5 (London: Routledge, 1988), 180.
With the hills held by the Japanese, it was a matter of time until the fall of Port Arthur.
Concerted efforts by the army and navy ensured that the garrison was pinned, and Japanese artillery was free to bombard the port. After the controversial surrender, when the Japanese checked the stores inventory of the Russians, they were surprised by the amounts that remained.
There was not only ample ammunition and food, but the supplies of champagne and vodka also appeared to be inexhaustible. 
123
124
2
During the summer of 1904 the Russian Baltic Fleet was refitted with newer warships to swing balance of naval power in Russia's favor. 
125
126
130
131
129
Stone, A Military History Of Russia: From Ivan The Terrible To The War In Chechnya (Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Security International, 1968), 148. 130
131 J.M. Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and Tumbling Bear: A Military History of the Russo-Japanese 
War 1904
-5 (London: Routledge, 1988), 138. 132
133
War 1904
-5 (London: Routledge, 1988), 251. 134
ports were forbidden to provide support to warships. 
137
Commanders operating at the operational scale who wants to fight maneuver warfare should be thoroughly familiar with the history of previous conflicts. The problems that face modern armies have roots in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Whether Schneider or Kipp are correct in the evolution of operational art at the advent of the railways, telegraph, or mechanization to support maneuver in the deep battles, there is no doubt that commanders faced challenges from the dramatic growth of armies and the increased range and lethality of weapons.
Little has been discussed in the evolution of operational art with the management and planning that is conducted by the operational planner. No longer can commanders conduct on a whim maneuvers or mobilizations. Now it takes careful analysis by the operational planning staff to plan for the myriad of problems that come from dealing with large armies and a complicated enemy.
During the Russo-Japanese war, the Japanese learned the way of European warfare and utilized their understanding of operational level war to set an achievable objective and the actions needed to achieve it. There were over a dozen named battles during the war, which could be a case study in itself, but both Port Arthur and Tsushima proved to be major causes of celebration for the Japanese. Both sides faced supply difficulties throughout the war. The Russians did not understand the challenges of a geographically isolated army and navy; though able to sustain them, they could not adequately support them during conflict. Also Russia's command and control was seen as a digression from the glorious periods of victory during the Russo-Turkish war (1877-1878). The Tsar was misinformed by the field commanders, and the sense of economic might in the west could overcome the obstacles they faced, prompted Russia to throw piece-meal war materials towards the east to face Japan. The Japanese on the other hand knew they had challenges as the war continued. They had to achieve victory as quick as possible against the Russian juggernaut, so not only military victories were important, but the psychological effects of making this a costly war for Russia. Immediately after the Battle of Mukden both Oyama and the war ministers stressed the necessity of terminating the war through peace negotiations. But at the time Tsar Nicholas, who was being assured by his generals that victory was near, did not consider negotiations. It was not until the fall of Port Arthur and the shock of losing his navy at Tsushima in May 1905 that he decided negotiations were necessary. 
138
139
Source: Created by author .8
Source: Created by author .8
71  
71  
Paul Holmes, "Japanese Operational Art in the Russo-Japanese War"(Monograph,  Naval War College, 1996).
Julian S.Corbett, Maritime Operations in the Russo-Japanese War 1904-1905, Volumes   One and Two (Annapolis and Newport: Naval Institute Press and Naval War College Press,
Rotem Kowner,  The Impact of the Russo-Japanese War (Routledge: London, NY, 2007), xvi.
Jacob Kipp, "Mass, Mobility, and the Red Army's Road to Operational Art, 1918
- 1936
Roxanne E. Bras, "John Nagl on the Future of Military Innovation," Small Wars Journal Blog Post, entry posted June 13, 2013, http://smallwarsjournal.com/print/14173 (accessed 18 August 2013). But Nagl is quick to warn against this interpretation. In talking about military innovations, he distinguishes between two kinds: high-and low-end. High-end innovation is generally technologically based, is associated with Russel Weigley's American "way of war," and results in more effective ways of destroying the enemy. Low-end innovation tends to be associated with the allocation of human capital, institutional knowledge, strategy, and operational approaches. It is often relatively inexpensive, but takes time to acquire and implement. While the military is very good at innovating at the high end, Nagl claims that it really struggles to do so at the low end. MTTs are a rare exception of low end innovation, and it took years, and perhaps some careers, to make it so.
Ibid., 39.   
Martin van Creveld, Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton, 2nd ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 97.
David G. Chandler, "Napoleon, Operational Art, and the Jena Campaign" in Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art, ed. Michael D. Krause and R. Cody Phillips (Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History, 2005), 65.
J.N.Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5:  A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 29.
Felix Patrikeeff and Harry Shukman, Railways and the Russo-Japanese War: Transporting War (New York: Routledge, 2007), 97.
J.N.Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5:  A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 122.
Ibid.,[59]
[60]
Martin van Creveld, Command in War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,  1985),59. Discusses the revolution in strategy and the limits in warfare to provide long-distance communication and intelligence concerning the enemy's operational and tactical moves. "Under such circumstances no very elaborate 'general' staff system was required…"
Ibid.,
60.
James J. Schneider, "Vulcan's Anvil: The American Civil War and the Foundation of the Operational Art" (Theoretical Paper No. 4., U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 2004), 34.
Stephen van Evera, Guide to Methods for Students of Political Science (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997), 49.
John W. Creswell, Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing Among Five Approaches, 3rd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2013), 98-99.
Henry Rowan-Robinson, The Campaign of Liao-Yang, ed. C.E. Callwell (London: Constable and Company, LTD, 1914), 2.
J.N.Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5:  A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 115.
J.N.Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5:  A New Look at the Russo-Japanese
Henry Rowan-Robinson, The Campaign of Liao-Yang, ed. C.E. Callwell (London: Constable and Company, LTD, 1914), 159.
Ibid., 207    
Ibid.   
David R.Stone, A Military History Of Russia: From Ivan  The Terrible To The War In Chechnya(Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Security International, 1968), 147.   
Jon E. Lewis, Battles: The Art and Science of Modern Warfare (New York, New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers, Inc., 1995), 21.
R. M. Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and Tumbling Bear: A Military History of the Russo-JapaneseWar 1904-5 (London: Routledge, 1988), 263.   
R.M. Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and Tumbling Bear: A Military History of the Russo-JapaneseWar 1904-5 (London: Routledge, 1988), 242.   
J.N.Westwood, Russia Against Japan, 1904-5:  A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 155.
Department of the US Army, Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, August 11, 2011. Doctrine for Joint Operations defines operational art as the use of creative thinking by commanders and staffs to design strategies, campaigns, and major operations and organize and employ military forces. In Army Doctrine Publication 3-0, 2012, 9. Army doctrine defines operational art as the pursuit of strategic objectives, in whole or in part, through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space and purpose.
The Emperor of Japan was unable to reconcile differences with Russia diplomatically.
Russia was an economic juggernaut that was expanding into the Far East, threatening Japanese interests. An imperial conference was summoned on 4 February to hear the opinions of the Emperor's advisors. The chief of staff, Oyama, believed there was only a 50/50 chance of winning a war against Russia and the Imperial Japanese Navy would maintain control of the seas a great cost. Given Japan's limited population and resources, as time passed it would be impossible to dislodge Russia from the Far East. 
108
The war began on 8 February 1904, when the Japanese fleet conducted a surprise attack and siege on the Russian forces at Port Arthur despite repeated warnings from diplomatic and military representatives abroad. 
109
3
Later Stoessel would be found guilty of prematurely surrendering the fortress and sentenced to western provinces along the borders of Germany and Austria-Hungary. 
113
114
The Russians had a larger number of forces in Korea and Manchuria, they were incapable of logistically supporting this massive army. The Japanese were relentless with ongoing battles, which proved challenging for Russia.
Japan: Fair Russia: Fair Mobility Russia was incapable of using a combined arms effect to maneuver, and ultimately mass, forces upon their enemy.
The Japanese were able to use captured rail and nearly free support from the sea to support its tactical actions upon the enemy Japan: Good Russia: Poor Source: Created by author. 114 Ibid., 23. Within 24 hours Japan could send troops across the Sea of Japan to the Korean peninsula. Command of the seas was required to move their 283,000 standing man army and later their 400,000 mobilized trained reserves. So at the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War even though Russia had a standing army of over 1,250,000 men, the advantage was all Japan's.
the Russian withdrawal from Mukden this final major battle allowed the Japanese to achieve their strategic aim of creating favorable conditions for a negotiated peace. Operationally and tactically the Japanese held the advantage of maneuver.
Operationally, the Russians had one purpose and did not contribute to the war until it could engage the Japanese in Tsushima. The Japanese, on the other hand, were able to monitor the Russians' progress while using the navy to support operations at Port Arthur and surrounding areas. The Russian Baltic Fleet once at sea showed its showed its incompetence when rumors of Japanese torpedo attacks in the North Sea was taken seriously. For Admiral Rozhdestvenski, he did not attempt to determine the location, disposition, or relative strength of the Japanese fleet to plan against it. He was predisposed with being able to move this fleet into the Pacific without thought of how the battle would ensue or how he would be able to maintain combat with the limited shore to ship supplies for this fleet. Tactically, once the two fleets met at Tsushima, the Japanese shadowing the Russians had a 3 knot speed advantage and started to maneuver its ships.
Togo seized and retained the initiative using the speed advantage to good effect. 136 With Rozhdestvenski's command and control knocked out early in the tactical fight, the Russian fleet succumbed to confusion and Japanese bombardments.
Logistically, the Russians had no sea support in theater once the Russian fleets were subdued and the last fleet located in the Baltic would require months to enter into the war. The Japanese, on the other, had held a significant advantage of having uncontested seaways to support its armies in Korea. Also, the Russians faced the logistical problem of Russian fleet deployment.
The move required the supply of coal of 3,000-10,000 tons daily. Unlike Russia's European counterparts, Russia had no colonies to support the journey. Under international law, neutral Russians, who were an economic power vastly superior to Japan's small global presence, lose in the Far East with a military force equivalent to Japan? The Japanese were able to use many dimensions of operational art as explained by both theorists Schneider and Kipp. This monograph displayed that the understanding of the operational level of war allowed the commanders to apply the art needed to link tactical actions to achieve a desired end state.
Both the scale of an army and the distance an army can operate alone illustrates operational art at the time of the Russo-Japanese war. Operational art is found to be a formula of operational scale multiplied by operational reach. But, the Russians had a massive army and was able to sustain it in the Far East. As discussed earlier, operational scale is the accumulation of mass and mobility. Operational reach is maneuver, plus logistics, and command and control.
The Japanese were able to offset advantages held by the Russians through the effective use of mobility, maneuver, and command and control. Though Russia had an equivalent army in the Far East, it was not able to effectively provide for mobility in the campaign; also Russia was hindered by a restrictive bureaucratic command and control system.
The Russo-Japanese War demonstrated that the Japanese learned lessons from the Prussians with land armies and from the British for its navy at the operational level of warfare.
However, the evolution was not consistent in all aspects of warfare. Though the Japanese were able to demonstrate skill at movement, maneuver, logistics, command, and the use of tactical actions to achieve their objective, they also fought using tactics 30 years out of date. The Japanese utilization of operational art against Russia was at least as important as the factors of scale and reach. The Japanese military leaders knew any prolonged war would continue to benefit the Russians. Hence, the peace treaty which resulted from Theodore Roosevelt's mediation was unpopular with the Japanese people, who saw their army as invincible through victories earlier in the war. 
140
140 Shumpei Okamoto, The Japanese Oligarchy and the Russo-Japanese War (New York and London: Columbia University Press, 1970),142.