# ID: 327959496e5f4951bead902578b0ccbd
# Title: The Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 and the Evolution of Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
-General Kuropatkin 2 2 J.N. Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904-5: A New Look at the Russo-Japanese War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), 1.
Note from General Kuropatkin, who was the Russian war minister paying an official visit to Japan in 1903.
His memoirs describe a positive view of Japan, unlike the Tsar, who viewed Japan's inhabitants as puny yellow men from whom Europeans had little to fear.
1 decades, Russian policy was was predicated on the acquisition of a Far East ice-free sea port to support their navy and maritime trade.
Since the Port of Vladivostok froze during the winter, Port Arthur provided the opportunity for year round operations.
During negotiations Russia and Japan could not agree to terms.
Japan proposed recognizing Russian dominance in Manchuria in exchange for Russia's recognition of Japanese dominance over Korea.
Russia did not agree to the terms proposed, and Japan began to plan the use of military means to remove Russian influence from the Far East.
Russia came to an agreement with China to lease Port Arthur to harbor its Pacific Fleet.
Relations soon deteriorated between Japan and Russia leading to the Imperial Japanese Navy attack on Port Arthur.
The Japanese were able to defeat the Russian forces over the 18-month campaign, stunning world observers.
The war would check Russian expansion eastward and elevate Japan's power and influence in East Asia.