# ID: 327959496e5f4951bead902578b0ccbd
# Title: The Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 and the Evolution of Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
During the Russo-Japanese war, the Japanese learned the way of European warfare and utilized their understanding of operational level war to set an achievable objective and the actions needed to achieve it.
There were over a dozen named battles during the war, which could be a case study in itself, but both Port Arthur and Tsushima proved to be major causes of celebration for the Japanese.
Both sides faced supply difficulties throughout the war.
The Russians did not understand the challenges of a geographically isolated army and navy; though able to sustain them, they could not adequately support them during conflict.
Also Russia's command and control was seen as a digression from the glorious periods of victory during the Russo-Turkish war (1877-1878).
The Tsar was misinformed by the field commanders, and the sense of economic might in the west could overcome the obstacles they faced, prompted Russia to throw piece-meal war materials towards the east to face Japan.
The Japanese on the other hand knew they had challenges as the war continued.
They had to achieve victory as quick as possible against the Russian juggernaut, so not only military victories were important, but the psychological effects of making this a costly war for Russia.
Immediately after the Battle of Mukden both Oyama and the war ministers stressed the necessity of terminating the war through peace negotiations.
But at the time Tsar Nicholas, who was being assured by his generals that victory was near, did not consider negotiations.
It was not until the fall of Port Arthur and the shock of losing his navy at Tsushima in May 1905 that he decided negotiations were necessary.