# ID: 32db2c78e78b4ab0b8ceb5c3293bedd4
# Title: Cyberwar in the Seams: Russian Exploitation of International and Humanitarian Law in Offensive Cyber Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
Russia is able to conduct offensive cyber operations that impact civilians, while maintaining the illusion of compliance with international law. This study analyzed Russian offensive cyber operations case studies to assess the scope and impact of the attack as well as determine the loopholes, ambiguities, or gaps in international law that Russia may exploit. The results of the case studies were analyzed with factors established from research on Russian military thought to establish likely political and military strategic objectives. The common objectives present in the case studies provided a baseline for Russian offensive cyber operations, and inform the document analysis of the various sources of international law. The mechanism exploited by Russia is textualism, an overemphasis on the definition of international law terms without consideration of the intent of the law. This can be mitigated by an effects-based approach to determining violations of international laws, specifically use of force and breach of sovereignty. Furthermore, the research indicated that Russia follows a deliberate course of action when conducting offensive cyber operations that gradually enables significant cyberattacks without triggering protections under international law or international humanitarian law.
A short paragraph is hardly a fitting acknowledgement to recognize the mountains of support provided to me by my wife, Emily, during the research and completion of this thesis. Sometimes a sheer prodigy of effort, sometimes delegating proofreading to the nearest loved-one, she consistently provides investments into my interests for which I am truly grateful. Her ability to manage our energetic and lovely daughter, a full-time job, and my long hours at the library, all the while being pregnant with our son will never cease to amaze me.
Likewise, the hours of scholarly discourse offered by my fellow inaugural Information Advantage Scholars, and the leadership of the program's Director, Mr. Pete Im, were invaluable for refining my thoughts into what I hope becomes a worthwhile discussion for future researchers. Despite being towered by your experiences and intellect, I've enjoyed every minute, meme, aside, and tweet.  Fiscal Year 2020 and the Future Years Defense Program (Washington, DC: Committee on Armed Services, February 14, 2019), 3, https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/ hearings/19-02-14-united-states-special-operations-command-and-united-states-cybercommand. Hereafter referred to as Nakasone Testimony.
The digital age is also a cornucopia of risk made possible by technology, data, communications, and their integration into our daily lives. Individuals, academic institutions, government, industry, and militaries have never been more accessible and vulnerable to cyberattacks by malicious actors across the globe. Many malicious actors have been State-sponsored, State-directed or State-run, and many of the victims have been civilians. Academics, industry leaders, non-governmental organizations, and international agencies such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have been advocates for recognizing the high potential for tangible harm to civilians in future cyberspace conflicts. They also recognize the absence of codified protections of civilians, similar to the Geneva Conventions, and seek a purpose-built solution for the unique environment that is cyberspace. 
2
Unfortunately, adversaries can leverage the general population and their reliance on connected technology as potential targets for supportive measures or even decisive attacks. General Paul Nakasone, Commander of USCYBERCOMMAND, highlighted the strategic impacts of these decisive adversary actions to the Senate Armed Services Committee in 2019 and specifically defined "malicious cyber actors [who] weaponize personal information, steal intellectual property, and mount influence campaigns" as 2 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), "Special Series: Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations," Law and Policy (blog), International Committee of the Red Cross, June 15, 2021, https://blogs.icrc.org/law-and-policy/ category/special-themes/avoiding-civilian-harm-during-military-cyber-operations. corrosive threats. 
3
China is eroding U.S. military overmatch and the Nation's economic vitality by persistently exfiltrating sensitive information from U.S. public and private sector institutions. Russia has used cyber-enabled information operations to influence our population and challenge our democratic processes. Other actors, such as North Korea and Iran, have similarly employed malicious cyber activities to harm U.S. citizens and threaten U.S. interests. Globally, the scope and pace of malicious cyber activity continue to rise. The United States' growing dependence on the cyberspace domain for nearly every essential civilian and military function makes this an urgent and unacceptable risk to the Nation. 
4
5
6
7
Whether the hardware across the globe hosting the malicious network traffic is facilitating the attack or should be considered neutral, or even a victim, is challenging to answer. International organizations, such as NATO's Cooperative Cyber Defence Center of Excellence, have expended significant efforts to identify how existing international law applies to cyberspace. These studies, known as the Tallinn Manuals, are insightful and detailed, but purely academic. Despite years of research and peer review, the nonlegally binding nature of these studies leaves civilians as vulnerable as ever to cyberattacks from State actors. In fact, various State-supported actors have utilized cyber operations against individuals in support of strategic economic, military, and political goals, such as during the Russo-Georgian War and the Russo-Ukrainian War.
The corrosive threat actors, as identified by General Nakasone, recognize cyber operations as a part of a system of systems, where the cyber component is complementary to kinetic operations, accelerating the path towards a strategic goal.
Adversaries, such as Russia, take a step further and integrate cyber operations on civilians during peacetime, adapting gray-zone conflict to the 21st century faster than treaties can be amended or written to prevent it. Russia, in particular, has integrated cyber operations deeply within its warfighting theories while still projecting an image of compliance with international law by avoiding the designation of armed conflict. These gaps, a result of applying laws written for physical conflict to a digital world, enable adversaries to unduly influence U.S. and allied government and military decision-making by leveraging the well-being of the civilian population.
Over the past two decades, the broad reach, difficulty in attribution, and dual-use nature of cyberspace have made the domain a valuable target for attack by corrosive threats, with the potential for significant direct and collateral harm to civilians. 
8
The study aimed to identify how Russia can perform OCO that impacts civilians, while maintaining the illusion of compliance with international law. This required researching historical examples of adversary cyber operations, and a reasonable understanding of international law and its constraints. The result offers insight into the baseline of cyber operations that an adversary may consider suitable towards the ends of achieving their strategic goals while minimizing risk to force, limiting the response to below the threshold of armed conflict, and feigning compliance with international law and international humanitarian law, in order to maintain a permissive cyberspace environment for future conflict.
Within the frame of the problem statement and purpose of the study, three research questions arose that provided structure to the study. The primary research question was:
1. How does Russia project an image of compliance with international law in the conduct of offensive cyber operations (OCO)?
The intent behind the primary research question was to offer historical examples of feigned compliance with international law and compare key elements of the examples with one another. The result would then provide the opportunity to look forward and determine how Russia might act in the future.
The secondary research questions look to the future, informing the discussion with Russian methodology rather than western insights. The secondary research questions are:
2. What loopholes or gaps exist in international law and its protections of civilians as it applies to OCO? 3. How does Reflexive Control Theory (RCT) apply to the use of cyberspace operations?
In order to facilitate the study, the researcher made several assumptions that materially impact the validity of the result. If these assumptions are proven to be incorrect, then the cross-case synthesis will need to be amended to remove the implications of the false assumption. The riskiest of these assumptions were generalizations made about Russia's tactics and techniques. First, Russia will continue its political and military belligerence, supported by OCO. The 2021 Interim National Security Strategic Guidance supports this assumption of continued belligerence, stating, "Russia remains determined to enhance its global influence and play a disruptive role on the world stage." 
9
RCT. 10
11
Cyberspace -Defined by Joint Publication (JP) 3-12, Cyberspace Operations, cyberspace is the "domain within the information environment that consists of the interdependent network of information technology (IT) infrastructures and resident data.
It includes the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and embedded processors and controllers." 12 Russian doctrine does not refer to this concept as cyberspace, but rather as an element of Information Space that is not considered separate from human information processing. 
13
14
15
16
15
16
Gray Cyberspace -Implied by JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations, gray cyberspace is the remaining cyberspace that is not considered blue or red. 
18
19
Information Warfare (Russian: informatsionnaya voyna) -Defined by many publications, but succinctly summarized by TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, information warfare is "Employing information capabilities in a deliberate disinformation campaign supported by actions of the intelligence organizations designed to confuse the enemy and achieve strategic objectives at minimal cost." 20 Information warfare is considered a permissible ruse of war under the provisions of Protocol 1 of the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. 
21
22
23
24
Semi-deniability -In the context of OCO, semi-deniability is a step further from plausible deniability toward attribution. The intent of a semi-deniable offensive cyber operation is for the perpetrator to embed enough information on the source of the attack to ensure the strategic messaging of the perpetrators is evident to the victims, without providing any concrete, legally-undeniable proof of the identity of the perpetrator.
Several limitations exist in studying international law's applicability to individuals in cyberspace, but the most impactful to this thesis is scope. While several years can, and should, be dedicated to the study of preventing non-combatants harm in any future cyberspace conflict, the scope of this study is narrower than the topic deserves due to the time limitation of the degree for which this thesis is written. The inability to travel to research primary sources, due to degree requirements as well as the on-going global pandemic, present another limitation on this thesis.
Furthermore, the research is limited by two primary factors: the limited distribution of Russian doctrine, especially as it relates to information warfare, and the author's reliance on translated materials for Russian-language documents and research.
The research relies on synthesis, analysis, and secondary sources about adversary strategic and operational frameworks. Fortunately, much attention has been paid to Russian OCO recently, mitigating some aspects of the limitation.
Moreover, Russia's overarching defensive perspective presents a limitation as well. Russian doctrine and military literature frame their military actions as a response to hypothetical aggression from Western countries. This defensive outlook enables Russian military action confined only by the hypothetical offending Western military action.
NATO's Handbook of Russian Information Warfare emphasizes that:
[i]t should be noted that the majority of these Russian sources present their research and findings as describing not Russia's own approaches, but the approaches which they say are adopted by foreign powers seeking to harm Russia. In some cases, the principles described reflect not home-grown theory, but Russian adoption of what it believes to be Western practice. 
25
In addition to limitations, this thesis is subject to self-imposed delimitations to facilitate one aspect or another of the study. While the most accurate and relevant information on adversary cyber warfare capabilities may be available in classified form, this thesis will include only public-domain documents in the research, and provide an unclassified analysis. Subjecting the thesis to classification would unnecessarily limit distribution and hamper the benefit it could provide, adding depth and data without significantly changing the resulting study.
Furthermore, the study is limited to a specific adversary. As identified in the DoD Cyber Strategy, several State actors and non-State actors are capable of some level of cyber warfare, such as China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran. This study is limited to solely Russia due to a combination of the researcher's interest in Russian information warfare and limitations on time due to degree requirements.
Finally, the chronological scope of the research ends in 2021 as a function of a rapidly redeveloping conflict in Ukraine with Russia as the principal aggressor. Apart from the stated difficulty in attribution for OCO, not enough time has passed to allow for establishing facts for the renewed Russo-Ukrainian Conflict in 2022. Additional study should be accomplished to integrate this unfolding conflict into the framework of this thesis.
The study into adversary exploitation of the international law and international humanitarian law as it applies to cyberspace is most relevant to strategic parties, such as government and military leaders. The analysis provided by this study will help inform, or reinforce, what to expect and how to defend against this specific adversary. It can be applied to any adversary who desires to project the illusion of compliance with international law while conducting OCO against the general population in an opponent's country.
The benefits of today's connected society come hand-in-hand with significant concerns. Adversaries now enjoy instantaneous access to the entirety of an opponent's population and have a desire to use that vulnerability toward strategic political and military goals. While civilians are customarily protected from harm in a physical conflict between States by treaties and international humanitarian law, applying these same constructs to cyberspace is not a simple task. The gaps created when international law is applied to cyberspace implicitly create liberal boundaries, or maneuver space, for what OCO crosses into the threshold of armed conflict. This maneuver space allows adversaries to unduly leverage U.S. and allied civilian population's wellbeing to achieve their strategic political and military goals. inflicting an incredibly high cost on non-military targets to decimate civilian morale. 
26
1. 1 How does Russia project an image of compliance with international law in the conduct of OCO?
2. What loopholes or gaps exist in international law and international humanitarian law and its protections of civilians as it applies to OCO? 3. How does Reflexive Control Theory (RCT) apply to the use of cyberspace operations?
A notable proponent in the space of modernizing international humanitarian law, specifically, has been the ICRC.
27
28
29
1. "States should address the concerns posed by the increasing integration of cyber operations with other military capabilities during armed conflicts." 30 NATO and the UN independently concur with the prospect of addressing the stated concern. 31 NATO's efforts offer scholarly studies and non-legally binding works on how existing international law may be applied to various types of cyberspace conflict. The Secretary General of the United Nations recently remarked on the need for addressing these same concerns, doing so under two working groups, a U.S.-sponsored Group of Governmental Experts, and a Russian-sponsored Open Ended Working Group. 
32
31
32
33
34
35
36
38
39
38 Brad Smith, "The Need for a Digital Geneva Convention at the RSA Conference (As Delivered)" (Transcript of Keynote Address at the RSA Conference, San Francisco, CA, February 14, 2017), 5-6, https://blogs.microsoft.com/wpcontent/uploads/2017/03/Transcript-of-Brad-Smiths-Keynote-Address-at-the-RSA-Conference-2017.pdf.
seeking to "deliberately distort their meaning and undermine their status as the consensus normative basis which to move forward." 
40
42
45
47
Microsoft has been an advocate for protections in cyberspace, protections from nationstate information and influence operations, and more. Leaders at Microsoft regularly publish articles, including Digital Defense Reports, as well as speak on the matter. 
48
50
51
As mentioned in the previous chapter, the Tallinn Manual was prepared for NATO's Cooperative Cyber Defence Center of Excellence in order research how to apply existing international law to the most severe OCO. Tallinn Manual 2.0 expands the focus to examine how existing international law applies to cyber operations that fall below the threshold of armed conflict. Tallinn Manual 2.0 is, again, a scholarly work that is nonlegally binding yet proves informative due to its in-depth discussions on the genesis of the legal precedent. It offers 154 black-letter rules that its authors consider widely accepted and free from doubt, pragmatically adapted from existing international law. The manual expends great effort on detailing the origination of the law and expands significantly on the definitions and justifications of each rule throughout the work. The Tallinn Manual and its 2.0 revision are substantial efforts towards establishing a common framework of applicability of international law to cyberspace. 
52
53
55
56
53
54
55
56
57
The ICRC seems to concur with the Tallinn Manual perspective of limited aims in preventing civilian harm in an impending cyberwar, explicitly stating, "existing processes must be adapted to the cyber context to ensure compliance with international humanitarian law." 
58
59
57
59
60
States to recognize the risks associated with gray-zone operations and the applicability of international humanitarian law. 
61
62
63
Regardless of the preferred path, whether the reader supports the industry perspective of revolutionary change, the ICRC's perspective of evolutionary, iterative change, or the Tallinn Manual's adaptation of existing laws to cyberspace, the concept of adhering to international law and protecting civilians in cyberspace are foundational elements of all paths.
International law and international humanitarian law have a variety of sources.
Customary international law consists of practices that have occurred throughout recent history to become a norm. International legal proceedings, such as those from the International Court of Justice, are another example of sources for customary international 61 ICRC, "Special Series: Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations," 15 June 2021, 3 62 Schmitt, Tallinn Manual 2.0, 495. 
63
Throughout the research on Russian sources, the Russian government and military view themselves as simply adopting tactics employed against Russia. On the other hand, Western nations would consider those same tactics as uniquely Russian, many of them objectively past the threshold of war crimes. NATO's Handbook of Russian Information Warfare introduces Russian sources with the preface that "the majority of these Russian sources present their research and findings as describing not Russia's own approaches, but the approaches which they say are adopted by foreign powers seeking to harm Russia." 
65
The implication is quite simply that OCO, referenced as information operations, on non-military targets is a core tenet of Russian New Generation Warfare. 
67
Another unique topic for Russian military thought is the socio-psychological theory of Reflexive Control. Developed in the 1960s by mathematical psychologist 
66
Chekinov-Bogdanov Commentaries of 2010
-2017, 8. 67
68
69
70
71
70
71
72
The above description simplifies the theory considerably, as Lefebvre includes methods to integrate formal and informal leaders in an entity, and the power they have over an organization. 
73
This thesis offers that OCO-enabled RCT operations can target mass populations, foreign and domestic, much more granularly that Soviet-era RCT. This could be accomplished by practitioners (entity X) refining baselines for entire population groups (entity Y), simulating the general population's decision-making process to determine reflexive structure. Enacting RCT methods in cyberspace allows for a significant optimization in the process of Reflexive Control of any entity Y, even as their full cognitive map is not yet known. Offensive cyber-attacks can be utilized to manipulate or elucidate the psychology of the target, providing feedback to build a better baseline model.
Once entity Y's reflexion baseline is created, any attempt at influence can help categorize sub-groups of entity Y. This may manifest as a haphazard, broadly aimed cyber-attack or misinformation campaign that resounds with some part of the entity Y population. If that part of the population contains an informal leader in a social group or movement, Reflexive Control methods categorize the sub-group, bounding the groups reflexion score, further reflexively controlling entity Y's subgroup (hypothetically labelled Y-1). The general population is subject to reasonably well understood psychological principles, leaving only the reflexive structure of the sub-group Y-1 above the Y-baseline to be identified. Military targets, as an example, generally follow prescribed (often incredibly detailed and readily available) decision-making processes such as the Military Decision Making Process. This bypasses the need for expending repeated effort for reflexive control over multiple social organizations or military units, and enables predetermining the baseline reflexion score of entity Y-1 as a mathematical variable. As additional information becomes available to identify the rest of Y's decisionmaking process, it can be added to the Y-baseline or the Y-1 sub-group baseline.
Furthermore, repeating the process on the remainder of entity Y to create more sub-groups (Y-2, Y-3, and so on) allows for a system of Reflexive Control to be built that captures an entire population. While this was a task-intensive process with Soviet-era Reflexive Control, this becomes a mundane task when presented with the general public target, or even the military target set, enabled by the immediate feedback of cyber-attacks and misinformation campaigns. With the advent of cyberspace, RCT methods became the primary method of influencing enemy strategy at negligible risk to force, ephemeral consequence on the perpetrator, and minimal cost compared to physical operations. 
74
75
76
77
This technical paper dedicates a significant space to updates on Russia's use of Reflexive Control concepts, and forecasts on future Russian conflicts, including their focus on cyberspace. Taken together, Thomas' works build a framework for understanding how the warfighting theory has developed over the past two decades, as connected technology and corrosive threats have matured hand-in-hand. Thomas' perspectives facilitate building a foundation for an understanding of the modern Russian way of war, and the fallacies of projecting uniquely Western ideologies onto Russian cyber and information operations. 
78
The selected method strove to empirically investigate Russia's image of compliance with international humanitarian law, substantiated by recent examples of uses of OCO on civilians that exploit gaps in international humanitarian law. Robert Yin's Case Study Research and Applications set the stage towards that goal adeptly, identifying that all research methodologies can be used for any of three distinct purposes: exploratory, descriptive, and explanatory. 
81
82
The researcher validated the cases as both recent enough to reflect newer Russian doctrine and old enough to have provided the opportunity for a large body of research.
The selected cases are the Russo-Georgian War, and the Russo-Ukrainian War.
While the researcher was preparing this thesis, the Russo-Ukrainian War resumed after a six-year ceasefire, complicating the how future researchers can replicate these results. Various scholarly articles used in this thesis refer to the Annexation of Crimea, the War in Donbas, or the Russo-Ukrainian War, not knowing that the conflict would resume in 2022. This thesis will utilize the Russo-Ukrainian War to indicate the Russian aggression in the 2013-2017 period, as the tactics, military and political goals, and scope of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine are fundamentally distinct from the earlier phase of conflict.
After selecting the Russo-Georgian and Russo-Ukrainian Wars as the cases, a specific methodology was required to determine valid inferences and apply them to future conflicts. Instead of analyzing the selected conflicts as a singular case, the researcher utilized cross-case synthesis, as identified in Figure 
1
The document analysis focuses on international humanitarian law to identify loopholes or gaps that have been exploited. As a function of addressing the primary research question of how Russia projects an image of compliance with international humanitarian law in the conduct of OCO, the document analysis also frames the answer to the secondary research questions of how RCT applies to the use of offensive cyberspace operations.
The case studies utilized in this mixed methodology research are not without criticisms. Cyber warfare is still novel, attribution is challenging, and the number of cyberattacks thus far limits the sample size. Considering the small sample size, countering bias plays an integral role in ensuring the analysis's validity. In an effort to mitigate bias concerns, the research relies on an expansive variety of authoritative authors when primary sources are unavailable. Yin describes case study evidence as coming from many sources, such as "documentation, archival records, interviews, direct observations, participant-observation, and physical artifacts." 84 Each of these six sources has strengths and weaknesses, particularly when considering the research topic, and "no single source has a complete advantage over all the others," according to 
Yin. 85
strategies reasonably reliably. 
88
89
The mixed methodology chosen by the researcher discretely analyzed two historical incidents, identified key inferences between the two independently assessed cases, and utilized the results to identify answers to the research questions, via cross-case synthesis and document analysis. While case study methodology has viable critiques, as identified in this chapter, the combination of methods offers an opportunity for verification and repeatability. As future incidents occur, another researcher only need accomplish a single case study of that event and verify that the key inferences identified in this work are still present in future incidents. 
88 Yin,
Case Study Research and Applications,
171. 89
CHAPTER 4
Russia has never had anything to do with any types of cybercrimes.
-Dmitry Peskov, Kremlin spokesperson, 13 February 2019
The analysis and findings presented in this chapter are categorized into three primary sections, beginning with a section discussing the analysis and findings from the case study of the Russo-Georgian War. Following the first section is an analysis and findings from the case study of the Russo-Ukrainian War, specifically during the 2013- articles that generally apply to military operations rather than solely OCO, several other objectives were discussed in the Chekinov-Bogdanov commentaries were present in the framework but not evident in the case studies, and therefore were not included in the document analysis. The key inferences that were found in the case studies were then evaluated with respect to which international laws they sought to exploit, if any. Finally, the chapter concludes with a more robust analysis of the specific exploited articles of international law that were being exploited, as well as a summary.
In August 2008, over five days, Russia seized the Georgian territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The tensions leading up to this find their roots in the aftermath of the fall of the Soviet Union, reignited by Georgia's Rose Revolution and aspirations to become a member of NATO, sustained by continued tensions in the South Ossetia region leading up to hostilities, until the situation was manipulated for Russian benefit. Russian tactics in this conflict were especially novel, as this appeared to be "the first case in history of a coordinated cyberspace domain attack synchronized with major combat actions in the other warfighting domains." 
90
91
91
94
95
Chekinov and Bogdanov highlight, in "Nature and Content of a New-Generation War," that "new-generation war will be dominated by information and psychological warfare that will seek to … depress the opponent's armed forces personnel and population morally and psychologically." 96 This perspective on warfare is reminiscent of Giulio Douhet's thoughts on demoralizing civilians with strategic bombing in World War I. Taking the element of the framework of adjusting public opinion, and applying it to the Russo-Georgian War, the researcher found a handful of OCO that served to manipulate the opinion of civilians in the general population and "[reduce] the opposing sides' 
94
95 Timothy Thomas, Recasting the Red Star: Russia Forges Tradition and Technology Through Toughness (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2011), 157, https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195632. 
96
97
98
99
100
101
97
Chekinov-Bogdanov Commentaries of 2010
-2017, 19. 98
99
102
Overall, the analysis of the OCO in the Russo-Georgian War found several key inferences within the analytical framework built from the Chekinov-Bogdanov commentaries: concealment of operations, adjust public opinion, destabilization of social situations, complicate rules and customs of war. The researcher's labeling of objectives as key inferences does not indicate complexity, scope, or success. It is only intended to highlight that OCO supports these generalized objectives, even in a rudimentary and unsophisticated manner. Russo-Ukrainian War (2013-2019)   Beginning in February 2014, shortly after Ukraine's Revolution of Dignity, Russian soldiers, without identifying insignia, began to seize the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea under the pretext of protecting Russian speakers from the Ukrainian government.
After annexing Crimea, Russian-backed separatists, and eventually Russian troops, began a conflict with Ukrainian troops in the Donbas region. Russian OCO are alleged to have begun as early as 2013, with malware such as RedOctober, MiniDuke, NetTraveler, and Uroboros, though the attackers showed voluntary restraint in target selection and attack at the onset of the conflict. In lockstep with Russian military thought, OCO were predominantly integrated into reconnaissance support for military strikes, as well as information operations facilitated by cutting-edge malware, until the scope broadened and restraint withered as the conflict continued. 
103
104
(1) Communicate, research and probe victim computer networks; (2) register malicious websites and domains with names mimicking legitimate ones; (2) send spearphishing emails (4) store and distribute additional malware; (5) manage malware; (6) transfer stolen data; and (7) negatively influence the public perception of some of the victims. The Conspirators reused some of the same infrastructure to target multiple victim organizations and individuals. 
105
As early as 2013, the Gamaredon Group targeted Ukrainians in order to obtain information on the Ukrainian government and military intentions. 
106
107
In 2014, a failed attempt at compromising Vybory, the Ukrainian Central Election Commission's computer-aided vote tallying system, was attributed to a hacking group with ties to the GRU. 
113
Immediately following the election, Russia undertook an offensive cyber operation resulting in the defacement, then disabling, of the Central Election Commission's results website for several hours, delaying the official announcement of the next president of Ukraine. 
114
115
116
Cyber-enabled reflexive control methods, used more aggressively in the future, could stay within international law and international humanitarian law while still achieving their objectives of influencing adversary decision-making. Continued utilization of cyberenabled espionage and cyber-enabled gray-zone tactics such as disinformation, election interference attributed to criminal organizations or hacktivists, utilization of proxy forces and botnets for denials of service, all complicate the attribution of a State for the violation of sovereignty for their opponent, exploiting customary international law, as well as established practices from International Court of Justice rulings. Furthermore, Russia will be able to continue to exploit a loophole that exists regarding international humanitarian law only applying during armed conflict. If they can successfully deny that the conflict is armed, through denial of communications or media sources, they will be able to enact OCO on the general population with impunity, as evidenced by hostilities in 2008 and 2015. Finally, considering the speed of opponent decision-making at the operational and tactical levels, Russia may exploit the requirements of Article 2(3) of the Charter of the United Nations, requiring States to seek nonviolent remedies under Article 33, such as "negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement" and more to support reflexive control methods, due to the incredible amount of time required to address such a conflict, since "the invocation of the responsibility of a State for an internationally wrongful act involves complex technical, legal and political considerations."
117
Concealment of operations also need not explicitly violate international norms, considering the tactics of ruse and camouflage is a specifically allowed practice under the Geneva Conventions. Current methods, such as the Pterandon malware used in Ukraine as early as 2013, are initially viewed as criminal activities or espionage, and do not directly violate use of force prohibitions in and of themselves, even when attributed to a State. When the pilfered intelligence is weaponized, passed on to military units for kinetic action, the cyberattack and malware would be subsumed under the greater violation of the use of force prohibition in international law such as the Charter of the United Nations. Even then, it is unlikely that international law would consider the weaponized intelligence an attack in its own right, due to inflexible legal definitions of terms such as attack, armed conflict, hostilities, violence, and harm. Concealing operations in the future may not be limited simply to concealing the physical presence of troops (an international law violation as a breach of sovereignty in and of itself) by enacting internet blackouts to deny journalists the ability to report and upload media.
Instead, concealing operations is likely to broadly include actions such as fostering misattribution by using code stolen from other State actors, launching attacks intended to be misattributed to destabilize an opponent's tenuous relations with an adversary, or hiring proxy cybercriminals to threaten or terrorize the general population while masking the benefactor. These actions challenge State responsibility as codified by the International Court of Justice, discussed below as Article 4 and Article 8, and also leverage the lack of inclusion of cyber effects in the same key terms, such as attack, listed above.
Destruction of the opponent's economy evokes imagery such as indiscriminate shelling or area bombing, which are prohibited by a variety of international laws. Despite the billions of dollars of loss associated with the NotPetya data-wiping malware attacks in 2017, no effort was expended to apply the principles of State responsibility to provide restitution for the effects of the attack. Furthermore, cyberattacks under this objective again leverage the insufficient definition of attack, which prevents the Geneva Conventions requirements for discriminating between military and civilian objects.
Future attacks intended to destroy an opponent's economy may involve manipulating and attacking stock markets or hacking supply management and logistics databases without necessarily running afoul of international law, again exploiting the lack of a use of force or violation of sovereignty in cyberattacks.
Socio-psychological impact, destabilizing social situations, and adjusting public opinion covers a wide range of political and military objectives in the two studied conflicts, ranging from defacing government websites, to power grid attacks, to leaks of pilfered private data by a State, and even election interference. The scope of these three Chekinov-Bogdanov framework objectives cover violations of customary international law, the Charter of the United Nations, the Geneva Conventions and International Court of Justice rulings, and all of them leverage the lack of an armed attack enacting international humanitarian law, plausible deniability, proxy forces, and misattribution. Future conflicts will likely see State-sponsored cybercriminals leaking private health or financial data of an opponent's civilians, and cyber-enabled influence or disinformation campaigns creating destabilized social situations that offer Russia prima facie legality to step in with military force. The most likely pretexts will be language, religion, and race, borrowing from Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations. 
118
119
The Charter of the United Nations is an example of treaty law, and binds UN member states to it. A small number of nations or states are not members of the UN, such as the Holy See, and some states with limited recognition such as Taiwan, Palestine, and Kosovo. Russia, however, is a member of the UN and therefore subject to its laws. The aspects of the Charter of the United Nations that are most relevant to conducting OCO are Article 2(4) and Article 51. The Charter's Article 2(4) directs that member States "shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state" while also prohibiting actions inconsistent with Article 1, which identifies purposes of the UN. 
124
125
126
124
125 Ibid. 
126
127
The research conducted during the case studies, cross-case synthesis, and structured document analysis provided sufficient data to answer the primary research question. The utilization of the Chekinov-Bogdanov commentaries to establish a framework for the case studies was a valuable tool, but with certain limitations. The framework aided in developing a baseline for which international laws Russia is currently exploiting, and identifying general OCO Russia is likely to take in future limited conflict, as well as proposing which escalatory measures can reasonably follow while still ascribing by international law. The exploitation of several aspects of customary international law, treaty law, and international humanitarian law were all found in both case studies, and demonstrated the maneuver space created by the stringent textualism in applying existing international law, intended for physical conflict, to conflicts in cyberspace.
Russia has been able to maintain an image of compliance and, therefore, the ability to act with impunity while conducting OCO due to an established practice of precision application of gray-zone conflict tactics to cyberspace. Furthermore, the image of compliance is supported by the lack of evidence in either case study of directly harming civilians in or via cyberspace, with the exception of indirect harm via power grid attacks and elections interference. While the case studies considered conflict with limited aims, the results already show escalation in scale and impact of cyberattacks that is only likely to increase unless international law is updated with considerations for future cyber conflict.
Both case studies inferred an offensive cyber operation, followed by a narrowlyscoped use of force. Any nondestructive impacts from the offensive cyber operation are subsumed under the UN Security Council complaint of the destructive use of force or physical breach of sovereignty, creating space where Russia continued conducting OCO.
The physical breach of sovereignty, which would typically violate international law, then had a supportive narrative launched through defacement, denial of media and government websites, or redirecting traffic to Russian servers. This supportive narrative offered justification for the physical breach under tenets that would generally follow international law, such as acting in defense of ethnicity or race, or removal of threats to peace, from customary international law and the Charter of the United Nations. OCO on telecommunications then prevents competing ground-truth narratives from being widely released. The primary caveat is that the cyberattacks must be subsumed under the physical use of force or breach of sovereignty UN Security Council complaint.
Expanding from the baseline, Russia leverages textualism, whereby the specific definition of a term is valued over the intent of the law, as effective loopholes, ambiguities, and gaps in the application of international humanitarian law to cyberspace.
The definitions for armed attack, use of force, hostilities, physical violence, damage, and breach of sovereignty are too narrowly defined to apply to cyberspace, de facto creating a permissive environment for cyberattacks on governments, militaries, and even civilians.
International humanitarian law's reliance upon activation by armed conflict also exploits the definition of armed conflict, restricting any protections of civilians that would otherwise apply in a physical conflict between two States. These operations embody gray-zone conflict tactics, achieving strategic effect while staying below the threshold of armed conflict, specifically leveraging the strict definitions of armed attack, use of force, or armed conflict.
Finally, the research and analysis suggested a beneficial relationship between OCO and Reflexive Control methods due to the potential for viable feedback mechanisms, computer-aided modeling of reflexion, and the existing efforts in the case study that align with the Reflexive Control method of Selecting Messages. In fact, even though Russia likely utilizes multiple warfighting theories to support its strategic goals, a majority of its actions in cyberspace are supported under the construct of RCT. Despite this inference of a link between the two, the case studies lacked specific evidence of whether or not any previous OCO were verifiably reflexive control methods.
As demonstrated in the case studies, Russian OCO leverage loopholes, ambiguities, and gaps in international law to achieve strategic political and military goals, at the cost of tangible harm to civilians. Other malicious actors are likely to utilize the same cyber maneuver space Russia operates within, turning the practice into a norm. The researcher recommends minimizing the maneuver space for belligerent impunity in cyberspace with a two-part solution.
First, upgrade contemporary domestic and international institutions, as well as treaties, to address cyber operations, gray-zone conflict tactics in cyberspace, and feigned compliance with international law. While governments would be generally responsible for effecting this change, other stakeholders such as the technology industry, utility providers, and telecommunications services are valuable advocates. This suggestion expands on the scope of the ICRC's talking point highlighted in the literature review, as limiting the adaptation solely to international humanitarian law still allows significant room for exploitation. If the conflict is not considered an armed conflict, international humanitarian law will not come into force. For this reason, policy changes must be made to the trio of international law, treaties, and international humanitarian law to minimize the maneuver space for adversary OCO.
Second, codify an effects-based determination of hostile cyberspace actions that do not meet the strict definitions of armed conflict, armed attack, hostilities, damage, violence, and actual harm. As an example, if Russia were to attack Poland's power grid, causing widespread and lengthy power outages, impacting emergency services, governing, finance, and essential services, then Poland would be empowered to swiftly determine whether the effects of the attack are comparable to an armed attack, enabling international humanitarian law protections and international support for armed or digital self-defense. Due process and appropriate attention to attribution will still be challenges to this recommendation in practice, but the goal of limiting maneuver space will have been achieved regardless.
The Chekinov-Bogdanov commentaries served as a valuable foundation to organize operations into strategic objectives. A concern, however, is that their most recent work is 2017, and considering escalation of conflicts and significant changes in Russian military actions within the past ten years, insight into Russian military thought from 2017 may be dated. As additional perspectives on Russian military thought surface from the aftermath of the Russo-Ukrainian conflict, it would be beneficial to revisit the framework to confirm its continued validity. Additionally, Colonel S.G. Chekinov and Lieutenant General (ret.) S.A. Bogdanov's writings occasionally forecasted too far forward to a type of technology or level of war that is not yet customary or has recently been proved inaccurate. As an example, they believed that quantum computers would "easily crack all codes and gain free, and virtually instant, access to all networks supporting the operation and security of government and military control agencies." 
129
130
129
130
Furthermore, the question of a modern and universal definition of harm arose. The interconnectivity and reliance on cyberspace allow adversaries to conduct operations to create cyber-enabled socio-psychological impact without distinction of military or civilian targets. Harm, in this sense, can manifest in a variety of ways, such as financial or psychological. Financial harm, enabled by malware or stolen digital credentials, is easily captured in the recommendation for a shift to effects-based determinations. On the other hand, psychological harm is not so easily captured in an effects-based determination, and increasing concern today compared to the 1949-era perspectives on mental health. Could mass psychological harm, such as mass-created deepfakes, or cyberattacks enabling false missile warning sirens, meet the threshold for a physical response?
In his 1984 book introducing RCT, Lefebvre envisioned a future for computeraided reflexive control, performing aspects of the analysis while leaving the creativity up to the human. 
131
132
When the system is tasked to support a narrative, it simply adjusts the narrative to include a perspective that targets the social leader in each group, or the group as a whole, repeatedly via social media or targeted advertising, to sway an entire population's decision-making process while remaining well within the bounds of international law as simple espionage and influence operations. A hypothetical system such as this could be used to placate, sway, or manipulate domestic and foreign populations. It could also be used to combat similar adversary systems, automatically inoculating the population from adversary information warfare campaigns. Future research on this topic may come from the realm of Department of Defense and Intelligence Community convergence, algorithmic warfare, or simply the synthesis of artificial intelligence and information warfare.
The research conducted on this topic shows evidence of Russian exploitation of textualism in international law, enabling maneuver space for OCO, and leveraging military use of force to subsume complaints of cyberspace breaches of sovereignty.
While textualism and imprecise analogs between physical and cyberwar may be the problem, implicitly adapting those definitions to include cyberattacks is a detrimental solution. Instead, allowing an effects-based determination of legal terms such as armed attack and armed conflict from cyberattacks enables flexibility in responding with military force. This presents its own set of challenges in the legal sense, but the threat of a legal military response to a cyber operation minimizes the maneuver space that adversaries currently exploit. Furthermore, the case studies identified a defined baseline for OCO. First, OCO to enable presence and future action. Then, OCO to complicate the legality of a response to a military use of force. Finally, OCO to obscure military and political goals, adjust their opponent's public opinion, and enforce permissive Russian narratives.
Finally, Russia is likely to continue OCO in order to further develop reflexive control methods and structures, due to the low risk of attribution, plausible deniability, low effort and cost, and high reward offered by their successful use. RCT is greatly benefitted by the reach afforded in cyberspace, and the ability to misattribute actions. If Russia is not already pursuing cyber-enabled reflexive control, it would be to its strategic benefit to do so.
enabled gig economy. Academic institutions utilize cyberspace to collaborate on research and analyze vast amounts of data, model systems and theories, and expand the reach of education. Governments use the cyber domain to facilitate transparency and governance, coordinate social programs and emergency response, and modern identity services. Industry, too, has integrated connected information technology into remote work, storefronts, teleworking, and through technologies such as blockchains for asset management, authentication, smart contracts, and payments. Modern militaries use cyberenabled capabilities to facilitate dispersed communications, conduct research and development, expedite virtual testing and evaluation of new weapons systems, and conduct daily operations such as intelligence, reconnaissance, and logistics. 1 1
Source: Thomas, The
Source: Thomas, The
85  
85  
Nakasone Testimony, 3-5.
Department of Defense (DoD), Summary: Department of Defense Cyber Strategy (Washington, DC: DoD, 2018), 3, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Sep/18/ 2002041658/-1/-1/1/cyber_strategy_final.pdf.
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I) (Geneva, Switzerland: ICRC Headquarters, June 8, 1977), 265, https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b36b4.html.
Ibid., 266.    
Ibid., 266.   
Attribution, as discussed throughout this thesis, relies on technical and legal attribution. Technical analysis by experts in cybersecurity, and investigation by authorities such as the Department of Justice, offer a less biased attribution than a political statement asserting blame without having accomplished analysis.
U.S. President, Interim National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President, March 2021), 8, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NSC-1v2.pdf.
Tom Burt, "New Activity from Russian Actor Nobelium," On the Issues (blog), November 13, 2021, https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2021/10/24/new-activityfrom-russian-actor-nobelium.
12 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-12, Cyberspace Operations (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2018), I-1.
CJCS, JP 3-12, I-5.
Michael Mazarr, "Mastering the Gray Zone, Understanding a Changing Era of Conflict" (Monograph, U.S. Army War College,
2015), 58, https://press.armywarcollege.edu/monographs/428. 20 U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The U.S. Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 (Fort Eustis, VA: TRADOC, 2021), GL-6.
Giles, Handbook on Russian Information Warfare,[1][2] 
Giulio Douhet, The Command of the Air (Eastford, CT: Martino Fine Books,  1921), 248.
The ICRC identifies as a private agency, rather than a non-governmental organization. They are charged as the custodians of the Geneva Conventions.
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Solferino and the International Committee of the Red Cross: Background, Facts and Figures (Geneva, Switzerland: ICRC Headquarters, January 6, 2010), https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/ resources/documents/feature/2010/solferino-feature-240609.htm.
ICRC, "Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations". As of the date of access, the ICRC has published 6 insightful articles under the special topic of Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations.
United Nations (UN) General Assembly, Open-Ended Working Group on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security, Final Substantive Report (New York, NY: UN, March 10, 2021), https://undocs.org/A/75/816.
ICRC, "Special Series: Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations," 15 June 2021, 2.
UN General Assembly, Open-Ended Working Group on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security, 11; Guterres, "Remarks to the General Assembly on the Secretary-General's Priorities for 2020"; Michael N. Schmitt, Tallinn Manual 2.0 on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Operations, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 1-6.
ICRC, "Special Series: Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations," 15 June 2021, 3.
NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCDCOE), "A Surprising Turn of Events: UN Creates Two Working Groups on Cyberspace," INCYDER, March 11, 2019, para. 8, https://ccdcoe.org/incyder-articles/a-surprising-turnof-events-un-creates-two-working-groups-on-cyberspace.
ICRC, "Special Series: Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations," 15 June 2021, 3.
Michael N. Schmitt, "'Virtual' Disenfranchisement: Cyber Election Meddling in the Grey Zones of International Law," Chicago Journal of International Law 19, no. 1 (August 16, 2018), https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cjil/vol19/iss1/2.
ICRC, "Special Series: Avoiding Civilian Harm During Military Cyber Operations," 15 June 2021, 3.
Michael N. Schmitt, "Taming the Lawless Void: Tracking the Evolution of International Law Rules for Cyberspace," Chicago Journal of International Law 3, no. 3, (Summer 2020): 38, https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cjil/vol19/iss1/2.
Ewan Lawson and Kubo Macak, Avoiding Civilian Harm From Military Cyber   Operations During Armed Conflicts, ICRC Expert Meeting (Geneva, Switzerland: ICRC, January 21-22, 2020), 6-7, https://shop.icrc.org/download/ebook?sku=4539/002-ebook.
Microsoft's archive of semi-annual Digital Defense Reports, from 2008 to 2018, is available at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/security/business/securityintelligence-report. The report provides broad statistics on threats that were spreading globally, while the regional reports offer specifics based on victim State.
  49  Burt, "New Activity from Russian Actor Nobelium."
Smith, "The Need for a Digital Geneva Convention at the RSA Conference," 2-3.
 51  Ibid., 2.
Giles, Handbook on Russian Information Warfare,[1][2] 
Lefebvre and Lefebvre, Reflexive Control, quoted in McCroskey, "Decision  Space Operations," 24.   
Russian military doctrine was available at the commencement of research through the Security Council of Russia (http://www.scrf.gov.ru), however after sovereign internet measures were taken after the beginning of the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, many Russian government websites became unavailable.
Timothy Thomas, "Russian Military Thought: Concepts and Elements," (Technical Paper, The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA, August 2019), https://www.mitre.org/publications/technical-papers/russian-military-thought-conceptsand-elements.
The European Union's East StratCom Task Force catalogs Russian disinformation campaigns on their website https://euvsdisinfo.eu.
Chekinov and Bogdanov, "Nature and Content of a New Generation War," 22, quoted in Thomas, TheChekinov-Bogdanov Commentaries of 2010-2017: What Did They  Teach Us About Russia's New Way of War, 7.   
Putin's Asymmetric Assault on Democracy in Russia and Europe: Implications for U.S. National Security, A Minority Staff Report Prepared for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations, 115th Cong., 2nd sess. January 10, 2018, S Prt. 115-21 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2018), 73-76, 181-184, https://www.foreign.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/FinalRR.pdf.
Amos C. Fox, "Hybrid Warfare: The 21st Century Russian Way of Warfare," (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 2017), 7, 23, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1038987.pdf.
The SANDWORM team is also known as Russian Military Unit 74455 or VOODOO BEAR, depending on the organization analyzing the threat.
Scott Brady, United States v. Yuriy Sergeyevich Andrienko, et al. (U.S. District Court, Western District of Pennsylvania, 2020), 7.
The Gamaredon Group is also known as Armageddon or PRIMITIVE BEAR, depending on the organization analyzing the threat.
Anthony Kasza and Dominik Reichel, "The Gamaredon Group Toolset Evolution," Unit 42, last updated February 27, 2017, https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/unit-42-title-gamaredon-group-toolset-evolution.
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, Ukraine -Early Presidential Election 25 May 2014 -OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report (Warsaw: Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, May 24, 2014), 35; Ukrainian Election Task Force, Foreign Interference in Ukraine's Democracy (Washington, DC: The Atlantic Council, May 2019), 12, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/ in-depth-research-reports/report/foreign-interference-in-ukraine-s-election.
The MITRE Corporation, "Enterprise tactics," ATT&CK, sec. S0368, accessed April 1, 2022, https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/enterprise.
United Nations (UN), Charter of the United Nations and Statute of the International Court of Justice (San Francisco, CA, June 26, 1945), https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/full-text; UN General Assembly, Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of International Security, 18.
United Nations, Charter of the United Nations and Statute of the International Court of Justice.
Chekinov and Bogdanov, "Nature and Content of a New Generation War," 22.
United Nations (UN), Statute of the International Court of Justice, International Court of Justice, 1945, 1, https://legal.un.org/avl/pdf/ha/sicj/icj_statute_e.pdf.
United Nations (UN) General Assembly, Report of the International Law Commission (New York, NY: UN, 2001), 84, https://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/ english/commentaries/9_6_1996.pdf.
UN General Assembly, Report of the International Law Commission, 103.   
Charlie Dunlap, "International Law and Cyber Ops: Q & A with Mike Schmitt about the Status of Tallinn 3.0," Lawfire, October 3, 2021, https://sites.duke.edu/lawfire/2021/10/03/international-law-and-cyber-ops-q-a-with-mikeschmitt-about-the-status-of-tallinn-3-0.
attribution due to the complexity of the task, and greater risk of being addressed with international law, potentially permanently creating a more restrictive cyberspace environment. Reflexive control methods against large populations can vary significantly in risk of violation of international law and efficacy.
Lefebvre and Lefebvre, Reflexive Control,[144][145] quoted in McCroskey,  "Decision Space Operations," 70.   
Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell,  Bob McGrew, and  Igor Mordatch, "Emergent Tool Use From Multi-Agent Autocurricula," (Paper, last revised February 2020): 1-2, https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1909.07528.
72 
Vladimir Lefebvre
Victorina Lefebvre
Soviet Concept of Influencing an Adversary's Decision Making Process (Englewood, CO: Science Applications Inc.
Erick D. McCroskey
Decision Space Operations: Campaign Design Aimed at an Adversary's Decision Making" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies
U.S. Army Command and General Staff College
18-31
(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Reflexive Control in military and non-military situations. 
79
80
This literature review sought to organize and summarize existing research in the fields on the primary and secondary research questions. States, industry stakeholders, and international organizations alike recognize the challenge of applying existing laws to cyberspace, but differ on paths forward. Despite sponsoring a UN working group towards establishing universal cyberspace norms, Russia has used offensive cyber operations, often impacting civilians, towards its strategic political and military goals.
The following chapters will utilize the research discussed here to answer how Russia is able to maintain an image of compliance with international humanitarian law as they conduct offensive cyberattacks against civilians, and whether Reflexive Control is utilized to support that effort. 
79
80
This study intends to determine the role of OCO against civilians, and civilian infrastructure, in Russia's application of RCT. Supporting the stated intent, the research sought to answer the primary and two secondary research questions:
1. How does Russia project an image of compliance with international law in the conduct of OCO?
2. What loopholes or gaps exist in international humanitarian law and its protections of civilians as it applies to OCO? 3. How does Reflexive Control Theory (RCT) apply to the use of cyberspace operations?
The researcher selected a qualitative analytical approach that identified key elements across historical examples to apply those elements to a framework that may provide insight into future incidents. While various individual methodologies might have been applicable, the researcher chose a mixed methods approach as it suitably addresses the primary and secondary research questions. This mixed-method approach consisted of two qualitative methods, a cross-case synthesis followed by structured document analysis.
The combination of methodologies minimized the shortcomings of comparative case studies with small sample sizes.
Gamaredon Group stole sensitive information, the Russian military followed through by kinetically destroying those identified Ukrainian positions or forces, highlighting the deep integration and precise nature of cyber-enabled targeting, as well as a causal linkage between the cyberattacker and the State. 
108
109
From the onset of the armed conflict, Russia effectively utilized Reflexive Control techniques, and was greatly aided by the maneuverability offered by cyberspace.
Defacing, manipulating, and denying news services' websites offered the opportunity for Russia to successfully "[obfuscate] its objectives and repeatedly deny its military presence in the country despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary," while OCO effectively facilitated the manipulation of Ukrainian decision-making through denial of 
108
109 Andrew S. Bowen, "Russian Cyber Units," (Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC, February 2, 2022), 2, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/details? prodcode=IF11718; Cyber Security Situational Centre, The Security Service of Ukraine (SSU), Gamaredon/Armageddon Group (Kyiv, Ukraine: SSU, 2021), 34-35. communication networks in conjunction with the initiation of the shooting war. 
110
The scope of the OCO was markedly broader than Russia had historically operated within. The initial years of the conflict expanded the scope to include the full spectrum of legal military targets such as the electrical grid, and some blatant cyberenabled violations of Ukraine's sovereignty, most notably a current hallmark of Russian foreign policy, election interference.
The OCO targeting the Ukrainian electrical grid showed incredible sophistication, ranging from social engineering cyberattacks to expansive and efficient malware such as BlackEnergy. 
111
112
110
111
112
The case studies show that Russia's use of OCO have distinct trends, despite the scale and scope distinctions between the two case study subjects. OCO against Georgia in 2008 showed a lack of sophistication with limited goals and a focus on semi-deniability in order to avoid impediments by customary, international, and humanitarian laws. For example, the two primary areas of international law that were exploited in support of the 2008 operations were use of force and violation of sovereignty. These operations, taken individually, do not constitute a use of force as outlined in the Charter of the United Nations, Article 2(4). In customary international law, use of force is generally attributed to armed military forms of coercion.
Observed in their entirety, however, the OCO were accompanied by an armed military use of force, in this case, the Russian belligerence associated with the 8 August 2008 invasion of South Ossetia. This complicated the application of international law to the cyber operation as it would have been subsumed by the UN Security Council complaint against their destructive use of force or physical breach of sovereignty. The pretext for engaging in the destructive use of force or breach of sovereignty was dubious but prima facie legal. Chronologically applying the framework to historical incidents cannot appropriately capture the increased sophistication and escalation expected of future cyber conflicts. In order to better address developments in cyber warfare tactics and techniques in the future, the researcher used the Chekinov-Bogdanov framework objectives to identify the international laws being exploited.
As a broad effort to manipulate the opponent's decision-making process, RCT does not need to inherently exploit any international laws, though it benefits from the International Law Several critical areas of international humanitarian law are relevant to how OCO are conducted, generally or against civilians. Customary international humanitarian law, International Court of Justice rulings and adopted Draft Articles, the Charter of the United Nations, and the Geneva Conventions serve as the foundation for the rules that nations at war are held to. Analyzing these documents with the key inferences from the case studies provides a baseline for OCO Russia is likely to undertake while continuing to project the image of compliance with international law and international humanitarian law, as well as highlight loopholes, ambiguities, and gaps that are exploited in these operations. While relevant to the topic in general, determining the status of cyberattackers, State or Non-State, within the concepts of jus in bello and jus ad bellum is outside the scope of this thesis.
Customary international laws are "general practices accepted as law" and are universally applicable, as opposed to treaty laws, which are intended to bind States consenting to them. 
120
The International Court of Justice is the "principal judicial organ of the United Nations," and as such sets legal precedent that can establish customary international law, 120 ICRC, Study on Customary International Humanitarian Law, 1.
as well as interpretations of existing international laws. 
121
Commission, it is not absolved from their responsibilities under Additional Protocol I. 
128
Utilizing the two case studies, the researcher found several key inferences useful in assessing Russian military thought as it applies to international law. These inferences were: reflexive control, concealing operations, destruction of economy, sociopsychological impact, adjusting public opinion, destabilizing social situations, and reanchoring and complicating the rules and customs of war.
Those inferences then helped identify general tactics associated with Russia's OCO. Inferences common to OCO in both conflicts were: concealing operations, adjust public opinion, destabilize social situations, re-anchor, and complicate rules and customs of war. Inferences unique to OCO in the escalated conflict of the second case study were: reflexive control techniques, destruction of opponent economy, and socio-psychological impact. This suggests a plausible ladder of escalation for Russia's OCO, with low-risk and low-cost operations that do not amount to a use of force against civilians setting the baseline. RCT operations that are task-intensive, such as successfully creating sociopsychological impact, or destruction of an opponent economy, run the risk of easier 128 Russian Federation, "Notification to the Governments of the States Parties to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the Protection of War Victims" (Swiss  Federal Council, October 23, 2019), 1, https://www.dfae.admin.ch/dam/eda/fr/documents/aussenpolitik/voelkerrecht/genevenotif ications/191030-GENEVE_e.pdf.