# ID: 33135654f48745f8be45a31558a45343
# Title: In Search of Post-Soviet Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
20 In an acute sense, Russia's return to Chechnya was sparked by growing partnership between Chechen and Dagestani Muslims, united by anti-Russian sentiment, to overthrow the existing Dagestani government.
Initially, the local government and volunteers from the Dagetsani republic joined to block an invasion from Muslims based out of the eastern mountains of Chechnya.
Eventually, after the local forces proved unable to repel the advancing invaders, the Russian Air Force stepped in to carry out a ruthless bombing campaign against the invasion forces moving from Chechnya in to Dagestan.
In the context of increased public support for the military, growing political apprehension over the future of the republic, and growing fear among the population Russia mounted its second major invasion into Chechnya.
21 As suggested above, planning for Chechnya II began as early as 1996, but was part of a larger transformation project taking place within the MOD.
Interestingly, however, it may have been the Ministry of Interior that led Russia back in the Chechnya, rather than the Ministry of Defense.
In the wake of the kidnapping of a senior Interior officer, the MVD began planning for a retaliatory strike against Chechnya.
None-the-Iess, the MVD is not solely responsible for moving Russia down the road toward the second conflict.
Despite significant opposition to the first Chechen war, in which many senior MOD officers resigned, there was growing support among the General Staff and senior military officers.
A plausible explanation suggests that those generals that opposed the first war has long since resigned their position.
The remaining military leadership were those who did seriously object to the first invasion.
Further, this group of military officers and subordinates wanted retribution for the black eye the MOD received in Chechnya 1.
Chechnya II seems to have been an inevitability given the perspectives of the post-Chechnya I leadership within the MVD, MOD and Putin himself.
From the Russian perspective, the second war was the continuation of military reform, vengeance sought by the MVD and MOD, growing resentment among Russians toward Chechya and Putin's solution to the historical North Caucasus problem.
 Brookings Institute Press, 2002, 59-61.
 24 Because of the secretive nature of Putin's government, it is unclear when the MOD began planning for major military operations.
There is evidence that the MVD had been planning the operation for months, if not years prior to the fall of 1999.
The MOD, while generally planning and conducting exercises focused on a second invasion of Chechnya, has not publicly indicated when concrete efforts were undertaken to conduct deliberate planning for the specific operation that commenced in the fall of 1999.
Certainly, there were indications of military thinking based on doctrinal changes taking place between 1996 and 1999 and the nature of the exercises and training being conducted by the MOD and other government ministries.
 12, Nos.
5-6 (September 2000).
32 Russian ground, air and naval infantry units made up the nearly 90,000 man contingent of MOD forces.
In addition, there were approximately 30,000 personnel of the MVD from Chechnya and the surrounding region that made up the invasion and security force for the second invasion of Chechnya.
The MOD units were as follow: Ground Forces -North Caucasus Military District (58 th Army Headquarters and support elements, 136 th Motor Rifle