# ID: 33135654f48745f8be45a31558a45343
# Title: In Search of Post-Soviet Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
The formative post-Soviet Russian military experiences at the operational level were the wars with Chechnya from 1994-1996 and 1999-2000. Strategic and tactical transformations that took place between the two wars have shaped Russian operational art in the post-Soviet era. In fighting a counterinsurgency, Russia will seek to fight a conventional
This paper explores Russian operational art in the decade following the collapse of the Soviet Union. The case studies will be drawn from Russia's wars against Chechen rebels in the North Caucasus. Using the First Russo-Chechen War (Chechnya I) as the baseline for this study, the chapters that follow will highlight lessons learned from Chechnya I and how the Russian military applied them to the Second Russo-Chechen War (Chechnya II). Using the historical backdrop of the development of czarist and Soviet operational thinking (see Appendix A), this paper seeks to identify themes in Russian operational thinking in this third major socio-political epoch for the Russian state. This paper will draw out generalizations about post-Soviet operational art in the broader context of the development of Russian operational art, beginning in czarist Russia, proceeding through the Soviet era and culminating on the post-Cold War, post-Soviet battlefield in the Caucasus. This paper will identify common themes in Russian operational art that have transcended decades of political and economic transformation and draw out new trends in Russian operational art that have emerged in the technologically advancing, nonlinear battle space. While much is written on both the history and development of Russian operational art and the two Russo-Chechen wars, this paper provides a unique approach to analyzing the impact of the first wars in which Russia was engaged in the post-Soviet era. As a framework for my analysis of the Russian campaigns against Chechnya, I will utilize the six warfighting functions as prescribed by Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication 1-2, Campaigning. 1
Chapter 2: First Russo-Chechen War, 1994-1996   The Soviet Union collapsed in the wake of the August 1991 coup against Mikhail Gorbachev. The Russian coup against the Supreme Soviet provided a brief period of time during which there was not sufficient control over the Russian military to respond to activity by Chechen nationalists. Three days after the coup began the newly declared "republic's" parliament issued a declaration of independence from Russia. 
2
3
4
5
6
There was little if any planning done for the use of air assets to directly support ground operations. Air superiority would be the main objective of the Army Air and Air Force elements involved in the fight. Even once hostilities began, there was little planning or communication taking place among air units of the Army, Air Force or MVD or between ground units and available supporting air units. Per the limited planning, each service or ministry would have air corridors and separate missions. There were no expectations by the Russians of any measured resistance on the ground in Grozny. Air superiority established in early December, it was believed, would allow Russian ground forces to close on Grozny without impediment.
Russian leadership believed that the show of force in the republic's capital would be enough to crush the Dadayev regime and reestablish Russian control of Chechnya. As a result of this assumption, no following on planning was conducted for post-Phase IV operations.? The campaign plan only included one operation, with one operational objective -the "seizure" of Grozny. Ultimately, the Russian attempt to reestablish control over the breakaway republic would turn in to a series of battles for Chechen urban strongholds, with the eventual withdrawal Russian troops from Chechnya in starting in late June 1996.
Air operations began on 1 December 1994 and eliminated the air-to-air and air-to-ground threats. However, the ground campaign against Chechnya did not begin until 11 December, four days late, according to Grachev's plan. The three task forces proceeded along their axes of advance in to Chechnya and were slowed by protestors and the first days of winter snowfall. 
8
While some viable targets were eliminated, hospitals, orphanages and other buildings of no military value accounted for the majority of targets hit. 
9
The second phase which was allocated 2 days by the plan, ultimately took two weeks to carry out. Because of the unanticipated delays, Russian troops were not in place for the assault on Grozny until 26 December, 15 days late, thus forfeiting surprise. Further, the double encirclement of the city never happened, allowing the strengthening Chechen opposition an LOC in and out of the city.
The Russians, having lost the element of surprise, hastily put together a plan for what they now knew would be a difficult assault on Grozny.11 According to the new plan, ground forces would advance on the city along four axes, two from the east and two from the west. 12 The significant changes to the plan were done very quickly and were not disseminated among the operationalleadership.13 There were no rehearsals within or among the task forces for what was a very difficult simultaneous attack.
The coup de main against Grozny began on 31 December. Moving under the cover of a heavy artillery bombardment, much of which found Russian rather than Chechen targets, three Russian task forces in four groups advanced to their slaughter. Russian ground forces advanced on the city and were met by the front edge of a flexible defense in depth that was meant to delay and harass. Moving along narrow urban corridors, Russian conscripts with little large-unit tactical combat training and no urban warfare training were attacked at will by small units of Chechen fighters using basic but effective guerrilla warfare tactics. Chechen snipers attacked APCs with success. Grenades and Molotov bombs were thrown from atop buildings to slow the columns moving down city streets that had been further channelized by obstacles set up to block side street escapes. Only one of the task forces made it to its objective, but all four groups were annihilated in the 31 December attack. 14 While the Chechens had only a small number of anti-aircraft weapons, it was the overcast weather that prevented the Army air and Air Force from supporting the ground attack. Rotary wing assets were used to support the group forces up to 30 December, but once the ground advance into the city began the helicopters were no longer used. IS Fixed wing assets were grounded by poor weather conditions. Designed for close air support, the Su-25 "Rook" (NATO "Frogfoot") was the only aerial platform to directly support of the attack on Grozny.I6 Ultimately, because of impediments caused by service-specific air mobility corridors, Russian air played no measurable role in support of the ground assault on Grozny.
The 31 December assault ended with the retreat of Russian forces to the outskirts of Groznyon 1 January 1995. A cycle began for the ground forces in which they would assault the city, extract causalities, regroup and attempt another assault. I? It took until 26 January for the forces that operated from opposing sides of the city to unite in the middle and capture the Presidential Palace. Fighting continued in the city throughout February, but by the end of March Grozny was secured. Chechens moved from city to city and this process was repeated until May 1995, when the urban areas were controlled by the Russian forces.
Two more minor battles would take place for Grozny. The second battle in March of 1996 resulted in a Chechen defeat. mApril, however, Dadayev satellite telephone call was tracked by the A-50 AWACs and he was killed in a subsequent missile strike increasing the resolve of the Chechen seperatists. 
18
mthe end, Russia lost 18 percent of its armored vehicle force during the campaign and 6,000 Russian soldiers and 3,000 Chechen separatists were dead. Civilian loses were estimated at 80,000 killed and 240,000 wounded. The Russians would not make this mistake again. They returned in 1999 with very different results.
The Russian failure in Chechnya I resulted from overconfidence, poor training, a lack of planning, inadequate intelligence preparations of the battlefield, a lack of coordination among ground and air elements and poor command and control of the ad hoc ground units assembled for the assault. Though Grozny eventually fell to Russian forces, the attempt to wrest control from Chechen forces took months rather than days, was eventually lost and exposed to the world a weakened Russian security apparatus. Operationally, the campaign in Chechnya was a failure.
Chapter 3: Second Russo-Chechen War, 1999-2000
Politically, the Second Russo-Chechen War, 1999-2000 (Chechnya II) was a continuation of unfinished Russian political and security objectives in the North Caucasus republic. 
19
Militarily, the Second Russo-Chechen war was a continuation of the overall operationalstrategic overhaul of the Russian military taking place in the wake of its embarrassing performance in Chechnya I. The military establishment felt that it had been hindered and betrayed by the politicians. The military had not admitted defeat by Chechen seperatists and had begun planning a follow on campaign almost as soon as the first war ended. 
21
22
23
The planning, as suggested above, for Chechnya II began well before the decision was made to conduct a full scale military offensive. The Second Russo-Chechen War would be conducted in three major stages. Unlike Chechnya I, the planning for the second invasion was more deliberate, taking in to account the realities of the operational environment in Chechnya and applying lessons learned from the first war.
24 The first stage was to be preceded by a significant aerial operation specifically targeted at terrorist centers of gravity, critical capabilities and critical vulnerabilities. This was a departure from Chechnya I during which artillery and aerial bombardment where conducted en masse against the entire city of Grozny. Stage II was directed at isolating and disrupting groups of terrorists operating south of the Terek River, while avoiding getting bogged down in urban guerilla warfare. This stage was planned to take approximately two months and began on 16 October 1999. The desired endstate was to disrupt Chechen guerilla groups from conducting organized operations against Russian forces and to establish strong points to control Chechen territory rather than attack enemy formations in cities. The use of conventional fire from strong points, rather than seeking out enemy forces for direct engagement was the main approach during Stage II. Additionally, a security area was to be established in the main area of control north of the Terek River and Grozny was to be secured?8
The third stage was planned in November 1999 as a result of approximately 5,000 terrorists escaping to the Chechen mountains?9 Stage III called for the complete destruction of all terrorist groups operating in Chechnya along with their bases of operation and support. 
30
Three main objectives were to result from routing the seperatists. First, the structure of the local government was the be reestablished and begin functioning normally. Second, basic needs such as water and electricity were to be restored and people were to be put to work to restore the local economy. Finally, the conditions were to be created to allow displaced peoples to return home, children to return to school and social life to commence. Kinetic operations would continue as required, but as Stage III passed, the focus was to shift to rebuilding Chechen society in the absence of terrorist contro1. 
31
Russian success can be attributed to changes made in the inter-war years at the tactical and strategic level and changes in their approach to warfighting at the operational level.
In this final chapter, this paper evaluates changes in Russian operational art as evidenced by a comparison of Chechnya I and IT. Russian success in major operations during Chechnya IT is a direct result oflessons learned and applied from Chechnya I, its first major post-Soviet joint campaign. The irregular conflict environment coupled with Russia's "loss of empire" with the collapse of the Soviet Union created the perfect storm for its loss in Chechnya 1. As history has shown, Russia, like the Red Army before it and the tsarist Army even earlier, adapted to the current threat environment to prove itself a major military power.
First Russo-Chechen War, 1994-1996   Command and Control Despite an existing command and control structure in the Northern Caucasus Military District, General Grachev initially appointed himself operational commander of the campaign.
His command was followed by a revolving door of leadership over the course the war. As many as nine command changes took place. Operational command during the war was directly overseen by the Minister of Defense and as many as one hundred general-level officers were operationally commanding a force that never exceeded 50,000 men including officers of all rank.
The number of generals on the battlefield complicated an already poor command situation; strategic planners were directing the operational and tactical employment of troops.
Despite Soviet successes in liberating 1,200 cities from German forces in WWII, none of the urban combat knowledge survived or was employed in the assault on Grozny. This can be explained by both poor leadership at the highest levels of the Russian military and political establishment and the inability for ground commanders to link tactical and operational achievements to virtually nonexistent strategic goals.
Russian forces were trained at the operational level for linear combat on an open battle field. There was no expectation and thus no preparation for fighting an urban war against guerilla tactics. Uncoordinated fire fights by individual units became increasingly effective over the war as the Russian military adapted lessons learned on the battlefield. However, the complete lack of coordination between small fighting units meant that increasing tactical success could not be tied together to achieve operational goals, which probably did not exist in the first place, and certainly could not be tied to a strategic objective.
Ad hoc units were hastily established from across the MOD, MVD, FSK and other government ministries. Because of the planned timeline of the invasion of Chechnya, these newly formed units were not given an opportunity to conduct operational or tactical rehearsals prior to departing for the North Caucasus. As a result, there was a complete lack of unit cohesion among the fighting men and poor integration of command and control at the leadership level. Communications systems were either not used, unable to cross-communicate among MOD, MVD and FSK or were denigrated by the limited Chechen electronic warfare capability.
Commanders were blind to what elements were fighting on their flanks which led to small, independent fights.
The Russian state inherited an effective intelligence apparatus from the Soviet Union, but the operational timeline established by the Minister Defense prevented its effective employment.
Little was done over the course of the war to make rectify this shortfall. Assumptions made by General Grachev based on inaccurate intelligence received from anti-Dadayev leaders set the Chechen campaign on a fatal trajectory. Strategic assumptions about the strength of his own force and about the weakness of his enemy, led the entire military apparatus to forgo an extensive planning process. The two week time frame established by Grachev further limited the effective intelligence preparation of the battlespace. Grachev never questioned his assumptions which meant that the Russian military was unprepared for the fight that they never expected in the first place.
There was virtually no cultural intelligence gathered on Chechnya or the city of Grozny.
Had the military known that the center of Grozny was heavily populated by ethnic Russians, it may have forgone the heavy artillery and aerial bombardment of the city, preventing mass casualty rates among the civilian population and the increased support of Dadayev' s rebellion.
Further, the Russian population, knowing intimately their Chechen neighbors, could have served as an excellent source of human-intelligence. Cultural preparation of the battlespace may have been able to identify the pockets of resistance that the initial invasion force would have met as they entered Chechnya.
A complete lack of adequate maps and satellite imagery of the North Caucasus also contributed to the failure of the campaign. Pre-invasion planning was done from maps with a scale of at best 1: 100,000. 
36
Poor intelligence and unquestioned assumptions led military logisticians to believe that they would be supporting a two week, unopposed maneuver to the objective followed by very limited fighting. This logistics assumption coupled with the compressed timeline for preparation meant that only minimal theater logistics preparations were undertaken. Composite logistics units were created from across Russia to support the campaign. While the Chechen forces were able to live off the urban terrain and resupply along relatively short LOCs to the south of Grozny, Russian forces relied on long haul of supplies over very stretched LOCs to the north. One advantage to the Russians was that Chechnya was part of the Soviet-era rail and road system, allowing rapid movement of logistical support over the long LOCs. In addition to expecting a very short maneuver period and limited fighting, Army logisitics would be tasked with supporting the composite units, meaning Army logistics had to account for MVD and FSK requirements. This was not taken in to account in the logistics planning and resulted.
The logistics support was set up to supply a conventional battle against a large opposing force. The reqiuirements of urban combat were significantly different. High demand items for urban combat were not accounted for. Ammunition and equipment maintenance requirements increase drastically in urban combat. This far exceeded the Russian Army's logistic capability.38
It became increasingly difficult to distribute food to forces fighting within the urban environment and resupply of high demand items such as hand grenades, flamethrowers, tear gas, ladders and grappling hooks and nightvision equipment. These items were quickly expended and unable to be rapidly replaced on the frontlines. High casualty rates among urban fighters further stressed the logistics system. Simply put, Russian Army logistics was ill prepared to support a major urban campaign. Though a large composite logistics force was able to be assembled, it was inadequately configured for a winter campaign in an urban environment.
The Russian military relied on Soviet doctrine that allowed two options for urban terrain.
If a city was occupied by a defending force it was to be bypassed; if the city was open, it could be taken from the march with a show of force. 39 Assumptions about the defense of Grozny suggested to Grachev that it could be taken from the march with a show of force consisting of 20,000 troops. Intelligence preparation of the battlespace would have told Grachev and the operational commanders that they needed a force consisting of about 120,000 troops that was trained and equipped for urban warfare. 
Force protection issues are almost too many to count. Russian doctrine relied mainly on overwhelming fire power as the primary approach to force protection. 
42
Second Russo-Chechen War, 1999-2000
Command and control saw the most marked improvements across the warfighting functions in the interwar period. The most significant improvements that had the greatest positive impact on Russian operational art in Chechnya II were the decrease in senior political
and General Staff-level control of military operations coupled with the restructuring of the North Military Caucasus District (NCMD) from an administrative to operational command. Top political decision makers allowed theater and operational commanders the latitude to make independent decisions, a marked difference from the previous war and a new approach to thinking about allowing operational art by commanders on the ground.
The restructuring of the previously MOD administrative focused NCMD to an "operational-strategic command" further enforced the latitude granted to commanders ground and improved coordination among the various ministries operating in the Chechen theater. 
43
Improvements in communications systems, the more prevalent use of electronic warfare against Chechen systems and the greater dissemination of radios improved communications across the board. Russian commanders ensured information security through the use of encryption devices unavailable, either because of equipment of training shortfalls, in Chechnya I.
Additionally, radios and other communication equipment was pushed out to almost every soldier, allowing increased tactical control down the chain of command and improved information feedback up the chain of command. 48
From its complete lack of strategic, operational and tactical preparation of the battlespace in Chechnya I, Russia learned and applied lessons about the intrinsic requirement for intelligence in military operations. A lack of knowledge related to the socio-cultural and physical terrain of Chechnya proved disastrous in the first invasion. Intelligence was a main focus prior to and during Chechnya II.
Russian forces were much better prepared for the second invasion of Chechnya. Opensource data was "mined" for information on the region and cities. Painstaking studies of urban areas were conducted, including analysis of public utilities, sewage lines, heating lines, streets and buildings. Avenues of approach for both friendly and enemy forces were assessed. 
49
During operations scout sniper companies served as spotter for artillery, provided targeting information, provided intelligence on enemy locations, gave topographic information and acted a an advanced warning asset to maneuver units to warn of potential hazards, both physical and enemy, in the avenues of approach. Additionally, composite units from across the various ministries were established to act as basic reconnaissance units. This was intended to create better intelligence gathering and sharing across the ministries and to break down the unique strategic cultures of those organizations. 
50
The large number of personnel fielded in Chechnya II required a significantly larger amount of logistics support than in Chechnya 1. As in Chechnya I, logistics throughput was accomplished mainly with rail. In the interwar period, a new main rail line to Dagestan was built to support military operations in the North Caucasus Military District. Bridging assets and rail repair units were the focus of attention in the preparation for Chechnya II. A major improvement over Chechnya I was the amount of time the logistics planners were allowed in preparation for the operation. Additionally, the "go-slow" attitude in the approach to Grozny allowed the logistics train to keep up with maneuver units. Supply lines held up well into the spring of 2000, it was becoming apparent that logistics could not continue to support the intensity of fighting for much longer. The MOD was required to dip in to emergency reserves to continue supplying the armed forces involved in the operation, thus depleting long term Russian military readiness. 
52
Two general improvements, each supported by joint training and exercises, were made to Russian armed force maneuver capabilities leading in to Chechnya II. First, there was a significant shift in the mindset related to operational and tactical maneuver. In Chechnya II, a "go-slow" mentality, coupled with zonal control and maneuver-by-fire, all supported by aerial and human intelligence increased successes achieved, particularly in the push to the Terek River and further south to Grozny. Secondly, in addition to being the cream of the Russian armed forces, troops were reorganized for Chechnya II into truly joint and/or specialized groupings.
With MOD as the lead operational commander, subordinate units were able to better coordinate with their zone of control. 
53
Artillery on the other hand saw command and control decentralized and depoliticized. In both instances, fire support to ground forces improved significantly. Rather than control at the highest headquarters, battalions were supported by artillery groups, with Motorized Rifle
Companies receiving support from a mortar or artillery battery. With artillery organic at lower echelons of command, maneuver was directly supported by ground based fires making efficient use of time-sensitive aerial and human targeting. This allowed greater standoff for ground forces as they closed with the enemy forces or allowed prosecution of fleeing enemy targets.
hnprovements in ground based and aerial fires reduced significantly the number of Russian casualties, increased efficiency in the employment of the often limited or logistically restricted platforms and played a significant significantly positive role on Russian morale while devastating that of the enemy.
From control of information to rest and recovery periods, troops were better cared for and casualties greatly reduced. Force protection measures were significantly improved in Chechnya n. At the forefront of force protection was the introduction of the maneuver concept of remote contact. The use of artillery and air fires in conjunction with maneuver forces kept Chechen guerillas outside of the AK-47's effective range. Increased communications capabilities also allowed for better coordination between adjacent units, thus reducing friendly fire incidents. The creation of the security zone north of the Terek River created a quasi-linear battlespace, allowing logistics buildup, force massing and retrograde of forces to take place within a more secure space than was the case in Chechnya 1. Further, scout snipers and reconnaissance units were used to provided operational and tactical indications and warnings for advancing units.
The Russian MOD recognized the psychological impacts of urban and guerilla warfare as with Chechnya showed the Russian bear learning and adapting, though not without difficulty at times, to modern, nonlinear warfare. It appears, however, after final analysis, that the Russian bear will-attempt to force a square peg into a round hole when it comes to non-linear warfare.
That is to say, in Chechnya II, the Russian armed forces trained for and conducted a conventional, linear campaign against an irregular guerilla force.
The history of Russian operational art can be traced to an intellectual wellspring in the imperial Army at the end of the 19 th century. The intellectual debate about the "operatic" sphere of warfare that took place within the General Staff Academy following the Russo-Japanese War laid the foundation for Soviet intellectual exploration of the conceptual space between strategy and tactics. At the end of the 19th century, militaries, like the rest of global society, were undergoing a period of innovation in technology, economics and politics. The American Civil War, Russo-Japanese War and other "modernizing" military conflicts began to highlight the changing nature of warfare. Tracing its history to the Prussian military intellectual, Helmuth von Moltke, operational art emerged in lock step with the technological innovations of the era.
Fashioned by Prussian Field Marshall Helmuth von Moltke, the idea that a conceptually independent sphere of warfare occupied the space between strategy and tactics began to emerge in Germany in the 1870s. ill an age of rapidly advancing technological innovation, Moltke identified that future wars would be fought differently than was the case during the set-piece battles that characterized his experience in the field. Moltke identified, correctly so, that future wars would be lengthy and total, characterized by increased lethality due to technological advances, more strategically mobile by employment of rail, and that command and control would be extended over great distances by the use of the telegraph. While his imperial counterparts did not fully grasp Moltke's contribution to the operational level of war in the latter part of the 19th century, Russian operational thought did begin to take shape in the early years of the 20th century. Though the Russian Army did not invent the concept of Operational Art, it certainly contributed a great deal to its development as an area of intellectual exploration separate from the previous strategy-tactics dichotomy.
Russian operational art, while founded in the traditional thinking of the imperial military intellectuals, would take a unique path to modern warfare by way of the Bolshevik revolution.
Russian operational art developed in an ideologically charged environment where military intellectualism existed with the specter of Bolshevik and Soviet thought. Russian operational art would transform in response to changing global realities, but operational concepts such as mass, army-groups, fronts, maneuver in operational depth, and a focus on offensive operations remain themes that link current Russian operational art to its imperial and Soviet legacy.
Academy prior to the Russo-Japanese War, 1904-1905. Then chief of the General Staff Academy, Genrikh Antonovich Leer began to philosophically separate "strategy in the narrow sense" or "tactics in the theater of military activities" from strategy and tactics of warfare.55
Despite the shortcomings in terminology, Leer began the discourse on the sphere of military activities that were on a higher conceptual level than geographically restricted military tactics carried out by independent armies, but were also lower on the continuum than the political strategy directed from the highest levels of political-military apparatus. Leer's major contribution to Russian operational thought was the idea of combining independent armies operating in the theater of war into larger groups of armies operating toward a common military endstate. This notion of "army-group" or "front" would become a central tenet in the Soviet Army and would be a major common thread linking Russian imperial thought to modern Soviet operational doctrine.56
From the time of Leer's major theoretical contributions until the early years of the Bolshevik's Red Army, a series of General Staff and Military-Engineering faculty contributed to the intellectual development of Russian opetational art. Aleksandr Neznamov contributed significantly to the terminological separation of operational thought from strategy and tactics.
The emerging three-way division of military activity was conceptually strengthened by Nikolai Mikhnevich who began refining the types of operations that would be supported by the "front."
Another intellectual, Andrei Elchaninov, made a significant contribution to the command and control criteria by suggesting a new level of command, the front command, that would occupy the space between commander in chief at the strategic levels and the armies in the field acting at the yet terminologically vague operational level.
Russian operational art took a hit during the World War I when operational considerations were abandoned as maneuver forces became bogged down in trench stalemates;
Russian military practitioners abandoned operational concepts for purely tactical resolutions. 57
The Bolshevik overthrow of the imperial establishment before the end of the Great War, however, would change the course of Russian operational art. The rapidity of mobilization experienced in WWI changed the intellectual debate around the concepts of mass, maneuver and combined arms. The depth and breadth of the battlespace had also expanded during WWI and mechanization of infantry increased deep maneuverability of forces.
Drawing from the realities of the Great War, early Soviet military intellectuals, often alongside former imperial Academy members, developed the concepts of the deep operations and mechanization of the newly formed Red Army. The impending Civil War forced the rapid creation and mobilization of a Red Army. The intellectual and practical military capital resided in former czarist officers. As such, the new Red Army was dominated in both the field and schoolhouse by former imperial officers. The influence of imperial officers was immutable because of "the former career officers' virtual monopoly of the (Red) army's most important administrative, command, and staff positions, which could only be filled with those with the requisite skills.,,58 Their influence was coupled with younger officers driven by ideological Bolshevism. From this marriage emerged Soviet operational art that would be applied on the battlefield during WorId War II.
Throughout the 1920s, the Red Army went through a period of debate over how to tailor the new military machine to meet the needs of a workers' state. Marxist-Leninist ideology suggests that along with the political-economic revolution would come a revolution in the military system. The Red Army set out to establish a unified military doctrine informed by
Marxist-Leninist ideological considerations to provide junior proletarian officers. The development of Soviet operational art was driven by Lenin's ideological departure from Clausewitz which suggested war had a social essence that was founded in class relations. 
59
Revolutionary fervor also created an environment after 1917 for military scientific exploration into operational nature of warfare and the creation of Soviet operational art.
Four major issues were debated throughout the Soviet 1920s. First was the consideration of length of future wars. Second, was whether the Red Army should pursue an offensive or defensive military? The third issue stemmed from the realities of WWI and whether future wars would be positional such as the trench wars of WWI or maneuverable because of the influence of inductrialization on militaries. Finally, the Red Army struggled with whether to build an army around traditional infantry or the mechanized infantry emerging from industrialization.
From the debates of the 1920s emerged a series of ideologically influenced decisions on the future of Soviet operational warfare. The intellectuals writing in the early years of the Red Army's recreation of the Academy of the General Staff all agreed that future wars would be lengthy and total. There was far less concensus on the other areas of debate, however, the Red Army reached conclusions by the close of the 1920s. Given the aggressive nature of Marxist-Leninist ideology, it is not surprising that the Red Army adopted an offensive spirit in the operational preparations.
The decision to pursue the offensive versus defensive spirit was closely linked to strategy of destruction which was the soul of revolutionary class warfare.61 Maneuver was seen as essential to the future of warfare because of the rapidly advancement of mechanization of infantry. However, the Red Army met with a compromise suggesting that positional warfare, such as that experienced in WWI, is a distinct possibility, but that maneuver would ultimately assert itself to ensure a more rapid victory. Finally, there was a strong tendency among the Soviet leadership toward a large citizen army with the entirety of the population oriented toward the war machine, in effect the concept of a "nation in arms.,,62 The Red Army also saw a large citizen army as counter to the current in the West that tended toward a smaller more mobile mechanized force. A compromise was reached in which the ideological considerations were met by maintaining a large army; military necessities were addressed by allowing the military to move forward on mechanization of the force in order to counter the movement in the West. 63
From the 1930s came the idea of a single battle concept that massed air, artillery, shock forces, and maneuver elements on the operational depth of the enemy. This combined arms approach, supported by mechanized infantry and improvements in air and artillery formed the Military reforms reintroduced levels of command that allowed for operational level employment of forces. Additionally, tank corps were reorganized and artillery was expanded.
The Air Force was restricted so that combined arms could be massed at the operational level. While Russia worked to have operational units capable of responding to Western/NATO encroachment into Russia's former sphere of influence, its main focus shifted to internal conflict.
Leading in to the its first war with Chechnya, Russian operational level focus was on a new force structure based around four interrelated functional components necessary in modern combat: information, ground, air, and logistical support. Command and control with communications supported by reconnaissance and electronic warfare capabilities made up the traditional headquarters element. Subunits to the headquarters were building blocks of combined arms units to provide flexibility to the operational commander to meet specific combat demands. The air component provided a maneuver element by way of vertical assault forces. The focus of logistics was sustainment to relatively independent sub-headquarters units operating in a nonlinear battlespace. 
73
12 Lieven, Anatol. Chechnya: 19 While President Yeltsin needed to first war in Chechnya to secure his reelection by way of an easy military victory for the post-Soviet military, he needed Russia's second war with Chechnya to propel his newly appointed prime minister, Vladimir Putin, to the presidency as his handpicked successor. President Yeltsin had lost faith in his prime minister at the time, Sergei Stephashin, and sought a replacement who was resolute on resolving the Chechen problem. Putin, a former KGB member, vowed to resolve the problem mercilessly to prevent the spread of Islamic radicalism throughout the North Caucasus.
20 In an acute sense, Russia's return to Chechnya was sparked by growing partnership between Chechen and Dagestani Muslims, united by anti-Russian sentiment, to overthrow the existing Dagestani government. Initially, the local government and volunteers from the Dagetsani republic joined to block an invasion from Muslims based out of the eastern mountains of Chechnya. Eventually, after the local forces proved unable to repel the advancing invaders, the Russian Air Force stepped in to carry out a ruthless bombing campaign against the invasion forces moving from Chechnya in to Dagestan. In the context of increased public support for the military, growing political apprehension over the future of the republic, and growing fear among the population Russia mounted its second major invasion into Chechnya. 21 As suggested above, planning for Chechnya II began as early as 1996, but was part of a larger transformation project taking place within the MOD. Interestingly, however, it may have been the Ministry of Interior that led Russia back in the Chechnya, rather than the Ministry of Defense. In the wake of the kidnapping of a senior Interior officer, the MVD began planning for a retaliatory strike against Chechnya. None-the-Iess, the MVD is not solely responsible for moving Russia down the road toward the second conflict. Despite significant opposition to the first Chechen war, in which many senior MOD officers resigned, there was growing support among the General Staff and senior military officers. A plausible explanation suggests that those generals that opposed the first war has long since resigned their position. The remaining military leadership were those who did seriously object to the first invasion. Further, this group of military officers and subordinates wanted retribution for the black eye the MOD received in Chechnya 1. Chechnya II seems to have been an inevitability given the perspectives of the post-Chechnya I leadership within the MVD, MOD and Putin himself. From the Russian perspective, the second war was the continuation of military reform, vengeance sought by the MVD and MOD, growing resentment among Russians toward Chechya and Putin's solution to the historical North Caucasus problem.  Brookings Institute Press, 2002, 59-61.  24 Because of the secretive nature of Putin's government, it is unclear when the MOD began planning for major military operations. There is evidence that the MVD had been planning the operation for months, if not years prior to the fall of 1999. The MOD, while generally planning and conducting exercises focused on a second invasion of Chechnya, has not publicly indicated when concrete efforts were undertaken to conduct deliberate planning for the specific operation that commenced in the fall of 1999. Certainly, there were indications of military thinking based on doctrinal changes taking place between 1996 and 1999 and the nature of the exercises and training being conducted by the MOD and other government ministries.  12, Nos. 5-6 (September 2000). 32 Russian ground, air and naval infantry units made up the nearly 90,000 man contingent of MOD forces. In addition, there were approximately 30,000 personnel of the MVD from Chechnya and the surrounding region that made up the invasion and security force for the second invasion of Chechnya. The MOD units were as follow: Ground Forces -North Caucasus Military District (58 th Army Headquarters and support elements, 136 th Motor Rifle
3 6 Jenkinson, Brett. "Tactical Observations from the Grozny Combat Experience." Master's thesis, US Army Command and Staff, 2002, 40. 7 Faurby, lb. "The Battle(s) of Grozny." Baltic Defense Review, No.2 (1999): 75-87 and Jenkinson, Brett. "Tactical Observations from the Grozny Combat Experience." Master's thesis, US Army Command and Staff, 2002 and Oliker, Olga. Russia's Chechen Wars, 1994-2000: Lessonsfrom Urban Combat. Arlington: RAND, 2001 and Reed, James. "The Chechen War: Part II." The Red Thrust Star, July 1996 http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/Red-Star/issues/JUL96/JUL96.html (accessed October 27,2008). 8 Seely, Robert. Russo-Chechen Conflict, 1800-2000: A Deadly Embrace. Portland: Frank Cass Publishers, 2001, 226-227. 9 Geibel, Adam. "Red Dawn in Chechnya: A Campaign Chronicle." Armor (March-April 1995): 12-13. 10 Seely
15 Ibid
30
30
-------------------------------------------------,
Thomas, Timothy. "Air Operations in Low Intensity Conflict: The Case of Chechnya." Ai/power Journal (Winter 1997): 57.
Cooling, Norman L. "Russia's 1994-1996  Campaign for Chechnya: A Failure in Shaping the Battlespace." Marine Corps Gazette 85, no 10 (October 2001): 61.
Thomas, Timothy. "Air Operations in Low Intensity Conflict: The Case of Chechnya." Airpower Journal (Winter
1997): 54.
/ 7J!lAI!cI,OMB No. 
0704-0188
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or