# ID: 33a25082c8db42719613c26984746dbf
# Title: Complexity Leadership Theory: A United States Marine Corps Historical Overlay
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
As the USMC resets the force and forges its path forward, the service must comprehensively leverage its best ideas from across the organization to effectively visualize, adapt, and act in the future operational environment. However, in an increasingly interconnected and globalized environment, leading transformational innovation has become more complex and dynamic. Complexity Leadership Theory (CLT) attempts to reconcile traditional, bureaucratic, hierarchal, leadership with approaches that incorporate the complex, adaptive, and systems characteristics found in information age organizations. This monograph overlays CLT on two periods of significant warfare innovation in the Marine Corps to evaluate the role of senior leadership in each event. The emergence of amphibious warfare in the 1920s and 1930s and helicopter warfare in the 1940s and 1950s not only transformed the Marine Corps, but changed broader warfare. In each case, the US military relied on the innovation for the operating environment that immediately followed. The case studies indicate a legacy of Marine Corps' senior leadership fostering a culture with the capacity to circumvent bureaucracy, and effectively solicit and implement innovation from all levels of the organization. The nature of such senior leadership exhibits many of the characteristics of CLT that remain applicable for current, military senior leadership.
The relationship between officers and men should in no sense be that of superior and inferior, nor that of master and servant, but rather that of teacher and scholar. John A. Lejeune
In a quotation, familiar and meaningful to most US Marines, General John A. Lejeune, the thirteenth Commandant, renders the commonly held essence of an organizational approach to leadership. Taught to Marines during initial training, and frequently repeated during professional, continuing education, the quote's underlying concept is ubiquitous in the language of the Marine Corps, from its doctrine to the execution of small unit leadership. 1 While Lejeune's use of analogy--nearly a century old--might appear to date its applicability for the current context, his ideas about the nature of organizational leadership, particularly regarding the roles and relationship between the institution's senior and subordinate members, continue to provide insight and utility. The essential characteristics of the relationship between Marines and leaders throughout the organization are transformational, reciprocal, richly-interconnected, and responsibility-laden. Marine Corps leadership should be engaging and personal, rather than topdown and bureaucratic. 
2
3
2 Ibid. 
3
4
5
6
7
5
6
7
8
Both the systems and the various agents contained within each reacts to one another and develop evolving strategies to adapt and succeed. 
9
10
11
12
Following more than a decade of counterinsurgency operations (COIN), the US military is transitioning to new force structure, operating concepts, organization, resourcing, and threat forecasting. During such transitions, much discussion centers around the ability of each service to innovate across the gap between organizational resources and an "uncertain" and "complex" future operating environment. As the USMC resets the force and forges its path forward, the service likely must comprehensively leverage its best ideas from across the organization to effectively visualize, describe, and act in the future operational environment. In an increasingly interconnected and globalized environment that organizations exist within today, significant, transformative innovation has become more complex and dynamic. Scholars across most disciplines note the transition from the industrial age to an information age as one of the foundational components of analyzing organizational leadership and change. The CLT attempts to reconcile traditional, bureaucratic, and hierarchal leadership models from the industrial age with a model that incorporates the complex, adaptive, and systems characteristics found in information age organizations. 
13
14
14 Mary Uhl-Bien. Adaptive Space: The Key to Leadership in a Complex World. Electronic presentation, presentation provided by Uhl-Bien to US Army School of Advanced Military Studies on 27 January, 2017. Referenced hereafter as Uhl-Bien, Adaptive Space; also Uhl-Bien, Complexity Leadership Theory, 2-6. See Figure 
1
Each of the case studies uses a similar structure. Each case study section opens with an introduction that includes an overview of the organizational innovation, the time frame covered, and the key senior, enabling and entrepreneurial leaders. Next, the case study applies each of three complexity leadership criterions to the leadership and organization. Finally, the case study links or separates the findings of the criteria application in a summary of the case study. The amphibious warfare case study occurs first historically and provides a foundation of CLT-related Marine Corps organizational terminology and culture that carries into the second case study.
Accordingly, while of no less value, the second case study requires less contextual familiarization is more succinct than the first. This paper uses three criteria for evaluating the complexity leadership model within the context of the Marine Corps historical, innovation cases studies. The first criterion serves as an examination of the leadership event, or what Uhl-Bien might describe as the "episode and interactions of interests." This criterion isolates the emergent, disruptive innovation, in a specific time and space, to determine whether the Marine Corps' organization and key agents can be described by the administrative and entrepreneurial systems in the complexity leadership model.
While the identification of individual key leaders results from the examination required by this criterion, in remaining consistent with complexity leadership's theoretical understanding of leadership, the paper links leaders by their interactions within the model. For example, the first case study pays particular attention to John Lejeune's and John Russell's leadership interactions within each of the organizational systems throughout the emergence process of the development of amphibious warfare. This criterion highlights the external pressures on the organization, defines the administrative and entrepreneurial systems, and introduces the organization's adaptive space, tension dynamics, and bureaucratic barrier, or "wall of resistance."
The second and most important criterion evaluates senior leadership use of enabling leadership. This criterion identifies and evaluates evidence of senior leadership linking-up, catalyzing, and sponsoring activities within an adaptive space during the leadership event as described in the complexity leadership model. 
15
16
The third criterion evaluates the overall adaptive response of the organization resulting from enabling leadership. Complexity leadership theory describes adaptive responses as generated "when networked agents are able to resonate around a new approach, alternative way of thinking, or adaptive solution the meets the needs of a complex challenge." 17 Uhl-Bien further describes adaptive responses as directly resulting from the "richly connected interactions that allow diverse people, ideas, and pressures to collide and combine in ways that generate emergence." 
18
15
16
18
The potential limitations of the research are several. Accurately interpreting the senior leader's precise motives and intentions in decision-making long after the fact, particularly when not available for interview, is necessarily inexact. The model's relatively recent promulgation limits some of the breadth and validity of research available to test the complexity leadership model. Finally, overlaying the complexity leadership model onto organizations, which existed during the industrial age presents potential incongruence with the organizational theory, structure, and nuance of information age organizations.
The paper addresses research limitations, partially, through the selection of prominent and already thoroughly researched case studies. The depth, richness, and variety of academic research associated with both the individual senior leaders and particularly the organizational innovations of amphibious warfare and helicopter warfare is vast. Comparing this paper's findings against a range of disciplinary perspectives and research efforts serves to mitigate potential problems of misinterpretation or noncausality.
The primary sources used in this paper include a variety of complexity leadership articles and briefings from Dr. Uhl-Bien and associated scholars, and the biographies, personal papers, and service recordings of each of the Marine Corps Commandants and leaders used in the case studies. The significant secondary sources include a variety of books and academic papers to support the development of the case studies, and Terry Pierce's Warfighting and Disruptive Technologies, which the paper uses to frame transformative military innovation.
As Mary Uhl-Bien's complexity leadership work fits within the larger field of complexity study, a few essential complexity sources form the foundation upon which the more specific discussion of complexity leadership rests. Key among the complexity sources used to frame complexity are Robert Jervis' book, System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life, and Axelrod and Michael Cohen's book, Harnessing Complexity: Organizational Implications of a Scientific Frontier. Jervis provides a widely-accepted foundation for understanding systems perspective and complexity in social context. 
19
20
21
Consequently, this paper captures and overlays the primary concepts contained within available Complexity Leadership research while acknowledging that future refinement within the field of study may produce slight variations from this paper. Finally, Dr. Yaneer Bar-Yam provides another useful source for this paper's practical overlaying of complexity leadership to the Marine Corps' organizational leadership and systems.
Bar-Yam agrees with the importance of the interactions of agents in systems and the negative correlation with increased administrative control. 
22
23
24
25
Considerable study of the subjects of leadership, complexity, organizational, institutional, and military innovation as well as the Marine Corps leadership and organizational innovation is available. However, no research appears to have attempted to extract and analyze senior Marine Corps leadership activities resulting in significant innovation using the lens of complexity theory.  Historical examples seem to indicate a legacy of Marine Corps senior leadership fostering a culture with the capacity to circumvent bureaucracy, and effectively solicit and implement innovation from all levels of the organization. The nature of such senior leadership exhibits many of the characteristics of the complexity leadership model that remain applicable for current Marine Corps senior leadership. Particularly for the current information age, the ability of senior leadership to place itself in the organization's adaptive space --below the traditional bureaucratic barrier between the innovation-producing, entrepreneurial and the executing, administrative levels--provides tremendous innovative potential for any organization. If, as the research seems to indicate, the Marine Corps has frequently demonstrated an institutional culture and capacity for senior leadership to recognize and exploit emergent agents and ideas from throughout its organization, it would be well-served to embrace such qualities to succeed in the complex, uncertain future operating environment.
The overarching attraction of complexity leadership for a military organization's leaders is the potential insight that its study could provide to navigate the increasingly complex and rapidly changing environment during a time of considerable strategic and operational ambiguity.
To understand and apply the complexity leadership model to Marine Corps organizational case studies, one must understand the model and establish a common definition of the terms used in the paper. Establishing common terms is particularly important as many of the terms are newlycoined, possess multiple, competing definitions, or may be unfamiliar outside of the field of complexity science.
As represented in Figure 
1
26
Simultaneously, these agents and systems are acting or creating strategies to influence each other. This interaction between agents, subsystems, coupled with internal tension and complexity pressures form the basis for organizational complexity.
As a large organization attempts to achieve its purpose, it must identify, link, and execute the best emerging ideas and strategies from the systems and agents across the organization. This approach provides the organization the broadest engagement surface with external pressures and operational objectives. Such an approach provides a correspondingly broad and more flexible generation of responses to external pressures and operational objectives. The approach represents a central principle of complexity leadership and rests upon two concepts. First, the Law of Requisite Complexity, which requires an organization to leverage complexity to overcome complexity. Second, complexity leadership research shows that when traditional leadership responds to challenges in complex environments with control and tightened administrative function, the organization's adaptive, tension dynamics are stifled (see Figures 
2, 3,
4
27
28
30
31
30
Marion,
and McKelvey,
Complexity Leadership Theory,
[305]
[306]
[307]
[308]
[309]
[310]
[311]
[312]
[313]
[314]
[315]
Complexity Leadership Theory,
7,
10,
12,
[29]
[30]
Adaptive Space,
[8]
[9]
[18]
[19]
[20]
36. 31
the emergent ideas and strategies in the adaptive space. Enabling leadership then sponsors (resources, protects, and champions -pushing or pulling) the concept beyond the initial resistance of the administrative system. 
32
33
34
35
The US Marine Corps' development of amphibious warfare between 1920 and 1941 provides an excellent example of disruptive, organizational innovation that changed both the 32 Uhl-Bien, Adaptive Space, 9, 26. 
33
34
35
Marine Corps and warfare in general (as displayed in the doctrine's joint implementation in World War II). Some, including J.F.C. Fuller, consider the Marine Corps' development of amphibious warfare to be one of the most important and decisive innovations of World War II. 
36
37
39
36
37
Marine,
[187]
[188]
[189]
[190]
[191]
[192]
[283]
[284]
[285]
[286]
[287]
[288]
[289]
[290]
[291]
[292]
[293]
[294]
[295]
[296]
[297]
[298]
[299]
43
44
45
46
47
Accordingly, its leverage, mission, voice, and resources were continuously limited compared to the other services. Many of these external pressures influenced the leadership systems and served to intensify the internal tension dynamics within the Marine Corps.
The administrative system, as defined in the complexity leadership model, could generally be described as the commandant and his small staff at Headquarters Marine Corps (HQMC) in Washington DC. 
48
50
51
52
derives part of its enormous capacity to serve as an adaptive agent for enabling leadership in the case studies from its overwhelming institutional reach.
The entrepreneurial system proves more nebulous to define due to the small size and internal familiarity of the Marine Corps. Most of the organizational leaders, from captain to colonel, knew each other. However, the organization placed a cultural priority on deployed and expeditionary assignments, and relegated the headquarters and limited, satellite garrison assignments to administrative status. Accordingly, one could best define the entrepreneurial system as the portion of the Marine Corps' leadership executing the Marine Corps' various missions. Fighting in small wars in the Caribbean, Central America, and South East Asian, foreign military training and protecting US interests in China and abroad, and participating in conventional land warfare in France during World War I produced the experience and credibility that drove entrepreneurial leadership. 
53
54
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
56
57
58
59
60
64
62
64
In another example of the continuity of Lejeune's vision and enabling leadership, also while a Colonel at HQMC he established "an ad hoc war plans committee" to explore the Marine Corps' employment in future conflicts. 
65
68
69
As he had with Russell, Lejeune identified and pulled Major Earl Hancock "Pete" Ellis, despite his rank or detractors, from the entrepreneurial system into the DOT. 
70
72
73
69
70
71
Bartlett,
Lejeune,
193. 72
73
Lejeune accepted Ellis' plans and began the sponsoring characteristic of enabling leadership. The commandant began resourcing the innovation through implementing a series of amphibious exercises and enlisting. Lejeune coordinated such exercises with the Navy into fleet maneuvers that served both as a "championing" function within enabling leadership and a complementary administrative leadership function. 
74
75
However, neither the Marine Corps nor Navy were organizationally aligned or capable of executing the amphibious operations that would prove essential just over a decade later.
The organizational change under Lejeune legitimized the concept of amphibious operations and laid the foundation for the full-scale amphibious operations required during World War II--particularly advanced base defense, educational institutionalization, and reforming or establishing the necessary bureaucratic conditions. 76 However, Lejeune whether for vision, personal view, or balance of the institutional conditions and service's requirements during his commandancy, focused the organization on "developing defensive amphibious warfare, fighting small wars in Central America, and monitoring events in China." 77 Scholar Stephen Rosen suggests that "although the intellectual breakthrough to redefine Marine Corps tasks and missions had been performed," Lejeune neither undertook "the political task of transforming the officer corps" nor reorganizing "the Corps around amphibious warfare." 78 Rosen also correctly notes, "Lejeune himself gave the whole subject of advanced base forces two paragraphs in his 1930 memoirs, and made no mention of amphibious assaults at all." 79 During Russell's commandancy, the remainder of the amphibious warfare innovation emerged; specifically, Russell enabled the development offensive amphibious/amphibious assault operations, implementation of the Fleet Marine Force (essential for naval-integration and ready amphibious force structure), and the associated officer promotion and education changes to allow for the innovation to survive. 
80
Shortly after Major General Lejeune's retirement in 1929, then BGen Russell became assistant to Commandant Major General Ben H. Fuller in 1933 and immediately began to 
76
77
78
79
80 John H. Russell, John H. Russell, Jr. Register of His Personal Papers 1827
-1947, compiled
81 and
Major General Fuller (fifteenth CMC, 1930-1934)
84
85
89
90
91
92
As illustrated in the case study, the familiarity and interconnectedness of the Marine Corps simultaneously promoted entrepreneurial level innovation and tension dynamics with the administrative system. Both Lejeune and Russell actively engaged the agents, tensions, and 
89 Millett,
Semper Fi,
[337]
[338]
Vandegrift,
Once a Marine,
[78]
[79]
[80]
Semper Fi,
326,
[332]
[333]
[334]
[335]
[336]
[337]
[338]
[339]
[340]
92
external pressures within the administrative and entrepreneurial systems throughout their careers.
Each routinely employed extraordinary vision and commitment for the future of the service--and actively sought to socialize, iterate, link-up, and catalyze other agents within the Marine Corps.
Upon assuming the role as commandant, Lejeune and Russell each understood and exploited the adaptive space. A significant part of that demonstrated skill and understanding prevented either from applying top-down administrative control to manage the considerable external pressures or internal competition for the priority, future missions, organization, or doctrine of the Marine Corps. Rather, each used the richly interconnected officer corps to both manage the internal tensions and reveal the best path to a vision for change. Lejeune's vision for the future was broad but balanced against the Marine Corps' legacy and enduring equities. His leadership spawned the conditions for system-wide enabling leadership for years and produced the first, major component of amphibious warfare--advanced base defense. Russell shared and expanded Lejeune's vision for the future of amphibious warfare, overseeing the development of a complete amphibious warfare doctrine including offensive assault, the FMF structure to train and ready the amphibious force, and a promotion system, which would enable the innovation to flourish. The emergence of the amphibious operations innovation that proved essential for the Allies in both the European and Pacific theaters of World War II originated through the enabling leadership Major Generals John Lejeune and John Russell.
Section 4: Helicopter Warfare: Vandegrift/Shepherd Leadership In the period after World War II, the US Marine Corps transformed itself from a force that conducted ship-to-shore amphibious assault to the first (ever) force capable of air mobility able to conduct a vertical and surface amphibious assault. 
93
93
organization. The massive military drawdown of personnel, equipment, and resources renewed many of the pre-existing pressures as other technological and military innovations created new pressures and tensions. As the success of the Pacific Island-hopping campaign brought US forces to the Japanese mainland, a monumental innovation emerged, changing warfare. On a much greater scale than the failure at Gallipoli, the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki shook the foundations of military thought regarding opposed access and forcible entry.
As the eighteenth Commandant, Lieutenant General Alexander A. Vandegrift (1944-1947) guided the Marine Corps through the conclusion of World War II and subsequent drawdown; extraordinary external pressures threatened the Corps continued existence. Vandegrift employed an enabling leadership approach rooted in the example and conditions established by Lejeune and Russell to initiate an adaptive response to the existential pressures. General Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr., the twentieth Commandant (1952-1955), as with Russell before him, expanded upon the initial innovative vision of his predecessor, Vandegrift, and repeatedly placed himself in the adaptive space between the administrative and entrepreneurial systems to enable a rapid and effective emergent response resulting in helicopter warfare--integrated air mobility and air assault. This innovation not only preserved the future of the Marine Corps, but again contributed to the broader evolution of warfare. 
94
Lieutenant General Vandegrift assumed the office of the CMC in January 1944 following two years of exemplary combat leadership in the Pacific from Guadalcanal through the preparations for the seizure of Tarawa. 
95
94
95
96
97
Budget competition and the implications of tactical atomic weapons for amphibious operations were the secondary pressures that reinforced the pressure of obsolescence. As the military community imagined the development and employment of tactical nuclear weapons, many senior military leaders theorized that naval projection and amphibious assault were unnecessary. In 1949, just a year from the pivotal landing at Inchon, Secretary of Defense, Louis Johnson stated: There's no reason for having a Navy and Marine Corps. General Bradley tells me amphibious operations are a thing of the past. We'll never have any more amphibious operations. That does away with Marine Corps. And the Air Force can do anything the Navy can do nowadays, so that does away with the Navy. 98 96 Millett, Semper Fi, 451-453. The Marine Corps' primary internal tension dynamics during the helicopter warfare innovation (1946 -1953) shared similar characteristics with those of the Marine Corps during the 1920s and 1930s. Even with a significant swell in the size of the Marine Corps during World War II, its post-war officer corps remained relatively small, familiar, and richly interconnected. While the officer corps' preeminent deployed combat experience had coalesced around amphibious operations in the Pacific, the service still possessed groups competing to define the Marine Corps' future structure, roles, and missions (though more nuanced than the conventional land, naval support, and small wars groups during the amphibious warfare innovation). 
99
The FMF, complete with a division-sized air-ground force in the Mediterranean and a Division reinforced-sized air-ground force in the Pacific, continued to be the central warfighting organization and mission platform for the Marine Corps throughout the innovation period. 
100
101
99 Millett,
Semper Fi,
[351]
[352]
[353]
[351]
[352]
[353]
[456]
[457]
[466]
[467]
102
103
104
However, Lejeune and Russell's efforts to foster a more creative, innovative, and intellectually engaging officer corps since the 1920s were prominently observable. Adaptive agents such as the Marine Corps Gazette, small innovation groups that identified and empowered talented visionaries, and a persistent use of the Marine Corps Schools to focus the disparate group of captains, majors, lieutenant colonels, military occupational specialties, backgrounds, ideologies, scholars and teachers on finding solutions for the service's future. The service culture also began placing increasing historical and sentimental value on the visionaries and innovators that helped change and prepare the Marine Corps for World War II. All of this set the conditions for the service to respond to the new pressures and tensions it faced in between World War II and the Korean War. Finally, the Korean War proved a critical element of the innovation's adaptive space as the Marine Corps' aggressive experimentation during the war most enabled helicopter warfare's emergence. 
105
6
In the summer of 1946, the Navy conducted a series of nuclear tests at the Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands that created serious doubts about the viability of amphibious operations. The tests illustrated the potentially disastrous outcome of the mass and concentration principles of amphibious warfare doctrine against a nuclear defense. 
106
107
108
109
110
106
107
108 Vandegrift,
Once a Marine,
320;
Millett,
Semper Fi,
[453]
[454]
Sky,
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
Semper Fi,
[453]
[454]
As the chair of the Special Board, Shepherd continued to enable and sponsor the innovation throughout his career. He identified, linked-up, and sponsored key entrepreneurial and administrative leaders during the Special Board and subsequent implementation of the helicopter development program. Notable leaders, Colonels Merrill B. Twinning, Colston Dyer, and Victor Krulak, selected by Shepherd for the Special Board and subsequent development effort at the MCS, and a small innovation group served to innovate, socialize, and enable the emergence of helicopter warfare throughout the 1940s and 1950s, often without his direct administrative control. 
115
113
114
115 Millett,
Semper Fi,
[453]
[454]
116
119
120
116 Millett,
Semper Fi,
[454]
[455]
[456]
Korea. 126
123
124
125 Ibid., 136. 126 Ibid., 156-157. 127 Keith B McCutcheon, "Equitatus Caeli," Marine Corps Gazette, 38, no. 2 (February 1954), 24-27;
Pierce, Warfighting and Disruptive Technologies, 74;
Montross, Cavalry of the Sky, 169.
132
132
133
doctrine, evolved into a broader innovation in warfare. Through innovating and adapting agents such as the Shepherd's Special Board, the MCS, small innovation groups, and McCutcheon's HMX-1 squadron, the Marine Corps demonstrated vision and enabling leadership from two of its senior leaders. Such leadership and vision quickly produced an innovation that continued to impact warfare from Korea, through extensive broadening in Vietnam, and into today. In 1954 before its development was even complete, General Shepherd best summarized the scope, scale, rapid emergence, and benefit of helicopter warfare:
It is a story of creative achievement. From peacetime exercises, the Marine Corps progressed to Korean combat operations in which whole battalions were transported to the front and whole regiments supplied by helicopter. And from the helicopter of 1947, carrying two men, the Marine Corps progressed to the helicopter of 1954, lifting 26 battle-equipped troops. Nearly ten thousand men in Korea were evacuated to hospitals or rescued behind enemy lines by Marine helicopters…battle operations were meanwhile being rendered more effective by helicopter troop lifts, supply missions, and command flights. 
134
135
This paper will use italics to highlight 'terms of art' used specifically to convey the intent and connection of the term to complexity leadership theory and to its application in the criteria and the case studies.
See Figure 1.
Robert Jervis, System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life (Princeton, NJ: Princeton  University Press, 1998).
Robert Axelrod and Michael Cohen, Harnessing Complexity: Organizational Implications of a  Scientific Frontier (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2000).
Some differences in definitions of complexity terms exist -for example, Uhl-Bien's definition of agents is less restricted than some current complexity definitions to individuals or groups acting with intent or authority, instead including any element of the environment or system that forms interrelationships with other agents. This paper uses the broader definition of terms.
Yaneer Bar-Yam, Making Things Work (Necsi: Knowledge Press, 2004), 14. Note: "What do people do when they don't understand 'the system?' They try to assign responsibility to someone to fix the problem, to coordinate and control what is happening. It is time we recognized that 'the system' is how we work together."
Ibid., 10. "One of the most profound results of complex systems research is that when systems are highly complex, individuals matter."
Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors on the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the US, and Israel. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2010), 7, 9-10, 16-23, 134-142. Adamsky's investigation of the cultural elements of military innovation are useful when considering organizational leadership; also, Williamson Murray and Allan Millett, Military Innovation in the Interwar Period. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 1-5. Williamson and Murray contribute to understanding of innovation regarding doctrine, organization, and technology.
Pierce, Warfighting and Disruptive Technologies.  Note: this paper uses the terms 'disruptive,' transformative, and emergent interchangeably.
 Complexity Leadership Theory, 14,[23][24] 
 Marion, and McKelvey, CLT: Shifting Leadership,[301][302][303][304][305][306][307][308][309][310][311][312][313][314][315] also,  Complexity Leadership Theory,[11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19] Adaptive Space,[15][16][17][18][19][20][21] 
 Complexity Leadership Theory,[9][10][11] 
Uhl-Bien, Marion, and McKelvey, Complexity Leadership Theory, p.  
301-315.   
Within CLT, administrative system is not synonymous with the executive structure of an organization and neither are the systems within an organization fixed (administrative and entrepreneurial
Mark Mandeles, Military Transformation Past and Present: Historic  Lessons for the 21st Century (Westport: Praeger Security International, 2007), 63-65.
 Complexity Leadership Theory, 30.   
Montross. Cavalry of the Sky,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35] Millett, Semper Fi,[455][456] 
Marine Corps Historical Reference Pamphlet, A Brief History of Headquarters Marine Corps Staff Organization(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1970, Revised), 16-20.    
See Figure 4.
Montross, Cavalry of the Sky,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35] 
Ibid.,[68][69][70][71][72][73][74][75][76][77][78][79][80][81] 
Ibid.    
Pierce, Warfighting and Disruptive Technologies, 73.   
Montross, Cavalry of the Sky, xi-xii.
 8.   
 8.   
Advanced Military Studies Program, School of Advanced Military Studies. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
AAF Army Air Force ACMC Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps CLT Complexity Leadership Theory CMC Commandant of the Marine Corps DOT Division of Operations and Training, Headquarters Marine Corps FMF Fleet Marine Force FLEX Fleet Landing Exercises HMX-1 Marine Helicopter Squadron One HQMC Headquarters Marine Corps MAGTF Marine Air Ground Task Force MCS Marine Corps Schools MCA Marine Corps Association vi leverage innovation
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
quick reaction troop lifts for anti-guerrilla operations. 
128
129
130
In the Helicopter Warfare innovation, Lieutenant General Vandegrift's contribution was two-fold. First, he responded to the powerful external pressures as well as internal consternation regarding the complex atomic challenge with an open, adaptive mindset, rather a control response. Rather than submit himself and the service to the "atomic hysteria" common among 
128
129 Montross, Cavalry of the Sky, 136. 
130
131 Ibid.,
[204]
[205]
[206]
[207]
[208]
[209]
[210]
[211]
[212]
136
Second, the senior leadership of the Marine Corps must maintain a systems and complexity understanding of leadership. Neither definitive nor prescriptive, such an approach to understanding the organization serves to expand leadership's view of the emergent capacity of the entrepreneurial system and identify and challenge bureaucratic barriers. While seemingly obvious, pressures, lack of resources, and unseen complexity frequently diminish or subvert the necessary systems and complexity habit of thought in bureaucracy.
Related to a systems and complexity leadership perspective, individual senior leaders must remain cognizant of the broad interactions of leadership across the organization, particularly the linkages between preceding organizational vision and emerging changes within the organization. As illustrated in the case studies and complexity leadership scholarship, a transformational innovation rarely is the result of a single leader or interaction. Rather, leadership interactions that produce enabling conditions over time connect in unpredictable ways to facilitate significant emergence. Accordingly, senior leadership must consistently seek to understand how the previous, current, and emerging ideas and interactions within the organization may be connected.
Fourth, senior leadership must recognize that administrative systems will not generate most of the organization's capacity for ideating, socializing, and iterating innovation within complex environments. Innovation must be able to move from the bottom up. Such realization is especially important in the information age, as the speed and breadth of interactions between agents and systems generates changes in often unpredictable and unexpected ways. Rigid industrial age leadership approaches, designed for administrative control and efficiency--a desirable and attainable outcome for manufacturing processes--are not conducive to emergent responses in the complex operating environment. Senior leadership, in its frequent functioning as the administrative system of the organization, should limit top-down administrative control as a response to external pressures; and should primarily serve to align, scale, and execute innovation with available resources for the organization.
Finally, senior leadership should persistently identify and position itself within the adaptive space between the entrepreneurial and administrative systems. Senior leadership's role in the adaptive space is to provide enabling leadership. The purpose of such leadership is less positional or authoritative, but more aimed at catalyzing and linking-up emerging ideas and then sponsoring them through the administrative barrier for aligning, scaling, and execution.
Positioning itself in the adaptive space forces leadership to continuously attempt to understand and balance external pressures with internal tensions, while enabling connections between individuals and groups that facilitate adaptation. Enabling leadership forms, leverages, or sponsors adapting agents, such as the MCS, small innovation groups (formal or informal), or the MCA, to link critical resources, innovators (e.g. Ellis, McCutcheon, Krulak), and brokers.
Enabling the strength and frequency of such rich interconnections across the service produces the best response to complex operating environments and reflects a legacy of Marine leadership.