# ID: 33e631bebf694282999339c943e43630
# Title: Contemporary operational environment and its effect on the Norwegian Army's training
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
The Norwegian Army is partly a conscript army and partly a volunteer force. The Army has one year to conduct basic training and combat preparations of the conscript force, which forms the basis for international operations and recruitment to the volunteer force. The Norwegian Army has gone through significant transformation the last five years, which has been, and still is, all-embracing and affects the entire Army. In addition to the challenges presented by the transformation itself, the Norwegian Army faces challenges concerning which missions it should prepare for, ranging from the current missions in Afghanistan, to the bordering areas with Russia. However, the Norwegian Army has not adjusted its training to reflect fully the increasing number of tasks and training requirements. There is a gap between how the force trains and how the training and combat preparation should look
pages.
The Norwegian Army is partly a conscript army and partly a volunteer force. The Army has one year to conduct basic training and combat preparations of the conscript force, which forms the basis for international operations and recruitment to the volunteer force.
The Norwegian Army has gone through significant transformation the last five years, which has been, and still is, all-embracing and affects the entire Army. In addition to the challenges presented by the transformation itself, the Norwegian Army faces challenges concerning which missions it should prepare for, ranging from the current missions in Afghanistan, to the bordering areas with Russia.
However, the Norwegian Army has not adjusted its training to reflect fully the increasing number of tasks and training requirements. There is a gap between how the force trains and how the training and combat preparation should look like to reflect the Army's future missions and tasks. One way to conduct training that is more efficient and thus contribute to mitigate some of the challenges concerning training is to increase the availability of simulator-supported training. Hence, the Army should establish a branch of the Norwegian Army Combat Maneuver Training Centre, located to North Norway. v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My intent with this thesis has been to clarify some of the current challenges the Norwegian Army faces with regard to training and combat preparations, and to suggest a possible way to mitigate the challenges. I am deeply grateful to the former commander of the Norwegian Army Combat Maneuver Training Centre (NACMTC), Lieutenant Colonel Jan Thorsvik, for his support of my initial concerns and ideas, which eventually led to the preliminary works for this thesis. Likewise, I am grateful to the commander of the Norwegian Army Combat Training Centre, Major Bernhard Dalen, for insightful comments, support, and motivation. However, I should better not forget the rest of the personnel at NACMTC who have provided great support and much of the key information, upon which this thesis rests.
I am also deeply grateful to Mr Kevin Benson, Dr. Mark Gerges, and Mr Guy Berry, comprising my MMAS Committee, for their patience, support, feedback, and clarifying as well as encouraging comments. I owe many thanks as well to Dr. Constance A. Lowe and Elisabeth J. Brown at the Department for Graduate Degree Programs, and my MMAS seminar instructor, Colonel William M. Raymond Jr., you have all provided decisive support. Thank you very much. However, I could not have completed this study if I had not had the greatest encouragement and support from my wonderful family: my wife Britt and our beautiful daughters, Silje, Marte, and Andrea. I have spent much time studying and writing, time I could have spent with you instead. However, I never heard any indications or comments of objections or protest. Indeed, armies do not prepare for the last war, they frequently prepare for the wrong one -if for no other reason than that governments will usually fund only against the anticipated primary threat as opposed to risk, and the adversary will usually play to his opponents' weakness rather than strength. 
(Smith 2005, x)
The answer is probably a mix of all the considerations above, which also form important parts of the Contemporary Operational Environment (COE). Thus, the basis for an army's training and combat preparations will change continuously as the COE is changing continuously. However, if the army does not cope with these changes and adapt its training and combat preparations, it may become irrelevant. Hence, the purpose of this study is to discuss some of the challenges the Norwegian Army currently faces, and to
show how the Norwegian Army can improve its training to better prepare for future operations in the COE.
The COE is probably the one factor that lays the foundation for training and combat preparations, upon which all other factors build. Some of the characteristics of the COE are that the COE, in contrast to the Operational Environment (OE), comprises the current and near future world as a whole; it is generic and holistic; it does not address enemies but potential adversaries; and that the COE is constantly changing. The OE then, is the environment where a country's forces currently are conducting operations, and addresses the enemy, partners and coalitions directly (Department of the 
Army 2003, ivviii)
In addition to the COE and the actual OEs, there are also domestic factors that influence how the Norwegian Army carries out training and combat preparations, such as the location of the Army's forces throughout the country, the balance between conscript units and volunteer units in the Army, and the economy. In a speech at the Norwegian National Defense College, the Undersecretary of Defense, Espen Barth-Eide, reinforced the message from the Strøm-Erichsen when he stated that the importance of Norway's northern areas has increased with regard to the recent international development, and he pointed specifically at Russia and her increased economy 
(Barth-Eide 2007)
The Norwegian Chief of Defense (CHOD), General Sverre Diesen, has stated that the scope of the military transformation affects the force structure itself, the imbalance between operational and non-operational units and organizations, and the economic disequilibrium between the Norwegian Government's resolutions on force structure and funding the force 
(Diesen 2006)
The second part of the Norwegian Army's challenge is the composition of the force. The Norwegian Army is partly a conscript army and partly a volunteer force, where the basic building block for the Army's forces is the conscript force. All conscripts must go through a mandatory one-year training period that comprises the basic training.
Implementation of new technology, new weapons, and new areas with regard to training, e.g. cultural competence and language training, must be addressed in this very limited period available for training. After the completion of the one-year training, parts of the conscript force will normally deploy to international operations. Only after completion of the mandatory one-year training and perhaps an operational tour abroad, are the previously conscripted personnel eligible to apply for a position in the volunteer force.
Thus, all basic training and preparations for deployment abroad must be completed within the one year that is available for the training of the conscript army.
The challenge is that the Norwegian Army has not adjusted its training to reflect all the tasks it has been assigned. There is a gap between how the force is trained and prepared and what the training and combat preparation should look like to reflect the Army's future missions and tasks 
(Stølan 2007a)
(Seland 2007)
Given that the COE is constantly changing, equipment and technology are constantly changing, training requirements increase, the Norwegian Army's basic training must take place within a year, and the fact that the Norwegian Army cannot afford to impose further strain on its officers, soldiers, and their families, training must change. The training must be as efficient as possible, and the training must be directed properly towards the OEs in which the army is expected to conduct operations, and the training must also reflect the requirements that spring from the COE. In order to achieve this goal, the Norwegian Army should reorganize the NACMTC in order to better prepare units and soldiers to conduct future operations in the Contemporary Operating Environment. Thus, the thesis is: The Norwegian Army should reorganize the NACMTC, to include the establishment of a Combat Training Centre (CTC) in northern Norway, in order to better prepare units and soldiers to conduct future operations in the COE.
The research question is formed as an applied research question 
(Turabian 2007, 9)
The Operational Environment, in contrast to the COE, is geographic or theatre specific and implies a specific enemy versus the generic "threat." Joint Publication (JP)
1-02 states that the OE is "A composite of the conditions, circumstances, and influences that affect the employment of capabilities and bear on the decisions of the commander" (Department of Defense 2007, 392).
A reference in the thesis to a Field Manual (FM) is a reference to an U.S. Army
Field Manual, while a reference to a Joint Publication (JP) is a reference to an U.S.
Armed Forces Joint Publication. In order to distinguish Norwegian and U.S. manuals and publications from each other, the thesis will refer to Norwegian manuals and publications with their original, Norwegian, names and/or publisher. The thesis will refer to official documents, which normally do not have an author, by its name or the publisher, if necessary with an explanation in English to what the document deals with.
The thesis will use U.S. Army's term full spectrum operations (Department of the and warfighting 
(Krulak 1998, 1)
(Hoffman;
Mattis 2005, 18-19)
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 13-23)
The thesis builds on the assumptions that Norway will continue to base her army partly on conscription and partly on professional forces, and that the Norwegian parliament will not change the mandatory serving time for a conscript solider, which is one year. Further, the thesis builds on the assumption that Norway will continue to contribute forces to various multinational operations, led by either NATO or the United Nations (UN). Finally, the thesis builds on the assumption that the Army's budget will remain relatively constant, thus, the thesis will not discuss solutions that imply significant budget changes or heavy economic spending.
The thesis has two limitations. First, the study will only reflect information that is available through unclassified sources. As such, there is a risk that the level of details can be insufficient to deduce comprehensive conclusions; however, applying classified sources will change neither the problem nor the possible solutions. Second, the study will not recommend solutions where additional training time will be at the expense of the personnel's spare time; as such solutions do not solve the main challenge, which is that the Army has too much to do in too little time available. It is not possible to increase the time available for training without making the entire Army a volunteer force. The only way to mitigate the current challenges is to change the way the Army is training.
One of the challenges with regard to the relevancy of this thesis is to keep up with changes as they develop in Norway. Therefore, the basis of this thesis is the status of the Norwegian Army as of June 2007. However, the thesis will take into consideration changes, publications, and studies made public later than June 2007 if they provide significant information. The thesis will not take into consideration any changes, publications or studies made public after February 2008. Additionally, the thesis will focus on factors that affect the army directly, and will not discuss the development of Norwegian security policy or the development of the relationship between Norway and her allies or her neighboring countries. Eventually, the second half of the study will only focus at the Norwegian Army, not the Norwegian Air Force, Navy or Home Guard.
The Army's main challenge is that it has too much to do with too little time where the doctrine in general terms defines the OE 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 39-47)
However, what the Norwegian doctrine defines as characteristics of the OE are in reality characteristics of the COE. Thus, this study will discuss the terms COE and OE in order to provide better understanding of the COE and the OEs and how they add significantly to the current training requirements for the Norwegian Army.  
(NATO 2001, 24-25)
(Smith 2005, 3)
(Smith 2005, 371-373)
The Harvard professor Samuel P. Huntington was maybe one of the first scholars to address the change and development of the modern world that sprang from the conclusion of the Cold War. Huntington's The Clash of Civilizations: The Remaking of the World Order, summarizes his theories in that the source of future conflict is cultural differences, and "that the most dangerous cultural conflicts are those along the fault lines of civilizations 
(Huntington 2002, 28)
(Huntington 2002, 312)
However, Huntington's theory has some flaws. In general, Huntington says that the world has changed after the end of the Cold War 
(Huntington 2002, 19
(Huntington 2002, 312-316)
(Huntington 2002, 312-316)
In his article The coming anarchy, first published in The Atlantic Monthly in 1994, Robert D. Kaplan points out what he thinks is an important aspect of the COE: that the main contributors to the world's current unrest and upheaval are scarcity of resources, crime, overpopulation, tribalism, and disease among the have not's and hopeless people in the world. Thus, the main strategic danger today is the threat of criminal anarchy, which may spread, as regional instability will continue to increase. According to Kaplan, the way to stabilize the challenges is to provide economic stability throughout the world and to implement the rule of law through nation building and government stabilization 
(Kaplan 1994)
Thomas L. Friedman, a Foreign Affairs columnist with the New York Times, published in 1999 The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization, where he argues that what is driving the world at an increasing speed is Globalization, of which the key factor is the interlocked and mutually dependent economies of the world. Friedman argues that many of the contemporary problems and conflicts develop in states not able to cope with Globalization, and concludes that Globalization both will prevail and will be necessary to develop further standards of living throughout the world. However, Friedman says, the economy of those states that do not cope with Globalization will eventually crash 
(Friedman 1999, 354-366)
Thus, Friedman supports Huntington's theories that the world is changing, and that reasons for conflict change as well, however, he disagrees significantly with Huntington concerning possible reasons for future conflict. Friedman's critique of Huntington, as well as other writers, is that the other authors try to explain the changing world and to connect the change to "The One Big Thing 
(Friedman 1999, xviii)
(Friedman 1999, xvii)
(Friedman 2000)
Interestingly, Thomas P.M. Barnett, professor at the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island, seems to build on Friedman's theories on Globalization in his article The Pentagon's New Map 
(Barnett 2003, 123-131)
However, the countries that make it in the globalized world are today's functioning democracies with stable economies. According to Barnett, the contemporary and future key security policy issue is thus to shrink the gap between the states that are able to cope with Globalization, and those states that are not, as "disconnectedness defines danger 
(Barnett 2003, 123)
However, the challenges western forces face in the COE are not new. What emerges as perhaps one of the most significant characteristics of the COE is the significance of Carl von Clausewitz's "paradoxical trinity 
(Clausewitz 1989, 89)
According to von Clausewitz, the relationship between the people, the military, and government is so vital, that if a strategist or planner neglects one of these three factors the strategy or plan is doomed to fail 
(Clausewitz 1989, 89)
Zedong offers the same insight in his book On Guerrilla Warfare, when he explains guerrilla warfare 
(Mao 2000, 41-46)
(Diesen 2007)
The most obvious factors that influence the training of the Norwegian Army comprise the COE, the current and possible future OEs, the location of the forces, the balance between the conscription and the professional forces respectively, economy, the training paradigms that prevail in the Army, and the current transformation of the Armed Forces. Some of these factors have been described and discussed extensively over the past years, while other factors are not described by literature or written sources at all or at least in a very limited way. Therefore, the thesis relies on information collected through personal communication and on the researcher's earlier study as well.
The Constant Factors' Effect on Training
The three main constant factors that affect the way the Norwegian Army currently trains are the location of the army's different subunits, headquarters, and staffs; the balance between conscript and volunteer forces; and economy. Information on these factors are available through official sources in general and through the Armed Forces official information services such as the Armed Forces monthly, Forsvarets Forum, and the Armed Forces official internet site, Forsvarsnett. 
4
However, the recently published Defense Study comprises the most up to date discussion of these factors. The Defense Study 2007 is a study published by the Norwegian CHOD, General Sverre Diesen, which covers both near and long-term future development of the Armed Forces. 
5
6
give the army an enhanced capability for rapid response to a crisis or threat 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007b;
Bjerke et.al. 2007
The Doctrine
8
(Haerstaben 2007)
(Haerstaben 2005, 4-6)
9
Nevertheless, the training schedules for NACMTC, as well as First Impres The Effects of Military Transformation
The next factor that influences the Norwegian Army's training is the current military transformation. As with training paradigms, there are not many sources available; but again the Norwegian Armed Forces official internet site provides some information. However, again as with the factor Training Paradigms, the sources covering transformation are not comprehensive, and the researcher has had to conduct additional research, primarily aimed at primary sources. Nevertheless, all sources the researcher has approached concur in the perception that many of the army's staffs and key officers are so bogged down in transformation issues that they do not have much capacity to develop and support training 
(Stølan 2007a
(Stølan , 2007b;;
Fossberg 2007;
Daltveit 2007;
Dalen 2007a;
Thorsvik 2007;
Hagen 2007)
Future Organization of the NACMTC On the one hand, many sources cover the current organization of NACMTC; most of these are available through the Norwegian Armed Forces' archives. On the other hand, there are not many sources covering a possible reorganization of NACMTC. Most of these, however, are mostly insignificant proposals for adjustment in staffing and materiel available for the unit. The only current work that proposes a significant reorganization of the NACMTC is the study conducted at the NACMTC in the early spring of 2007, the CTC North Study, which focuses on how to achieve more effect from training through establishing a branch of NACMTC, i.e., a second CTC located to northern Norway 
(Seland 2007
General Rupert Smith claims that there has been a paradigm shift from the interstate industrial war to war amongst people, where the development of the political and military fields are closely connected, and that organization and training of forces must change correspondingly for the forces not to lose utility 
(Smith 2005, xiii, 25)
(Hjelseth 2003, 34-37)
The quantitative design, in contrast, focuses on large selections, and a quantification of the collected information. The quantitative design works great for opinion polls to discover trends in the society, it offers possibilities to generalize the result of the research, i.e., the design offers high external validity. However, the main disadvantages of the quantitative design are that it is naturally superficial, and that the analysis must wait until all information has been collected. Additionally, there is a challenge concerning people who choose not to respond, and there may be a challenge
with regard to open polls, like those following the news on TV, where only those affected directly by the questions and have strong opinions choose to answer 
(Hjelseth 2003, 37-38)
(Hjelseth 2003, 23-25)
This thesis is an exploratory study where the purpose is to describe the factors that affect the Norwegian Army's training, and based on that description of the factors, suggest a way the Army can mitigate the challenges that apply to its future training and combat preparations. To ensure that the suggested solution will contribute to an improvement, the primary focus for the research has been to describe the factors that affect the Army's training and combat preparations. Without a proper understanding of the problem, it would be difficult to suggest a credible solution.
This chapter describes the methodology used throughout the thesis. The chapter comprises four parts, of which the first part describes how the necessary information has been obtained. The following parts describe which criteria that have been developed to evaluate the proposed solution, and how the thesis has been checked for validity and relevance. The last part concludes the methodology chapter.
The addressed challenges for the Norwegian Army are neither new nor unknown for at least some of the units in the Army. The problem statement itself and the approach to the solution are both taken from, and elaborate on, the CTC North Study. However, in order to ensure a balance of sources and to validate the information collected previously, the author has gathered additional information, both from primary and secondary sources.
The primary sources are primarily first-hand accounts of interest for the thesis, i.e., interviews, discussions, speeches, lectures, and forms of journal and newspaper articles, both in print and online. Targets for personal communications and discussions have been personnel within the Norwegian Army, but from other countries as well, who could contribute to the analysis and the solution.
Deliberately, the author has approached these officers based on their experience and competence, not their position within the army, as there is a risk that personnel in key positions may be too careful about expressing their view on a need for future changes.
The discussions with these officers have taken place both during the work on the CTC North Study, and during the work on the thesis itself. Typically, the officers approached for discussions hold central positions in the army when it comes to training, such as company commanders within both conscript and professional units, the commander and the assistant S-3 at NACMTC, the commander of the CTC, staff officers in the Army Forces Command, and staff officers and commanders at battalion level. Common for all officers is that they have conducted at least one operational tour abroad. In addition to the Norwegian officers, the researcher has been in contact with some officers from the U.S. Some of the interviews and communication have been recorded digitally, however, much of the information that forms the basis for the CTC North Study have been recorded as entries in notebooks or as inputs via email. Some sources, when commenting on a particular issue that may offend some Army leaders, have asked not to be identified in either the CTC North Study or the thesis. The researcher has complied with such wishes in a few cases, even if the result will be unsupported statements, which will thus provide less traceability and thus possibility for re-evaluation by other researchers. The challenge that arises from using anonymous sources is primarily credibility; however, some statements may be too important to omit.
The research contributed primarily to describing the factors that affect the Norwegian Army's training. The research ended when the factors were described well enough to allow the researcher to draw conclusions about the existing gaps between current training and desired future training. In order to conduct the analysis in a logical way, the author answered the research questions in a specific order, ending with the primary research question, which, obviously, comprised the recommended solution.
Hence, the author approached the research questions in the following order:
1. What is the COE's effect on training? 
As the thesis proves to be internally valid for the Norwegian Army, will the thesis provide external validity? Meaning, is it possible to generalize the conclusions of this thesis to be valid for other countries' armies? The thesis is designed to answer a set of factors and to deduce a set of requirements that are specific for the Norwegian Army.
Thus, the results from the thesis should not be used to analyze and adjust how other nation's armies should train in the future without proper analysis. On the other hand, the thesis may suggest one way to approach the problem of how to adapt training, a way that any army, force, or unit can utilize as appropriate.
This thesis is an exploratory study where the purpose is to describe the factors that affect the Norwegian Army's training, and from the description of the factors determine a set of requirements that apply for how the Army ideally should carry out its training in the future. The research has approached a wide range of sources, spanning from published works both in print and on-line, unpublished works such as the CTC North Study, and primary sources such as personal communication. As stated earlier, the final goal for the thesis is to show how a reorganization of the NACMTC can allow the Norwegian Army to improve significantly its preparations in accordance with the requirements determined through the analysis. Thus, based on the research, the analysis will comprise both determining which requirements that should apply to the future training of the Norwegian Army and how the NACMTC should be organized in the future to satisfy these requirements.
The amount of information collected as a basis for the thesis is extensive, and the factors that influence the training and combat preparations of the Norwegian Army are complex. Thus, the researcher has conducted the analysis of the collected information in two steps, covered in one chapter each. The following chapter provides the analysis of the COE and the two relevant OEs, while chapter five offers the analysis of the primarily domestic factors that influence the Norwegian Army's training and combat preparations, to include suggesting a future reorganization of NACMTC.
Success or failure in operations is largely dependent on how the Army and the Home Guard plan and conduct training… There are two basic factors that influence training: it should concur with demands and requirements for contemporary operations; and it must be preparations for future operations 
(Forsvarsstaben 2004, 166)
The Norwegian Army's newly approved training doctrine states that the Norwegian Army should be capable of conducting full spectrum operations, which, according to the doctrine, embrace four main types of operations; combat operations, stability operations, humanitarian operations, and information operations, respectively 
(Haerstaben 2007, main body, 4)
However, the thesis will present these requirements as issues for further consideration in future studies.
The Effects of the Contemporary Operational Environment (COE)
The future of the western way of war, and so of the western way of life and the advantageous economic system that sustains it, ultimately depends on three things: a sustained ability to manage international crises and prevent them from turning into armed conflicts, the outcome of which is always unpredictable; the continued willingness to pay (in both human and material terms) for defense against perils that are not immediately apparent; and the maintenance of each state's political control over its armed force… 
(Parker 2005, 428)
One of the challenges of the COE is that there is no simple threat picture for the western world. Should a country base its military and the training of the military on traditional threat pictures against national sovereignty? Alternatively, should the direction of a country's forces focus on peace enforcement and peacekeeping? There are no easy answers, as the decision will imply consequences for the country and her forces in the long term. However, a country must probably prepare for both options, as a country cannot ignore threats to national sovereignty, at the same time, a country will probably feel an obligation to contribute to shaping a safer world in conjunction with other countries and/or organizations. In an analysis of serious conflicts, the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs
11
(Windheim 2006, 2)
Thus, the possibility of future civil war-like conflicts is obvious, and is clearly a 
There are some militarists who say: we are not interested in politics but only the profession of arms. It is vital that these simple-minded militarists be made to realize the relationship between politics and military affairs. Military action is a method used to attain a political goal. While military affairs and political affairs are not identical, it is impossible to isolate one from each other 
(Mao 2000, 89)
The political variable also encompasses the presence and significance of the actors in the COE: regular and irregular forces, insurgents, terrorists, criminals, conflict entrepreneurs, media, private commercial organizations, private security organizations, transnational corporations, and nongovernmental organizations that provide humanitarian assistance. The large number of actors contributes to the increased the level of complexity of the military operations 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 39-47)
Concerning training requirements, the importance of political considerations in military affairs is not a contemporary invention. Carl von Clausewitz addresses the significance of balance between policy and politics on the one side and military operations on the other side, and concludes "the political object -the original motive for the war -will thus determine both the military objective to be reached and the amount of effort it requires 
(Clausewitz 1989, 80-81)
(Krulak 1999)
The COE does not address enemies but threats, which range from traditional conventional forces similar to what, for instance, Russia can field, to insurgent forces similar to the insurgents currently operating in Iraq and Afghanistan. The two extremes on this scale represent challenges with regard to the threat picture in their own perspectives. The threat of a conventional force requires the Norwegian army to be able to conduct high intensity warfighting operations, while the threat of insurgent forces requires the Army to be able to conduct counterinsurgency (COIN) and stability operations, which, accordingly, is stated in the current training doctrine of the Norwegian army 
(Haerstaben,
main body,
4)
One significant characteristic of the COE is change. From Norway's commitment in Lebanon, through the Balkan period, and to today's Afghanistan, change in the threats and their methods is evident. Evaluating the threat pictures as they have evolved from the end of World War II until today provides the same evidence, i.e., change. Thus, the Army must evaluate this evolving change with regard to both the adversaries' and own forces' modus operandi, as well as other parallel changes with regard to culture and environment.
The purpose of the evaluation should be to retain the initiative instead of becoming solely responsive to the adversary's action, or worse, ineffectual. However, evaluation alone will not help the forces deployed abroad. The most important part is probably the development and dissemination of the lessons learned, following the integration of new tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) in the Army's units 
(Leners 2007)
The Norwegian Army has started the establishment of a branch in TRADOK to deal with lessons learned, however, the Army has not concluded the development of the branch 
(Haerstaben 2007, annex G, 1)
(Fossberg 2007)
One challenge concerning lessons learned is to establish a "collaborative issue resolution 
(Pietron 2007)
(Leners 2007)
(Seland 2007)
The conventional threat picture implies that the Army, in general, should be prepared to conduct high intensity warfighting operations. However, the Norwegian Army itself is currently so small that it is fully dependent on reinforcements from NATO or another coalition force to be able to fight and win a traditional war of defense in Norway, from which the requirement of interoperability springs. Interoperability encompasses a wide specter of means, ranging from plug and play capability of command, control, communication, and information (C3I) systems, through logistics and maintenance issues, to language skills and procedures. Further, the conventional threat picture requires specific capabilities, from which additional training requirements spring.
One obvious example may be air defense (AD) systems, which is probably not very important in a COIN or stability scenario, but which is vital in a high intensity scenario.
One of the main challenges with a COIN or stability scenario is an adversary who employs terrorist tactics to fight the forces present in the area. Often, these tactics are called asymmetric; however, the term asymmetric is imprecise, as it does not say anything other than that the opponent chooses to employ other means than force on force.
Currently, these terrorist tactics encompass suicide bombers, improvised explosive devices (IEDs), mines, and ambushes, from which the primary requirement springs, force 
In general, the economic factor may not seem significant at the tactical level of conflict. However, the growing world population, increasing urbanization, and increasing number of people living below the poverty line, imply that one significant source of future conflict may be the wish from those living in poverty to have a share of the worlds wealth 
(Friedman 2000)
(Atkinson 2002, 57)
However, the importance of culture has probably been one of the Norwegian Army's strengths throughout many years, exemplified in an interview with the commander of the Norwegian led Provisional Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Meymaneh, Afghanistan, as the team was ready to deploy abroad. One of the many aspects the commander had focused on during the pre-deployment training was the importance of cultural understanding, which the new commander defined as a "vital facilitator when it comes to the need to develop and maintain mutual trust between the local populace and the military force 
(Kroken 2006)
The religious aspect is probably decisive with regard to how a force operating Similarly, as a thorough understanding of the religious aspect probably can turn out to be decisive, so can understanding of ethnic factors, as they became, and still are, important issues on the Balkans and in Africa. In some countries or regions, clan and tribal connections may be so strong that they may trump even religious influences. Thus, cultural competence is about facilitating and perhaps emphasizing our own operations through interaction with the local populace, which relates closely to the statement that every soldier is an ambassador and a sensor 
(Oakley 2008)
Realizing the importance of the interaction between soldiers and the indigenous people, and that every soldier is an ambassador and a sensor, is an attitude that is important to establish with regard to both collection of information and conduct of the ever-present information operations (IO) campaigns 
(Oakley 2008)
IO is one of the contemporary slogans or buzzwords that the soldier on the ground may find difficult to grasp. However, if Carl von Clausewitz was right when he said, "War is thus an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will 
(Clausewitz 1989, 75
IO should be a central and decisive part of every contemporary operation. However, the debate on the interaction between officers and media and the visible effect that the Armed Forces have punished some of those speaking with media, or at least the media have portrayed them as punished, have probably led officers to be careful with the interaction with media in order not to harm their careers. Nevertheless, if media is important with regard to conduct of operations, the Army must promote building of trust between officers and the media, and thus increase the officers' ability to interact with the media, which will be a difficult and time-consuming effort with regard to the ongoing debate. As the former marine, now Al-Jazeera journalist, Josh Rushing says:
"The media has become a battlefield in the larger global war on terror. You need to ask yourself if you're even on that battlefield and if you are ready to engage in that conflict" 
(Rushing 2007, 227)
The factor information covers the significance of language skills and the ability to use interpreters as well. Language is power. The ability to master one or more foreign languages provides a huge advantage when dealing with representatives from other countries, as well as when communicating through interpreters. The first requirement to address is fluency in English, which is an interoperability issue. Norwegians have a reputation for having good English skills. Nevertheless, there are indications that people from Norway may have a somewhat unrealistic impression of their own language skills 
(Tessem;
Engström 2007)
(Dahlen, 2006)
The variables infrastructure and physical environment do apply significantly to training requirements for the Norwegian Army. Infrastructure, or the lack of such, in addition to increasing urbanization, will put restrictions on the way the forces will be able to operate in the theatre, and will be one of the big challenges in a future operation, where combat operations will be complex, both with regard to technical aspects, international law, and moral considerations 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 39-47)
One requirement is very important though, as many possible AORs are desolate, where the travelling distances to next higher-level headquarters and higher-level medical facilities may be measured in hours instead of kilometers. Units down to section level, due to the way the Army operates in stability operations, face a special demand for medical skills, as it may be difficult for the force to guarantee medical evacuation by helicopter due to climate, weather and distance from existing airports / bases with helicopters. Additionally, distances and modus operandi will probably require skills in operating advanced long-range communication systems.
Why does it take so long to settle what General (Ret.) Sir Rupert Smith argues is "wars amongst people?" Chairman Mao and Ho Chi Minh argued their view on time as a factor that helped the people's war. Additionally, when looking on what has taken place in Africa and on the Balkans, not to mention World War II, to settle hatred takes time.
Thus, to settle a conflict where the combatants have committed extensive atrocities against each other will probably take generations, as those who are old enough to hate probably will have to pass away before the hatred can end. For instance, only in the last 10-15 years the relations between Germany and other European countries have been normalized after what took place between 1939 and 1945 
(Beevor 2005)
Time is perhaps more a planning factor than a factor that leads to training requirements. However, it is important to be aware that all types of stability operations will take time. NATO is still present in Kosovo, and only recently has Bosnia become stable enough to allow NATO to transfer the mission and the last part of the normalization process to EUFOR. UN is still present in Lebanon since the establishment of UNIFIL in 1978, etc. Therefore, even if training and combat preparations for stability operations should focus on making a difference for the local population, the strategy nested all the way down to the tactical level should be long-term and stable.
The other effect of time, is the time it currently takes for a capable force to project force. A great power like the United States, and probably China and Russia in the near future, will be able to project power in very short time, thus, smaller states like Norway, if threatened by a great power, must be able to react to the threat in equally short time in order not to be overrun or made irrelevant. However, rapid reaction capabilities are connected primarily to the Norwegian Navy and Air Force, in addition to the volunteer part of the Norwegian Army, and will not be discussed further in this thesis.
Norwegian forces have their primary operational environments in Norway and the adjacent ocean waters. Strong ability to deal with extreme climate and similar geography inland, especially in the northern areas, will therefore dimension training and equipment. However, the Defense's participation in international operations implies that the Armed Forces must be equipped and trained for jungle and desert conditions as well 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 39)
The Norwegian Joint Doctrine defines the operational environments in which the Norwegian Armed Forces should be prepared to operate. More specifically, the doctrine states that the number one area of priority for employment of Norwegian forces is the bordering areas with Russia to include the ocean waters. Further, when the doctrine says that the Norwegian forces should be prepared to operate in desert and jungle environments, the doctrine points probably at Afghanistan and Sudan. Afghanistan, because Norwegian forces have been present in the country since 2003 and probably will stay in the country until the country is stable, which may take long time 
(Mood 2008)
Sudan is listed because the Norwegian government has worked to commit Norwegian forces to the UN led force in Sudan. However, in January 2008, news came that the Sudanese president would not allow Norwegian forces into the country; thus, the Norwegian government withdrew the offer of forces to the UN force 
(Røyseland 2008
The question is: will an analysis of the two remaining OEs, the bordering areas with Russia and Afghanistan, respectively, add new requirements for the training and combat preparation of the Norwegian Army? Probably, the most significant requirements spring from the COE, however, the two specific OEs may add some specified requirements.
Currently, there are many indications that Russia has regained economic strength and is back on the field as a re-emerging power player. The question is: does Russia pose a threat to Norway? Currently, maybe not. The paradox in security policy is that military threat can be defined as a function of capability and will. Thus, even if Russia currently has the capability to use force to impose her will against Norway, she does not necessarily have the will. However, the will to use force can easily change; thus, it is not possible to neglect a possible future threat from Russia without accepting risk, even if it is not likely today. Hence, the Norwegian Armed Forces must be prepared to counter a threat from Russia.
One possible future source of conflict between Norway and Russia is the northern areas and its rich natural resources, oil, gas, and fish, respectively, which affects the economy of the two countries significantly. Indeed, petroleum products, fisheries, and ocean farming is the primary source of Norway's current wealth and standard of living (Jacobsen 2008). Additionally, one of the richest areas when it comes to oil, gas, and fish is the Barents Sea, in which Norway and Russia still have an unresolved dispute concerning where the border between the two countries' maritime economic zones should go. The recently discovered Shtokman Field, situated in the Russian sector of the Barents Sea, holds crude oil and natural gas of strategic significance to Gazprom, the Russian company that holds the rights to extract the oil and gas. Indeed, one of Norway's largest companies in the oil industry, Statoil Hydro, is involved in the Shtokman project, from which Gazprom's goal is to extract approximately the same amount of gas per year as the annual total amount of Norwegian gas production (Gazprom 2006).
Due to the increased price of crude oil over the last decade, Russia has regained economic strength, from which the Russian military is one of the branches that benefits significantly. In his annual lecture in the Oslo Military Society, the CHOD, General Sverre Diesen, addresses the relationship between Russia and Norway. He argues that it will be natural that Russia due to the increased Russian economy will increase her military activity in the north, as Northwest Russia with the Kola Peninsula is Russia's only direct strategic access to the Atlantic Ocean. However, Diesen also says that the Russian long distance air patrols as a demonstration of power in connection with the Russian suspense of the CFE treaty is not an encouraging act 
(Diesen 2007)
(Nordstoga 2007
Another example of the increasing Russian activity and demonstration of power was the Russian maritime exercise the autumn of 2007, which took place in international waters, but within the Norwegian economic maritime economic zone and in-between Norwegian oilrigs. The heavy fighter and helicopter activity, centered on the Russian fleet comprising Admiral Kuznetzov, two Udaloy class cruiser and support vessels caused heavy Norwegian concerns and a shutdown of Norwegian air activity in the area. Due to pressure from Norwegian authorities and the Coast Guard, the Russian fleet after a while moved westwards 
(Helgesen 2007
However, the Russian ratification of the Partnership for Peace Status of Force Agreement (PfP SOFA) will probably further facilitate an increased cooperation between Russia and NATO (NATO 2007b). For Norway, this ratification implies the removal of one significant obstacle in order to be able to conduct joint exercises and army-to-army cooperation with Russia, which is one way to contribute to easing of tension in the north.
On the contrary, the Russian suspension of the CFE treaty as of 12 December 2007 (NATO 2007a), probably because of the United States' and NATO's plans to establish the long planned strategic missile defense shield, shows that there are still issues to be resolved between NATO and Russia.
The areas in the north are becoming increasingly important due to the global warming. Clearly, the ice covering the Arctic Ocean is retreating, which leads to increased interest from many actors. One significant effect from the retreating ice is that in a few years, the Northeast Passage may be open year round, which offers new available waters for shipping, and a significantly shortened way for ships between Europe and Asia. These new shipping lanes will cross through the Norwegian maritime economic zone 
(Mandag Morgen 2007)
The challenges the Norwegian Armed Forces face in Afghanistan are extensive.
However, does Afghanistan, as the second OE of current interest for Norway, represent new challenges and training requirements that the discussion of the COE and the northern OE has not addressed so far? Probably, the Afghan OE only elaborates and specifies much of the issues discussed under the COE. Of particular interest is culture, as a common denominator for language, politics, religion, history, social issues, etc. In addition, Afghanistan represents some specific challenges when it comes to COIN operations as part of the NATO-led stability operations, carried out by ISAF, much due to the mountainous area of operations (AO). The mountains themselves represent challenges due to altitude and inaccessibility; however, as Norway is mountainous itself, Norwegian forces are accustomed to operating and training in mountainous areas.
One other challenge in Afghanistan, which relates heavily to its culture, is the position and networks of local power players such as warlords, clan elders, and imams.
To add to the challenge, very much of the local economy is based on harvesting opium poppies and trading/smuggling raw opium. The warlords may be defeated or neutralized through destroying the poppy fields and thus destroying the warlords' economy, however, they will not let that happen without fighting. Another aspect of the value of the poppy trade is the effect an attack on the opium-based economy will have on the local population. If NATO or other agencies in Afghanistan cannot provide other sources of regional and national issues that may affect their operations, which definitely will be a time-consuming task.
Today, a private in the Infantry has to master the use of significantly more and increasingly complex equipment than I myself had to master as a company commander in the eighties 
(Diesen 2007)
The Norwegian CHOD, GEN Diesen, points in his annual lecture in the Oslo Military Society
12
Generally, most of the training requirements are universal, as they spring out from the analysis of the COE. The OEs represent some specific challenges in addition to those represented by the COE. However, the key elements are the COE and the one OE, i.e., the bordering areas with Russia. The second OE, Afghanistan, can become irrelevant due to a future Government decision to withdraw from Afghanistan, even if this is not very likely. Thus, the soldiers and units must master the challenges of the COE as well as those of the OEs in order to be properly trained and prepared for future operations.
The COE, as shown by the discussion above, represents extensive challenges that soldiers and units must master when conducting operations in the future. One challenge is that the Norwegian Army lacks a doctrine that covers properly how the Norwegian Army should conduct operations in the COE. The doctrine for land operations of 2004 covers a few generic terms, but focuses mostly on the theoretical level, operational terms, and conduct of force-on-force operations within a maneuver warfare approach 
(Haerstaben 2004
When it comes to implications for current and future training and combat preparations, the operational variables of the COE imply that the Norwegian Army faces extensive and increasing challenges. No units and officers, NCOs, and soldiers that train and prepare to conduct operations in the COE can do that with a Cold War mindset. In today's world, all personnel must have knowledge of how the operational variables affect the COE and the OE.
The most important issues from the operational variables are that all officers, NCOs, and soldiers must have thorough knowledge about political, religious, societal, and cultural issues in general, and about local issues relevant to actual OEs in particular.
In other words, they must be culturally competent. Part of the cultural competency also include basic local language skills for the actual theatre of operations, in addition to fluency in English, which is a prerequisite for working with interpreters, but also an interoperability issue.
CHAPTER 5
The Constant Factors' Effect on Training
In sum, domestic operations and operations abroad imply that the Armed Forces currently must be able to plan and conduct operations throughout the entire spectrum of conflict. Thus, the Armed Forces are dependent on capabilities within several areas to succeed in operations. However, the capability to conduct combat operations in high-intensity conflicts is the Armed Forces main rationale, which implies special requirements on robustness and the ability to conduct joint operations. This must form the basis for the future development of the Armed Forces. 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 29)
Currently, the Army has two main bases, one in southern Norway and one in northern Norway. The Army Headquarters is located to the capital, Oslo, while the Army Forces Command is situated in northern Norway. Some units are located in other places of the country; however, the location of these units is insignificant to this thesis, as the Norway every year, the travelling costs make a significant percentage of the training budget 
(Seland 2007)
The balance between the conscript force and the volunteer force is important for Norway. A professional, or volunteer, force implies high reaction capability to crises that may occur in the future, however, a conscript force is significantly less expensive than a professional force, which gives a conscript force an increased capability to sustain a participation in international operations, simply because more soldiers are available for the same amount of money 
(Bjerke et.al 2007, 37)
An additional important effect from the conscription of soldiers to the Army relates to recruiting competent and motivated personnel to become NCOs and officers.
The conscript army is most often the first meeting between the Army and the future NCOs and officers, thus by ensuring a proper basis for recruiting through the screening and selection mentioned above, the Army has a good starting point in order to develop and maintain a professional corps of NCOs and officers 
(Strøm-Erichsen 2006)
The model, which shapes the Norwegian Army's training and combat preparation, starts with the training of the conscript force. This training is by parliamentary resolution limited to 19 months in total, of which the mandatory service is limited to 12 months 
(FRM 2008)
The primary challenge that springs out from the conscript army is time available for training. Obviously, the Army must cover not only the traditional requirements that normally apply for a conscript force, i.e., homeland defense, but also the requirements that derive from both the COE and the OE. Currently, however, the Army has to adapt the ways it trains and prepares for deployment abroad, as the training requirements already are extensive. To date, the Norwegian forces that deploy abroad have received
proper training and they achieve good results in the operations they conduct 
(Hals 2007)
The first challenge is that the extensive training of the forces earmarked for deployment abroad implies significant added strain on the soldiers, the NCOs, the officers, and the army families 
(Fossberg 2007)
(Daltveit 2007
The question is, basically, how should the Army train in the future in order to achieve better balance between how the Army trains and prepares for combat operations and the amount of time required to train? There are already indications that the conscript force may not be able to conduct more training than it already does without imposing too much strain on its personnel and their families, from which the officers and NCOs, and thus the training itself, will suffer 
(Hanssen 2006)
(Stølan 2007)
However, as shown by the analysis of the COE and the relevant OEs, there are probably additional training requirements, with which the conscript force must comply to conduct better and more efficient training and combat preparations. Alternate solutions, instead of implying changes concerning how the Army trains, could include extending the mandatory time of service, which requires a decision in the parliament, or converting the Army to an all-volunteer force. Neither of these solutions is easily applied nor likely to happen. In a long-term perspective, the Norwegian Parliament may agree to extend the mandatory time of service. However, the probability that the Parliament increases the defense budget sufficiently, in order to convert the Army to an all-volunteer force, is very small.
The economic factor is of constant importance, as most of the restrictions concerning training stem from the economic factor. The budgets, in general, will probably not vary much in the coming years, even if the Defense Policy Committee recommended last year that the Government should increase the army budget with NOK one billion in order to allow the Army to establish another battalion of volunteer forces.
The committee recognizes that the current threat scenario implies a need for an increased reaction capability, which only professional forces can provide 
(Bjerke et.al. 2007
However, even if the Army's budget increases, the Government will probably earmark the budget increase for the professionalization and training of the other battalion. As such, the Army will not have any additional money for training in the future. Therefore, any recommended solution for the future cannot be significantly more expensive than the current solutions.
The today's operations, and must be preparations for tomorrow's operations 
(Haerstaben 2005, 4)
(Haerstaben 2005, 16)
The question is: do Army's units still train and prepare for a "Cold War" scenario? Probably some do, as the Army as a whole has not fully adapted its training to the challenges presented by the COE and the actual OEs. Nevertheless, this is natural, given the primary mission to defend Norway from foreign aggression. However, already in 2005, the Army Chief of Staff argued that there is probably an imbalance with regard to how different units train 
(Haerstaben 2005, 4-5)
(Daltveit 2007)
Nevertheless, the Army faces challenges with regard to training and competence, which both the Army Chief of Staff and Commander TRADOK, Brigadier General Barthold Hals, acknowledge 
(Mood 2008;
Haug 2008
(Mood 2008
14 Expressed by Major Jan Erik Haug during discussions with the author in April 2008. Major Haug is currently the Military Assistant to Commander TRADOK, Brigadier General Hals.
When it comes to training, however, one of the biggest challenges is probably that much of the decision-making with regard to how the units should conduct their training is pushed down to the battalion level 
(Haerstaben 2006, 77)
Training for Operations, part 2: "The foundation for training for operations is laid within good staff work and reliable support activity within and outside the unit 
(Haerstaben 2006, 76)
One challenge that at least partly, stems from the delegation of tasks down to battalion and company level is the way the Army currently trains its commanders from platoon leaders and up 
(Stølan 2007a)
(Hagen 2006)
(Haerstaben 2007
(Haerstaben 2007, annex E, 1)
The Norwegian Joint Doctrine looks into another factor that adds weight to the Army's challenges, which is the need for flexibility, with regard to both different methods of approach and operational methods; and the needs to utilize the possibilities implied in effects thinking, networks thinking, and maneuver thinking. This factor adds significantly to the training requirements aimed especially at current and future commanders. Thus, the Army must facilitate and conduct training and coaching of today's and future commanders at battalion, company, and platoon level, who will be the ones who will make most of the important decisions in operations today and tomorrow.
According to the Joint Doctrine: "It is a particular challenge to develop commanders on all levels to be able to regularly gain initiative and make decisions on their level, and simultaneously, if necessary, act on a direct order from higher levels 
(Forsvarsstaben 2007a, 54-59)
Staff Trainer (CST) and the CTC, given that the commanders train in their designated roles together with their units.
One other challenge for the Norwegian Army is the current exercise cycle. Every year the Armed Forces conducts one particular large scale winter exercise that encompasses most of the Army's units, many of the Norwegian Air Force and Navy units, some Home Guard units, and most often allied forces from NATO and PfP countries. However, the exercise will normally take place in the same areas every year, with few exceptions; and the exercise objectives are normally an offensive operation followed by some kind of stability operations. However, due to the size of the exercise and the prestige connected with it, the exercise will be the one activity that all units focus on during the training year. After the exercise, due to the one-year training cycle of the conscript force, the Army's focus shifts from basic training to preparations of those units bound for international operations 
(Stølan 2007a
The one competency that suffers specifically from the current training paradigms and exercise cycle is the Army's combined arms competence. First, there are obvious differences between the volunteer part of the Army and the conscript part. Second, there are obvious differences between units in the conscript force. Interestingly, however, the battalion with the best reputation when it comes to combined arms competence is one of the conscript battalions: namely the Armor Battalion of Brigade North 
(Stølan 2007a
The challenge is how can the different units in the Army build combined arms competence when the available time for training is restricted? The answer is obvious, to change the way the units train. Not to say that the Army should change the sound principle of bottom-up approach to training, which means to build competence from the bottom, which again means that, for instance, the a unit must pass the platoon level training before proceeding to the company level 
(Haerstaben 2005, 16-18)
(Seland 2007
Some units train more often at NACMTC than other units, however, the large boost of combined arms competence will only come when the entire Army has changed in the way its companies and battalions train. The challenge is that most of the battalions send their companies to NACMTC and the CTC without any clear idea of which training goals the different units are supposed to achieve. The only battalion that has trained as a battalion system in the CTC is Telemark Battalion, the Norwegian Army Rapid Reaction Force (RRF) 
(Røstad 2006)
(NACMTC 2004
(NACMTC , 2005
(NACMTC , 2006
(NACMTC , 2007))
The observations from the CTC rotations, as well as the number of cancellations and improvised or reduced rotations at both NACMTC and the CTC, indicate that there are many tasks competing with the Army's need to focus on training. It may be tempting to say that this lack of focus stems from the military transformation the Army has gone through, and that the main reason is that the Army has been significantly reduced without a proper reduction of its numerous tasks and missions. However, it is not possible to make any conclusions on this issue without a large-scale evaluation of the Army's current missions and tasks, compared to manpower and workload. Nevertheless, there are some indications suggesting that the workload of the Norwegian Army is unhealthy, which is reinforced by the fact that the current amount of overtime work in the Armed Forces equals a work force of 1000 personnel, or 7% of the number of active duty personnel in the Armed Forces 
(Saevrøy 2008)
As stated in chapter two, all sources the author has approached concur in the perception that many of the army's staffs and key officers are so bogged down in transformation issues that they do not have much capacity to develop and support training. These statements support the perception discussed above, that so many tasks are pushed down from the higher echelon staffs that it is difficult for the staffs and units from One direct consequence of the transformation, however, took place late 2007, when the Defense Staff chose to cancel the annual winter exercise, mentioned above, in order to prioritize the conclusion of a large economy project. On a question asked in the Armed Forces' monthly, Forsvarets Forum, about the reasons for the cancellation, the Defense Communication Director, Birgitte Frisch responded. "The economy project is a large project that has to be concluded, in other words, we are willing to cut something we think is some of the most important (sic). It is beyond doubt that units will receive a poorer training standard after this decision, but it is a consideration and now we have chosen to prioritize the economy project 
(Frisch 2007)
One of the biggest challenges that stems from the transformation of the Norwegian Army is the reduction of the force, which becomes obvious when considering the change concerning international commitment. Earlier, large parts of the forces that were deployed abroad came from the reserve, which is currently not the case. Most of the forces the Army deploys to international operations come from the conscript force immediately after the conclusion of the one-year basic training, which contributes significantly to imposing further strain on the Army's personnel and their families. The strain from the deployment tempo is particularly hard for officers and NCOs, spanning from a deployment cycle of an average of 1:3, i.e., 6 months abroad and 12 months in Norway, to a 1:1 cycle for specialists 
(Thomassen 2008)
(Rosvoll 2008)
However, the transformation, or modernization, is not going to stop. On the contrary, modernization is a never-ending cycle, due to the complexity and change implied in the COE. The question remains: on which basis does the MoD, and eventually the Government, carry out the modernization of the Armed Forces? There may be indications that this basis is subject to change as well, as stated below by the Undersecretary of Defense, Espen Barth Eide, in his opening remarks at the Norwegian National Defense College in September 2007.
With the state-to-state relations as a benchmark it is in fact not asymmetric -but on the contrary symmetric -challenges that may become the predominant features concerning the Defense. Our own challenges in the northern areas are thus already to a great extent very typical. This insight shows that we already are facing what we can call post-post 9/11, then, the root assumptions for the future we made only a few years ago may have to be revised. 
[…]
The only thing that is certain is that the future implies change, perhaps drastic, with which the Army must adapt or become irrelevant. Probably, future transformation, or modernization, will be a constant source of distraction and a competing interest when 
War is the realm of uncertainty; three quarters of the factors on which action in war is based are wrapped in a fog of greater or lesser uncertainty. A sensitive and discriminating judgment is called for; a skilled intelligence to scent out the truth 
(Clausewitz 1989, 101)
(Oakley 2008)
(Barron 2005)
Clearly, the skills must be adapted to rank and responsibility.
By constantly developing relationships, the goal is that the environment in which the Army is operating will start developing in a supportive way. This requires a lot of cultural competence, language skills, and knowledge on the use of interpreters on the as well as knowledge and confidence in how to engage with media. Units and soldiers can only achieve these skills through regularly training on the necessary skills; units will have to use role players, as well as representatives for particular cultures and representatives from media, to achieve the desired results.
Obviously, all units and soldiers who operate in the COE must be able to respond to attacks, ambushes, IED threats, etc., which implies that not only maneuver units but The other part of the full spectrum operations aspect, which applies to both international operations as well as defense of Norwegian territory, is high-intensity combat operations, where access to NACMTC in general and the CTC in particular is crucial to achieve the training objectives. The CTC is crucial when it comes to maintaining and developing combined arms competence, as the instrumented training field provides the opportunity to achieve and receive effects from artillery, aircraft, antitank mines, etc. However, the CTC does not have capacity to allow every battalion and company size unit to train with simulator support. Even if the CS and CSS units manage to allocate time for basic infantry training, it will be difficult, if not impossible, for the units to get access to the CTC due to the current prioritization of training time.
Thus, it is obvious that the Army must do something to ensure that all units have sufficient competence at the end of their basic training, and similarly their predeployment training. The high-intensity combat and combined arms aspects are challenging enough concerning the one year the Norwegian Army has available to conduct basic training. That challenge is intensified because of the specific requirements from the COE, which implies that all units trained and prepared for international operations must be multi-purpose units and must be able to defend themselves, even when operating as small units. Hence, in order to enhance learning and to save time by training efficiently, the Army as a whole must employ simulator-supported training to a much larger extent than today. Simulator support gives unbiased and uninfluenced feedback to the training units and its commanders, and contributes to effective learning in a much more effective way than traditional training.
Originally, the plan in the first phases of the project that led the Army to establish NACMTC was to build two CTCs, one located in southern Norway and one in northern Norway, respectively. Each would have the capacity to train a battalion task force at a time. Because of economic reasons, the Army reduced its ambitions, where the plan was adopted to establish two CTCs as originally planned, but with the capacity to train a company size task force at a time. However, again due to economic reasons, the goal was reduced once more, and the idea of a CTC in northern Norway was cancelled 
(Seland 2007)
Opposing Force (OPFOR) Squadron (Sqn), a Gunnery Wing, and an Armor Drivers School. 
15
However, the concept comprises four rotations, where the first rotation is basic training for tank crews, where the tank drivers and tank commanders receive specific training in addition to the training given to the crews as a whole. This rotation takes place at the Armor Drivers School and the Gunnery Wing in its entirety. The following three rotations take place at the CTC, where the second rotation focuses on section and platoon level, and the third rotation focuses on platoon and company level operations with a combined arms approach. Finally, the fourth rotation focuses on complex company operations in a full combined arms environment 
(Seland 2007)
All of NACMTCs subunits largely utilize simulators in order to accomplish their primary task, which is to facilitate efficient training and to save costs for the Army. The CTC has most of the outdoor simulators, sufficient to equip two companies in addition to the OPFOR Sqn, and several sets of simulators spread out to three camps in northern Norway. The Swedish company SAAB has delivered most of the Army's outdoor simulators and the computers, networks, and antennas the gives the CTC the possibility to inject events, and to monitor and to track what takes place. The appendixes B, and C of this thesis gives the details in the dissemination of the outdoor simulators, however, the numbers of simulators in northern Norway, generally, equals that of the capacity at Rena, with a few exceptions.
However, the main problem for NACMTC in general and the CTC in particular, is that the capacity already is swamped 
(NACMTC 2004;
2005;
2006;
2007)
A gives an overview of the current capacity at the CTC together with an estimate of the required number of training weeks, which shows that the capability to satisfy the Army's total need for simulator-supported training at the CTC is nowhere near sufficient. The current capacity at the CTC is 45 weeks per year, where a normal rotation is five to six days long. Again, the need to look upon the training weeks at the CTC in one-year cycles stems from the fact that the conscript force has one year to complete its basic training.
Thus, as shown in appendix A, even with a cautious approach to future simulatorsupported training, the required number of training weeks is 62. However, the one-week rotation length is too short to reach the current desired training objectives. According to the commander of the CTC, Major Bernhard Dalen, normal rotations should probably comprise eight to nine training days 
(Dalen, B. 2007a
According to the CTC North Study 
(Seland 2007)
(Seland 2007)
, y uses daily.
Solution number one,
16
The second possible solution is to pull together all available simulator materiel and concentrate the materiel to NACMTC at Rena, which will give the Army the ability to conduct fully instrumented training of a battalion task force, including OPFOR. This solution also provides flexibility should the Army decide to employ a regime to approve and certify units up to and including the battalion level. However, the consequences of this solution are more severe than solution number one, the most important of which is that the solution does not give the CTC any increased capacity. Clearly, the Army would benefit from a CTC with the capacity to train battalion-sized task forces; however, it is probably more important to increase the number of possible rotations through the CTC.
Additionally, this solution will not reduce any costs, and it will not reduce the strain on the Army's personnel and their families.
The third possible solution is to establish a second CTC, located in northern Norway, which can save the Army travel costs for two to three rotations per year, and per company currently located in northern Norway. In order to establish the CTC, the Army must pull together all outdoor simulators currently in northern Norway and bring them under control of the new CTC, which will give the CTC sufficient capacity to train company-sized task forces against an instrumented OPFOR. As such, the solution will provide the ability to deal with at least two of the basic challenges deduced in this thesis, which is that all units in the Army need basic combat training, and that this training should be supported by simulators and training teams in order to enhance learning and save time. This solution can also have another effect, namely to reduce the strain on the Army's personnel and their families, which can be summed up in a short expression: the total number of nights out of bed. Thus, CTC rotations close to the units' home garrisons will provide the ability for the officers and NCOs to go home in the evenings when a training day is brought to an end, and it will be possible to stay at home in the week-end in the midst of a rotation if the rotation goes over two weeks.
However, there are some consequences of this solution as well. First, there is a need for some investments, which primarily result from the need to established one or two training fields with basic instrumentation, i.e., at least one antenna, an exercise control (EXCON) facility, and optical fiber connections between the EXCON and the antenna. Depending on the degree of instrumentation, i.e., coverage for antennas with regard to monitoring tactical radio nets, base stations for a dedicated O/C net, a sufficient map foundation with height data, there will be significant costs connected with the project 
(Dalen 2007b
A CTC in northern Norway will give the company commanders the possibility to be trained as company commanders, compared to being trainer or exercise leader, and will give units other than maneuver units the possibility to train basic combat skills with simulator support 
(Daltveit 2007)
This thesis concurs with the recommendation from the CTC North study; the Norwegian Army should establish a second CTC, located to northern Norway. Solution number one and two must be rejected, as the solutions do not give the Army an increased number of available training weeks with simulator support. Solution number four will give the Army an increased number of training weeks with simulator support; however, the Army may degrade its own internal competence by doing so. Common for all three rejected solutions are that they do not contribute to reducing the strain on the Army's personnel and their families.
Thus, to support the establishment of the CTC North, the Army should pull together all available outdoor simulator materiel in northern Norway and concentrate the materiel under CTC North leadership and control. However, there are some important issues to address. First, it is important that the CTC North remains under control and leadership of NACMTC due to follow-up of the use of the simulators, follow-up of contractual issues with SAAB, and consistent follow-up with regard to future development of simulators and simulator policy in conjunction with TRADOK and the Norwegian Army Logistics Organization (NDLO) 
(Seland 2007)
Additionally, there is a need to renegotiate the support, and especially the number of weeks with available Light Portable EXCON (LPE) or EXCON support with SAAB.
SAAB should reassign its personnel in northern Norway to the CTC North as well. When it comes to budgeting, the CTC North should, due to the already discussed command relationship, draw its budgets and resources from NACMTC, which eventually will have to be adjusted to reflect the increased capacity.
After the establishment of the CTC North, the Army will have to change the generic rotation concept in order to maximize the potential benefit from the establishment. However, rotation number one, which is primarily training of tank and APC crews, will have to take place at Rena due to the location of the Armor Drivers School and the Gunnery Wing. Nevertheless, the dismounted force does not have to travel with the crews to Rena, as the force can conduct instrumented basic training at home base. Rotation number two should still focus on section and platoon level, but should take place at home base with support from the CTC North. Rotation number three, also at home base with support from the CTC North, should then focus on platoon and company level. Eventually, rotation number four and its focus on complex company task force operations in a combined arms environment should take place at Rena and CTC South, which, due to the current configuration, will have somewhat different and increased capacity compared to CTC North. Finally, if the future brings a regime for approval or certification of units, this should take place during rotation number four 
(Seland 2007)
There is a need to adjust the simulator policy at NACMTC as well, in order to support the proposed change concerning the Army's training and combat preparations. contribute to reduce the strain on the Army's personnel and their families 
(Seland 2007)
Recommendations in order to Reinforce Learning Currently, the Army's brigade and battalion commanders have very little time available to train their own units, to include subunits. One way to mitigate this challenge, which will also allow commanders from battalion to platoon level to receive training, without administrative requirements, is to increase NACMTCs capability to set up training teams 
(Stølan 2007)
Probably, the most important objective for current and possible future international operations is to win the trust of the local population, therefore the forces abroad must operate in such way that they do not produce new adversaries every time an opponent or enemy is apprehended or neutralized. Thus, it is vital to train full spectrum operations in its entirety, supported by role players, on all levels in the Army. In addition to the challenge presented by role players, the training units and its commanders should be challenged with regard to language, the use of interpreters, and the presence of media.
If necessary, the complexity of the exercises can then easily be increased by employing an increasing number of role players 
(Haerstaben 2006, 42)
Training Requirements Not Covered by Reorganizing NACMTC Reorganizing the NACMTC will eventually give the Norwegian Army's units more time to train on additional requirements not covered sufficiently today. However, there are several issues a reorganization of NACMTC will not cover, of which the most important issue is probably training paradigms. The Army needs a cultural change where the Army's focus should be on training and combat preparations to a larger extent, not on ever-present administrative tasks following transformation or support to higher level staffs and units. In order to do this, staffs throughout the Army should probably focus more on facilitating and supporting training, and not delegate as many tasks as today down to battalion level and below.
Additionally, the Army needs to incorporate language training and enhancement of cultural competence, including political and cultural issues. The Army, i.e. TRADOK, should probably address language training and cultural competence through another study. However, in the future, the Army's units should also, to a larger extent than today, train language and cultural skills during both traditional exercises and rotations through NACMTC by employing interpreters and role players into exercises and training.
Clearly, there is a need to develop systematic media training for the Army's units and their commanders, which is possible to do both in garrison, and by employing journalists and media role players on exercises. However, the main challenge may stem from the current organizational culture within the Armed Forces, which says that speaking to journalists is not a good thing, and speaking to journalists may imply There is one particular risk connected with the conclusion, which is economy. It may seem that it is easy to establish a branch of NACMTC without significant cost.
However, the thesis does not cover a detailed economic analysis to address the costs  
Modern World, which is perhaps the one source that gives the best overview of the changes in the way modern war is waged. General Smith has authority on the matter from his extensive operational experience, which comprises command of the British armored division in the 1991 Gulf war, command of the U.N. forces in Bosnia, and command of the British forces in Northern Ireland. Finally, he served as Deputy Supreme Allied Commander in NATO from 1998 to 2001 under Generals Wesley Clark and Joe Ralston
Social
Social
C402ASABR3-8). The question is: how does an army prepare its officers and soldiers to meet this battlefield? The goal is obvious. Every officer or soldier on the street should be comfortable with the presence of media and know what he or she can say, and know what questions the Public Affairs Officer (PAO) should take care of. However, the area of media handling in the Norwegian Army comprises some challenges, which stem from an ongoing debate on media and openness to media within the Norwegian Army. Through several articles in many newspapers and periodicals, high ranked officers, PAOs, and journalists debate on where the boundary between loyalty to the chain of command goes versus what officers can say to the press.
(Fossberg 2007)
All translations of Norwegian documents, doctrines, field manuals, etc, are by Major Ingvar Seland unless otherwise stated.
The personal communication encompasses interviews, discussions, briefings, etc. The documentation of the communication comprise notes, emails, and digital recordings, all of which on file with the author. See the reference list for a comprehensive overview of the primary sources and documentation.
In Norwegian: Forsvaret Fellesoperative Doktrine
The Norwegian Armed Forces official internet site offers information in English, and is available at http://www.mil.no
In Norwegian: Forsvarssjefens Forsvarsstudie 2007
In Norwegian: Norges Offentlige Utredninger 2007:15 -Et Styrket Forsvar ff of the Army
The General Inspector will in U.S. terms be the Chief of Sta
In Norwegian: Haerens Utdannings-og Treningsreglement
Forsvarsnett: http//:www.mil.no
In Norwegian: Mulighetsstudie -Kamptreningssenter Nord. The short form CTC North Study will be used throughout the thesis.
Norsk Utenrikspolitisk Institutt (NUPI)
Oslo Militaere Samfunn (OMS)   
In Norwegian: Generalinspektøren for Haeren.
Se appendix D for the current and the proposed future organization sketch.
The discussion of the pros and cons of the four possible solutions are taken from the CTC North Study in its entirety.
REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release; Distribution is , located to North Norway. u
. S. Army Command and General Staff College I, Ingvar Seland
United States Army Command and General Staff College (CGSC)
Combined Arms Research Library
Science degree. COE Contemporary Operational Environment COIN Counterinsurgency CS Combat Support CSS Combat Service
Afghan culture is complex. Due to frequent wars, civil wars and unrest through the last centuries, and a tribal based society, it is not possible to discuss Afghan culture as one common culture. Tribe and tribal issues are more important than the nation and its government (Michigan State University 2008). Afghanistan's population of about 32 million people encompasses seven main ethnic groups, which speak over 30 different languages, has a life expectancy at birth between 43 and 44 years, and only 28 % of the population above 15 years of age can read and write. However, Dari as the official language and Pashto is spoken by about 85% of the population. Afghanistan's official religion is Islam, where the population comprises 80% Sunni Muslims and 19% Shi'a Muslims 
(CIA 2008)
To sum up, the Afghan OE does not present new challenges or training requirements for the Norwegian Army, only emphasis and specifications to the issues discussed under the COE and the northern OE. However, the culture of Afghanistan is complex, and the intermixed relations between religion, social structures, clans, politics, warlords, economy, poppy trade, etc, make Afghanistan a very challenging environment.
Hence, the Norwegian Army forces that train and prepare for deploying to Afghanistan will have to pay close attention to analyzing the local conditions as well as to consider Probably, the most important difference from the way the Norwegian Army has been training and preparing in the past springs from the threat picture in the COE, but also from the bordering areas with Russia, and the Afghan environment. The Norwegian Army must be prepared to conduct full spectrum operations, ranging from high-intensity operations, both in a defensive fight in Norway and as part of an international operation, to COIN and stability operations abroad. The difference concerning COIN and stability operations compared to the way the Army has been training, is that all units present in the theatre of operations the must master basic skills to operate and survive in an asymmetric environment. In other words, all units and all personnel must have the necessary combat skills to defeat an ambush or an IED-attack, as well as have the skills and attitudes necessary to fulfill Luis Oakley's statement "every soldier is an ambassador and a sensor 
(Oakley 2008)
(Krulak 1999)
NACMTC is very high. Thus, a rotation is easy to cancel if the unit is short on time or money 
(Fossberg 2007)
The discussion of the COE shows that the threat is present everywhere, exemplified by the attack on the 507 th Maintenance Company at An Nasiriyah, Iraq, on 23 March 2003 (U.S. 
Army 2003)
(Daltveit 2007
(Seland 2007
The Norwegian Army suffers from training paradigms that prevent effective and efficient training, the most important of which is that the Army's units do not utilize the possibilities implied in simulator-supported training, which will eventually give the units institution, service, and army. The Norwegian Army's approach to leader development comprises three parallel runs: leader training, leader education, and personal growth 
(Haerstaben 2007, annex C, appendix 6)
In an ideal world, the Army would train its commanders as an important and integral part of the Army's training and combat preparations, not let the commanders be trainers for their units nor be part of the training team. However, this is often not the case if the commanders make it to the training field at all due to administrative tasks. An important question is then, how can the commanders allocate sufficient time for their own training? It may be naïve to think that Army units can deal with the challenges and effects presented by the ongoing transformation in a short perspective, meaning that it may be difficult for commanders from platoon to battalion level to stop doing the tasks pushed down from above. However, it is possible for commanders to allocate time for their own training, by freeing the time they have spent training their units. One way to do this is either to establish training teams within one's own unit, in which no commanders are assigned, or to use training teams from the outside. Currently, two of the very few places in the Norwegian Army that have training teams available which can provide realistic training, to include leader training, in an environment characterized by complexity, uncertainty, and a combined arms environment, are the CTC and the CST at Rena 
(Seland 2007)
In the big picture, the current goals for the Army's training and combat preparations are probably sufficient to cover the challenges from the COE and the actual another study by for instance TRADOK, however, it will take years and much public debate until this matter is settled thoroughly; a process the Armed Forces should initiate.
Currently, TRADOK is working on how the Army should continue to develop the TRADOK branch for lessons learned. From the documentation available to the author, the process gives the impression that analyzing and disseminating lessons learned may be a time-consuming process. Thus, the challenges presented by issuing lessons learned rapidly to those who need it, such as new enemy TTPs, should be incorporated in the work on the lessons learned branch. Additionally, NACMTC is a tool the Army should consider for a role with regard to analyzing lessons learned, as the CTC has the technology available for validation of tests and experiments through unbiased collection and analysis of information.
The COE and the two OEs that are relevant for the Norwegian Armed Forces  