# ID: 33fbe3d3a000453f8dc6e85cf8dca186
# Title: Thinking Different about US National Security
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2011.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
This study challenges the enduring assumption of U.S. National Security Strategy that America is uniquely charged to underwrite global security through maintaining military superiority. Since the beginning of the Cold War the U.S.'s use of military force in pursuit of its vision of global security that includes primacy of U.S. core values and eliminating rivals has cultivated an environment of compliance and created this era of "persistent conflict" to balance power. The diminished decisiveness of force and the evolving global context in which war is undertaken are discussed along with the impact of recent studies of suicide terrorism, lasting peace efforts, and cognitive psychology. A new assumption and a derivative framework for U.S. led global security is advanced; one based on the causative factors of peace and stability rather than those associated with "persistent conflict".
viii THINKING DIFFERENT ABOUT U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY
At the beginning of the Cold War the United States, coming to grips with its super power status and capabilities, made an assumption that the U.S. is uniquely charged to underwrite global security which it pursues through maintaining military superiority. The U.S. developed a strategy to support attainment of its interests, including maintaining global security and stability, by seeking primacy of U.S. core values and first eliminating then later avoiding the rise of future peer rivals. Accepting this assumption, the U.S. created a national security framework based on a military with unmatched capability for precision and massed destructive effects, with forces forward-based throughout the world, with the power to project force into denied territory, and with the national will to intervene on behalf of U.S. interests. 
1
EVOLVING THREATS TO THE U.S.
Gen (ret) Rupert Smith described a form of war, which evolved from the Napoleonic wars, reached a zenith during WWII, and remains the basis for western ideals of war today; that war is a military campaign waged in support of obtaining a political objective by defeating an opposing military force, this leading to the capture of the opposing government's will, and forcing negotiations. In order to conduct this form of war the nation requires access to a large military force and a plan to mobilize that force along with the nation's industrial complex to support it. Thus the nation must have an enemy to plan against. 
2
4
has maintained its assumed role of underwriting global security through military preeminence and its derivative National Security framework. To combat the threat of WMD proliferation and secure U.S. interests the U.S. has maintained its forces stationed in strategic locations throughout the world, its power projection capability, and its penchant for intervention.
Understanding this nuance of maintaining global military preeminence in the pursuit of interests and preemptive action abroad to defend the homeland is important for two reasons.
First this enduring assumption of U.S. responsibility remains foundational to the 2010 National Security Strategy and was appropriately accepted as fact during the 2010 QDR, the congressionally appointed 2010 QDR Independent Panel, and is the basis for the 2011 National Military Strategy, the Army's new Capstone Concept and its Operational Concept. 
5
In terms of the evolving global context, we must first consider the methodological or tactical trends which adversaries are employing to combat U.S. military preeminence. In order to counter U.S. capabilities for precision and mass, its adversaries conceal and disperse their forces, operate increasingly in urban areas amongst civilian populations, provoke the U.S. into overreacting and overstretching in order to negatively affect the cost-benefit analysis of fighting, and to reinforce their position with a global audience through propaganda. The pervasive and accessible worldwide media networks enable this global audience of foreign governments and individual citizens and to be a more effective influence on decisions of policy.
These factors tend to diminish the decisiveness of military force. Second, political science studies of lasting peace have shown that exercising military hegemony evokes power balancing behavior; it does not underwrite peaceful relations. The exercise of military force to influence the internal behavior of another government can create friction against that nation's ideals of sovereignty. Participants within a power relationship will contend for a re-distribution of power even when they benefit from the dominant power's protection; especially when reliance on the outside power creates internal public support issues. Exercising military power makes a nation unpredictable decreasing trust and increasing doubt over motives. This study concludes that strategic restraint can create a reciprocal rather than a compliance relationship, and is a causative factor that paves the way for lasting stability. 9 Using preeminent military power to pursue U.S. interests creates an environment of compliance in which cooperation is only possible when another nation's interests match the U.S.'s. In other words, there is no utopian "new world order" that can be founded on unipolar military superiority.
The current era of "persistent conflict" to defend the U.S. homeland from violent extremists employing suicide terrorism must be understood in the context of this balancing Religious based theorists blame the rise in adherence to Jihadi-Salafi Islam and the ascent of al Qaeda as an international actor. 10 Another study concluded that suicide terrorism "is an extreme strategy for national liberation" by a weak actor who recruits individuals to commit acts of martyrdom as part of an organized campaign to coerce a stronger occupying force to leave their identified homeland. 
11
13
Indeed, some terrorist or insurgent organizations receive crucial external aid from Middle Eastern governments the U.S. supports. This "persistent conflict" is the U.S.'s catch 22:
engaged in conflicts on foreign soil with extremists who are attacking the U.S. because it is engaging in conflicts on foreign soil to further its interests. Since 9/11 the U.S. has attacked pockets of militants, destroyed safe havens, and reached out to moderate Muslim communities in attempts to counter-radicalize the minority extremists and dissidents. Military efforts to locate and defeat current militants are a necessary component of the "persistent conflict" but can reinforce the justification for martyrdom. Killing militants is often used as a coercive tool to dissuade individuals from using terrorism or non-conventional tactics in the future. These endeavors are appropriate however for establishing secure environments that can support longer term efforts to change behavior other than through coercion. Destroying safe havens can produce short term gains or result in creating another target of opportunity for the groups employing suicide terrorism. Depending on the methodology, safe haven destruction can also feed the root causes of the conflict. Counter-radicalizing dissident groups is difficult for a cultural outsider to accomplish. The psychological dynamics of power relationships tells us that changing behavior between culturally dissimilar peoples requires a high amount of referent power, "admiration", or legitimate power, "accepted authority" to make up for the lack in similarity. The historical use of hard power in the Middle East has reduced U.S. soft power appeal diminishing referent power. Furthermore, the actual underlying conditions driving these groups to employ suicide terrorism are the inability to resolve internal political issues in part because of uncontestable U.S. military power supporting current regimes, falling or failed governance, and an extreme minority call to generally oppose western power and influence through violence. In other words, these groups contest the legitimacy of their own governments let alone the U.S.'s authority in their affairs. Without similarity, attractiveness, or authority, attempts to counter-radicalize or change behavior are hugely disadvantaged. What current political science studies imply is that a better strategy to combat the use of suicide terrorism may be to delegitimize the martyrdom. Without the public support of martyrdom, future acts of this nature could be reduced to simple suicide affecting both the coercive potential and the draw on volunteers.
As a large consumer market for Middle Eastern oil it is in the U.S.'s interest that the price remains under control. But the U.S. must consider the circular logic that using military force to protect its interests has created a suicide terrorist threat to its homeland as the only viable response; to which the U.S. has responded with yet more military force. The question the U.S. needs to answer is: will the military objective of destroying al-Qaeda, its leadership, and affiliated groups lead to resolving the "persistent conflict" or does resolution require thinking differently about underlying assumption and what underpins global security? Sun Tzu said nearly 2500 years ago: attacking the enemy's strategy is of supreme importance in war followed by, in descending order of effectiveness, disrupting his alliances, attacking his armies, and with the worst policy being attacking his cities. 14 U.S. efforts to date have been focused on destroying forces including in his cities, but have not effectively pursued al Qaeda's strategy, its alliances, or addressed its grievances. The U.S. should never capitulate to the demands of a terrorist and the leadership of al Qaeda is beyond reconciliation. However, the U.S.
has not yet begun to address the underlying causes of this "persistent conflict"; that U.S. use of military preeminence to secure its interests in the Middle East has given rise to a galvanizing ideal of using suicide terrorism to coerce the U.S. to stop.
The U.S. is rightly concerned about failed or failing states that could potentially provide safe haven for lawless or violent groups and in maintaining free access to the global commons.
The root cause of failing states is in governance, and, as the U.S. has concluded during the last decade, while military force can provide a measure of security and create an environment in which governance issues can be resolved, governance issues are best solved by other means.
The 2010 NSS, 2010 QDR, the 2010 QDR Independent Panel, and the 2011 National Military
Strategy state that problems with governance are best solved by "whole of government" or "comprehensive approaches"; often where the military forces will assume a supporting role to some other agency. Also, supporting repressive for the sake of stability or supporting unknown groups engaged in insurgent like activity can be a political quagmire. The global commons generally refers to the international shipping lanes, airspace, and cyberspace.
Threats to these are from piracy and state-to-state competition for resources which threaten U.S. interests, not necessarily the homeland. If U.S. policy makers properly understood the studies of lasting peace, suicide terrorism, the psychological dynamics of power in modifying behavior, and this synthesized vision of the evolved global context, they would readily conclude that military preeminence alone cannot underwrite security in global commons and failing governance any more than in underwriting global security writ large.
Military force is still necessary, useful, and can yet be an effective coercive option. The world has and will continue to have people who view gratifying their own desires as more important than the cost to others and those who believe the end justifies the means and ways.
Nor is it always wise to reserve military force for a last resort to secure a more favorable position for achieving a political end. This may sound noble in a "Just War" context but it can place one in the position of having to win the violent exchange in order to salvage one's interest from the jaws of defeat; fertile ground for escalation and desperation to win. Recent political science work has identified protracted conflict and desperation to win a violent exchange as the leading causative factors for civilian casualties. 
15
Conflicts are more protracted in these contexts because of the additive effects of reduced decisiveness of force, lack of comprehensive whole of government solutions, the increased impact of the global audience on policy decisions, and the attention to civilian casualties.
Moreover, using unipolar military preeminence has elicited a countering strategy of suicide terrorism. In short, the underlying assumption that defines the U.S.'s extremely expensive national security framework -that the U.S. is uniquely charged to underwrite global security through maintaining military preeminence -is in fact incorrect, and the resulting security framework, for all its expense and demonstrable capability, is becoming increasingly less effective.
As the U.S. searches for alternatives to this enduring assumption and the international order it seeks to underpin, the U.S. should consider the question posed in the 2010 QDR, "Whether and how rising powers fully integrate into the global system will be among this century's defining questions, and are thus central to America's interests." 
16
desire rising powers to mimic or usurp U.S. military preeminence and the enduring assumption of U.S. responsibility to underwrite global order according to its interests since the beginning of the Cold War?
Declining relative power and potential rise of peer competitors presents the U.S. with tough choices ahead. Options range from: synchronizing hard and soft power to re-establish the effectiveness of the enduring assumption and its framework, governmental reform relative to the organization, funding, and control over employment of military force to attempt to create a distributed decision making process, to more cooperative, multilateral, or isolationist options. If the U.S. seeks to re-establish the effectiveness or simply hold onto the enduring framework it would have to accept the reality of continued funding of military preeminence and the constant effort to balance against its power in one form or another. At some point the U.S. may have to wrestle with the question of when, as Nietzsche suggested, the U.S. may become the monster it fights. An isolationist policy is also difficult because of the domestic pressure a media connected public can put on the government to take action, the potential for economic backlash of failed states, and that many nations are dependent on this enduring framework for their security. Moreover, the studies that define restraint as the leading causative factor of lasting peace warn that drastic reversals like this are rarely adhered to over time.
I propose another solution: replacing U.S. responsibility for underwriting a global security environment with an international framework governed by rule of law; one similar to the United Nation's (UN) Responsibility to Protect (RtoP) effort. RtoP is a peremptory norm, meaning the international community recognizes that it is fundamental to the maintenance of an international legal order from which no derogation is permitted. It is not a law that supersedes sovereignty, the right to self defense, or the right to pursue state interests as long the pursuit of interest adheres to the accepted norm. RtoP establishes the responsibilities for a state to prevent civilian victimization and outlines a vehicle for dealing with states when they fail to meet that responsibility. This change in the international framework of security that the global community took is monumental and could be expanded if the U.S. changes its assumption of what underwrites global security: U.S. military preeminence or normative state behavior. 
18
As the sole superpower the U.S. has to lead this change. The hardest part of this new framework for the U.S. will be the strategic practice of restraining military power to secure its interests. It will make decisions for preemptive action more difficult, but replacing the penchant for intervention with strategic restraint is consistent with studies on lasting peace. This new framework would not change the requirement for power projection. Power projection would remain necessary for participation in collective action when states fail to meet their responsibilities and to underwrite the potency of strategic restraint and maintain deterrence against future peer competitors whom do not comply with this UN framework. As this framework matures, the U.S. could potentially realize opportunities to release some facilities abroad, reducing the forward basing of troops. The U.S. would have to balance these decisions against maintaining power projection and deterrence postures. The means of the U.S. military would not have to significantly change. The core missions of warfighter and leader, collective action as part of an international force, and building security capacity are already key capabilities the U.S. charges its military forces to perform. U.S. Special Operations Forces are particularly adept at these functions. U.S. air and naval forces are unmatched in capability and likewise invaluable in a cooperative security environment. As hard as it may seem, a U.S. vision of global security based normative state behavior underwritten by global cooperation and action, could pose an alternative to a multi-polar military competition for power, continuing to pay the bill for declining military preeminence, or adopting a more isolationist role in international affairs. Most importantly, it assumes that U.S. leadership in establishing and maintaining a global system based on the rule of law, cooperation, and distributed power, underwrites global security, not U.S. core values and military preeminence. Changing this assumption can lead to global cooperation rather than compliance and serve to mitigate the root grievances driving groups to employ suicide terrorism.
because Russia and China are not capable of foreign military intervention and they must therefore adopt this strategy by necessity. Both however have intervened in countries they border upon in the past and maintain primacy of influence with many countries under their respective security umbrellas.
xviii.
RtoP. Under the RtoP framework the UN Security Council could authorize a range of actions if the members agree that the actions of any party to a conflict constitute genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, or ethnic cleansing. 
AGENCY 
NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
10
SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) National Security Fellowship Program and Chuck Stone Program for Diversity & Education in Media School of Journalism
Mass Communication University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Associate Dean for Undergraduate Studies
National Security ecurity Fellowship Program and Chuck Stone Program for Diversity & Education in Media School of Journalism and Mass Communication University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Security Fellowship Program 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT School of Journalism and Mass Communication NUMBER(S) Army Special Forces Napoleon B. Byars Associate Dean for Undergraduate Studies Director, National Security Fellowship Program and Chuck Stone Program for Diversity & Education in Media School of Journalism and Mass Communication University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Senior Service College Fellowship Program
The views expressed in this student academic research paper are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of the Army, Department of Defense
U.S. Government
to obtain state interests, including by the U.S., if the U.S. were to value cooperation over compliance. Under this new normative state behavior security framework, when a state's interests intersect with the failure of another state to adhere to the established norms, the UN Security Council could authorize action against that state. The response tools the UN currently anticipates using under RtoP are: acting early to build capacity to protect where necessary, economic and diplomatic tools, and collective action using existing UN Chapter VI and VII authorities to intervene. The UN has established criteria for choosing the lead country in an RtoP type intervention that include but are not limited to similarities in culture, potential conflicts of interests, capability, willingness, and suitability. These agreements will NOT be easy.
However, if we consider the diminished coercive power of U.S. military force relative to the global context and the rise of global powers then the U.S. has about twenty years to reinvigorate the potency of military preeminence, change the global context, or compete within the international security framework it has created.
Criticism of UN solutions center on the perceived ineffectiveness of the Security Council because consensus building and veto power prevent the UN from taking action on the more important issues to the U.S.; and in the UN's relatively weak ability to enforce decisions of the Security Council. To these criticisms I offer two counterarguments. First, that the U.S.'s vision of international order and security based on primacy of U.S. core values and absence of a peer competitor and its underlying assumption of the unique charge to underwrite global security through military preeminence inherently compete with all other external sources of power.
When U.S. interests conflict with UN consensus or abstinence, the U.S. has placed its preeminent ability to act above the collective will. China has shown that UN Security Council members sometimes veto proposals because they disagree with judgment based on U.S. core values or the exercise of U.S. military power to resolve the issue. The U.S.'s vision of world order is not compatible with a distributed power system like it envisioned when it sought to create the UN. If, however, the U.S. changes its vision of international order from requiring primacy of U.S. core values, absence of peer competitors, and military preeminence to underwrite global security, to a vision of the global community cooperatively underwriting normative state behavior, the inherent competitive power aspect could diminish. U.S. leadership can make the UN effective but only by appreciating the value of consensus in the governance of people and changing its view of what makes the world secure.
Second, that these same arguments have been used in the past to describe U.S. constitutional democracy. In fact the foundational ideas of the U.S. constitution were to create a body of government in which power was divided by design; that consensus building and veto authority would provide a system of checks and balances against consolidated power. A system designed to make the hard issues harder to solve but at the same time the solutions more representative of the collective will of the governed than of the will of the government. This system is inherently more cumbersome and less efficient than a governing system where power is consolidated. But, America's founding fathers feared consolidation of power into a small group and chose instead consensus and compromise in the governing of internal and external affairs. How less should the U.S. treat the global community it has assumed unique responsibility to secure? That Americans have become distrustful of their own government in part because of a perceived inability to solve the hard issue is a mirror image of how they view the UN in governing world affairs. If the U.S. looks inward to its foundational ideas rather than