# ID: 34674ec8b28d4360aac8487939ae4168
# Title: From Tukhachevskii to Gerasimov: The Evolution of the Russian Way of Warfare into the Information Age
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Since the Soviet era, the Russian has not had the physical capability to execute Tukhachevskii's theories of Deep Battle and Deep Operations, nor has the geopolitical climate fostered conditions to do so in pursuit of Russian national interestes.
Instead, Russia engaged in wars with limited aims and means in Georgia in 2009, and Ukraine beginning in 2014.
Soviet doctrine of Deep Operaitons of annihilation strives to physically destroy the adversary.
Today, the Russian theory of Deep Operatoins seeks to achieve success with a more significant informational component in a strategy of limited action in New Type Warfare.
Leveraging the information environment allows Russia to compensate for its lack of military capacity for sustained large-scale combat against Western powers by integrated military and non-military means in a whole-of-nation approach.
Russia seeks seams in the relationships of the international system and exploits opportunities to employ limited military means successfully by achieving operational surprise, maintaining the initiative with its operational tempo, and by massing physical and cognitive effects throughout the depth of the tactical, operational, and strategic areas.
       Rather than massive, multimillion-man armies, Russia's military consolidated into smaller, professionalized conventional maneuver formations with more robust capabilities.
These capabilities include its long-range fires, air defense, and cyber-electronic means.
In Russia's theory of New Type Warfare, "gray zone" activities conducted by non-military and irregular military means complement the conventional military entities.
Since these reforms, Russia has demonstrated its "near-peer" capabilities to contest Western military powers in every operational domain in its major exercises, the annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, and the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine.