# ID: 34674ec8b28d4360aac8487939ae4168
# Title: From Tukhachevskii to Gerasimov: The Evolution of the Russian Way of Warfare into the Information Age
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Since the Soviet era, the Russian military has not had the physical capability to execute Tukhachevskii's theories of Deep Battle and Deep Operations, nor has the geopolitical climate fostered conditions to do so in pursuit of Russian national interests. Instead, Russia engaged in wars with limited aims and means in Georgia in 2008, and Ukraine beginning in 2014. The Soviet doctrine of Deep Operations of annihilation strives to physically destroy the adversary. Today, the Russian theory of Deep Operations seeks to achieve success with a more significant informational component in a strategy of limited action in New Type Warfare. Leveraging the information environment allows Russia to compensate for its lack of military capacity for sustained large-scale combat against Western powers by integrated military and non-military means in a whole-of-nation approach. Russia seeks seams in the relationships of the international system and exploits opportunities to employ limited military means successfully by achieving operational surprise, maintaining the initiative with its operational tempo, and by massing physical and cognitive effects throughout the depth of the tactical, operational, and strategic areas.
Since the Soviet era, the Russian has not had the physical capability to execute Tukhachevskii's theories of Deep Battle and Deep Operations, nor has the geopolitical climate fostered conditions to do so in pursuit of Russian national interestes. Instead, Russia engaged in wars with limited aims and means in Georgia in 2009, and Ukraine beginning in 2014. Soviet doctrine of Deep Operaitons of annihilation strives to physically destroy the adversary. Today, the Russian theory of Deep Operatoins seeks to achieve success with a more significant informational component in a strategy of limited action in New Type Warfare. Leveraging the information environment allows Russia to compensate for its lack of military capacity for sustained large-scale combat against Western powers by integrated military and non-military means in a whole-of-nation approach. Russia seeks seams in the relationships of the international system and exploits opportunities to employ limited military means successfully by achieving operational surprise, maintaining the initiative with its operational tempo, and by massing physical and cognitive effects throughout the depth of the tactical, operational, and strategic areas.        Rather than massive, multimillion-man armies, Russia's military consolidated into smaller, professionalized conventional maneuver formations with more robust capabilities. These capabilities include its long-range fires, air defense, and cyber-electronic means. In Russia's theory of New Type Warfare, "gray zone" activities conducted by non-military and irregular military means complement the conventional military entities. Since these reforms, Russia has demonstrated its "near-peer" capabilities to contest Western military powers in every operational domain in its major exercises, the annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, and the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
This contestation in the land, air, sea, space and cyberspace domains presents challenges to Western military operational planners in understanding how the Russian military will approach large-scale combat operations (LSCO) against a significant military power. The purpose-or "why"-for Deep Operations remain the same in the Information Age, but the means and ways do not. By examining Deep Operations theory, commanders and staffs can understand the "how"
of Russian operational art, although the current context must be applied. Thus, the "what" remains, leading to the question: What are the requirements of Russian Deep Operations in the contemporary era? Given Russia's desire to avoid a significant Western kinetic military response, the most critical requirements for Russian Deep Operations are seizing the initiative through operational surprise, maintaining a high operational tempo to retain the initiative, and the massing of effects simultaneously in the tactical area and the operational rear. These particular requirements are important because-if successfully executed-they facilitate accomplishment of Russian political and military objectives before the world can prevent such action. Russia will need to achieve its operational objectives before strategic decision makers can understand the environment and respond, therefore imposing a higher political or military cost to undo Russia's actions.
The Soviet doctrine of Deep Operations for annihilation supported a direct, offensive strategic approach and strove to destroy the adversary. Today, the Russian theory of warfare more closely reflects Svechin's ideas and seeks to indirectly achieve attritional success with a more significant informational component, rather than simply physical destruction of the enemy, given the limited means and aims available. Leveraging the information environment allows Russia to compensate for its lack of capacity for sustained large-scale combat against Western powers.
Russia operates this way presently so as not to cross a threshold of violence that will spur the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) into significant military action in response.
The hypothesis is that when on the offensive during LSCO, Russian forces will leverage deception and Information Age technologies to facilitate the speed of initial operations and increase ambiguity for adversary decision-makers. These efforts in the information environment will focus on the disruption of the enemy's command and control with kinetic and non-kinetic means to set conditions for ground forces to destroy enemy units physically, or neutralize them, and penetrate operational rear areas. To accomplish this, Russia requires local air superiority to provide intelligence to cue fires assets, including non-kinetics fires like cyber electromagnetic capabilities, to mass effects in the operational rear. The other significant requirement is the logistics capability to sustain tempo and provide operational reach for ground forces. In nonpermissive environments, these sustainment capabilities are more vulnerable, and therefore Russian forces will need to shape the local information environments to mitigate risk before executing ground maneuver.
Similarly, when on the defensive during LSCO, Russian forces will echelon themselves in depth. Advancements in technology now allow the defender to affect the attacker's rear areas with long-range artillery and rockets, as well as cyber-electromagnetic capabilities to disrupt the attacker's ability to command and control his forces. In this case, Deep Operations through maneuver is not the prime object, but rather deep effects, to stymie the attacker.
To test the hypothesis, this monograph presents a comparative analysis of the original Soviet theory of Deep Operations and applies the concepts to the current operational environment, from the Russian military perspective using qualitative analysis of primary and secondary source documents. Next, via a case study of the recent Russo-Ukrainian conflict, the author discusses the Russian military's current capabilities and demonstrates how Russia The theories came about as a result of losses in the Russo-Japanese war, the stalemate of World War I and subsequent civil war after the Russian revolution. 4
History credits Svechin as the first man to use the term "operational art" in 1922 which he defined in Strategy as "a critical conceptual linkage between tactics and strategy." 5 He recognized logistics as a critical function to enable the operational art. Svechin linked tactical actions and logistics in theory as:
[T]he material of operational art and the success of the development of an operation depends on both the successful solution of the individual tactical problems by the forces and the provision of all the material they need to conduct an operation without interruption until the ultimate goal is achieved. 6
Reinforcing Svechin's ideas, B. N. Morozov defined operational art as:
[A] component part of military art, concerned with the elaboration of the theory and practice of preparing and conducting front and army operations of the different services of the armed forces. Operational art is the connecting link between strategy and tactics.
Proceeding from the demands of strategy, operational art determines the methods of preparing and conducting operations for the achievement of strategic goals and serves as the point of departure for tactics, which organized the preparation and conduct of the combined arms battle in accordance with the operation's goals and tasks. 7
Significant in this definition is the connection of theory and practice at front and army levels, germane to LSCO, and the use of combined arms to achieve the goals of the operation. These aspects lay the foundation for evolution to modern military thinking at the operational level.
Early in the reform of military thought were debates on strategic approach. There was a battle of ideas on strategy between two schools of thought. Tukhachevskii championed for an offensively-minded strategy of annihilation while Svechin favored a strategy of attrition.
Tukhachevskii's camp won the debate, and his theories continued to develop within an offensive mindset, resulting in Deep Battle and Deep Operations. 8
The Soviet strategy of annihilation after World War I meant that Isserson's theory of operational art had to nest with that strategy since the operational level links strategy and tactics.
There was not an appetite for an attritional strategy using limited means during that era, and the purpose of operations was to achieve decisive aims with offensive actions, enabled by technological advancements. 
9
The new means of combat warfare relevant to operations in depth included the airplane and the tank.
According to Soviet expert David with limited military means. 
10
The Soviet army had to penetrate the tactical depth of the broad front with enough combat power to locally encircle the front units for destruction while passing a breakthrough echelon through into the operational rear. Thus, the theories of Deep Battle and Deep Operations emerged.
Tukhachevskii listed the "depth of operational objectives-operational reserves, army headquarters, major signals centers, airfields, army or higher long-range artillery, and major logistic dumps."
11
Isserson codified four necessary conditions to successful Deep Battle: weapons that "combined firepower and maneuverability"; "the ability to simultaneously suppress throughout the depth of the tactical battlespace"; the rupture and penetration of the enemy's defense in the tactical area; and defenders in the tactical area must find themselves isolated from operational and strategic reserves. 
12
14
15
16
13
17
Forward Detachments located enemy units, secured important objectives like river crossing sites and railroad junctions, and set conditions for follow-on operational maneuver forces-greatly facilitating maintenance of operational tempo. 
20
21
22
27
28
Additionally, the concepts were associated with purged officers and in disrepute. 
29
Therefore, the commanders of large formations could not translate the theory of Deep Operations into battlefield success in the early stages of the Great Patriotic War. The Soviet High Command, the Stavka, needed to adapt quickly lest the German Army succeed where Napoleon failed in 1812.
Operation Barbarossa highlighted Soviet military shortcomings as the German blitzkrieg again proved initially successful, but created a sense of urgency for military thinkers to adapt.
However, since two of the three significant military theorists died in the purge and an airplane crash, and Isserson remained imprisoned, none of the main proponents of the theories were in the Red Army. Instead, Josef Stalin charged Field Marshal G. I. Zhukov, fresh from his first combat blooding in Khalkhin-Gol against Japanese forces, with the defense of Moscow and subsequent command of a front. Many of Triandafillov and Isserson's ideas on operational art and Deep Operations influenced Zhukov, especially regarding composition and employment of operational echelons, and maneuver. 30 However, given the fate of the original proponents of these theories, 
27
31
32
33
31
32
The frontage at the onset of the offensive campaign was approximately 625 kilometers long. Planners sought to break through the German front to an operational depth of 600 to 700 kilometers to the Oder River. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
Second, the Red Army was successful because it maintained an operational tempo that allowed it to retain the initiative through the two stages of the campaign. Tempo refers to speed and position relative to the adversary, and who holds the initiative. 
40
41
For mobility, engineer support was crucial to facilitate wet-gap and river crossings to maintain the operational tempo. There were two or three major rivers to cross on each line of operation for the fronts. Not only could the Red Army mass combat effects at decisive points, but its operational tempo and disruption of the German Army in the operational rear with air strikes and forward detachments hindered the Germans from massing effectively against the Soviet offensive and seizing the initiative. 
42
43
41
42
43
44
45
46
While the context of the Great Patriotic War provided the Soviet Union with an existential crisis, the geopolitical climate changed drastically in the seventy-five years that followed. The Cold War and nuclear armaments, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the rise of Vladimir Putin all drove paradigm shifts in how the Soviet Union, and later Russia, pursued national interests. The offensive strategy of annihilation and demand for unconditional surrender of Germany were appropriate at the time, but in an age of nuclear weapons, and the emergence of space and cyberspace as operational domains, Russia changed its mindset and strategic approach. 
44
Glantz and House,
When Titans Clashed,
[197]
[198]
46
In modern Russian theory of warfare, the required operational effects and ends are the same, but the ways and means are significantly different, due to technological advancement and the current constraints of the geopolitical climate. Additionally, Russia's strategic approach changed drastically since the Soviet era. Throughout the 20th century, Russia and the Soviet Union adhered to a direct, offensive strategy, whereas Russia presently uses an aggressive, predominantly indirect, and less overt strategy, with Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbas as exceptions.
With the feasibility of nuclear exchange during the Cold War, the Soviets put aside the theory of Deep Operations and favored strategic rocket forces over large maneuver formations.
However, the Soviets eventually sought more flexibility and adopted anti-nuclear maneuver doctrine which directed operational maneuver in groups of smaller formations. 
47
48
49
47 Glantz, "Soviet Operational Art Since 1936," 268-271. 48
49 Christopher Lowe, "The 'Battle' and the 'Battle of Ideas': Misunderstanding of Information Operations" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2010), 17. 
50
protection of friendly systems. 
51
Since the Soviet Union's collapse, Russia has risen from the ashes as a revisionist power.
However, its military capabilities had atrophied in quality, and Russia no longer had the volume of military means available as it once did. Thus, driving the need to alter its strategic approach based on available means and the strategic context.
After the disappointing performance in Georgia, Russian military leaders revised its theory of action to fit in the modern era and conducted reform to meet the realities of the geopolitical and military systems, marking a transition to a more indirect, and predominantly covert, offensive strategy, although Gerasimov terms it a "strategy of limited action." 
52
53
The Information Age is arguably the most recent military revolution that recast societies and militaries. Technological advances exemplify the changing character of war as ranges and lethality of weaponry increase, leading to changes in the geography of the battlefield and the expansion of the operational level of warfare-Russian operational art. Additionally, lines of communication are significantly different in the Information Age with the advent of cyberspace, artificial intelligence, space-based assets, and transportation capabilities. These changes create opportunities for Russia to exploit the limitations of democracy in the information environment and cause significant disruption in tactical, operational, and strategic areas of its adversaries at relatively low costs. 
54
Russia's military leaders continue to rely on the heritage of great theorists like Svechin.
In 2013, Gerasimov used Svechin's thoughts to note that each conflict has a logic all its own, and this has been the case in each recent conflict in which Russia has entered. 
55
56
63
64
65
In hybrid warfare, tactical actions are more than just the combination of offensive, defense, and stability operations. In several key respects, these actions include cyber and electronic operations targeting an opponent's movement of troops, targeting an opponent's ability to communicate across the front, and targeting an opponent's information. In fact, many of the operational cyber and electronic operations prey on the same targets as operational fires, albeit with different means. Concurrently, hybrid 62 Ofer Fridman, Russia's Hybrid Warfare: Resurgence and Politicisation (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 93. 
63
64 Amos Fox and Andrew Rossow, Making Sense of Russian Hybrid Warfare: A Brief Assessment of the Russo-Ukrainian War (Arlington, VA: Institute of Land Warfare, 2017), 2. 
65
66
67
Within the military means available for Russia's military to employ, there is a "[re]new [ed]   emphasis on surprise, deception, and strategic ambiguity." 68 At the operational and tactical level, Russia leverages a newer form of maskirovka, especially in the information environment. By this, the author refers to "volunteers and contractors" employed by Russia to keep certain activities "non-military" in character and therefore do not cross thresholds that would invoke a Western armed response. Also included in modern maskirovka is the exploitation of social media and the open press of Western democracies. 
69
69
conducting training exercises to mask the military build-up for the incursion into the Donbas. 
70
5
71
72
72
73
Furthermore, the BTG could serve as a tactical or operational vanguard, or as the main maneuver entity, as demonstrated in Ukraine.
As noted, the essential requirements to conduct offensive Deep Operations in the 21st century remain the same as during the Soviet era. The Russian military forces pursuing Deep Operations must achieve surprise to seize the initiative, simultaneously mass effects throughout the depth of the operational area, and maintain operational tempo. However, given the limited character of recent conflicts, the BTG acted as the main conventional maneuver force, rather than the exploitive vanguard of an army-sized element like the Forward Detachments did in the Great Patriotic War. In modern equivalency of purpose, the Glavnoe Razvedyavatel'noe Upravlenie, or GRU, Spetsnaz, and proxy forces prepare the deep environment for the conventional maneuver forces and facilitate exploitation in the information environment following conventional success. 
74
73
74
The Zapad 2017 exercise indicated that Russian large maneuver formations for LSCO would have characteristics reminiscent of Great Patriotic War-era in that they will be "heavy artillery-enabled, land-based forward push with the joint help of reconnaissance units and special operations, air superiority elements, air defence, and naval elements." 75 Mathieu Boulègue concluded that: Zapad showed that any army seeking to burst Russia's A2/AD bubble would bear a high enough cost as to be effectively beaten . . . Russia demonstrated that its borders with Eastern Europe are not only conventionally tough to breach but also benefit from solid anti-access capability to deny entry to enemy forces-not just geographically but also on many strategic fronts, from space down to the sea. 
76
75 Mathieu Boulègue, "Five Things to Know About the Zapad-2017 Military Exercise," Chatham House, 25 September 2017, accessed 31 December 2018, https://www.chathamhouse.org/expert /comment/five-things-know-about-zapad-2017-military-exercise. 
76
77
7
The Russo-Ukrainian Conflict (2014 to 2019)
The sheer volume of troops, vehicles, and armaments for massive fronts and large-scale land combat are impractical for the Russian military both economically and geopolitically.
Mitigations for this are shaping activities in the Gray Zone with special operations forces, other entities and local proxy forces. These Gray Zone activities facilitate the generation of ambiguity 
77
The Russo-Ukrainian conflict was one of limited aims so as not to provoke a large-scale reaction from the West. While the Russo-Ukrainian conflict exemplified New-Type Warfare characterized by Gray Zone activities like covert leverage of proxies to achieve operational surprise, there were elements of Deep Battle and Deep Operations regarding the military objectives sought: control of government buildings, neutralization of security forces before the main force arrived, critical commercial infrastructure, and media sites. As a result of special operations and operations in the information environment, the "little green men" quickly seized the Crimean Peninsula before Ukrainian decision-makers understood the environment. 
78
79
At the tactical level, Russia employed technological capabilities in Ukraine for electronic warfare that can disrupt unit operations and enable friendly maneuver. These capabilities can disrupt a spectrum of communication and navigational systems. Additionally, Russian forces leveraged the electromagnetic spectrum for intelligence. Using cyber-electromagnetic capabilities, the Russian forces detected a general location of Ukrainian soldiers through the electromagnetic signature of their communications equipment and their personal devices. 
80
Subsequently, Russian artillery would follow the drone.
Another capability that Russia demonstrated at the tactical level was precision message delivery of psychological messages when it set tactical conditions in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. 
We would be powerless to achieve the aims of the present if we failed to go beyond the limits of historical experience, if we failed to reassess it from the perspective of the new conditions of our era, and if we did not mercilessly discard all that was time-worn and stale.
-G.S.  , 1965-70, in The Evolution of Soviet Operational Art, 1927-1911:  The Documentary Basis Volume II Operational Art, 1965-1991, trans. Harold S. Orenstein (Portland, OR:  Frank Cass, 1995), 81.
New Type Warfare, the military, in concert with non-military means, achieve effects in the operational environment and accomplish the strategic objectives.
In modern Deep Operations, the required effects and ends are the same, but the ways and means are significantly different, due to technological advancement and the current geopolitical climate. Additionally, Russia's strategic approach changed drastically since the Soviet era.
Throughout the 20th century, Russia and the Soviet Union adhered to offensive strategy, whereas Russia claims it presently uses an active defense strategy. Therefore, given Russia's desire not to provoke a Western kinetic military response, it will seek to exploit seams in alliances and agreements, as it did with Ukraine which was not a member of the European Union or NATO.
In the future, despite Russia's proclaimed defensive strategic approach and preference to avoid major military combat with the West, there exist opportunities when the Russian military may go on the operational offensive for a short duration to achieve political objectives. If Russia becomes an aggressor in the Nordic states of Finland or Sweden, for instance, it is likely that the Russian military will have approximately thirty days to operate before the West can levy an effective military response-if at all since these states are not NATO members. At that point, it will likely be too late to affect change militarily without risking significant escalation that Western societies may not support. Therefore, operational surprise, massing effects, and operational tempo will be critical in such a case to secure as much territory quickly and then sue for a political settlement or transition to defense in depth to repel a counteroffensive.
Russia will also continue to operate in the Gray Zone until such operational opportunities arise in which the military can achieve rapid progress toward strategic objectives. When opportunities for employment of military forces arise, the most critical operational requirements for Russian Deep Operations are achieving operational surprise, maintaining high operational tempo, and the massing of effects simultaneously in the tactical area and the operational rear.
Thus, military action in Ukraine exemplifies the needed strategic ambiguity and speed to achieve operational objectives before the international community could discern the situation and prevent aggressive action. Furthermore, within Putin's risk calculus, Russia will pursue military action where it assesses it will succeed without escalation to armed conflict with the West, but Russia will also plan for options that will allow it to "off-ramp" aggressive action if it deems the West will intervene militarily as a preemptive measure.
The construct of time, space, and purpose within operations is significantly different in the character of warfare during the Soviet era compared to the Russian military in the Information Age. The range of indirect fires, unmanned aerial systems, space-based support capabilities, and reach of internet and media drastically changed the art of the possible within the operational art.
Russia integrates organic operational capabilities, national and non-military means effectively into the operational construct during wars of limited aims, also evidenced in the Russo-Ukrainian conflict.
To buy time for conventional forces, Russia will leverage deception and Information Age technologies. The military will focus these means on the disruption of the enemy's command and control to set conditions for ground forces to destroy enemy units physically in the tactical area and penetrate operational rear areas. Russian forces require local air superiority to provide deep strikes and intelligence to cue fires assets, including non-kinetics fires like cyber-electromagnetic capabilities, to mass physical and cognitive effects in the operational rear. The other significant requirement is the logistics capability to sustain tempo and provide operational reach for ground forces. In non-permissive environments, these sustainment capabilities are more vulnerable, and therefore Russian forces will need to shape the local information environments and infiltrate clandestine entities to mitigate risk before executing the ground maneuver.
While not previously considered at the beginning of this study, the theory of Deep Operations can be said to include defense in depth in the modern theory. With Russia's strategy being ultimately defensive, the military will seek to achieve effects in depth-kinetic or nonkinetic-to disrupt an adversary advance and degrade the effectiveness of enemy combat power.
Finally, there is an imbalance between Russia and the United States regarding the art of the possible with information operations, and willingness to leverage sharp power-defined as using soft power tools like information for deceptive or manipulative purposes. 
84
Consistent with the Russian way of war, the strategic approach to the information component of their [New Type Warfare] is aggressiveness and brute force that is opportunistic and dynamic, and unconstrained by the truth. Another characteristic that gives Russia's information strategy strength is the decentralized execution of the centralized themes without bureaucratic approval processes which provided resilience when open source intelligence exposed their activities in Eastern Ukraine. 
85
The implications of Russia's current theory of warfare are threefold: Getting to theater, fighting the fight, cognitive resiliency.
First, during major combat operations, the time from the initial penetration of front lines to disruption of the adversary's operational depth is significantly shorter and can begin before kinetic actions against the front line occur. Intelligence entities and special operations forces conduct this disruptive shaping activity before conventional maneuver forces attempt to breach the front lines. In a war of limited aims, these low visibility entities perform the role akin to those of the forward detachments in the Great Patriotic War. Deep Operations theory previously called for pre-assault fires with aviation and artillery to shape the battlefield and provide tactical and operational advantages to the Russian penetration force and subsequent exploitation forces. In its new way of warfare, Russia synchronizes these artillery fires with other information related capabilities in an integrated manner to set conditions for successful penetration. Simultaneously, in a way that would make Tukhachevskii proud, these fires break down the enemy's ability to sustain and provide command and control to its forces throughout its operational-and sometimes strategic-depth.
Second, Russian military leaders, much like Western leaders, would face challenges initially in effectively operating large combat formations in LSCO as it is an art rarely practiced in reality. However, large exercises like Zapad 2017 and Vostok 2018 provide Russian commanders with more opportunities to practice maneuvering operational formations. Currently, the United States cannot train maneuvering divisions or corps outside a virtual environment. Thus senior military commanders may be at a disadvantage initially in LSCO.
Third, within the framework of New Type Warfare in the Information Age, the strategic level of warfare will be far more active in the conduct of information warfare than during the Soviet era, nuclear weapons being the exception. Telecommunications is one of the driving factors in this idea, given that global information dissemination can be almost instantaneous. As the Russian military strives for operational surprise and high operations tempo to speedily achieve objectives, the challenge for Western military powers will be to mobilize and project combat power forward promptly. In the Information Age, there is now a global reach through cyberspace to have operational effects during hybrid warfare or LSCO by leveraging weaponized information.
For instance, theater logistics are vulnerable to disruption via malware delivered during cyberspace operations which challenges the assumption that Western powers will be able to project combat power into a theater uncontested. Additionally, using a technique called "doxxing," adversaries can expose truthful, sensitive or damaging information for malign maneuver remained relatively unchanged, the effects to be achieved in the information environment played a role in giving commanders and operational advantage. Figure 
8
Previously, the Russian military divided responsibility amongst ten Military Districts that Russia consolidated into five OSKs. The Western and Southern Joint Strategic Commands are significant as they encompass the near abroad of Eastern Europe and the Caucasus Region of Eurasia. These two areas were host to the two most recent conventional conflicts in which Russia engaged with ground forces-Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine beginning in 2014. These OSKs are akin to the fronts as organized in the Great Patriotic War but are now joint service entities. The composition of the Western OSK-oriented on Russia's European frontier-includes three armies of ground forces, two air defense and aerospace armies, the Baltic Fleet and 11th Army Corps. 
91
Second, Russia prioritized technological advancements that now allow it to contest every operational domain. According to the US Army's pamphlet on Multi-Domain Operations, "over the last decade, Russia has increased its investments in anti-access and area denial capabilities and systems intended to deny the Joint Force entry into a contested area and set the conditions for a fait accompli attack." 
92
91
29  
29  
83
Jacob W. Kipp, "General-Major A. A. Svechin and Modern Warfare: Military History and Military Theory," in Strategy, edited by Kent Lee (Minneapolis: East View Publications, 1999),
2 Richard Simpkin, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii (New York: Brassey's Defense Publishers, 1987), 38-40. 3 Richard W. Harrison, Architect of Soviet Victory in World War II: The Life and Theories of G.S. Isserson (Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company, 2010), 91-93. 4 Ibid., 26-31.5 Jacob. W.Kipp, "The Tsarist and Soviet Operational Art, 1853-1991,"  in The Evolution of the Operational Art: From Napoleon to the Present, ed. John Olsen and Martin van Creveld (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011), 65.6 Aleksandr A.Svechin, Strategy (Minneapolis, MN: East View Publications, 1999), 69.
David M. Glantz, "The Nature of the Soviet Operational Art," Parameters 15, no. 1 (Spring 1985): 4.
Simpkin, Deep Battle, 50.    
Harrison, Architect of Soviet Victory,[86][87] 
David M.Glantz, Soviet Military Operational Art in Pursuit of Deep Battle (Portland, OR:  Frank Cass, 1991), 25.    
Harrison, Architect of Soviet Victory, 106.   
Harrison, Architect of Soviet Victory,[110][111][112] 
David M. Glantz, "Spearhead of the Attack: The Role of the Forward Detachment in Tactical Maneuver," Journal of Soviet Military Studies 1, no. 3 (1988): 3.
Timothy G. Heck, "From the Vistula to the Oder: Soviet Deep Maneuver in 1945," in Deep Maneuver: Historical Case Studies of Maneuver in Large-Scale Combat Operations, ed. Jack D. Kem (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Army University Press, 2018), 111.
Harrison, Architect of Soviet Victory, 111    
Ibid.,[144][145][146][147] 
Heck, "From the Vistula to the Oder," 101.
Amos Fox. "Hybrid Warfare: The 21st Century Russian Way of Warfare" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2017), 6.
Harrison, The Russian Way of War, 138.   
First and foremost, I must thank my wife 
Catherine
Dr. Les Grau
Mr. Charles Bartles
Dr. Scott Gorman
Michael Manner
purposes. 
86
The US Army and the joint force requires an education and training overhaul on operations in the information environment. There is not a separate information operations campaign plan as is commonly believed, but rather there is a concept of support to the campaign plan, just as there are concepts of support for fires, sustainment, intelligence collection, and schemes of maneuver. These warfighting functions are all integrated into an overall campaign plan, as information should be as well. It is folly to view operations in the information environment as a stove-piped effort. In the event of LSCO, integration of information activities such as cognitive resiliency developed on the homefront, online identity management, signature reduction, and tactical and operational deception will save lives.
Maxim Trudolyubov posits that the Russian population would be willing to go to war if their leader decided to do so. 
87
Geography matters in the strategic context and the potential execution of Deep Battle and Deep 86 Sebastian Bay and Nora Biteniece, "The Current Digital Arena and its Risks to Serving Military Personnel," NATO STRATCOM, January 2019, 11, accessed 17 March 2019, https://www.stratcomcoe.org /current-digital-arena-and-its-risks-serving-military-personnel. 
87
Ultimately, while Putin deftly kept Russia's malign activities from breaching the threshold to spur a NATO armed military response, recent incidents with the Ukrainian Navy and continued electronic warfare and cyberspace acts of aggression in the Baltic Sea region may cause flashpoints. To be without well thought out plans for contingencies and crises would be folly. Regardless of the immediate likelihood or location of direct armed conflict, it would be irresponsible and not in keeping with Secretary Mattis' strategy of deterrence to not plan for combat with near-peer adversaries. Furthermore, these plans must account for cognitive threats in the information environment, rather than rely solely on technology and kinetic activity.
Operational artists would do well to study the past to understand the underlying theories and synthesize with the current contexts of their adversaries to more accurately understand current environments and frame problems. 