# ID: 3551d809381c4816ac72be82486a25c6
# Title: In Defense of the Defense: The Continuing Political Value Of" Denial of Enemy Aims"
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
billions of dollars of interconnected interests, and billions in US military spending.
Traditionally, the ideal military goal in airpower theory calls for the United States to use superior or overwhelming firepower in tandem with coordinated mobility, speed, and precision at an operational-tactical level of warfare, or the level of "battle," to produce such decisive effects that the enemy is virtually "disarmed" before he can even mount effective operations. 
1
2
3
Divorced from contextual political realities, the emphasis on strategic offensive interdiction makes eminent military sense. However, not all political and territorial rivalries lead to wars over completely opposed political stakes. In advising military and political leaders on how to discriminate on the use of force in strategic situations involving peer competitors, military theorist Carl von Clausewitz argued that they must strive to understand the actual political nature of the conflict at hand by answering the question, What war are we fighting? "Generally speaking," wrote Clausewitz, "a military objective that matches the political object in scale will, if the latter is reduced, be reduced in proportion. . . . Thus it follows that . . . wars can have all degrees of importance and intensity, ranging from a war of extermination down to simple armed observation" (emphasis added). 
4
5
As this article shows, today's East Asian security environment is much more fluid than the one during the Cold War, in which the global and European theaters were defined by two rigid, largely unchanging ideological blocks of states that refused each other trade, technological sharing, and finance, and which sat poised on the brink of World War III. Nor is it like the constant confrontation with Saddam Hussein from 1990 to 2003, or like that with Slobodan Miloševic ´ in the former Yugoslavia from the early 1990s through the 1999 bombing campaign. Instead of the "reinforcing cleavages" seen with these adversaries-in which all economic, political, moral, and military issues became directly counterposed-US conflicts of interest with today's rising China are partial in scope and mediated strongly by dense and complex financial, trade, and diplomatic relations. Conceivably, this more nuanced twenty-first-century geopolitical reality may introduce significant constraints on the ideal airpower goal of full strategic offensives against an opponent's home territory during a crisis or militarized dispute.
To move forward in the debate, the article first describes in greater detail the overall characteristics and thrust of strategic offensive interdiction, followed by a brief examination of today's international system. It then draws upon Clausewitz's often overlooked analysis of the restrained application of force during limited interstate conflicts between great powers. As the article demonstrates, Clausewitz's analysis of variations in both political stakes and levels of warfare goes well beyond his concept of "centers of gravity" that contemporary readers so often cite to justify effects-based weaponry in airpower targeting theories. 
6
7
Airpower advocates have a long history of arguing that offensive, strategically decisive operations are the most efficient and appropriate use of airpower. Despite acknowledgement of its defensive aspects, traditional notions are built on the idea of delivering quick victories at very low cost in US treasure and lives through decisive offensives that virtually disarm the adversary militarily and politically without having to fight his frontline forces indefinitely. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Especially in the latest round of airpower theorizing, arguably initiated by Warden, the theory has addressed in one way or another the potentially revolutionary ability of airpower to range across the battlefield and enemy's larger home territory, hitting both tactical and strategic targets simultaneously via "parallel strikes," unblocked by major defensive hurdles. 
15
16
17
The Strategic Operating Environment: Global Integration, Regional Fragmentation
The modus operandi of the future is accommodation between leading powers at certain times and deterrence at others-a flexible combination of the main actors emerging to thwart the excessive ambitions of one of them.
-Dilip Hiro, After Empire: The Birth of a Multipolar World
The world is entering a globalized age of "pragmatic multipolarity"-a loose network of interactions based on tactical cooperation among states to bolster their domestic identities and further their shared international interests, rather than a system of competing, well-defined blocs based upon utterly hostile ideological worldviews. At a global level, the reality of unprecedented interstate and transstate socioeconomic networks creating an internationalized form of national wealth makes rising powers in all continents fear the societal costs of upsetting financial and trade flows. Furthermore, the interelite agreement on norms of sovereignty and self-determination of peoples along ethnic, religious, ideological, and linguistic lines now makes the idea of territorial transfer via warfare nearly incomprehensible in any rational economic or cultural sense. The transfer of material resources, manufacturing wealth, and population-based rural productivity via warfare is no longer profitable, as it demonstrably was in European international orders past. 
18
In particular, a key part of the US triumph over communism in the Cold War involved the production of a seemingly ingrained, durable, and lasting transnational socioeconomic class with cultural implications. These global elites speak the same professional language of business and high finance, can translate pervasive demands for internal products and resources into a domestically understood local cultural idiom, and can transform local mores and customs regarding money, trade, and information exchange into the globalized, Westernized language of commerce. 
19
20
Granted, high levels of general-deterrence stability among major powers exist worldwide. Nevertheless, clashes in strategic perceptions, political ideologies, and territorial claims can still very much matter at the regional level, for several reasons. First, there is a lack of domestic, elite cultural commonality among very disparate sovereign leadership circles within the major or rising powers of the twenty-first century, accompanied by little shared strategic culture on issues of war, peace, interests, attitudes, and perceptions. Brazil, India, China, Russia, South Africa, Turkey, and any other possible rising power do not share the same domestic cultural histories, the same conflict histories at a geopolitical level, or the same experience with domestic politics and the formation of strategic elites over time. This is true because none of them shares completely the same region, with the partial exception of Asian and Eurasian overlaps in contiguity between Russia and China as well as China and India. Second, in ways similar to those of old European international systems, rising powers all harbor some level of nationalist-based territorial claims based on legacy disputes in which the identity of peoples overlaps with swaths of disputed territory. 
21
22
For instance, in regard to China, one Japanese scholar and policy analyst has argued that in the 1990s, "the government needed nationalism for national integrity, leadership consolidation, and legitimacy, and prevention of what they saw as negative Western influence upon the minds of the people." 
23
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
It follows, too, that war can be a matter of degree.
-Clausewitz, On War One could summarize Clausewitz's most basic theoretical argument in one dictum of particular importance for today's US joint force structure: military leaders should not fight wars with limited political stakes as if they are "absolute" wars over unlimited political goals. Or in his Feature own words, "Obviously, wars waged by both sides to the full extent of their national strength must be conducted on different principles from wars in which policy was based on the comparative size of the regular armies." 
33
If one were to go beyond this point, it would not merely be a useless effort which could not add to [political] success. It would in fact be a damaging one, which would lead to a reaction [from the enemy]; and . . . such reactions usually have completely disproportionate effects. 
34
Thus, in terms of what we now call the tactical and operational levels of war, or what Clausewitz referred to as the "engagement" and "campaign," respectively, he argued that "an attacker can overshoot the point at which, if he stopped and assumed the defensive, there would still be a chance of success-that is, of equilibrium. It is therefore important to calculate this point correctly when planning the campaign. An attacker may otherwise take on more than he can manage and, as it were, get into debt." 35 But Clausewitz's life's work did not start out with notions of purposefully constrained offensives, a reality that often confuses the debate. In the beginning sections and chapters of On War, Clausewitz initially seemed to verify the main threads in Jominian reasoning-that is, the collapsing of the tactical-combat, operational-battle, and military-strate-Feature gic levels into one grand military-political level of action and deed, thought, and decision making:
War is an act of force, and there is no logical limit to the application of that force. Each side, therefore, compels its opponent to follow suit; a reciprocal action is started which must lead, in theory, to extremes. . . . Theory . . . has the duty to give priority to the absolute form of war and to make that form a general point of reference, so that he who wants to learn from theory becomes accustomed to keeping that point in view constantly, to measuring all his hopes and fears by it, and to approximating it when he can or when he must. 
36
Ultimately, though, Clausewitz was not content merely to describe this already-popular mode of thought, epitomized by historical colleague Jomini in his claims of having reached an objective theory of war. Instead, Clausewitz felt obliged and compelled to critique it severely, based on his own quite extensive wartime experience in command of Prussian forces in the counteroffensives against Napoleon. Indeed, the main difference between them-and a crucial one for air and sea power debates today-is that Jomini's "theory of war" was, in fact, a detailed discourse on "grand tactics" or what we may today call the "theater-strategic" level of war, which simply assumed the goal of complete military disarming of the enemy at the outset. 
37
Would this [total military effort in one giant battle] ever be the case in practice? Yes, it would if: (a) war were a wholly isolated act, occurring suddenly and not produced by previous events in the political world; (b) it consisted of a single decisive act or a set of simultaneous ones; (c) the decision achieved was complete and perfect in itself, uninfluenced by any previous estimate of the political situation it would bring about. 
38
Naturally, Clausewitz here sets up three conditions probably impossible to realize concretely in the political world, but he does so in a way that aptly describes in three short points the basic underlying assumptions of Jominian theorizing. 
39
The interaction of the two sides [enemies] tends to fall short of maximum effort. Their full resources will therefore not be mobilized immediately. . . . . . . It is contrary to human nature to make an extreme effort, and the tendency therefore is always to plead that a decision may be possible later on. . . . Warfare thus eludes the strict theoretical requirement that extremes of force be applied. 
40
41
42
43
44
Political decision makers are so cautious, not because of an irrational or overly sensitive fear of using military force to its full potential but because of the near-chronic uncertainty about adversary goals, intentions, and strength or intensity of political will over any given issue in dispute. An anarchic international system that purposefully and closely guards secrets about such variables virtually guarantees the latter. 
46
If you want to overcome your enemy you must match your effort against his power of resistance, which can be expressed as the product of two inseparable factors, viz. the total means at his disposal and the strength of his will. . . . But the strength of his will is much less easy to determine [than his available means] and can only be gauged approximately by the strength of the motive animating it. Assuming you arrive in this way at a reasonably accurate estimate of the enemy's power of resistance, you can adjust your efforts accordingly. . . . One could [for example] . . . conceive of a state of balance in which the side with the positive aim (the side with the stronger grounds for action) was the one that had the weaker forces. The balance would then result from the combined effects of aim and strength. 
47
The key phrase in this quotation is, "Assuming you arrive in this way at a reasonably accurate estimate of the enemy's power of resistance," the latter of which depends upon, as Clausewitz notes, a complex combination of both the adversary's means and the "strength of his will." Given that a haze almost always surrounds the second factor in this equation, it should come as no surprise to Air Force planners that US politicians often fail to live up to the dictates and expectations of traditional airpower theory. The following point of Clausewitz's bears repeating: "But if the decision in war consists of several successive acts, then each of them, seen in context, will provide a gauge for those that follow." Due to the need to assess the enemy's strength of will, it is exactly this incremental decision-making method that has nearly always defined the political approach to the use of force against peer competitors. Barring the completely certain intelligence of political will or the Feature wars of ideological genocide carried out by obvious megalomaniacs such as Adolf Hitler, it probably always will.
Here, Clausewitz represents a firm philosophical body of thought separate from the more purist versions of offensive strategic interdiction-specifically, his recognition that, in warfare between major powers, disarming the enemy could mean an infinite number of physical realities, depending upon the opponent's strength of will, which in turn would directly relate to the political aims sought:
We can now see that in war many roads lead to success, and that they do not all involve the opponent's outright defeat. They range from the destruction of the enemy's forces, the conquest of his territory, to a temporary occupation or invasion, to projects with an immediate political purpose, and finally to passively awaiting the enemy's attacks [emphasis in original]. Any one of these may be used to overcome the enemy's will [emphasis added]: the choice depends on [political] circumstances. 
48
49
When we attack the enemy, it is one thing if we mean our first operation to be followed by others until all resistance has been broken; it is quite another if our aim is only to obtain a single victory, in order to make the enemy insecure, to impress our greater strength upon him, and to give Feature him doubts about his future. If that is the extent of our aim, we will employ no more strength than is absolutely necessary. 
50
51
52
53
With this in mind, it is hard to refute Clausewitz's characterization of a full-scale war between actual peer competitors at the great-power level:
If a state with its fighting forces is thought of as a single unit, a war will naturally tend to be seen in terms of a single great engagement [in accordance with the arguments of Jomini]. . . . But our wars today consist of a large number of engagements, great and small, simultaneous or consecutive, and this fragmentation of activity into so many separate actions is the result of the great variety of situations out of which wars can nowadays arise.
Even the ultimate aim of contemporary warfare, the political object, cannot always be seen as a single issue. Even if it were, action is subject to such a multitude of conditions and considerations that the aim can no longer be achieved by a single tremendous act of war. Rather it must be reached by a large number of more or less important actions, all combined into one whole. 54 Feature Again, it is important to point out why Clausewitz argues that war consists of different levels of decision and different types of planning. One might argue that much of this early theorizing is no longer relevant because it was so inextricably based on the reality of "land war" and crude offensive technologies of the time. However, this would be misreading. Clearly, Clausewitz argues that war is nearly always a halting, hesitant, and mixed beast, not because of technology or terrain but because of politics, both domestic and international: "This fragmentation of activity into so many separate actions is the result of the great variety of situations out of which wars can nowadays arise." 
55
Eventually, Clausewitz prescribed a different approach to "victory" in cases of "limited wars" between peer great-power competitors, which he saw as emerging from partial, rather than total, conflicts of interest with the adversary. In interstate disputes based on only partially conflicting values or material goals, the parties could skillfully use individually decisive (tactical) "engagements" or combats towards rather less decisive, less definitive campaigns and the overall war as a whole. By the end of his unfinished tome, Clausewitz had begun to delineate a type of warfare so limited in political goals that military means and military objects would also, in tandem, become directly influenced and indeed severely constrained in their employment against the adversary-at least at an operational or a campaign, if not tactical, level of fighting: Suppose one merely wants a small concession from the enemy. One will only fight until some modest quid pro quo [italics in original] has been acquired, and a moderate effort should suffice for that.
. . . Neither side makes more than minimal moves, and neither feels itself seriously threatened.
Once this influence of the political objective on war is admitted, as it must be, there is no stopping it; consequently we must also be willing to wage such minimal wars, which consist in merely threatening the enemy, with negotiations held in reserve. 
56
That is, one could choose the destruction of the adversary at a strategic political level via disarming his entire military machine alongside, perhaps, pure "punishment" strikes meant to wear down the populace. Both of the latter would argue for decisive, offensive, campaign-level invasions of the adversary's territory and attacks on his strategic "objective points." Alternatively, one could choose to let the opponent strike first and bear those costs via mounting a purely strategic defense, even as one's own combats and battles themselves would have mainly offensive characteristics at a lower level of action and military decision making:
What do we mean by the defeat of the enemy? Simply the destruction of his forces . . . either completely or enough to make him stop fighting. . . . Engagements mean fighting. The object of fighting is the destruction or defeat of the enemy. The enemy in the individual engagement is simply the opposing fighting force. . . . . . . The complete or partial destruction of the enemy must be regarded as the sole object of all engagements. . . . . . . By direct destruction we mean tactical success. We maintain therefore that only great tactical successes can lead to great strategic ones. . . . Tactical successes are of paramount importance in war. 
57
As one can see, therefore, Clausewitz's focus on the "strategic defense" in wars of "limited objects" did not derive at all from military passivity at the level of counterposed forces in the battlespace. We must not confuse his argument for strategic defensive wars of limited aims with some claim that all wars should be fought halfheartedly or, perhaps more accurately, that individual combats or "engagements" should be lacking in offensive fervor and results. Clausewitz clearly states, repeatedly across separate chapters, that one core thread binds all military and political planning together-the destruction of an adversary's fighting forces at the lowest tactical or operational level.
So much then for the ends . . . in war; let us now turn to the means.
There is only one: combat [emphasis in original]. However many forms combat takes, however far it may be removed from the brute discharge of hatred and enmity of a physical encounter, however many forces may intrude which themselves are not part of fighting, it is inherent in the very concept of war that everything that occurs must originally derive from combat [emphasis in original].
. . . Whenever armed forces, that is armed individuals [emphasis in original], are used, the idea of combat must be present. . . . . . . The fact that only one means exists constitutes a strand that runs through the entire web of military activity and really holds it together [emphasis added]. 
58
59
60
61
62
In a US-PRC crisis over any imaginable geopolitical issue, whether Taiwan's status or the South China Sea's mineral, oil, gas, and military navigation issues, US political leaders probably will need offensive force options at a tactical and perhaps even operational (campaign) level of planning. However, we must funnel all such offensive combats towards strategically defensive political goals, in which diplomats will Feature not want to disarm and defeat China but bargain for new issue settlements that leave the overall Asian balance of power in place for the most part. Therefore, in any future great-power crisis in the Asia-Pacific theater, rather than think in terms of offensive parallel operations involving simultaneous strikes meant to degrade the enemy's ability to communicate with (or command) his forces in the field, US decision makers would likely proceed along the lines of Clausewitz's description of political-military linkages:
Thus there are many reasons why the purpose of an engagement may not be the destruction of the enemy's forces, the forces immediately confronting us. Destruction may be merely a means to some other end. In such a case, total destruction has ceased to be the point; the engagement is nothing but a trial of strength. In itself it is of no value; its significance lies in the outcome of the trial. 
63
The simple truth is that in a world of rising powers defined by complex interdependence, neither side will be particularly interested in completely disarming the other. In a limited war, the United States eventually may want to denude Chinese capacities for power projection in its near abroad, but US decision makers almost certainly will not want to treat China as it did Japan during World War II-or Saddam in 2003 or Miloševic ´ in 1999 in Kosovo Province-by forcing China to retreat from positions on its own internationally recognized sovereign territory. Instead, politically likely offensive and defensive actions will occur in China's near abroad over issues that do not entail regime change or complete capitulation. Thus, with these partially competitive and partially cooperative aspects of US-China relations well in mind, smart military planners today will indeed focus their efforts on the reality of incremental, halting, and "fragmented" political edicts during the protracted course of a given crisis or conflict in the Asia-Pacific. Ultimately this means planning for campaigns and wars defined as "defense by denial of enemy aims."  Feature Notes
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or