# ID: 355708b579e24328b5562bb6ac2f1823
# Title: Building Partner Capacity for Unconventional Deterrence: A Systems Approach for Asymmetric Defense in Taiwan
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Since the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001, security cooperation and especially SFA have largely focused on BPC in order to counter global terrorism.
However, under the 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS), the 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS), and the National Military Strategy (NMS), the DOD has now shifted focus to GPC and the potential for large scale combat operations (LSCO) against peer or near-peer threats such as China or Russia.
President Biden reinforced these themes shortly after his inauguration in the Interim National Security Strategic Guidance (INSSG)-emphasizing collective action and the reinvigoration and modernization of alliances and partnerships: "we will strengthen and stand behind our allies, work with like-minded partners, and pool our collective strength to advance shared interests and deter common threats.
"2 2 F 23 There have been some positive steps to refocus security cooperation and SFA for GPC and LSCO, such as the Irregular Warfare Annex to the 2018 NDS and the U.S. Army's creation of five permanent Security Force Assistance Brigades (SFAB).
But overall, the security cooperation enterprise is lagging behind when it arguably should be leading the way.
GPC is predominantly occurring on the frontiers between PNs and revisionist adversaries such as China and Russia, who are exploiting this space to their advantage-often using proxies and hybrid tactics to avoid attribution.
BPC policy, strategy, and doctrine must adapt and align with the current GPC construct, which expands the view of the operating environment from an obsolete peace/war binary model to an alternate "competition continuum" of cooperation, competition below armed conflict, and armed conflict.
The Joint Force and SOF need a BPC model that is flexible enough to compete in this operational environment and effectively deter not only the outbreak of conventional conflict, but also the escalation of "gray zone" irregular and unconventional threats below the threshold of armed conflict.