# ID: 35d97661370b4c4eb80876c7e404302a
# Title: Reintegrating Short Range Air Defense Into the Maneuver Fight
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
As the United States faces growing global uncertainty, the need to renew key military capabilities is vital to fight and win across any conflict that threatens U.S. interests. To retain overmatch, the combination of our capabilities must be relevant to successfully deter our potential adversaries. The Army's investment to incorporate Maneuver Short Range Air Defense into each division is a move towards this end. This thesis examines the future readiness of these forces using a historical and an Australian case study as examples of successful integration of similar capabilities at similar echelons. This study leverages historical doctrine while comparing it to modern guidance. It synthesizes our current readiness with historical success, yielding areas for development prior to reintegration. The research aims to answer the question: How can the US Army best set the Leadership and Training conditions for reintegration of divisional Short Range Air Defense? 15.
a large-scale friendly formation and potentially sway the outcome of a battle. I loved how no other branch could perform the job-there are many means to destroy a tank, but only air defense weapons can challenge the broad spectrum of air threats. I was a necessary and valued member of the team.
Since commissioning, I served seven of my eleven-year career in a protection or fires billet of some variety, most of which were specifically SHORAD. I deployed to Iraq in 2009-2010 to execute Counter Rocket Artillery and Mortar operations as a Platoon Leader. Although not a traditional air-threat focused role, the experience of serving as a special staff member for an infantry brigade commander began to develop my passion for protecting the force, and introduced me to the maneuver language.
From 2011-2012, I served in 1st Battalion, 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment (4th Brigade Combat Team (BCT)) 82nd Airborne Division. I deployed to Afghanistan for seven months as the Assistant Operations Officer, primarily responsible for plans and future operations. Although not in my career field, this billet helped me understand maneuver concepts and realize that my education through the Fires Center of Excellence (FCOE) did not adequately prepare me for this maneuver role. In planning air assaults, raids, and combat patrols, I relied more on the lessons I learned in Ranger School and West Point than any of the institutional knowledge I learned at Fort Bliss or Fort Sill. I say this not to denigrate the branch, but rather to expose the notion that just because an air defender graduates from their education continuum does not mean that they are prepared to integrate with infantry or armored divisions.
I later returned to the branch to command Echo Battery, 3rd Battalion, 4th Air Defense Artillery Regiment (Airborne) in 2012-2014. The battery organically consists of four Avenger Platoons and one Sentinel Radar Platoon, and is also capable of conducting airborne operations with the Stinger missile. This experience gave me first-hand experience dealing with challenges associated with the SHORAD capability gap within the U.S. Army. As one of the few remaining SHORAD units, my battery was habitually tasked to support the ready battalion from 82nd Airborne Division (Global Response Force) as well as additionally tasked to support the rotational brigades through both stateside Combat Training Centers (CTCs). With these tasks, my battery was not a sufficient force to meet the operational needs of the Army.
In 2014-2016, I served in the Military Personnel Exchange Program with duty in Australia at the School of Artillery in Puckapunyal, Victoria. Australia's Army air defense exclusively consists of SHORAD organizations. Over the course of two years, I saw the technical and tactical competence of many grades, from junior enlisted to the Regimental Commander. I felt that the performance capability of most U.S. air defenders of similar rank were on-par with their Australian counterparts, but my estimate based on my experience there is that the greatest capability shortfall is at the junior officer level (Lieutenant to Senior Captain). Although their weapon systems are as outdated as U.S. systems, I saw junior officers plan and integrate their capabilities into the fight with expertise and precision. I knew then that if SHORAD is restored, the U.S. Army's ADA officer-training continuum must improve. By steering the branch towards High to Medium Air Defense (HIMAD) and the higher-echelon threats for which it is designed, the branch became divorced from maneuver echelons. Our knowledge gap is not a product of our warfighting function, but rather our conceptual distancing from maneuver.
My Australian experience is why I focused my recommendations in this research on the human aspects of what will improve our ability to conduct SHORAD operations in divisions.
Over time, I better understood the challenge within our Army. We have developed a generational knowledge gap that will be increasingly harder to fix over time, as resident experience with integration into the maneuver force dwindles from our ranks.
Primary: How can the U.S. Army best set the leadership and training conditions for reintegration of divisional SHORAD?
To appropriately answer the primary question, secondary questions are:
1. What are the current reintegration directives and plans? 2. What is the current air threat facing the maneuver force? Army requirements to protect the maneuver force from air threats, the Cross Functional Team planned an immediate system to fill the need. IM-SHORAD uses existing, off-theshelf technologies, meaning that the initial Stryker systems will have missile launchers and machine guns to destroy aircraft. The planned Stryker platform, facilitated by its reconfigurable turret, is designed for future upgrades relying on directed energy, electronic warfare, and other non-kinetic means (such as jamming) rather than missile and gun technology.1 F 2 This final system will lose the "interim" prefix and will just be Maneuver Short Range Air Defense (M-SHORAD). The distinction between the two is unimportant, since this research does not focus on materiel solutions but rather the capability of air defense support to maneuver units. M-SHORAD: Although a combination of weapon systems are linked to this term, it is better used to define a capability. The National Commission on the Future of the Army defines it as, "those dedicated Air Defense Artillery and non-dedicated air defense capabilities which enable movement and maneuver by destroying, neutralizing, or deterring low altitude air threats by defending critical fixed and semi-fixed assets and maneuvering forces."2 F 
3
Another effort of air defense modernization is Indirect Fire Protection Capability (IFPC). IFPC protects "fixed and semi-fixed assets" such as "permanent facilities and structures (e.g., air bases) and transient facilities and structures (e.g., assembly areas)."3 F 4 This thesis delimits this effort from the scope of study. This research follows national policy regarding potential adversaries. Current U.S. strategic documents specify potential adversaries to be China, Russia, North Korea, Iran, and terrorist organizations.4 F 5 This study focuses on the threat to Western Europe by solely analyzing Russia as a potential adversary. An assumption is made that most recommendations of this thesis generally apply to any potential adversary.
It was first necessary to assume that national strategy continues to direct the U.S.
Army to retain the mission to prevent conflict in all theaters by maintaining a viable, expeditionary force and that adequate resources are applied in the future to accomplish this enduring mission.
The next assumption was that the U.S. joint force no longer enjoys air superiority versus peer threats. The expectation of the future operational environment is a significant driver for the M-SHORAD development.
Next, reinvigorating Air and Missile Defense (AMD) continues to be an Army priority and will be brought to fruition by delivering M-SHORAD capability to every Army division. If momentum ceases and the goal is abandoned, this research is no longer relevant.
The final research assumption was that planned units will be manned in accordance with branch propositions, which are described in the literature review portion. 2017 upon review of the global environment. To promote his "America First" foreign policy, he identified four pillars to grow the nation: Protect the American people, the homeland, and the American way of life; promote American prosperity; preserve peace through strength; and advance American influence.5 F 6 The President prescribed to the military more detailed tasks to remain in overmatch with potential adversaries: Modernize, fulfill critical capabilities, improve readiness, and expand the size of the force.6 F 7 He assessed that as a vital component to national power, the U.S. military must stand ready to deter aggression across the domains of military operations-able to be a dominant force, convincing adversaries that the American military can and will defeat them if necessary.
Former Secretary of Defense James Mattis outlined Department of Defense support of the National Security Strategy in his 2018 National Defense Strategy.
Although he specified the operational requirement for layered missile defense and disruptive capabilities for the missile threat spectrum, perhaps his most relevant objective 6 U.S. 
President,
National Security Strategy,
4. 7 Ibid.,
28.
Synchronized with national strategy, this research identified techniques to improve readiness over the coming years so that the U.S. Army is prepared for M-SHORAD integration, that applies modern technology to fill the critical capability gap of protecting the maneuver force from enemy air threats.
Providing evidence for a secondary research question, European theater strategy was an important focus area. It was selected for review since Europe is the directed locale for the fielding of the first M-SHORAD battalion (5th Battalion, 4th Air Defense Artillery Regiment).
The premise for the review of this document originated with an article published on June 14, 2018 by Defense News in regard to the SHORAD capability gap in Europe.
One can assume that leaders had previously identified it, but this is the first time a regional leader to Europe publicly specified the gap. Lieutenant General Ben Hodges, then the United States Army Europe commander, told Defense News during an interview in Poland his concerns in his forces' ability to counter unmanned aerial vehicles. "That is my SHORAD concern, especially if there's like a swarm."9 F 10 His chief of staff, coalition partner in the German Army, Brigadier General Markus Laubenthal, identified and simplified the SHORAD capability gap more accurately, "this is a very scarce capability, so between the assault rifle and Patriot there is not enough between to tackle short-range air defense challenges."1 0F 11 This problem is addressed in the strategy for the European region. Focusing on the ground force's role through Integrated Air and Missile Defense, General Scaparrotti asserted that strength hinges on the inclusive concept of incorporating partner 10 Jen Judson, "The U.S. Army Grapples with Short Range Air Defense Gap in Europe," Defense News, June 14, 2016, accessed December 22, 2018, https://www.defense news.com/smr/road-to-warsaw/2016/06/ 14/us-army-grapples-withshort-range-air-defense-gap-in-europe/.
11 Ibid. nations and North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies in addition to growing our own force.1 1F 12 He specified capability for missile defense through the Terminal High Altitude Air Defense and Patriot missile defense systems, and suggested the requirement for greater protection of maneuver forces through the employment of "critical enablers."1 2 F 13 Based on Lieutenant General Hodges's knowledge and concern for the SHORAD critical shortage against his central concern of a "swarm" of drones, this conceptual framework is where SHORAD fits into General Scaparrotti's strategy. Altogether, he aimed to build a more robust IADS in Europe: a system of redundant sensors and effectors under a common command and control network.
Filtered through National Strategy, this section examined the Army Captone Concept (ACC), the U.S. Army Operating Concept (AOC), and additional Army directives including the Army Modernization Priorities and a review of the Joint and U.S. Army Warfighting Functions. Altough these guiding documents cover much more, the purpose of this section was to specifically define air defense integration tasks and their origins.
The ACC was a key U.S. Army document to understand the precepts for air defense modernization. Published in 2012, the ACC described the anticipated future environment and how the Army must respond, including near to mid-term capability requirements. This document described the transition of the Army from one focused on winning two wars, to an expeditionary Army that does many things well.1 3F 14
The ACC answered three questions:
1. How does the Army view the future operating environment? 2. Given the future-operating environment, what must the Army do as part of the joint force to win the Nation's wars and execute successfully the primary missions outlined in defense strategic guidance?
3. What capabilities must the Army possess to accomplish these missions?1 4F 15 Review of the ACC focused primarily on principles that apply to this thesis, since it covered a spectrum of concepts and functions.
The ACC asserted that the future Army will operate in a complex and uncertain environment with adaptive threats operating in a decentralized manner.1 5 F 16 The enemy will incorporate "high-technology airborne systems for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, and strike."1 6 F 17 The application of decentralized, increasingly technologically advanced UAS platforms pose a threat to ground forces to an extent never before experienced on the battlefield. The proliferation, advancement, and innovative application of unmanned aircraft will challenge the Army both tactically and operationally.
Adversary commanders will position forces and capabilities to support rapid precision attack against air and seaports of debarkation and interrupt the flow of logistics or follow-on forces. Adversaries are developing more capable unmanned aerial platforms that employ global positioning system jammers, and long-range precision strike systems including land attack and air launched cruise missiles.1 7F 18
This material application is one of the certainties of the future operating environment, and is the impetus for the SHORAD capability requirement in American Army formations. In order to retain the ability to win in a complex operational environment in an era of fiscal austerity, the Army must relentlessly consider modernization.1 8F 
19
20
Additionally applicable to the human dimension of leadership and education, the ACC also mandates leader development to accompany the incorporation of the new way of war, mirroring education with material and tactical advancements as the Army develops decisive action training and doctrine.
Future Army forces require the capability to train and educate leaders, Soldiers, and civilians using a continuous adaptive learning model that develops the initial, functional and professional skills, knowledge and attributes to provide the fundamental technical and tactical competence necessary to conduct decisive action in support of unified land operations.2 0F 21   In coordination with other concepts, the ACC envisioned a more robust, more adaptable, critically thinking Army as part of a larger joint and multi-national force on the modern battlefield by combining defensive fires capability with training and educating our leaders. It also outlined the required capabilities to meet the current operating environment. Coupled with other fires capabilities, air defense investments are aimed to support expeditionary operations by providing air and missile defense to deny enemy air assets that could limit area accessibility, such as enemy UAS observing targets for long-range precision fires.2 1 F 
22
Building upon the ACC, the Army developed TRADOC Pam 525-3-1, the U.S.
Army Operating Concept: Win in a Complex World, published in 2014. The AOC bridges the gap between the ACC and functional concepts by describing, "how the Army 
21
22
will employ forces and capabilities in complex environments against increasingly capable opponents."2 2F 23 The AOC described the Army's role in globally integrated operations including multinational, coalition, and joint integration across the domains of land, air, maritime, space, and cyberspace.2 3 F
24
25
In the Preface from the Commander, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, General David Perkins stated that one of the greatest duties of warfighting professionals is to "think clearly about the problem of future armed conflict."2 7 F 28 He further described the AOC to answer three questions:
1. What level of war is the concept going to address? 2. What is the environment we think Army forces will operate in?
3. What is the problem we are trying to solve?2 8F 
29
27 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, i. 
28
29
30
In order to confront this challenge, General Perkins outlined that the Army must provide the Joint Force with multiple options, be able to integrate with multiple partners, across the domains, and present multiple dilemmas to the enemies of the U.S. Army.3 0 F 31 Of importance to the integration of M-SHORAD, General Perkins emphasized Joint Forcible Entry operations using combined arms with the abilities of "mobility, firepower, and protection to defeat the enemy and establish control of land, resources, and populations."3 1F 32 M-SHORAD leaders must be knowledgeable in the mobile, aggressive, expeditionary nature of Joint Forcible Entry in order to fulfill their protection tasks.
Likewise, maneuver leaders, accustomed to Joint Forcible Entry operations, must gain experiential knowledge with integrating M-SHORAD capability.
In describing the development of the force, General Perkins highlighted that innovation is crucial, in that it helps anticipate challenging conditions of the future operating environment.3 2 F 33 Interestingly, innovation in this context applies not only to technological advancement, but also manning of organizations and training of individuals. This accents the notion that the next fight requires intellectual flexibility, creativity, and adaptability in conjunction with superior material solutions in order to seize, retain, and exploit the initiative. This idea is affirmed when he states, "The tenets of this concept must apply to the institutional Army as well as the operational Army."3 3 F 34 31 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, iii. 
32
33
34
The AOC defined the means by which the Army accomplishes decisive action (the simultaneous employment of offense, defense, stability, and/or defense of civilian authorities).3 4F 35 The Army Core Competencies are: Shape the security environment, set the theater, project national power, combined arms maneuver, wide area security, cyber operations, and special operations.3 5 F 36 While air defense plays a role in most of the core competencies, this thesis focused on potential potential air defense roles in combined arms maneuver.
Combined arms maneuver on the modern battlefield is critical. Across the domains, combined arms maneuver is "the application of combat power in time and space to defeat enemy ground forces, seize, occupy, and defend land areas and achieve physical, temporal, and psychological advantages over the enemy."3 6 F 37 For the last decade, combined arms maneuver has been employed on limited terms in combat and many of the skills associated with effective employment of all assets across the warfighting functions have faded. Artillery units in Iraq and Afghanistan were tasked to perform infantry roles, and restrictive Rules of Engagement, collateral damage concerns, and high approval authority limited the employment of strike platforms from the U.S. Air Force.
Additionally, over that time many of the enabling forces typical of large-scale combat operations have not been employed in their prescribed warfighting functions. An example of this gap is the divestiture of SHORAD from maneuver units. The ability to integrate 
35
36 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, vi. 
37
38
42
43
It is important to understand conceptually where air defense fits into Army operations. Field Manual (FM) 3-0 (Operations) distributed Army forces into six warfighting functions, which this research often references. A warfighting function is "a group of tasks and systems united by a common purpose that commanders use to accomplish missions and training objectives.4 3F 
44
Former Army and current joint doctrine, however, position air defense in the protection warfighting function. Considering the implicit crossover of air defense into joint planning, it is necessary to define both the fires warfighting function in FM 3-0 as well as the joint function of protection.4 4F 45
To better define the complexity of where ADA fits into the Army Warfighting Functions, this research required a brief glimpse into Joint doctrine. Joint Publication 3-0 (Joint Operations) defines protection as force protection "which preserves the joint force's fighting potential."4 5F 46 Protection in joint doctrine consists of many components, and air defense is outlined under the Defensive Counter Air capability, which consists of two components: active and passive air and missile defense measures. 
44
45 Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Suffolk, VA: Government Printing Office, 2017). 
46
Active AMD "Includes all direct defensive actions taken to destroy, nullify, or reduce the effectiveness of hostile air and missile threats against friendly forces and assets."4 6 F 47 This is how the depth of capabilities within the IADS, including aircraft, ADA weapons, and sensors fit into the joint functions.
Passive AMD covers all the ancillary tasks expected of anyone operating on land with contested airspace to mitigate risks associated with air threats. It includes, "All measures . . . taken to minimize, mitigate, or recover from the consequences of attack aircraft and missiles . . . measures include camouflage, concealment, deception, dispersion, reconstitution, redundancy, detection and warning systems, and the use of protective construction."4 7 F 48 FM 3-0 lost much of the detail enumerated in Joint Publication 3-0 with regard to tasks associated with air defense. In support of the publication, however, the Army generated FM 3-01 (U.S. Army Air and Missile Defense Operations), which goes into greater detail. Air defense is found nested within the fires function, or, "the related tasks and systems that provide collective and coordinated use of Army indirect fires, air and missile defense, and joint fires through the targeting process," and consists of lethal and non-lethal effects.4 8 F 49
The only specification related to SHORAD in FM 3-0's definition of fires speaks to air defense forces assigned to the corps echelon, including, "air defense radars, 47 JCS, JP 3-0.
48 Ibid. 
49
The next section is the result of actions taken in response to national strategy and Army directives and defines initiatives that the Air Defense branch is currently executing.
Subsections in this topic are ADA Branch Chief Guidance on M-SHORAD, the Warfighting Functions, the M-SHORAD Organizational Model, and the M-SHORAD system review.
In 2017, Brigadier General Randall McIntire, then the Commandant of Air Defense, published in the Fires Bulletin the future outlook for the branch in response to the changing threat environment and Army directives.
Citing the Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook published by AWG (described later in this research), Brigadier General McIntire defined the potential threat as, "the blending of UAS, electronic warfare jamming equipment, and long-range rocket artillery."5 0 F 51 McIntire described the UAS threat in greater detail, explaining that small, low-flying aerial systems are difficult to detect and defend against, "present[ing] considerable threats to maneuver forces."5 1F 52 He identified the employment of UAS to detect 50 HQDA, FM 3-0.
51 McIntire, "The Return of Army Short-Range Air Defense in a Changing Environment," 5-8. 
52
M-SHORAD and IFPC are not interchangeable, but rather complementary systems that provide a tiered defense. Incorporating both capabilities simultaneously meets the 'mix' air defense principle. M-SHORAD is designed to be more mobile to maintain pace with maneuver elements, while IFPC is designed to be more stationary to offer a depth of defense (large magazine capacity) against massed enemy fires.
The third effort for air defense modernization is the concept of combined arms contributions to air defense. Components of Combined Arms For Air Defense (CAFAD) include incorporating internal weapons systems to counter the enemy air threat as well as passive measures taken by the ground force. Although complementary, these measures are still critical to survivability because sometimes it is all they have. "Even with anticipated growth, the ADA force will not have the number of units and systems to provide the required defenses throughout the force."6 6F 67 Incorporating into training the 
65
66
79
An M-SHORAD battery provides dedicated air defense for a brigade sized element and each consists of a headquarters section, three firing platoons (four systems each), a Sentinel platoon, and two maintenance sections (weapons/systems and vehicle).7 9 F 80 The battery command post integrates with the supported BCT command post, and the firing platoons integrate at the maneuver battalion echelon. The battery is additionally "responsible for the dissemination of the Air Defense Warning and Rules of Engagement to the brigade's forces in order to integrate CAFAD as an air defense tier."8 0 F 81 With reasonable certainty, the M-SHORAD battery commander is only one of two air defense officers present in the brigade TOC (assuming the Air Defense and Airspace Management (ADAM) billet is filled) and represents a key linkage between brigade tactical operations and air defense firing units. Likewise, the M-SHORAD platoon leader is the sole air defense representative in the supported battalion TOC. The platoon leader must be able to understand and verbalize employment considerations to the maneuver force and communicate maneuver plans back to the air defense battery commander thus enabling an integrated common operating picture across the brigade area of operations.
The SHORAD technical and tactical competence coupled with the ability to provide clear and concise advice to operations planners at battalion, brigade, and division echelons is not commonly practiced in the current air defense force.
Similar concerns are evident for the MANPADS battery, designed to provide dedicated protection for light formations. This battery consists of a headquarters element 
80
81
The maintenance company consists of a headquarters section as well as feeding, supply and distribution, and field maintenance elements. Maintenance and sustainment elements can be task organized to support the line batteries, and distribution elements can transport resupply items including ammunition, alleviating support requirements from parent units.8 2F 83 The exception is the MANPADS battery, which, because of the austerity of their employment, relies on the supported unit for sustainment.8 3F 84
The Organizational and Operational plan presented a concise review of the operational environment, historical background, existing capability gaps, and a concept for the operational and organizational employment of the SHORAD battalion. This document is significant because it established the proposed organizational structure, composition, and generates an understanding of leader requirements of the proposed formations. The future battlefield is complex, requiring many forms of air defense. M-SHORAD and MANPADS are categorized as forward deployed when compared to 
82
83
84
Patriot and Terminal High Altitude Air Defense (THAAD). Many air defense leaders today are not familiar with the austerity, complexity, and maneuverability of large-scale ground combat operations, but rather the isolated employment of a static asset in support of echelons above corps against a limited threat. Because of the nature of employment of HIMAD, the majority of air defense officers in the U.S. Army today are underprepared to integrate effectively into the maneuver force. The maneuver force is training on largescale combat operations within the division and below, whereas the air defense branch
has not yet reached that level of effort.
The M-SHORAD platform brings tiered and layered air defense capability to the future battlefield. This section describes capabilities that identify the technological knowledge gaps of ADA leaders. With this, leaders can understand how to better incorporate the future of defense into current operations planning and training. Army, General Dynamics Land Systems builds the platform for M-SHORAD, the Stryker. The Stryker is a light armored wheeled vehicle. Although its survivability and mobility is somewhat limited compared to tracked vehicles, the system far exceeds the mobility of the Avenger and is sufficient for combined arms maneuver to protect armored elements. Most Strykers can carry up to nine passengers, however this variant will trade passenger space for additional ammunition.8 4F 85 85 Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., "Army Anti-Aircraft Stryker Can Kill Tanks Too," Breaking Defense, July 10, 2018, accessed March 1, 2019, https://breakingdefense.com/ 2018/07/ army-anti-aircraft-stryker-can-kill-tanks-too/.
Hellfire Missiles: The M-SHORAD turret will contain two ready-to-fire Air-tosurface Guided Missile 114L Longbow Hellfire Missiles, with millimeter wave guidance system, fire and forget capability, and a range of 8km. These missiles additionally have anti-armor capability. Resupply stock inside the vehicle is unknown.8 5 F 86 Stinger: A second pod of missiles expands the options for the firing unit. Four FIM-92J Stinger Missiles will be equipped with a proximity fuse warhead, different from formerly used hit-to-kill missile technology. The proximity fuse enables destruction of smaller, lightweight UAS varieties that would otherwise be difficult to achieve a direct hit.8 6F 
87
86
87
88
89
93
Reconfigurable Turret: The Moog Reconfigurable Integrated-weapons Platform is a, "flexible, scalable remote turret providing tailored overmatch and improved survivability against current and emerging threats across the full spectrum of conflict."9 3 F
94
Future technology plans: Brigadier General McIntire, Cross Functional Team lead for M-SHORAD, plans to upgrade M-SHORAD after the initial fielding. The future M-SHORAD is "less about missile technology [with] more of a directed energy focus . . . we put over 50 percent of our Science and Technology money going towards directed energy products."9 4 F 95 The Army plans to field a 50-kilowatt laser by 2023, replacing some component of the previously described M-SHORAD.9 5F 96 High-powered lasers can kill low-end drones in seconds or less, adding the capability of destroying UAS swarms. Not limited by ammunition resupply, the laser is able to destroy drones as long as the vehicle generates electricity. Fratricide or collateral damage considerations are another benefit, since direct-fire kinetic weapons involve some sort of ammunition debris falling to the ground. However, weather effects such as rain and fog are a limiting considerations for effective employment of directed energy.
The combination of systems on the M-SHORAD brings a significant volume of combat power and lethality to the combined arms fight. The ability for it to defeat a spectrum of targets from tanks to helicopters, and infantry to drone swarms, make it a venerable asset to any maneuver formation. Considering the complexity of these systems, this section implied necessary training that leaders must receive prior to successful integration with maneuver. 
95
96
This section outlines a timeline from an array of sources to help visualize the past, present, and future of M-SHORAD. Colonel Chuck Worshim, program manager for cruise missile defense systems with the Army's Program Executive Office Missiles and Space, told Defense News that the M-SHORAD solution is moving at "lightning speed" compared to the typical acquisition process.9 6F 
97
99
This section focused leaders on the threat in the European theater of operations and aimed to answer the question: What is the current air threat facing the maneuver force? Better understanding of the threat provides focused training initiatives for both M-SHORAD and maneuver planners. This section leveraged three source documents, all which contain corroborating data. First, in December 2016, the Asymmetric Warfare Group published an unclassified document identifying specific Russian capabilities and employment tactics. This document, The Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook, also proposed non-material solutions to many of the concerns. Although the document described many aspects of Russian warfare across the war-fighting functions, this review only highlights functions applicable to this study. The second source document shifted its gaze to the next fight. In 2017, the RAND Corporation, an American nonprofit global policy think tank, published research on "how the Russian military would conduct combat operations in the event of a high-intensity conflict with a capable peer or nearpeer adversary."1 08F 
109
Russia can prosecute a target in 10-15 minutes after acquisition-there is no time to develop intricate plans.1 19F 120 Developing CAFAD TTPs will reduce air threat effectiveness and set the conditions for M-SHORAD integration.
The four categories of UAS activities, described below, are: Russian strategists believe that aerospace will be the primary domain in modern warfare and that the advantage goes to the side that can gain and sustain fire superiority.
Interestingly, "Russian forces will not seek a parity confrontation against a peercompetitor with superior training on a unit-by-unit basis. Rather, they will employ 121 AWG, Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook, 43. 
122
123
124
125
The AOC states that adversary capabilities include "precision-guided rockets, artillery, mortars, and missiles that target traditional U.S. strengths in the air and maritime domains."1 27F 128 Adversaries will use these capabilities to overwhelm defensive systems, including the IADS, in the effort to impose a high cost to the United States and coalition partners. Additionally, overmatch is a critical concern. "Overmatch is the application of capabilities or use of tactics in a way that renders an adversary unable to respond effectively."1 28 F 129 Potential enemies currently possess the capability to overmatch American weapons systems. These capabilities include long-range precision fires, air defense systems, and UAS.1 29F 130 Use of these systems in a combined-arms approach limits the joint force's ability to achieve dominance in the air, sea, and land. A method of breaking the Anti-Access, Area Denial chain denys the enemy unfettered access to aerially observe friendly targets and necessitating the requirement for robust air defense 
126
127
128 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, 8. 
129
130
The AWG document describes "The 'Drone Defender' as a non-kinetic material solution to defend airspace against UAS. The system is man-portable and is designed to electronically interrupt the UAS signal, forcing the UAS to either land or return to its ground command station depending on the UAS digital design.1 31 F 132 "The system is ruggedized, relatively lightweight and easy to employ."1 32F 133 If the enemy chooses to use small, low-flying, difficult to detect systems such as quadcopters, this presents the notion of a blending of roles of the air defender and the Electronic Warfare specialist. Fielding the capability to defeat small, low-flying drones is critical to success on the future battlefield.
In a "Most Dangerous Course of Action" scenario, Russia may incorporate other elements of air power, although this is not a strength of the total force. Combining reconnaissance, aerial interdiction, and combat air support with advancing ground forces Since Counter Rocket Artillery and Mortar batteries were not organic to battlespace owners, and their capabilities were not maneuverable in nature; air defense leaders were not included in the combined arms operations process in combat. The next goal within DA PAM 600-3 states that SHORAD supports maneuver elements and that "Integration with infantry, armor, artillery, aviation, and logistics elements are critical to the success of these systems on the battlefield."1 45 F 146 The only remaining Avenger elements on active duty are subordinate to air defense brigades and have minimal habitual relationships with maneuver units. DA PAM 600-3 alludes to the criticality of integration, perhaps laying the groundwork for the restructureing of SHORAD elements to a maneuver echelon. In practice, SHORAD currently only supports maneuver upon receiving a tasking to support a CTC rotation, or ad-hoc relationships with division ADAM cell or fires brigade on their respective installation.
The third goal is that Patriot formations are employed "routinely in support of joint and multi-national echelons."1 46 F 147 Although the FCOE has a split-course concept for training oriented on the students' next assignment (temporary effect), there is no enduring (long term effect) split career path proposed for HIMAD officers supporting echelons above corps and those SHORAD officers who routinely support tactical formations (division and below in this case).
The fourth goal regards training. According to DA PAM 600-3, an ADA officer mission essential task is to, "Train, develop, and evaluate ADA skills at CTCs."1 47F 148 It goes on to say that the goal is to develop officers proficient in combined arms operations. This research could not identify any evidence that a Patriot unit has ever deployed to a Graduates of the Air Defense Artillery Basic Officer Leader Course will be adaptive officers who are steeped in the profession of arms, technically and tactically competent, confident, and capable of making independent assessments in complex, foreign, and joint environments to accomplish any mission in Unified Land Operations through mission focused leadership and critical thinking. The ADA CCC also splits training after the common core period. The BCT Support track "prepares the Officer to provide air defense support to BCTs conducting large scale combat operations. Students learn how to employ short-range weapons systems, de-conflict airspace, and gain an understanding of BCT Fires Cell Operations."1 56F 157 This track is segmented into six components: AMD Overview, ADAM understand what the FCOE is training to prepare officers to understand the enemy and create an air defense plan so as to fulfill roles as a special staff member. Reaffirmed by a solid course package on theoretical and practical application of SHORAD tasks, these enable these officers to fulfill roles on a battalion or brigade staff to assist in planning.
The vision of the Maneuver Center of Excellence (MCOE) is to produce, "trained combat Soldiers and is the primary driver for development of the future force."1 58F 159 Since the MCOE is a key funnel for combat leader development, and since the destructive potential of the enemy air threat against a maneuver force is known, it is only fitting that this thesis reviews their training plan as it relates to air defense. Although there is an air defense warrant officer on faculty at MCOE who is dediated to his assigned air defense instruction, he is limited to the curriculum directed by the course memorandum of instruction. Since the Cold War and the realization that a coalition will not have sufficient dedicated air defense coverage to protect all ground elements from the air threat of a near peer adversary, the concept of using non-dedicated air defense weapons systems against an air threat along with passive techniques intended to reduce aerial attack effectiveness has existed. This section reviews former and current CAFAD doctrine, eliminates expired techniques, describes modern techniques, and highlights similar techniques that have spanned the last four decades. Although efficiency rates of active techniques for CAFAD are questionable, they are also unavailable at the time of this research. The intent is to show techniques that should be trained to enable success on the future battlefield, and to raise the question if modern maneuver forces are adequately preparing for this threat.  The enemy threat has certainly evolved since the Cold War. Early CAFAD doctrine only attested to fixed wing and rotary wing threats. Not until 1999 did doctrine consider UAS, ballistic missiles, and cruise missile threats as it pertains to CAFAD. As doctrine evolved, so too did techniques for better understanding potential enemy capabilities, courses of action, and air threat planning considerations. Current doctrine further refines the UAS group, defining five different categories with focus on the more tactical (Tiers 1 and 2) categories. For these threats, current CAFAD doctrine specifies methods of UAS attack, explaining the difference between surveillance, indirect attack, direct attack, and swarm attack, mirroring AWG's Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook. To maneuver commanders, the highlighting of the UAS risk with potential catastrophic results should be cause for concern.
Air attack warning presents another significant challenge to maneuver formations. The Army's goal was to train one Stinger team per maneuver company by 2018.1 63F 164 Assuming this goal is now a reality, or at least close, now maneuver commanders have at their fingertips the means to destroy most low flying aircraft that present a heat signature. Although the Stinger has Identify Friend-or-Foe capability, it is the last point of fratricide mitigation before the missile is launched. In a contested environment, when air attack is expected and the airspace is congested with both American, enemy, and coalition/multinational aircraft, there is a vital responsibility for the Stinger team (in most cases one junior non-commissioned officer and one Soldier) to visually recognize the aircraft prior to missile launch. SHORAD Soldiers are trained, and are regularly evaluated, on Visual Aircraft Recognition. Commanders must be willing to assume the risk of placing a weapon in junior Soldiers hands, which could have strategic impact upon a fratricide event. The same concept applies for the initiation of active CAFAD measures. 
164
In modern doctrine, air attack warning describes mechanisms for controlling air defense to mitigate fratricide. First, the Air Defense Warning is a brevity code (red, yellow, white) to communicate the likelihood of enemy air attack. Army Techniques Publication 3-01.8 specifies, "Any commander, after coordination and approval from the Area Air Defense Commander, may issue a higher level of warning for their command but may not lower the level."1 64 F 165 Next, the Weapons Control Status offers a mechanism to control the usage of air defense weapons. Doctrine suggests that the Weapons Control Status will be prescribed to maneuver formations from the air defense element in the respective echelon headquarters. Finally, pre-established Rules of Engagement offer commanders the opportunity to identify and disseminate hostile criteria, which echelon will control CAFAD, and the right of self-defense, which takes precedence over limiting control mechanisms. Maneuver platoon leaders, those who would be expected to issue fire control orders in a CAFAD scenario, must be trained in the intricacies of the fratricide mitigating tools of Air Defense Warning, Weapons Control Status, and Rules of Engagement.
Finally, CAFAD doctrine has always made some type of training recommendation to maneuver elements. Of interest, 1981 doctrine suggested the use of remote controlled aircraft at the firing range, a suggestion that did not matriculate to modern doctrine, which offers no replacement strategy for simulating an air threat. Also, since 1981, the same checklist for passive air defense has been recommended to maneuver units, pasted below. 
165
The most uncommon research method is the personal nature of the two case studies. A former member of 2ACR in an air defense billet provided valuable documents to understand the dynamics of American air defense in the 1990s. Additionally, the researcher was formerly assigned to the School of Artillery in Australia, providing a firsthand perspective on the inner workings of air defense in another nation. All other research used open-source documents to formulate the remainder of the argument.
To meet criteria for data collection, documents must have directly answered one of the three following questions: What are the current reintegration directives and plans? What is the current air threat facing the maneuver force? What are the components of the generational SHORAD knowledge gap in the areas of leadership and training? For example, the most existential threat facing America is Russia. The RAND Corporation and the AWG published insightful research on Russian military techniques. This research uses those source documents, with focus on the air threat.
The most significant weakness in this research is the lack of a historical review of a divisional air defense unit. The case study of 2ACR is immediately applicable, but was not subordinate to a division. This weakness is irrelevant, however, because 2ACR was designed to be a regional unit which, in the event of large-scale conflict, would likely be restructured to support a deployed division in Europe. So, in concept, the theories remain consistent with divisional air defense.
The central challenge for this research was the research problem itself. Since the modern generation lacks knowledge on integrating SHORAD into maneuver, the researcher was limited in leveraging resident experience for insight. The only method to overcome this challenge was to research and reference bygone TTPs and doctrine to yield solutions for the future.
Although the researcher intended to use a quantitative section of research, applying statistical data to the experience-base (as it relates to SHORAD) in the force, the Human Resources Command has insufficient means to yield such data. Future research could review by-grade experience types from Air Defense, Infantry, and Armor branches to quantifiably prove the current generational SHORAD knowledge gap.
The two case studies are the cornerstones to the results of this research. By comparing required skills of an air defense officer in the case studies, findings yielded support for the hypothesis of a generational knowledge gap as well critical weaknesses in our current Army officer corps, all captured within the recommendations section of this research.
Findings are suitable for research goals because they directly answer both the secondary and primary research questions. Listed in the recommendations section, the Army has enumerated and actionable areas to improve now to prepare for divisional SHORAD.
The details and flow of the research are outlined in the below graphic.
Components of the knowledge gap were extrapolated by comparing successful practice in the case studies with the current state of the force. With emphasis on leadership and training, current operating practices within American ADA are reviewed for later comparison to the case studies. This comparison yields the components of the generational knowledge gap. A visual representation of the literature review is depicted below in Figure 
9
The following section described the components of 2ACR with regards to air defense which are applicable to leadership and education. For referenced source material, see Appendix A. This section described the roles and responsibilities of key air defense players in 2ACR to show those duties which may be required in an M-SHORAD battalion. It then selected conceptual areas of expertise displayed in 2ACR in their practice of air defense.
Figure 
10
14,
Appendix
Air Defense Regimental Staff (maneuver perspective): The only air defense entity assigned to the Regimental Headquarters, the Air Defense Coordinator (ADCOORD) Section is the primary staff section for coordinating air defense for the Regiment. The relationship with the ADA Battery Commander must be close, but the roles are distinctly different. Similar in concept to the current ADAM cell, the ADCOORD was responsible for linking the ADA Battery Commander to the Regimental Commander. In this realm, the ADCOORD fulfilled staff roles for the Regiment. Similar to the ADA Battery Commander, the ADCOORD maintained links from the Regimental Headquarters to their higher ADCOORD, the Corps Air Defense Element. See Figure 
15,
Appendix A
AD Regimental Staff (air defense perspective): This excerpt, taken from the ADA Battery TACSOP, further defines ADCOORD section roles, from the viewpoint of the ADA Battery Commander. One who has experienced modern ADAM cells might take particular interest in the specification that upon the displacement or destruction of the TOC, the ADCOORD must assume command responsibilities for the air defense battle. attests to the reality of the air threat, and this was before the persistent aerial observation typical of today's operational environment. See Figure 
20
Maneuver Language. This document is one of many Knowledge Quizzes from Lieutenant Colonel (Retired) Hollister's collection. The collective subject matter of these knowledge quizzes is most important. Most questions do not focus on air defense, but rather maneuver tactics. The issuing authority understood that Lieutenant Hollister must know these concepts to successfully integrate his capability into the fight. See Figure 
22
In large scale ground combat operations, a division is employed as a tactical unit.
The division is expected to conduct decisive action, or the simultaneous exercise of offensive, defensive, and stability operations. Since the air defense battalion is the senior air defense element in the division, air defense officers from platoon leader to battalion commander must understand the anticipated enemy, the type of operation the maneuver element is planning, and how to best employ air defense forces for the given operation. First, Hollister recommends retaining Avengers as a Squadron asset and to avoid task organizing them to respective troops. Since there is no evidence that any maneuver commander issued tactical tasks to Avengers, the central problem was not one of command relationships, but rather that Hollister, the Platoon Leader and ADO, previously experienced difficulty in controlling firing units over the radio whilst firing units simultaneously answered to maneuver units' commands. The Operations Officer partially confirms Hollister's request, "Avengers should remain at the Squadron level for control." He goes on to confirm the importance of an overarching conceptual approach to air defense employment, best visualized by the air defense employment guidelines (mutual support, overlapping fires, balanced fires, weighted coverage, early engagement, and defense in depth).1 6 5F166 But then, contends that movement of Avengers cannot be controlled by the ADO. "Your span of control is too limited and the lines of communication too long to think you can adequately command and control sections for movement yourself." One could conclude that Avenger tactical tasks and purposes must be issued by the ADO, but not tactical movement guidance because of limited situational awareness and the evolving ground threat.
Hollister's second assertion was tactical in nature. He recommended that Avengers maneuver behind the Scouts as opposed to with them, and still provide adequate air defense coverage of the maneuver force. Major Penn disagreed, "I still support moving Avengers with troops for protection, provided they remain with the troop rear elements."
Finally, Hollister stated that integrating Avengers with the maneuver force during operations would familiarize maneuver troops with air defense capabilities, a notion proven invalid in later correspondence.
The takeaway from this message, regardless of Hollister's unsuccessful petition, is that a junior air defense officer initiated professional correspondence with a maneuver field grade officer on topics that spanned tactics, command relationships, and training management. This supported the secondary research question of identification of the generational knowledge gap. See Figure 
25
The Forward Edge of the Battle Area, anti-tank systems and scouts (used in their specified respective roles), are concepts that have not been habitually practiced in counter insurgency.
Emplacement. Lieutenant Hollister identifies a training shortfall for the Squadron.
He doctrinally references "a lack of understanding about who should emplace the fire units." Hollister suggested some maneuver leaders did not understand the command relationship of the ADA Platoon. The Commander charges equal responsibility, "the Avenger crew needs to be aggressive also." Although a seemingly obvious idea, it's possible that a cavalry first sergeant directed an air defense sergeant to adjust tactical employment, hardly a situation where aggression is commonly accepted. Hollister also suggests an education component to teach leaders Avenger capabilities. In an ideal environment, this would have happened prior to collective tactical training. But the takeaway is that a junior air defender is recommending professional development for maneuver leaders, which the Commander directed the S-3 to schedule because of this memorandum. The implication is that Lieutenant Hollister would have then planned, prepared, and executed the training session. Night Operations. A common force multiplying capability especially when integrated with light units, the Avenger's Forward Looking Infrared was the next topic of concern. The Forward Looking Infrared is capable of detecting infrared signatures at night, then engage observed ground targets with the M3P .50 caliber machine gun. This capability is enticing to ground commanders and can be used as a selling point for forward Avenger integration, but here Hollister reminds the Commander of the intended air defense role of the Avenger, to which the Commander agrees, "Right, Roger." The takeaway is the ADO must be informed of system capabilities and use them to market the system to maneuver elements, but apply caution to not re-task the Avenger team away from their air defense role.
Maintenance. Again, Hollister demonstrates an understanding of Avenger capabilities, in that the system is separate from the vehicle, and the system can still provide protection despite vehicle maintenance status. In essence, Hollister requests mechanics and vehicle repair parts, to which the commander agrees to support. "SMO [Squadron Maintenance Officer]-action-What are their parts? Help us, LT Hollister."   This demonstrates Hollister's creativity to arrive at a solution to a complex problem by leveraging his supported unit.
Communications. Similar to the previous issue, Hollister contended that his Avengers required basic repair parts for communications equipment, the commander promises, "we will help, of course." maneuver commanders, effectively, and be willing to initiate tough conversations. See Figure 
31
Secondly, LNOs must integrate with all staff sections to be effective in their role. Specifically for operations, LNOs must understand (and integrate effects) with future operations and plans, and simultaneously maintain awareness of current operations and adjust air defense assets accordingly as the situation develops. The document directs other staff section interaction as well (not pictured for sake of simplicity).
Coordination with Supported Unit. This document outlined a checklist, suitable for a platoon leader or company commander prior to initiating an air defense mission.
In Checklist One, air defense officers must understand command and support relationships, system capabilities, enemy capabilities, and the concept of sustainment, areas with great depths of requisite knowledge to provide the maneuver force.
In Checklist Two, the first five lines are arguably the most important to successful integration of the air defense asset into a maneuver formation. Mainly, they are specified tasks the air defense officer and team chiefs must perform; tasks that lie solely in the air defense realm that if not performed, expose the maneuver force to the spectrum of the given air threat. This checklist directs interaction with commanders to describe the concept of early warning and air defense practices, the instruction of AAAD referenced in modern doctrine as CAFAD, air defense planning and production of associated products, and finally the understanding and incorporation of adjacent air defense unitsand that is only the first five tasks, for one officer! Clearly, expectations are great and the risk is high. See Figure 
33,
Appendix A
Based Air Defense officers in their technical field to operate effectively in 16ALR.
Officers arrive with a basic fundamental knowledge of Army operations and planning procedures, which gives way to training specific roles and functions of the GBAD officer. Regimental Officers Gunnery Course, for junior captains, is an eight week course intended to re-acclimate officers to their career field, some of whom arrive from a broadening-type assignment. Following re-acclimation, the captains are quickly expected to perform at a high level when planning GBAD operations. This section highlights Australian officer training areas which help them to contribute more effectively to combined arms maneuver.
Understanding the Enemy. Regardless of nationality, air defense officers, not unlike other specialized career fields, are expected to assist the supported staff during Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield to understand not only the anticipated air threat, but also employment practices for their enemy air defense counterparts. To this ends, a portion of instruction in Regimental Officers Basic Course is committed to enemy air defense platforms. This knowledge is crucial when assisting commanders and intelligence officers' understanding of the operational environment. Additionally, and most practically, GBAD officers are instructed on Visual Aircraft Recognition and attack profiles by hostile aircraft. The combination of these two seemingly fundamental concepts makes the GBAD officers valuable additions to a supported staff. Although Air Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield is a component of American air defenders' course-load at the FCOE, Australians teach to a greater depth in specific technical capabilities and limitations of enemy systems.
Integrating GBAD into the ground scheme of maneuver. As a culminating exercise for both Regimental Officers Basic Course and Regimental Officers Gunnery Course (scaled to expectations of the officer grade), GBAD officers incorporated their technical knowledge to prepare and present an operations order in which they protect a maneuver force, given a ground scheme of maneuver. By phase, GBAD officers are expected to assess the operational plan and employ their assets according to the ADA employment guidelines and employment principles. This allowed officers the chance to demonstrate their ability to understand a supported plan and present a sound scheme of GBAD protection. A portion of the assessment includes defending the plan to a coalition brigade commander, role-played by the United States Instructor in Gunnery. This allows officers to verbally demonstrate their technical knowledge, explain risks, and offer areas for decision to the commander.
Instructing CAFAD. Finally, Regimental Officers Basic Course officers plan and execute an AAAD small-arms range. Although the students are afforded the opportunity to engage remotely piloted vehicles at a live-fire range (with low kill-rates) the purpose of the training shows lieutenants how to execute such a range in the event they are tasked to do so in support of a maneuver formation. Referencing the CAFAD doctrine section of this thesis, although familiar with the concept, American air defense officers are not taught how to train maneuver formations in active and passive air defense techniques.   
176
Since there is no current divisional air defense, limited SHORAD units exist to support BCTs as they train at CTCs, and minimal formal air defense education at the MCOE, it should be no surprise to senior leaders that maneuver officers are uneducated on the application of this important operational capability. Lack of SHORAD training exposes the maneuver force to the enemy air threat.
This research has reavealed much insight while answering the primary and three secondary research questions. The threat is relevant and real and the planned capability to defeat that threat is beyond suitable, but the Army is underprepared to face the threat. This section explained the enemy most likely course of action, assessment of the M-SHORAD capability, and described the lack of preparedness of maneuver and air defense officers.
Enemy Most Likely Course of Action: Many corroborating sources assert that the modern battlefield will be contested across all domains. In the air domain, the U.S. Air Force has enjoyed air superiority for many decades. To bypass this critical capability, potential adversaries such as Russia will employ a spectrum of UAS, which the U.S. Air Force cannot internally defeat. Using small, low-flying UAS, Russia has proven the capability to observe targets for near-immediate destruction by long range precision fires. This adversarial capability could be an initial phase to defeat land forces, including both maneuver forces and high value assets such as Terminal High Altitude Air Defense and Patriot, to defeat coalition air defense and allow air parity against the air forces, thus presenting an even more dangerous threat to maneuver forces. To eliminate this critical vulnerability, the U.S. Army must closely integrate air defense with maneuver forces, with focused targeting of tier three and four UAS. M-SHORAD an Excellent Capability: The M-SHORAD system and organizational construct is suitable to defeat the anticipated threat and to support the speed and maneuverability of the American fighting force. However, future upgrades and an aggressive posture to modernize the M-SHORAD platform is critical. The EW suite on the M-SHORAD is an important capability in the IADS as it pertains to the close fight. Future directed energy weapons planned for the M-SHORAD system will perhaps yield multiple mechanisms to defeat small UAS.
Maneuver Officers Not Prepared: The generational knowledge gap in maneuver officers is evidenced by a general lack of concern on the potential for future air threats. This statement is predicated on the facts that MCOE has minimal instruction on air defense through the entirety of their education continuum. This fact manifests into a lack of knowledge on SHORAD capabilities and limitations to protect maneuver formations, and over-reliance on the air defense officer to integrate effectively into their scheme of maneuver to attest to the threat.
The reality is that air defense resources are limited, and it is a reasonable assumption that a commander must assume risk to employ maneuver forces without the luxury of air defense protection. CAFAD doctrine is generally underutilized and not practiced or trained. To acknowledge the air threat, units must employ passive air defense at every opportunity during tactical training and must additionally train to employ their organic weapons in an active air defense manner to defeat an enemy air threat. To have realistic expectations for CAFAD, active techniques include direct-fire machine guns such as the M2 .50 Caliber or M240, or other internal air defense capability such as a man-portable Stinger missile. An infantry Soldier trained to operate a Stinger missile Source: Created by author.
Furthermore, air defenders must be prepared to tactically employ and maneuver their systems in support of a maneuver formation. To accomplish this broad task, young air defenders must wear many 'hats'. The first hat they must learn to wear is a platoon Chapter four discussed findings and analysis from the research, including the enemy most likely course of action, assessment of the M-SHORAD capability, and described the lack of preparedness of maneuver and air defense officers. This chapter described an interpretation of the findings, enumberated recommendations which the U.S.
Army should address prior to SHORAD reintegration, and a final summary.
The meaning of the results found in this research are that the U.S. Army is behind on the integration of a critical capability to the modern battlefield. The main conceptual takeaway is that the SHORAD knowledge gap is not only an air defense problem, but rather an issue the entire force must approach together. The tactical culture of Army units
does not wholistically approach the potential realities of the air threat. The implication is that in modern conflict, U.S. maneuver forces could be quickly overwhelmed by the employment of air power if the Army does not make prudent adjustments.
The following twelve recommendations are calls for action directed to various intities across the U.S. Split ADA officer career tracks: The nature of the HIMAD career track does not correlate to SHORAD. Formally splitting career tracks will help to develop officers to successfully accomplish their respective tasks. It is an inappropriate analogy to compare this dynamic to rocket and cannon artillery for FA officers, or mechanized and light for infantry officers. The difference transcends weapon system for three reasons. First, the reporting chain for SHORAD crosses branches. Unlike HIMAD, SHORAD battalion commanders, battery commanders, and platoon leaders must be accustomed to reporting to maneuver commanders, depending on the command and support relationships for the given operation. In other branches, changing weapon system does not significantly change the supported commander's branch. Secondly, air defense battalion commanders must be accustomed to reporting to either the division echelon (Division Artillery) or maneuver brigade. Battery commanders must report to the maneuver brigade, and platoon leaders must report to the maneuver battalion. Supporting these echelons is not common for HIMAD officers, who typically follow their organic reporting chain. Finally, the concept of tactical employment for SHORAD is significantly different. SHORAD is closer to the threat, further from support areas, and relies on its maneuverability for survivability and to bring the capability to bear for the supported force. For these reasons, the air defense branch should split at BOLC and stay split through battalion command.
Ranger School and MCCC is offered as an additional opportunity for all SHORAD officers: Because they have been absent from BCTs over the last decade, air defense officers today lack credibility in the maneuver TOC. Ranger qualified officers gain instant credibility, and air defense officers who graduate from MCCC can develop their individual credibility by learning how to speak the maneuver language. Education should be tailored to specific unit of assignment. For example, Ranger School is more obligatory for officers going to a light infantry division as opposed to an armored division. Also, the intent is for only a portion of SHORAD officers to attend MCCC, since otherwise the split education system would be irrelevant. A fair portion of SHORAD officers should attend MCCC to provide resident expertise to maneuver planning and to set the conditions for the SHORAD FCOE class to arrive at Fort Benning.
Assess feasibility of electronic warfare air defense weapon system in each                  
Brigade (Avenger) from South Carolina National Guard was activated in Germany. This was the first American ADA Brigade to deploy to Europe since the end of the Cold War.1 42F 143 In November 2018, 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defense Artillery Regiment (active component) became the first unit set to receive M-SHORAD and activated in southern Germany. The battalion received Avengers in the interim before M-SHORAD is fielded.
Brigade (Avenger) from South Carolina National Guard was activated in Germany. This was the first American ADA Brigade to deploy to Europe since the end of the Cold War.1 42F 143 In November 2018, 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defense Artillery Regiment (active component) became the first unit set to receive M-SHORAD and activated in southern Germany. The battalion received Avengers in the interim before M-SHORAD is fielded.
157
*
Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., "Army Boosts Investment in Lasers," Breaking Defense, October 16, 2018, accessed March 1, 2019, https://breakingdefense.com/ 2018/10/army-boosts-investment-in-lasers/.
Fires Center of Excellence, Capabilities and Development Integration Directorate, United States Army Maneuver Short Range Air Defense Battalion Organizational and Operational Concept (Fort Sill, OK: Fires Center of Excellence, 2018), 3.
Randall McIntire, "The Return of Army Short-Range Air Defense in a Changing Environment," Fires Bulletin (November-December 2017):
5-8. 5 U.S. President, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: The White House, 2017), 2.
U.S. Secretary of Defense, Summary of the National Defense Strategy (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2018), 5-6.
Ibid.   
U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, "Statement of General Curtis M. Scapparotti, United States Army, Command, United States European Command," Washington, DC, March 8, 2018, 1.
Ibid., 16.   
Army Capabilities Integration Center (ARCIC), "Capstone Concept," December 19, 2012, accessed December 23, 2018, http://www.arcic.army.mil/ Concepts/Capstone.
Ibid.
U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-0, The U.S. Army Capstone Concept (Fort Eustis, VA: Government Printing Office, 2012).
Ibid., 7.   
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-0, 8.
ARCIC, "Capstone Concept," 1.
 30.   
Army Capabilities Integration Center (ARCIC), "The U.S. Army Operating Concept (AOC): Win in a Complex World," October 7, 2014, accessed December 23, 2018, http://www.arcic.army.mil/Concepts/Operating.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1.
ARCIC, AOC.
 i.   
Leonardo DRS, "Multi-mission Hemispheric Radar (MHR)," accessed March 1, 2019, https://www.leonardodrs.com/products-and-services/multi-mission-hemisphericradar-mhr/.
93 Ed House, "C-UAS + M SHORAD," SitRep (4th Quarter 2017), accessed March 1, 2019, https://www.leonardodrs.com/sitrep/q4-2017-defensive-protectionsystems-and-technologies/maneuver-air-
defense/.94  Moog, "Turreted Weapon Systems," June 28, 2018, accessed March 1, 2019, http://www.moog.com/markets/defense/turreted-weapon-systems.html.
Scott Boston and Dara Massicot, The Russian Way of Warfare (Washington, DC: RAND Corporation, 2017), 1.
 18.   
Peter Schoomaker, "Statement by General Peter Schoomaker, Chief of Staff United States Army, before the Commission on National Guard and Reserves," December 14, 2006, accessed October 11, 2018, https://web.archive.org/web/ 20061221114904/http:// www.army.mil/-speeches/2006/12/14/989-statement-by-generalpeter-schoomaker-chief-of-staff-united-states-army-before-the-commission-on-nationalguard-and-reserves/index.html.
McIntire, "The Return of Army Short-Range Air Defense in a Changing Environment," 5-8.
Missile Defense Advocacy Alliance (MDAA), "Fill The Gap!" October 4, 2016, accessed March 1, 2019, http://missiledefenseadvocacy.org/alert/fill-the-gap.
The Second Cavalry Association, "The History of the U.S. Second Cavalry," Dragoon History, March 13, 2018, accessed March 1, 2019, https://dragoonshistory.com.
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats (Suffolk, VA: Government Printing Office, 2017), I-7.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-01.8, Techniques for Combined Arms for Air Defense (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016), 1-2.
Ibid.,[3][4][5][6] 
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-01, U.S. Army Air and Missile Defense Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 1-8.
Maneuver Center of Excellence, CAID Instructor Coverage Menu Master, 2.
Ibid., 1.
Ibid.   
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
The last Soldier to die from enemy air attack was in the Korean War.1 36 F 137 However, the Cold War saw a proliferation of peer air threats necessitating the mechanism to protect maneuver elements from enemy fixed and rotary wing aircraft. Many systems entered and left service between the years of 1959 and 1998, including Hawk, Chaparral,   and Vulcan. The 1990's saw improvements to the Army's air defense capability, improvements that would stay relatively constant for the next decade. Patriot was introduced to the force in 1994, replacing the Hawk; and the Avenger and Bradley Linebacker were fielded in 1988 and 1997, respectively, to replace the Chaparral and Vulcan.1 37 F 
138
3
138 F 139
There is a generational SHORAD knowledge gap amongst Soldiers of every grade that will be increasingly harder to fix over time, as resident experience with integration into the maneuver force dwindles from our ranks. To help resolve this problem, this thesis yields recommendations for how the U.S. Army can best set the leadership and training conditions for reintegration of divisional SHORAD.
The methodological approach is qualitative in nature, with the purpose of understanding the underlying reasons for why the state of the force is distanced from SHORAD familiarity, and to understand prevalent trends in why the Army is now reinvesting in SHORAD. Additionally indicative of qualitative research, this study uses two case studies, is absent of in-depth statistical data, and heavily relies on the collection of information, both past and present, to formulate an opinion on recommendations. Consistent with guidance in CAFAD doctrine, TTPs for 2ACR began to bring about a total concept of air defense to the force. This collective air defense responsibility
In conclusion, the Squadron Commander commented, "Good comments! Professional discussions like these are healthy!" The fact that the Commander denied the majority of Lieutenant Hollister's requests does not weaken the argument of proper air defense integration, but rather bolsters it. By denying certain requests, the Squadron Commander displayed a firm holistic understanding of the roles of the Commander, the ADO, and the Avenger firing units in the air defense fight. Then, consistent with Air-Land Battle, displayed a glimpse of scalability concerns to substantiate his argument; "It was easy for [the ADO] to stay with two systems during Troop Ops, what happens during SQDN OPS!" From Hollister's perspective, it certainly must not have been easy to make these requests, but he felt they were necessary of the position. The denied requests exemplify Lieutenant Hollister's boldness and proactive approach to confront problems.
See Figure 
29
Liason officer. A liaison officer is the link between commanders and their staffs.
Since the ADA battalion doesn't have the designated manning to fill LNO positions for every supported maneuver battalion, the sole air defender, the platoon leader, must be the link between the maneuver staff and the air defense staff. Outlined in Lieutenant Hollister's documents is a description of general tasks for LNOs, since he recognized this responsibility. Appendix A contains pertinent excerpts.
First, the document stated that LNOs are integral to conducting Air Land Battle, equivalent to modern Multi-Domain Operations. Since this is the current trajectory of America's defense force, LNOs are implicitly required. The key is LNOs must be selected for their, "ability to communicate effectively (language capability)." The obvious implication is that an air defense officer must be able to use the same lexicon as
The final component to this case study described the active and passive measures 2ACR took to prepare for the air threat. This concept, then called AAAD, is explored in a later section using past and current doctrine as a guide. In this section, however, the important takeaway was that ADOs in 2ACR must have trained the maneuver force on the proper employment of AAAD, a concept that has likely deteriorated from our maneuver ranks over the last decade.
The Regiment called on all organic shooters for active air defense including, "tanks, Infantry Fighting Vehicles, Army aviation, small arms fire, and field artillery."
Insufficient evidence exists whether these Soldiers trained on the firing range against an air threat, but the expectation alone that these Soldiers would orient their systems to the air speaks to the catastrophic danger of a near-peer enemy air threat. Specific gunner guidance is listed in this section as well. The idea of a designated "air guard," or a vehicle mounted medium or heavy machine gun designated to provide visual early warning of enemy aircraft, further suggests a training requirement for maneuver units. In regards to passive air defense, the maneuver force must take deliberate action to mitigate risk from the air threat. Action that if not incorporated into training, cannot be adequately replicated on the battlefield. There are many specific training requirements that can be gleaned from this short excerpt. Insufficient evidence exists to confirm or deny if 2ACR actively included these components to AAAD into regular training events, so this study must assume that they trained as per dictated in their tactical manuals. Introduction Components of the Australian example for SHORAD are reviewed in this case study. Regimental Officers Basic Course is a 12-week course intended to train Ground does not constitute a designated SHORAD capability, but rather bolstered active CAFAD. Active CAFAD is tenuous for many reasons. First, the enemy most likely course of action (air domain) is to employ small, low-flying, modern UAS platforms, which the Stinger is not designed to defeat. Secondly, Soldiers who operate direct fire systems that can defeat the UAS do not regularly train to engage aerial targets. Thirdly, effective rates of active CAFAD mechanisms are low.
Units such as the Asymmetric Warfare Group (AWG) have conducted numerous experiments to determine the effectiveness of small arms fire against UAS. AWG experiments have found this to be a last resort, especially when applied to UAS operating in support of other systems. Leaders must not only assess whether this is realistic, but also the current mission.1 76F 177
Air Defense Officers Not Prepared: The generational knowledge gap in the air defense community is significant and must be addressed prior to M-SHORAD battalion fielding. Components of the gap revolve around the diverse nature of tasks the SHORAD officer must accomplish. The graphic below depicts the components of the generational knowledge gap amongst Air Defense officers today.
177 AWG, Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook, 44. plans for tactical formations would shed insight onto this focus area. CAFAD was another critical component of this research, but efficacy rates of active air defense done by maneuver elements was called into question. Also, considering the spectrum of new intelligence collection technologies available, what needs to be addressed in current CAFAD doctrine? Future research on this conundrum would be beneficial. This research did not focus on other components of SHORAD, such as IFPC. In large scale ground combat operations, how can the U.S. Army best employ these weapon systems to best achieve a tiered and layered approach? Finally, considering the current force does not have SHORAD experienced officers to fill M-SHORAD battalions, what is the best approach to use talent management to enable immediate mission success?
This thesis answered the primary and three secondary research questions to help solve the SHORAD problem. If actioned, recommendations for action and research would set the conditions for successful reintegration of M-SHORAD.   