# ID: 3668be2dd9114ebe866db550e9e54a13
# Title: Tactical and Operational Impact on the Brigade Combat Teams' Ability to Defend Against Near-peer Adversaries After Restructuring of Field Artillery Assets
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
As the Army refocuses on large-scale ground combat operations, the FA, as a branch, must work rapidly to update its doctrine, training, and equipment to meet this challenge.
The requirement to support units that are potentially overmatched and outranged by US adversaries will prove to be a pivotal capability gap.
Expenditure of funds across all the Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership and Education, Personnel, Facilities and Policy (DOTMLPF-P) domains reestablish FA as a branch that will significantly impact the battlefield in the close and deep fights.
This thesis will focus on addressing how the restructuring of FA units and changes to Army doctrine have potentially limited a BCT's ability to defend against offensives operation from a near-peer adversary like Russia.
Russia serves as a point of comparison for several reasons in this thesis.
Historically, the United States has seen Russia as a competitor posing a great threat militarily based on system capabilities and US competing global interests.
Russia has sought to counter US military technology by fielding military equipment that can overmatch US capabilities.
Multiple nations have also adopted portions of Russian doctrine, to include threat nations such as China and North Korea.
The National Defense Strategy identifies both China and North Korea as posing a threat to the United States and US allies.
Finally, Russia will serve as the point of comparison-based offensive operations conducted in Ukraine that would pose a significant challenge to a BCT tasked with defending NATO allies in the Baltic Region.