# ID: 368a6a7c0d7944b58eda5016960c30c5
# Title: Russian Way of War: Post Soviet Adaptations in the Russian Military
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian federation has deployed forces for three different large-scale combat operations. These three operations-Chechnya 1994, Chechnya 1999, and Georgia 2008-were conducted facing in each operation, a differently structured opponent. As a result of these different structures, Russian forces were required to conduct both Combat Arms Maneuver and Counter Insurgency. This full spectrum of combat operations provides sufficient material to determine if the military of the Russian Federation has developed a new Russian way of warfare, or if Russian forces are still conducting operations utilizing the same methods as their Soviet predecessors. The determination of a new Russian way of war will be made at the tactical, operational and strategic levels of warfare. As Russia continues to gain wealth from the sale of energy and attempts to expand influence globally, understanding the capabilities and weaknesses of the Russian military will become more important.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation involved itself in three major ground operations. This thesis will identify from these three events, (1994-1996 Chechen War, 1999-2009 Chechen War, and the 2008 Georgia War) the commonalities in post Soviet military operations of the Russian Federation and determine if there is a new post Soviet Russian way of war.
Since the 1999 assumption to the presidency by Vladimir Putin, Russia has again attempted to assert itself on the international scene. The ability of the Russians to play an important role in negotiations throughout the Syrian civil war highlights this point. 
1
2
3
The old Soviet model is rapidly losing its effectiveness. As a result, the Russian military must revolutionize and develop a new Russian way of war, or the potential for increased global influence will be wasted under an inefficient and incapable Russian military clinging to Soviet methods.
To identify an emerging Russian way of war, this thesis will study three conflicts and identify distinct traits from each. Identifying the Russian way of war will provide insight into capability and potential for future deployment of Russian forces. As the world's political and military policy continues to develop with relation to the Russian Federation, identifying this may prove extremely important.
In order to determine the capability and effectiveness of the Russian forces, the three largest conventional military operations that the Russian Federation conducted will be examined. Although smaller Russian incursions in Kosovo and the Tajik civil war influenced Russian military thought and development, they are outside of the scope of this study. The three identified conflicts encompass a full range of military operations as the Russians faced traditional military forces, militias, and in the case of the first Chechen war a hybrid force. By dissecting these actions, a determination of a new Russian way of war will be identified.
The primary research question for this thesis asked, following the disintegration of the Soviet Union, what identifiable traits of a Russian way of war emerged?
Additionally within this question, what other elements of national power including diplomatic, informational and economic, has the Russian Federation used to create a new Russian way of war. Finally, an all encompassing Russian way of war will be determined by examining the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of warfare. By examining all three levels, a complete picture emerges about the strengths and weaknesses of the Russian military and how competent civil leaders maximize Russia's military strengths while minimizing weaknesses.
In order to address the existence of a Russian way of war, it is helpful to define and provide context that frames the meaning of the term "way of war." The United States Army's Command and General Staff College definition of a "western way" of warfare is based on of five fundamentals. These are innovation, technology, discipline, aggressive military traditions, and unique war financing. These basic fundamentals separate western armies from their non-western enemies. No identification of a way of war is complete without also examining the theories of Carl von Clausewitz. It is by using these combined theoretical measures to study Russia's military that recognition of an emerging or existing Russian way of war is identified. Identifying if Russia has adapted to meet the myriad of political and military challenges it has faced since the Soviet collapse will make the determination of a new Russian way of war. If the Russian military has not changed, and continues to rely on a one size fits all conventional Soviet model, then questions concerning relevance, efficiency and civil military relationships will certainly surface.
Soviet military planning and doctrine framed potential fights as an allencompassing world conflict between two diametrically opposed combatants. Smaller nations would join as members in a coalition of one of these two groups (communist or capitalist). As a result, Soviet doctrine envisions a future world war of wide scope waged over vast territories. Such a war would be characterized by an absence of continuous fronts, rapid and sharp changes in the strategic situation, and deep penetrations into the rear areas of the forces involved. Forces would rely on mobility and maneuver to wage an intense struggle to seize and maintain the initiative. The Soviets emphasize the primacy of the offensive, stating that military and political objectives are ultimately achieved only through aggression and continuous offensive actions. Although defensive actions occasionally would be necessary, they would be active in innovative operations undertaken with the purpose of either supporting nearby offensive operations or creating favorable conditions for resuming the offensive. 
4
5
6
7
Soviet planners again demonstrated the preferred massing of forces during the 1956 Hungarian uprising and the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia. In 1979 the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. Even with the Soviets possessing both artillery and air assets, the Soviet military was unable to mass against and subsequently defeat the Afghans armed with rifles dating back to World War One. Although the USSR supported insurgencies in Asia and Central America, Soviet doctrine focused on massing forces against a near peer and could not adequately address the subtleties of counter insurgency operations.
Another key to ensuring that the Red Army would remain effective as a mass focused force, was the establishment of a cadre of trained officers who during times of crisis like the Great Patriotic War, would lead the rapidly expanded military. 
8
9
10
The Bolshevik and later Soviet political leaders from the time of the Brest-Litovsk treaty (1918) looked at the survival of the communist state as the countries' primary objective. As long as the Soviet state remained strong, goals of communist expansion could be achieved deliberately and effectively. However, if outside bourgeois forces disrupted the Soviet state, expansion would never occur. Stalin codified this belief in the need to protect the state with "his dictum of 'socialism in one country. 
'" 11
8
9
10
11
12
The dissolution of the Soviet Union and transformation into the Russian Federation was an especially turbulent time for the Russian military. As a result of the transitional difficulties:
[T]he military that Russia inherited, in short, reflected no reasoned military judgment, no coherent strategic design, no considered calculation of Russia's needs and interests. Rather, it was left with large shards of military capability extracted from the wreckage of the Soviet Union, the misshapen residue of a superpower that no longer existed. 
13
The dissolution of the USSR and the fragmentation of the Soviet Armed Forces fundamentally transformed the petty criminal activities-and the more systematized abuses of authority and power by the officer corps and military leadership--that had characterized Soviet military garrison life for decades. The frequent pilfering of unit equipment and supplies by military personnel of all ranks, and the routine misuse of manpower and material resources by officers, rapidly became a sophisticated, multi-dimensional, ubiquitous series of criminal enterprises fostered and sustained by systemic corruption. 
14
13 Steven Miller, Moscow's Military Power: Russia's Search for Security in an Age of Transition, 2004, www.amacad.org/publications/russian_mil_intro.pdf (accessed 14 November 2013), 7.
14 Graham Turbiville, Mafia in Uniform: The Criminalization of the Russian Armed Forces, 1995, http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/mafia.htm (accessed 15 November 2013).
The political turmoil surrounding the dissolution of the Soviet Union made the difficulties within the Russian armed forces all the more acute. When President Yeltsin called on the military to pressure the Chechens in November 1991, the problems listed above directly led to failure. 
15
15
16
18
In the waning months of the Soviet Union, Estonia, Latvia, Georgia, Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Azerbaijan, Kyrgystan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Armenia, and Turkmenistan all declared independence. The international community quickly recognized their independence and welcomed them into the community of nations.
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December of 1991, Kazakhstan declared its independence. These states were primarily Soviet satellite states, but the action reduced the size of the Russian federation and depleted military capability. 
19
In November 1990 a unique event occurred in Chechnya. The Congress of the Chechen People gathered more than 1000 Chechen Delegates together in Grozny. The congress was convened to put pressure on the local Soviet authorities to "speed up political change and to celebrate Chechen history and culture in a way that had never been possible before. 
20
Repression was not the only issue in Chechnya. The standard of living in Chechnya was near the bottom of all countries in the Soviet Union. "Soviet official statistics showed Chechnya close to the bottom of the list of Russian autonomous republics and regions in most socio-economic and educational indicators." 21 Economic difficulty, cultural repression and a general feeling of hopelessness developed into the seeds of revolution. It was during 1990 that these seeds of revolution finally germinated in Chechnya.
The following year, the Chechens conducted their first elections and elected Dzhokhar Dudayev who "won 85% of the vote." 22 On 1 November 1991, Dudayev in his first act as the elected President of Chechnya declared Independence. Moscow renounced this attempt to follow other former Soviet republics, and one week later, Russian television announced a state of emergency in Chechnya. Following the declaration, "Russian Interior Ministry troops landed at the military airbase at Khankala outside of Grozny." 
23
25
22
23
24
25
26
Instead of quelling the Chechen support for independence, the operation steeled Chechen resolve. The operation's failure to unseat Dudayev added to his public support in Chechnya. "It raised all the Chechens to their feet and immensely increased Dudayev's popularity. This gave him additional leverage to strengthen his government and to undertake measures to solidify his country's standing as independent." 
27
As Soviet power continued to wane, Chechen autonomy increased. In addition to autonomy, Chechen forces in a style typical of the mafia, exerted influence over the Russian troops still stationed in Chechnya. Almost immediately, Chechens began buying and stealing the weapons of the former Soviet Union. The problem was so bad, that by May 1992, Pavel Grachev, the Russian Minister of Defense, signed a directive that split the Russian weapons in Chechnya fifty-fifty between the Chechens and the soon to be departing Russian forces.
28
29
In what would be a reoccurring problem throughout the Russian military, soldiers received only sporadic pay. 
30
31
Whether for corrupt reasons or as part of a quid pro quo in return for maintenance of the oil pipeline from Baku, throughout this period the Russian authorities allowed Chechnya to go on importing Russian oil for processing at Chechen plants and re-exporting the refined product. At least 300 million dollars in profits from oil went to the Chechen government during this period but never showed up in the state budget. 
32
33
Russian forces departed Chechnya, Dudayev was in control, but Chechens continued to suffer. Basic services failed, public sector employees who showed up to work were not paid, and armed groups patrolled throughout the country. "Gunmen in camouflage who could have belonged to anyone, but appeared to be defending President Dudayev" were abundant. 
34
Stalin viewed the Chechens as a potential threat. To neutralize that threat, they were uprooted from their ancestral homes and deported en mass to central Asia. These deportations were so widespread that by 1956 almost no ethnic Chechens remained in their native land. 
35
33
34
35
The plight of the ethnic Russian population would be a stated reason given for the Russian intervention in Chechnya. Yeltsin expressed the desire to protect ethnic Russians. This however was just one of the many contradictions of the conflict.
"According to studies of the conflict in Chechnya, the plight of ethnic Russians in Grozny had little influence on Yeltsin's decision to take action in Chechnya." 37 Yeltsin may have stated that for the press, but it was simply not the case.
It was not just ethnic Russians suffering under the lawlessness prevalent during the Dudayev regime. All Chechens regardless of ethnicity suffered. With a barely functioning government and no plan to rectify the myriad of issues surrounding the civil services and economic outlook, the opposition to Dudayev grew. This opposition culminated with the assembly of a "Temporary Council" consisting of "more than 2,056 delegates representing more than two-thirds of Chechnya's communities." 
38
36 Russell,
45. 37
38
41
39 Ibid.,
24. 40 Ibid.,
26. 41
42
43
The best argument for Russia's use of force against Chechnya, of course, was blood. The open use of force to prevent the further spilling of blood would be justifiable in both the eyes of the Russian citizenry and the international community. So that blood would begin to be spilled in Chechnya, the opposition was hurriedly armed. 
45
46
On 17 August 1994, Dudayev's forces attacked the village of Tolstoi Jurt. "The pretext for Moscow to openly use force in Chechnya was now in place." 47 With a viable opposition and Dudayev's support beginning to falter in Chechnya, the Russians saw an 
43
44 Timothy Thomas, "The Caucasus Conflict and Russian Security: the Russian Armed Forces confront Chechnya Part One, Section One: From Intervention to the Outskirts of Grozny (Military-Political Events from 11 December to 31 December)," Slavic Military Studies 8, no. 2 (June 1995): 233-256. 
45
Knezys and Sedlickas,
30. 46 Ibid.,
31. 47 Ibid.,
32.
The official position in Moscow was to treat it as an 'internal Chechen matter.' The model was used with two other Caucasian republics, Azerbijan and Georgia, where in 1992 two anti-Moscow presidents had successfully been overthrown with covert Russian help. 
48
49
50
Their capture was especially embarrassing for the Russians who touted this operation as purely Chechen. Russian participation in this operation could no longer be denied. Dudayev "threatened to execute the Russian soldiers being held prisoner," if the Russians did not admit participation. 
51
48
49
Knezys and Sedlickas,
46. 50 Ibid.,
49. 51
Yeltsin faced an increasing number of difficulties. Paramount among the difficulties, Yeltsin now only had two choices with regard to Chechnya:
[E]ither recognize Dudayev or switch to direct intervention. The first choice presented two unacceptable evils. It would have been a personal political disgrace for Yeltsin to accept defeat. Plus, he recognized that to accept Chechen independence might threaten the cohesion of the Russian Federation. 
52
"What stands out in the sequence of events following the botched 26 November operation is the sudden escalation in the speed of decision making." 
53
In order to bring forces up to strength, the Russian Federation had to combine units and sub-units from various branches of services and departments from across the federation. The degree of combat readiness varied among them, and they were not trained to work together in combat operations. 
54
52
53
54
55
"The Federal Counterintelligence Service (formerly KGB) and the Russian Army General Staff's Intelligence Command (formerly GRU) reported that Dudayev's forces were as yet insufficiently organized and were not ready to resist a larger armed force." 
56
Years of Soviet mismanagement and the drastic drop in military spending by the Russian Federation ensured that troops and commanders both were not trained.
Additionally, the equipment was in such a state of disrepair that it almost failed to make it into the theater. When the attack finally commenced, three prongs consisting of a large unsupported force were sent toward Grozny. 
58
55
56
Knezys and Sedlickas,
43. 57
58 Raymond Finch, Why the Russian Military Failed in Chechnya (Fort  Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 1996), http://fmso.leavenworth. army.mil/documents/yrusfail/yrusfail.htm (accessed 22 November 2013). would be inevitable. Although some bluster must be taken into account, senior leaders believed that a smaller force could achieve Russia's objective. Pavel Grachev, the Russian Minister of Defense, stated prior to the invasion that the entire issue "could be resolved with a single parachute division." 
59
On the morning of 11 December 1994, the "largest Russian military operation since the war in Afghanistan" commenced. 
61
63
60
61
1
62
63
64
However, the root of the problem was a lack of responsibility at all levels. From the highest levels of government down, no one wanted to be held accountable for this operation. This desire for plausible deniability resulted in the transmission of vague verbal orders instead of written orders. If subordinates possessed written orders commanders would be the ones held liable after its failure. If no written orders are given, senior political and military leaders could claim that subordinates simply did not follow the orders given. It is then the commander on the ground that is responsible.
To compound matters, "Yeltsin's 11 December 1994 decree stated, 'I order all officials responsible for conducting measures to restore constitutional order in the Chechen Republic not to use violence against the civilian population but to take these people under their protection." 66 This decree made operations exceedingly difficult for the Russian army. It provided Yeltsin a means to deny responsibility for any civilian deaths, but limited the army's options. If the operation turned violent and civilians were injured, the politicians could claim the army simply violated its orders. The army would be the scapegoat. Although this was a problem, Russian commanders were not overly concerned. They still operated under the belief that a mere show of force would be enough for the Chechens to capitulate. This unfounded belief and the previously discussed lack of readiness almost guaranteed a Russian military catastrophe. Although there were obvious combat readiness deficiencies, none of the soldiers expected anything more than minor civilian interference. No one expected a bloody conflict.
As the Russian military positioned itself to attack into Chechnya, Russian citizens and leaders openly questioned the need for military action. Senior Russian military leaders and political leaders such as Yeltsin's advisor on nationality affairs Emil Pain, expressed their extreme opposition to Yeltsin's Chechen policy and resigned in protest.
As stated above Colonel General Eduard Varobyev resigned due to the Russian forces lack of planning and preparation. "Three of the Defense Ministry's top generals, Boris Gromov, Georgy Kondratyev and Valery Mironov, all Deputy Ministers, also spoke out against use of the army in Chechnya." 
67
68
67
68
Russian forces pushed into Chechnya on 11 December 1994, moving toward the capital from three different directions. The movement did not go as planned:
The 76th Pskov Paratroop Division and the 21st Detached Paratroop Brigade moving along Route 3 were stopped near the community of Verchnyje Ashaluk by local inhabitants who blocked the road. As no provision had been made as to what to do in the event that local inhabitants refused to allow the columns to pass, the troops turned back. 
69
In some of the fiercest fighting prior to the Grozny operation, Russian forces managed to displace approximately 1000 Chechen fighters from the Village of Petropavlovskaya. "In the end, rather than storming the Chechen positions, the Russian forces literally blasted the Chechen fighters out of them." 70 This technique of overwhelming firepower was used throughout the remainder of the conflict. This was the only tactic available as a result of the lack of training, manpower, and substandard equipment. However, the cost to the civilian population as a result of this techniques utilization was enormous. By 17 December 1994, Russian forces cleared to the very outskirts of Grozny. Yeltsin issued a final ultimatum demanding Chechen disarmament; as a show of goodwill, the "Russian Army withdrew a short distance." 71 His demand was 
69
70
71
Russian planes began bombing shortly after the deadline. Except for a two-day reprieve, Russian aircraft bombed the city continuously. The campaign lasted until Russian forces moved into the city and began the occupation. 
72
By 25 December 1994, Russian forces were in position around Grozny and Russian military leaders developed a plan to capture the city. "Grachev decided to assault Grozny and finish the operation off in one blow, despite the fact that advanced preparations had not been made for such a move." 
73
73
At the tactical level, failing to isolate before the attack violated Russian doctrine and greatly contributed to Chechen initial successes. Although understanding the potential difficulties associated with allowing the southern portion to remain open, Russian commanders did not possess the number of troops required to close it.
Additionally, they continued to believe that the size of their force and the firepower brought to bear if required would be sufficient to ensure victory. Grachev also believed it possible to decapitate the Chechen government and "in one step liquidate Dudayev and the government officials supporting him." 74 On 30 December 1994, Russian forces began the operations against Grozny with a significant aerial and artillery bombardment.
Although the bombardment did not abide by Yeltsin's 11 December decree, Russian commanders possessed nothing else to give them a tactical advantage.
Russian commanders believed that this demonstration of firepower combined with a rapid occupation by armored forces would shock the Chechens into submission.
However, Chechen fighters had already faced Russian armor and Russian fire and they would not be shocked. Russian commanders missed the Chechen resolve during the assaults on the defended villages surrounding Grozny. These attacks demonstrated not only the Chechen fighters resolve, but the skill with which they would fight. Chechens defended tenaciously, forcing the Russians to resort to overwhelming fire as the only means to achieve success. The initial aerial and artillery urban bombardment did little to nothing against Chechen fighters. They were prepared, tested and ready. Although 
74
As discussed earlier, one of the most significant problems facing Russian forces was the substantial lack of training. 
75
Russian forces operated in a highly kinetic operation. They were simply not prepared.
Their lack of preparedness forced the Russians to resort to using old Soviet tactics that they were familiar with, namely massive and indiscriminate use of indirect fire.
Individual infantry fire and maneuver techniques were non-existent and the conscript soldiers were as much a danger to themselves as to the Chechens. 
76
77
78
79
75
76
77 Timothy Thomas, "Air Operations in Low Intensity Conflict: The Case of Chechnya," Air Power Journal 11, no. 4 (Winter 1997): 51-59. 
78
79
80
2
81
82
83
83
unwillingness to act on critical information led directly to the catastrophe that occurred and resulted in the loss of Russian soldiers. Although Russia's leadership knew about Dudayev's preparation, they were willing to send soldiers into combat unprepared with the hope that the operation would succeed. The unconcerned attitude of senior military leaders, maintained the perception emanating from Moscow that this would be a simple and peaceful operation. The administration continued to state that a show of Russian military power would be sufficient to achieve the desired results. Had the Russian military followed their doctrine and used overwhelming force and direct firepower, they would "not have met Yeltsin's stated intent to safeguard the lives of noncombatants." 84 This may be a bit of a contradiction following the aerial and artillery bombardments. However, the sight of Russian forces directly conducting kinetic operations contradicted Yeltsin's guidance. A forceful seizure of the city demonstrated that Russian forces are not occupying based on a desire to protect the population. The military was there to destroy. When Russian aircraft bomb civilians from the air, it can be explained away as a miss on a viable military target.
The same denials cannot be made when infantry conduct a deliberate attack. As Russians began their movement to the identified targets, they encountered heavy resistance. The Chechens, well armed, trained and prepared, executed planned and coordinated anti armor ambushes. Russian forces were again simply not prepared.
When ordered into the city, Russian forces conducted movement in armored columns. These columns did not follow Russian doctrine and as stated above were not supported by dismounted infantry. Combined with Russia's failure to block south of the 
84
The Russians, just like the Chechen Opposition before them, attempted to take the city by driving unsupported armored columns straight to the city center. Just like with the previous operation, once Russian forces were inside the city, the Chechens demonstrated their skill and training. Chechen gunners destroyed both the first and last vehicles of the Russian convoy. This effectively blocked the Russians and contained them in well organized and prepared ambush zones. Withering Chechen fire and untrained Russian forces resulted in the almost total destruction of the Russian columns. One of the attacking brigades the 131st Maikop Brigade lost "20 of its 26 tanks and 102 of its 120 BMPs. By all accounts, the 131st ceased to exist as a fighting force. 
85
85 See figure 
3
86
Russia's commanders finally accepted that the Chechens planned, prepared, and equipped their soldiers for a highly kinetic fight. Understanding this, the remaining Russian forces planned accordingly. For the next assault on Grozny, Russian forces began following their doctrine and sealed off the city center limiting the ability of the Chechen fighters to resupply.
Even with Russian forces utilizing their doctrine, they were still "unable to conduct precision operations in urban terrain that incorporate appropriate measured response." 87 This inability, which resulted from the significant lack of training and readiness, required Russian forces to rely extensively on artillery, inaccurate aerial, and massed direct fire attacks. These attacks were more devastating than the initial bombardment and served to clear areas prior to Russian occupation.
Although effective at clearing enemy forces in an urban area, this technique also destroyed the homes of citizens still unlucky enough to remain in the city. Utilizing the technique of overwhelming fire, Russian forces eventually seized all of the now destroyed locations targeted during the initial assault. With the occupation of the identified target areas, the Russians claimed to have seized the city. "President Yeltsin announced that the taking of the palace factually meant the cessation of hostilities." 
88
Russian forces using the techniques that proved successful in the seizing of Grozny pushed Chechen forces out of the villages and into the mountains, the traditional 87 Ibid., 40. 
88
On 14 June 1995, Shamil Basayev one of the most effective Chechen field commanders seized the Russian town of Budyonnovsk 100 miles from the Chechen border. Following an initial skirmish, a large number of Russian security forces arrived and began engaging Chechen's who took Russian civilians hostage and marched them into the local hospital. 89 Following a multi-day standoff, the Russian government agreed to allow the Chechens and hostages to board busses which drove the fighters and hostages to Chechnya. The result of this operation was profound. Specifically: Budyonnovsk was a pivotal episode of the war. Facing defeat, the Chechens had launched a ruthless raid that appeared suicidal both for themselves and their cause. Yet they emerged not only relatively unscathed, but in a stronger position than before. They had won a much-needed ceasefire and forced Russia to be serious about peace talks. 
90
Throughout the summer and early winter of 1995, Russian and Chechen forces upheld an uneasy truce. The Russians did not leave and "the Chechens being the kind of people they are, as long as Russian soldiers were in Chechnya, then ceasefire or no 89 Michael Specter, "Chechen Rebels said to Kill Hostages at Russian Hospital," New York Times, 16 June 1995, www.nytimes.com/1995/06/16/world/chechen-rebelssaid-to-kill-hostages-at-russian-hospital.htm (accessed 16 November 2013). 
90
91
Compounding the problems for the Russians was the constant hostility between themselves and the Chechen civilians. "Even in Grozny, Russian rule never evolved from a state of military occupation." 92 This inability to work with the Chechens enabled the resistance to grow and weakened the Russian's position in Chechnya. The Chechens realized that they "only had to destroy the Russians' will to fight, a task in which, like the Vietcong and FLN, they eventually succeeded." 93 This is not to say that Russia did not secure any victories following their seizure of Grozny. On 21 April 1996, a rocket fired from a Russian plane found its mark and killed President Dudayev while he was talking on a satellite telephone. 
94
Throughout this period, negotiations between the Russians and Chechens took place. But even with a demoralized army, Russia did not capitulate. Discussions had failed, it was time the Chechens tried something else. Furthermore:
The Chechens believed that there was no way of terminating war actions but to stop force with force. Only equals could negotiate on equal footing. Thus to demonstrate that they were equal in force to the Russians, the Chechens needed to 
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
95
96
97
98
4
99
101
102
Prelude to War: de facto Chechen Independence On 31 August 1996, Russia and Chechnya signed the Khasavyurt Treaty officially marking the end of hostilities between the two nations. This treaty addressed four key issues in an attempt to maintain peace between the belligerents. These four points included the implementation of a permanent ceasefire; complete withdrawal of Russian forces and disarmament of the Chechens; A five year period of autonomy during which the parties would discuss the feasibility of independence; and the establishment of a mechanism for the two governments to discuss Chechnya's status in or out of the Russian federation. 
103
104
Following the first Chechen conflict, Russia employed a strategy of maligned neglect. Although Presidents Maskhadov and Yeltsin signed economic agreements in late 1996, which as signed, provided Russian assistance in the rebuilding of Chechnya's infrastructure and governmental systems, no support ever materialized. As a result, "it remained a region exploited, impoverished, confused and still suffering from the legacies of the former Soviet Union." 
105
106
107
108
Following Russia's departure from Chechnya in 1996, governmental services such as water and electricity across Chechnya were either limited or completely nonexistent. Additionally the payment of war reparations to Chechen citizens from the damage caused by the first conflict never fully materialized, this resulted in continued impoverishment of the population. The security apparatus in the country was also either weak or depending on the part of the country, non-existent. As a corollary "Aslan Maskhadov, elected president of Chechnya in January 1997, could not effectively maintain any semblance of law and order."
109
110
The duly elected government in Grozny was in trouble. The Chechens continuously claimed that the Russians did not do enough to assist Chechnya. The Russians cited the 26 February 1999 conference on crime in Chechnya as an honest attempt to assist Chechnya. 
111
If the Chechen government failed, Russia would have the excuse it needed to reoccupy the country, instill a pro-Russian government, and reclaim some of the lost prestige resulting from the defeat of the first war. "On 17 September, RIA-Novost reported that the Russian MOD was drawing up a plan for carrying out a large scale operation to destroy illegal Chechen armed formations and their bases in Chechnya." 
112
111
112
Following years of mismanagement, Russian people were extremely dissatisfied with the state of the nation and the leadership abilities of President Yeltsin. 
113
114
115
116
117
The Russian intervention in Chechnya appears to have been determined by Russia's election timetable. Duma elections would take place in December 1999 with the Presidential election to follow in June 2000. The Presidential elections were especially important as they were to determine the succession to Boris Yeltsin. 
118
119
Several crucial events occurred between May and December 1999. How the events unfolded and who was responsible for them, is still debated. What is not debated is that destabilization in Chechnya and surrounding regions combined with terror attacks in Russia changed the public's perception about Chechnya and how it should be dealt with.
As public opinion shifted more toward military action, there was no alternative.
[A] die was cast and the hardliners in the Russian military and intelligence community decided to plot the future demise of Chechnya's independence by 
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
The official government story is another possibility for who was responsible for the attacks. During the time period between 1996 and 1999 Chechnya experienced a rise in Islamist extremism. Two of the more prominent Islamic warlords, Shamil Basayev and Al-Khattab possessed both the means and motivation for the September attacks. 
120
121
122 Throughout the month of September 1999, a series of blasts tore across Russia killing approximately 300 people. 
123
Furthermore the later attacks against the school in Belsan and Nord Ost demonstrated the propensity for terrorist activity by the Chechens. 
124
125
126
127
124
to his departure for Moscow. 
128
From 1996 to 1999, the security issues for Russia grew from kidnapping, to all out invasion. Cross border raids and kidnapping became so common that Russia had no alternative but to act. The final straw was the August 1999 invasion in which: guerillas led by the Dagestanis Nadir Khachilaev and Bagantden Magomedov, invaded the Tsumadin district from Chechnya in an attempt to capture the Dagestani town of Agvali. Dagestani Interior Ministry (MVD) troops intervened and thwarted the Chechen attempt. 
129
These bombings galvanized the support of the Russian public. By focusing on terrorism, Putin changed the topic of the debate. No longer were Russians discussing Chechen independence, they were discussing Chechen terrorists. As a result: 
128
129
The anti-terrorist operation against Chechnya completely altered the political mood in Russia. Putin possessed widespread support for the military operation in Chechnya, in contrast to the war of 1994-1996 and Putin played a prominent role in leading and coordinating the anti-terrorist operation. 
130
Russian politicians possessed something to divert the public's attention away from their own problems. No longer did the Russian people focus on the economic issues facing the nation and President Yeltsin's horrible job at overseeing the economy. Russian politicians identified an external foe and the government wasted little time in dealing with it. This crisis relieved Yeltsin's political pressure. Although Yeltsin's popularity remained low, he no longer faced the prospect of impeachment and prison. 
131
Putin's election ensured that Yeltsin no longer faced prosecution over his handling of the first Chechen crisis. 
132
The raid staged from Chechnya on the village of Agvali was the stated catalyst for the second invasion of Chechnya. Although this attack was the final straw for the Russians, the situation during the past years in Chechnya was not good. Criminal and 
130
133
134
Warlords continued to control the countryside and criminal and kidnapping elements maintained their lucrative businesses. Maskhadov simply lacked the power to take on the Islamic warlords and criminal elements.
Maskhadov's inability to effect the deteriorating situation inside the country was directly tied to his nation's economic condition. The repeated promises by Russia to help re-establish the economy and infrastructure following the first Chechen war never materialized. The Russians never provided the material nor financial support as promised and stipulated in the Khasavyurt Treaty. As a result, "throughout the 1990s rightly or wrongly Chechnya has been viewed by both Russia and elsewhere as a 'rouge republic' where corruption and crime are rife and lawlessness is virtually a way of life." 136 By 133 Walter Comins-Richmond, "The Second Chechen War," http://faculty.oxy.edu/ richmond/csp8/second_chechen_war.htm (accessed 31 October 2013). 
134
However, in order to maintain the war beyond an initial invasion, the government needed to maintain public support. Yeltsin accomplished this through control of the media reports from Chechnya. In regards to controlling the media:
Pavel Felgenhauer, an independent Moscow military analyst, summed up the Russian information war approach during the October intervention as thus; 'this is not journalism. You can't even call it one-sided. This is propaganda. But it keeps up the popularity of the war. 
145
146
Russia's forces did everything possible to highlight the successes of the conflict.
During the 1994-1995 battle for Grozny, Russian forces incurred heavy casualties.
Pictures of the casualties, destroyed Russian equipment, and charred Russian corpses galvanized public opposition to the conflict. 
147
148
Prior to the start of this conflict, Russian military planners "realized that whenever possible, it was to the Russian Army's advantage to keep the Chechens at least 300 meters away from the conscript Russian ground force." 153 This distance is the maximum effective range of the AK-47. Since the Chechens did not possess an abundance of long-range weaponry, engagements at greater than 300 meters favored the Russians. If the Russians failed, then the potential for Chechen forces to inflict heavy casualties greatly increased. However, "with a more effective system of fire planning and control, the Russians were in a position to exploit their overwhelming superiority in air power and artillery during the advance into the Chechen Republic." 
154
The Russians developed the concept of a tactical group that "worked together more or less permanently within a specific zone of responsibility." 155 This tactical group comprised soldiers who trained together and knew the area they were operating in. Unlike 153 Lester W. Grau, "Technology and the Second Chechen Campaign: Not all New and not that Much," in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne Aldis (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 101. 
154
155
the first campaign where soldiers from different units combined just prior to the operation, Russia attempted during this war to maintain unit cohesion. This cohesion greatly enhanced the tactical effectiveness of the conscript forces and created significant difficulties for the Chechen fighters. By advancing methodically through the northern parts of Chechnya and engaging suspected targets immediately after identification, Russian forces presented a more difficult target for the Chechens. They never allowed Chechen fighters skilled at close fighting near their positions.
Although the tactics and pace of this invasion were different, the forces used were not all that dissimilar from the force that invaded in 1994. The Russian military still primarily consisted of a conscript force. This conscript force served two-year terms and never fully developed the skills associated with professional soldiers. The utilization of massed artillery fire served this type of conscription army exceptionally well and directly led to their initial success. Although Russia's forces were not well trained, they did attempt to adapt and correct their most pressing deficiencies. Russian forces realized this prior to departing Chechnya the first time and began "to take into account the combat experience of the troops." 156 As a result, the Russian military designed units that would be "highly mobile formations, having a modular structure, equipped first and foremost with modern weapons and equipment." 157 Through the use of overwhelming artillery support and highly mobile units, the Russians developed a plan for defeating Chechen groups.
However, the poor state of military readiness often forced changes to Russia's plans.
"Given the relatively poor state of the Russian armed forces, they would not be able to cope with the full range of tasks presented by the situation in the Caucasus." 
158
159
158
159 Federation of American Scientists, "Russian Military Spending," 7 September 2000, www.fas.org/nuke/guide/russia/agency/mo-budget.htm (accessed 31 October 2013). 
160
161
Utilizing a methodical artillery centric method, Russia's casualty figures remained much lower than during the invasion of first conflict. Additionally, Russian forces used "highprecision laser-guided artillery deployed against selected targets." 162 Utilization of this technique enabled commanders to quickly destroy any opposing Chechen position.
Russian forces adapted between the two conflicts, the Chechen fighters did not.
Many of the field commanders from the 1994 war still operated in Chechnya. These warlords and bandits, such as Shamil Basayev defeated the Russians before and believed they could do it again. The Chechen's "minds were fixed on the poor performance of the Russian military in the 1994-96 Russo-Chechen conflict and miscalculated the speed that Russia could coordinate and concentrate sufficient forces to neutralize the bandit formations." 
163
As Russia's forces approached Grozny, they again applied the lessons of the 1994 debacle. During the first war, Russian commanders and politicians ignored the threat of 
162
163
164
"During the second campaign, the Russian forces surrounded the city, but did not enter it in force. Tanks and artillery ringed the city, while dismounted infantry and Special Forces personnel, accompanied by artillery forward observers and snipers, slowly crept into the city." 
165
167
164
165
166
167 Carlotta Gall and Thomas de Waal, Chechnya Calamity in the Caucasus (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 359.
Following their doctrine of isolating before an attack, Russian commanders surrounded the Chechen capital and effectively sealed it off. Continuing with their tactic of massed artillery fire, Russian forces conducted "an artillery preparation that left Grozny looking like Berlin in 1945." 
168
169
170
To him, a war was a war, his operational techniques would be the same whether the war was conventional or counter-guerilla." 171 This targeting of civilians by the military directly violated the "norms enshrined in the human rights law." 172 In this fight, those norms no longer mattered to Russia's politicians, commanders and soldiers. Unlike the first campaign, Russian forces controlled the media. This might have been an outrage and completely outside of the rules of war, but without media scrutiny, Russian commanders possessed significantly more latitude in the conduct of operations. The Russians used the term bez predel (without limits) to describe their operations. 
173
Following the passage of the December 11th deadline, Russia's forces commenced the full-scale operation against Grozny. During the buildup and encirclement of Grozny, Russia conducted operations to clear and occupy the towns surrounding the city. Additional units established blocking positions south of the city to halt any attempts by the Chechens to either reinforce the city or escape from it. "By the end of the month (December 1999), airborne assault units occupied areas adjacent to the Georgian border in the south . . . in a bid to stop reinforcements, arms and ammunition getting through to the Chechen fighters." 
174
172
173 Schaefer,
193.
Russia's conscript army still confronted a dearth of training, causing the potential for operational failure. Again, "unlike the 1995 assault on Grozny, the Russians taught their soldiers some basic MOUT (military operations in urban terrain) techniques." 
175
176
175
176
177
"The improvement in Russian tank-infantry cooperation in these street battles may be judged from the claim that only one tank was destroyed in Grozny while it was shielding a group evacuating the wounded." 178 Russian forces have been known to exaggerate operational successes, and diminish any failures. As a result, this claim may simply be bluster on the part of Russia's commanders. It is especially dubious when taken with the lack of independent journalists throughout this campaign. Although independent confirmation about the exact number of Russian combat losses is nonexistent, it is undeniable that the Russian forces conducted a significantly more successful and integrated attack on Grozny than occurred during the first campaign.
As the Russians moved into the city, they maintained a slow and meticulous pace.
Combined arms units of infantry and armor directly supported by artillery and aviation led the attack. They searched "for Chechen strong points, when they found them, artillery and long-range tank fire was directed to eliminate the strongpoint and crush the building." 179 Urban environments present significant challenges for the attacker.
Defenders possess an almost infinite amount of hiding places and the ability to attack from any direction. Russia overcame this just as they had during the movement from the 177 John Pilloni, Interview by author, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 15 August 2013. 
178
179
Russian commanders retained flexibility with their techniques and often changed tactics forcing the defenders to react quickly. A common ploy was to dispense with heavy preparatory fires immediately before an attack. Instead a detachment would launch a surprise attack just before dawn and occupy a limited objective, one or two blocks perhaps. The enemy, deprived of rest by ceaseless artillery fire, might be taken unaware, but usually made a major effort to recapture the lost ground. 
180
Unlike the first Chechen campaign, Russian forces employed advanced and more destructive weaponry like the fuel air bomb and laser guided ordinance. 
181
One of the most destructive weapons used during the conflict were fuel air bombs or thermobaric bombs. "Russia used thermobaric weapons sparingly during the first Chechen campaign," during the second campaign Russia relied on this weapons 
180
181
182
[T]he Russian army looked for other ways to move them. Two methods were proposed, chemical weapons and thermobaric weapons. The Russian political leadership apparently vetoed the use of chemical weapons, but allowed the use of ground delivered thermobaric weapons. Air-delivered thermobaric systems were used outside the city. 
183
184
182 Ibid. 
183
184 Schaefer,
190
As Russian forces moved into Grozny, they began encountering stiff resistance from Chechen fighters. "By 31 December the operation had become bogged down." 
185
187
186
187
188
After continued Russian victories fighting pitched battles against Chechens in fixed positions, Chechnya's leaders finally understood the need to change tactics. 
189
190
As the year 2000 continued, the war transitioned from Russian attacks against Chechen defended positions to a classic guerilla phase with the attacks perpetrated by mobile groups of Chechens directly targeting Russia's military forces. Russians responded to these attacks with overwhelming force and pressure on civilians. Following the fall of Grozny, Russian forces, without warning the civilian population commenced an hours long aerial bombardment of the village of Katyr-Yurt. The use of 500lbunguided bombs was reminiscent of the carpet-bombing of World War II and resulted in the deaths of over 350 civilians. 
191
192
193 191 Schaefer,
192. 192
The missing "mothers" and the "children's corpses" were the byproduct of Russia's occupation. Chechen civilians claimed that Russian forces kidnapped and executed any Chechen they pleased. Terrorist or militant activity was not required, simply being in the wrong place at the wrong time could result in death. 
194
195
196
Although Russia preferred to employ massed artillery attacks against Chechen fighters, this technique lost effectiveness as the war progressed. Following Maskhadov's 194 Ibid., 60. 
195
Grau,
127. 196
197
As the Chechens often lacked the combat power to overwhelm Russian fortifications, Chechens focused attacks on "soft targets" or Russian logistics convoys.
These attacks forced the Russians to spend an increasing amount of energy on ensuring the Lines of Communication remained open. Ensuring freedom of movement became exceedingly difficult the longer Russian forces remained in Chechnya. This difficulty was primarily due to improvised explosive devices.
By mid-2004 the number of Improvised Explosive Device (IED) attacks had risen so high that a senior correspondent for the Russian parliament's daily newspaper expressed alarm: "The mine war waged by the guerrillas in Chechnya has become so intense that the daily operational reports are overflowing with dispatches about the latest 'roadside bomb attacks. 
198
The increased number of ambushes and Improvised Explosive Devices combined with an already inefficient Russian logistical system caused continued material shortages.
Russian units constantly complained that the Russian military failed to ameliorate their logistical shortfalls. As a result of this failure, "many Russian units endured prolonged shortages of ammunition, fuel, spare parts, flak jackets, combat gear, tents, radios, medical supplies, food, and fresh water."
199
200
As the western world and America in particular familiarized itself with international jihad, Russia continued the active struggle. President Putin used the threat of global jihad and terrorism resulting from it as justification for his actions in Chechnya. The United States agreed with Putin and provided him political cover in the international community.
By continuing to support the American objectives in Afghanistan, Putin understood the benefits to be had. Putin was not the only one: Putin, who had been the first to call Bush with his sympathy after learning of the 9/11 attacks, graciously offered to help with the invasion of Afghanistan. He let the U.S. ship supplies through Russian territory and did not object to the U.S. setting up bases in Central Asia, where the local despots quickly caught on to the opportunity. 
201
They were willing to accept any terms that would permit them to survive." 
203
Although Russia claimed victory it may in the end be just another temporary reprieve. To further Russia's problems, the Islamic aspect of the insurgency that Putin used to garner western support for actions in Chechnya appears to be a legitimate threat throughout the northern Caucasus. "Despite the fact that the Chechens have not yet regrouped into a unified resistance, the other nationalities within the emirate seem to have coalesced into a relatively professional force with some clearly discernable organizational characteristics."
204
As a result, Russia continues to use the same tactic that proved successful in Chechnya.
By continuing to provide material, financial, and security support, the Russian backed leaders of these nations keep the lid on the Islamic insurgency. 
205
The end of the second Chechen conflict looks remarkably similar to the start of the conflict. Islamic militants continue to operate in Chechnya, albeit not in the large numbers present prior to the conflict. They also possess the ability to launch attacks into Russia though not with the strength possessed prior to the conflict. 
206
206 CBS News, "Chechen Militant Leader Doku Umarov Calls on Islamists to Disrupt the Sochi Winter Olympics," 3 July 2013, www.cbsnews.com/chechen-militantleader-duko-umarov-calls-on-islamists-to-disrupt-sochi-winter-olympics/8301-202_162-57592100.html (accessed 5 November 2013).
1992 only increased the tension between the two nations. 
209
210
211
214
Although the August war was short in duration, the events and maneuvers leading up to the actual conflict were years in the making. Georgia began alignment with western nations and organizations shortly after its 1991 independence under the direction of President Eduard Shevardnadze. Although this courting of western governments and institutions disturbed Moscow, the Georgians continued their alignment with the west. They wanted to turn west and prosper like the Baltic States. 
215
218
219
222
223
One of the deftest political moves taken by Russia prior to the conflict dealt with citizenship. Russia opened citizenship in the Russian federation to people of the former Soviet Union republics. As a result, "90% of South Ossetia's population of under 100,000 
220
221
228
229
230
231
229
232
233
234
By conducting military operations in a sovereign country, Russia played a potentially risky game. The potential for western intervention was a serious consideration for Russia. If western forces deployed to buttress the Georgian military, there was a significant risk of conflict escalation. Additionally the Russians could fail at their desired goal of blocking NATO expansion, while simultaneously consolidating control of other nations looking for western patronage. 
235
236
In the months prior to the conflict, Russian supported separatists increased their attacks against Georgian police. The offensive military capabilities of the separatists were increased following Russia's removal of CIS sanctions. This removal of sanctions "cleared the way for Russian arms shipments to the Abkhaz separatists."
237
238
235
236 Shaun Walker, "Georgia began War with Russia, but was Provoked, inquiry Finds," The Independent, 1 October 2009, www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/ georgia-began-war-with-russia-but-it-was-provoked-inquiry-finds-1795744.html (accessed 16 November 2013). policemen, Russia responded by flying four military aircraft over Georgia in a direct violation of Georgia's airspace. 
239
240
241
Russia's information campaign ensured operational and strategic success for Moscow. Prior to the initiation of hostilities, "Moscow accused Tbilisi of mobilizing its troops in the Kodori Gorge in preparation for an attack against Abkhazia."
242
243
244
Russia continued to move forces into the two Georgian regions right up to the initiation of conflict. In Abkhazia "Moscow dispatched heavily armed so-called peacekeepers to counter the mythical Georgian buildup in the Kodori Gorge." 
245
246
248
However Russia claimed that peacekeeping operations and not an offensive capability was the equipment's purpose. 
249
251
247
248 Donovan, 10. 
249
250
251
252
253
The Georgian perspective of the conflict centers around the belief by the Georgian government that Russia was trying to annex Georgian territory. This annexation and the re-establishment of Georgian territorial integrity was one of president Saakashvili's primary concerns following his election. 
254
255
Following the order by Saakshvili to attack into South Ossetia, Georgian forces launched an artillery barrage against the occupied capital of South Ossetia, Tskhinvali.
Georgian forces initially met with success, however Georgian forces never secured or blocked the Roki tunnel thus allowing Russian forces to move freely across the border. This lack of focus toward the tunnel and Russia's reaction stemmed from Georgia's focus toward the South Ossetian separatist forces. However, "in the actual fighting in August 2008, the separatist forces that the Georgians had seen as their main adversary played only a supporting role as a vanguard to the Russians, to engage and draw the Georgians into combat."
256
257
From the very start of the conflict, Georgia displayed a lack of understanding of their threat, as well as weak operational and strategic planning. As a result of the weaknesses, "the often haphazard way in which plans were conceived and implemented undercut the tactical advantages the Georgians enjoyed and undermined their entire effort."
258
Russia's strategy toward Georgia was a combined political-military campaign.
Both Putin and Medvedev through direct Russian intervention and pressure through their proxy forces in the separatist republics increased pressure on Tbilisi. This pressure increased until Georgian politicians were forced to conduct military operations. 
259
260
263
Although Russia previously stationed "peace keepers" in South Ossetia and therefore had combat power in the area before the conflict, the first significant Russian response came from the area of the Roki tunnel. Russian forces having just trained during the Kavkaz 2008 exercise began movement through the tunnel and massed in South Ossetia. Although eventually able to deploy sufficient forces through the tunnel, Russia's military readiness slowed movement and initial deployment attempts met with significant difficulty. Russia's forces still primarily used vehicles and vehicle designs left over from the Soviet Union. Furthermore, the equipment was not maintained causing impairment to movement. 
264
Georgian forces however continued to focus on the South Ossetian fighters and did not block the Roki tunnel. 
265
Russian forces continued through the Georgian fire and successfully engaged the Georgian forward elements focused on seizing Tskhinvali. Russia's forces advanced on the Georgian military's positions using the same techniques that served them well during the 1999 Chechen war. Namely they advanced with a significant amount of aerial and artillery support. The overwhelming firepower scattered Georgian formations and allowed Russian units to advance and seize Tskhinvali. As Russian forces advanced through South Ossetia, they "generally used Soviet tactics, moving in column formation, fighting from the lead elements and continuing to press forward after making contact." 
266
267
266 Cohen and Hamilton,
28. 267
268
270
271
272
273
274
269
270
Cohen and Hamilton,
34. 271 Ibid.,
44. 272
273
274
Popjanevski,
152. alone." 279
280
281
Russia's air force also failed to conduct effective airmobile operations with the army. 
282
280
envelopment." 
283
"The Russian air force, while underperforming by western standards demonstrated decisive air superiority over its Georgian foe." 
284
285
286
287
283
284
285
286
Although successful in some arenas, overall the "Russian air component demonstrated a remarkably limited capacity to wage air combat for a country aspiring to be a military great power." 
288
[W]ere forced to handpick colonels and generals from all over Russia, [men] who were able to command in battle; the commanders of the paper divisions, when they were given reinforcements of men and armaments . . . were confused and some [even] refused to obey orders. 
289
288 Cohen and Hamilton,
37.
290
291
Furthermore, Russia's communications systems also proved deficient. This problem was endemic across all echelons and greatly hampered Russia's operations. The problem became readily apparent when the "58th Army commander, Lieutenant-General Anatoliy Khrulev, communicated with his forces in the midst of combat via a satellite phone borrowed from a journalist, since communication between units was unavailable."
292
Additionally, the Russians noted a significant number of intelligence failures during this conflict. As discussed above, Russia's air force targeting officers did not have sufficient intelligence on Georgian capabilities and target locations. Although the war was short, the dearth of intelligence capability led to a high number of Russian aircraft destroyed. The Russians also identified deficiencies in their tactical intelligence collection capabilities. Russian Unmanned Aerial Vehicle's did not possess effective sensors. The cameras mounted on the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle had such poor resolution that they provided no benefit to Russian commanders. 
293
At its most basic level the Georgian war was "intended to demonstrate that Moscow was again a force to be reckoned with and that the days of Russian strategic retreat were over." 294 Putin settled the Chechen question of independence and with the invasion of Georgia demonstrated that it was "capable of effectively acting in its periphery, and is willing and able to use military force to protect its interests. 
295
293
294
295
296
297
Georgia faced significant economic challenges following the 2008 war. Russia's forces successfully destroyed a sizeable amount of Georgian infrastructure including damage to Georgia's major port facilities. Following the war, western nations awarded over US $4.5 billion to assist Georgia with reconstruction. 
298
These nations are still within Russia's sphere of influence and would be handled severely if they did not follow Russia's lead. This is especially important given Russia's dominance in providing natural gas to heat European homes. Although Russia's army did not seize or destroy the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan or Baku-Supsa pipelines, the control of 297 Ibid., 105. South Ossetia places Russian forces easily within striking range. 
299
301
Russia may have succeeded in intimidating its neighbors, as Socar the Azerbaijan state energy firm announced that it would transfer more oil directly through Russia and not the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. 
302
299
304
sites/markadomanis/2013/08/01/since-2000-russias-defense-spending-has-almost-tripledbut-it-still-isnt-a-threat-to-the-west/ (accessed 31 October 2013).
Russian Organizational Development
The Russian force structure no longer resembles the Soviet army just prior to and during the collapse of the Soviet Union. This change has occurred slowly and has often been opposed by the military elite, which view any change as a direct challenge to their power and potential employment. 308 "The Russian military, as a whole, does not want to modernize; or rather it does not want to be "modernized" in the way that its political masters want." 309 Although there has and will likely be continued resistance to change in the military, a common theme from Yeltsin through Putin has been near constant political pressure to develop and change the modus operandi of the Russian military. No longer will the military be free to conduct operations as it sees fit. In a new democratic system, civilian oversight must occur, something that the Russian military is not happy to accept. 310
Although the will of politicians is generally supported by the public, "organizations resist change; military organizations resist change more than most; and it can be argued, Russian military organizations resist change more than most military organizations." 
311
308 Miller,
16. 309
310 Miller,
17. 311
[F]irst set in motion the process of military reform that the ending of the Cold War so demanded. He looked upon his military machine as a gargantuan, inflexible dinosaur that absorbed immense state resources, while seemingly providing for very little in the way of operational utility in the defense and security realm. 
312
As the Russian economy contracted following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the ability to maintain large government institutions characteristic of a communist state, no longer existed. As a result, Yeltsin began to reduce Russia's military force structure.
This effort was "driven largely by the rationale that smaller was better." 313 This belief was out of sheer fiscal necessity as much as an actual belief in the advantages of a smaller force. Since Russian forces were often not paid and resorted to selling military equipment the capability to field the force was reduced. A smaller force that the nation could afford was necessary.
The deployment of the military since the collapse of the Soviet Union demonstrates that without the professional force that Russia's politicians desire, mass is still the preferred technique used to meet operational and tactical success. Mass however brings with it a number of problems that the Russian military has attempted to address.
Primarily the inability to relay orders up and down the chain of command. The decaying Russian military infrastructure contributes to as many operational problems as the force 312 Ibid., 3.
313 Thorton, "Organizational Change in the Russian Airborne Forces," 8.
structure, but as a result of the fiscal situation, Russia cannot adequately address material issues. As a result of these material deficiencies Russia has focused its attention where it will have the most impact, toward updated force structure. 
314
By transitioning from the old Soviet command and control system of the past, Russia's forces are attempting to become more flexible in dealing with the challenges they will likely face in the coming decades. responsive force, they should provide Russia's policy makers with an expeditionary force which can be an effective foreign policy tool.
Even with the significant changes that have been made since the collapse of the Soviet Union, significant challenges remain. In line with a newer professional force, Russia's military has been forced to look at not only modernization equipment, but also the modernization of manning.
Since the time of the Czars, the Russian military has been primarily a conscription force. 
319
Since the 1990s, the Russian president has pressured the military to change the manning structure. The military establishment however maintained a vested interest in the conscription method. Conscription required a large number of officers. The old Soviet and 1990s Russian army possessed approximately three times the officers as the American army. 
321
320
323
324
325
323
324
325
326
The preferred method of Putin to man Russia's military is the use of contracted soldiers "kontraktniki." The distinction between contracted and conscripted soldiers in the Russian military is similar to drafted and enlisted soldiers in western armies.
Kontraktniki soldiers sign contracts for a three-year period that serves in similar capacity to a western soldiers enlistment. Switching to a contracted force "would mean a smaller military. It would require fewer bases, less infrastructure and fewer officers to run it." 327 However this transformation from conscription to a professional army has not occurred rapidly and there are still insufficient numbers of contract soldiers to fill the ranks.
Russia's military is however making progress. By the end of 2013, Russia's military is expected to have just under three hundred thousand contracted soldiers, with another fifty thousand each year following until the entire military is under contract. 
328
327 Thorton, "Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces," 4. 
328
past. The Georgia war and the capture of Georgian army bases provided insight to Russian soldiers into the standard of living of other nations militaries. In a widely disseminated expletive laced video, Russian soldiers filmed themselves inside the Georgian barracks in Senaki and questioned why they are forced to live in squalid conditions when Georgian soldiers have nice facilities. 329 Russia's soldiers understand how other soldiers live and unless Russia reaches and maintains these standards, the ability to recruit and keep a professional standing army will be greatly diminished.
Russian forces have in the past struggled with the recruitment and longevity of contracted soldiers. The first serious attempt at contracting soldiers occurred in the 1990s under Boris Yeltsin. However as a result of the fiscal difficulties facing Russia, the promised pay was either late or non-existent. This problem has persisted and made recruitment extremely difficult. 330 Additionally as the video described above demonstrates, the living conditions were often poor further adding to the difficulty in maintaining trained and qualified soldiers. Although Russia faced significant difficulties in building a volunteer army, the combat abilities of these soldiers as exhibited by their effectiveness during the Georgian war have demonstrated the need to continue the program.
One of the primary benefits in building and maintaining an all-volunteer force rests with public support. Not only would the force be smaller, the unpopular 
329
Cohen and Hamilton,
56. 330
331
332
However, radical change in a system can create growing pains. Since the 1990s, Russia has dealt with force structure changes and continue to work through them. The result is a force better prepared than during the 2008 war and will pending any radical fiscal changes, be better prepared in the future. 
333
331 RIA Novosti, "Russian Prosecutors Find 65,000 Violations in 2012 Draft," 16 April 2013, http://en.ria.ru/military_news/20130416/180670179/Russian-prosecutorsfind- 65000-violations-in-2012-draft.html (accessed 15 November 2013). 
332
333
334
With the significant problems still facing Russia's military it is unlikely that development and implementation of radically new doctrine will occur in the near future.
However manning and equipment reforms have occurred. To be successful, the Russian military will have no other choice but to adopt new doctrine and tactics.
Among the tactics that most need changed is Russia's use of mass. Russia's use of that military term connotes not a massing of effects as in the American army, but a massing of soldiers. Without a large number of soldiers, Soviet and early Russian commanders could not succeed. "To the Russian commander it -mass-is an indicator of the potential success of an operation."
335
Even prior to the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia struggled to keep pace with the technological advancements in the west. This problem was only exacerbated with the fiscally constrained environment of the past two decades. Prior to President Putin's efforts to increase military capability, "the Russian defense budget shrunk to two percent of the American budget and the armed forces have been reduced to 1.2 million."
336
Although previous defense budgets were only two percent of the American budget, the size of the Russian force was roughly equivalent to the size of the total American force. 
337
The collapse of the Soviet Union had a devastating effect on Russia's military. In the immediate aftermath, "many of the army's best officers and soldiers left the military due to lack of pay, poor living conditions, and the new promise of capitalism that came with the fall of communism." 
338
339
Commanders need to mass effects at a particular time and place on the battlefield.
Without the ability to communicate, failure is likely to occur. Unfortunately for the Russians, the 2008 Georgia war demonstrated the abject failure of Russia's communication network. 
342
The failures of Russia's army during the 2008 Georgian war empowered reformers such as Serdiukov to push through changes within the military. The Soviet era generals who actively subverted military reforms could no longer justify their approach to army management. The Soviet era systems failed "the need for quite drastic reform 345 Thorton, "Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces," 45. 
346
347 Thorton, "Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces," 29. identified the need for reforms. However, due to a myriad of factors including resistance of senior officers and a fiscally constrained environment, the Russian military was not able to make the required drastic changes. Strategically, the Kremlin simply did not understand the post Soviet operational environment and assumed that the grandeur of a bygone age would be sufficient to exert control over other states. This was not the case.
Compounding the problem, the inability to develop capability at the tactical level forced change discussed later at the strategic level.
During the Chechen interwar period, the Russian military did evolve. 
348
These developments were the only ones that could be achieved as changes to the military By the end of the second Chechen war, Russian forces limited direct operations and instead supported friendly Chechen operations. Following the drawdown, Russian forces again attempted to adapt. These adaptations slowly began to address the organizational deficiencies identified during the Chechen campaigns, primarily the lack of training and professionalism of Russian soldiers, as well as the material deficiencies plaguing Russia's military. At the strategic level, the realization that Russian forces alone could not crush the Chechen opposition indicated a more realistic approach to handling the crisis. By empowering the Kadyrov regime, the Kremlin identified a way to extricate itself, while maintaining claims of victory. Russia achieved the same end state, the dominance of another region. However, the approach was completely different from Soviet methods. This conflict demonstrated that control, or political pressure, no longer requires the presence of military forces, as was the method preferred by the Soviet Union.
Political control and influence will now suffice.
The 2008 Georgia war again demonstrated that Russia out of necessity clung to mass as the preferred technique for dealing with tactical problems. However, the employment of forces and operational goals of the operation are radically different from the techniques of the Soviet Union. As with the drawdown in Chechnya, Russia is content with maintaining a modicum of control through the threat of future force, not the imperial domination that characterized Soviet operations. Even with a modernization of operational and strategic goals, Russia's military continues to face significant obstacles at the tactical level.
As was the case during the Cold War, Russia still looks to the great equalizer, atomic weapons, as the means to ensure the conventional military is not overwhelmed.
Planning for and utilizing nuclear capability during war game scenarios demonstrates that Russia's senior leaders still do not possess the confidence in their conventional military to stop a near peer threat to the homeland. Until Russia possess a military capable of repelling any threat, the nuclear option will likely be the primary option for defense of the homeland.
Other than suppressing information, the other means of ensuring support was to keep casualties low. Throughout the remainder of October 1999, Russian troops occupied the border areas inside Chechnya. Unlike the 1994 war, Russia's field commanders undertook a methodical approach to the invasion.
Other than suppressing information, the other means of ensuring support was to keep casualties low. Throughout the remainder of October 1999, Russian troops occupied the border areas inside Chechnya. Unlike the 1994 war, Russia's field commanders undertook a methodical approach to the invasion.
302
307
317  
317  
Amy Woods, "Rogers: Syrian Deal 'Big Win' for Putin, 'Dangerous' for US," Newsmax, 15 September
2013, www.newsmax.com/Newsfront/rogers-syria-putindangerous/2013/09/15/id525743 (accessed 25 November 2013). 2 Nicholas Eberstadt, "Russia the Sick Man of Europe," National Affairs no. 158 (Winter 2005), www.nationalaffaris.com/public_interest/detail/russia-the-sick-man-ofeurope (accessed 25 November 2013).
Corey Flintoff, "Russia May Be Poised to Regain Influence in Region," npr.org, 2 October 2012, www.npr.org/2012/10/02/162164918/should-the-u-s-still-fear-russia (accessed 25 November 2013).
Department of Defense, Soviet Military Power (Washington, DC: Government  Printing Office, 1985), 12.
Ibid., 26.   
Condoleeza Rice, "The Making of Soviet Strategy," in Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986), 655.
Ibid.   
George Kennan, "The Sources of Soviet Conduct," Foreign Affairs 25, no. 4 (July 1947): 566-582.
Carlotta Gall and Thomas deWaal, Calamity in the Caucasus (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 76.
Ibid.   
John Russell, Chechnya: Russia's 'War on Terror' (London: Routledge, 2007), 43.
Pavel Felgenhauer, "Russian Military Reform: Ten  Years of Failure" (Proceedings of a Conference held at the Naval Postgradute School, 26-27 March 1997), Edited by Elizabeth Skinner and Mikhail Tsypkin, www.fas.org/nuke/guide/russia/ agency/Felg.htm (accessed 23 November
2013).20  Gall and deWaal, Calamity in the Caucasus, 76.
Lieven, 64.    
Stasys Knezys and Romanas Sedlickas, The War in Chechnya (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1999), 20.
Robert Seely, The Russian-Chechen Conflict 1800-2000: A Deadly Embrace (New York: Taylor & Francis, 2012), 151.
Gall and deWaal, Calamity in the Caucasus, 113.    
Marcel de Haas, Russias Military Reformes: Victory After Twenty Years of Failure? (Netherlands Institute of International Relations 'Clingendael', November 2011), www.clingendael.nl/sites/default/files/20111129_clingendaelpaper_mdehaas.pdf (accessed 22 November 2013).
Lieven, 74.    
Ibid.,[74][75] 
Carlotta Gall and Thomas deWaal, Chechnya, A Small Victorious War (London:  Pan Books, 1997), 209.    
Lieven, 89.   
Pilloni, "Burning Corpses in the Streets," 61.
Gall and de Waal, Calamity in the Caucasus, 359.    
Ibid., 360.   
Lajos Szaszdi, Russian Civil Military  Relations and the Origins of the Second Chechen War (New York: University Press of America, 2008), 47.
Anne Aldis, The Second Chechen War (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 5.
C. W. Blandy, Moscow's Failure to Comprehend,in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne Aldis (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 11.
Anup Shah, "Crisis in Chechnya," Global Issues, 4 September 2004,  www.globalissues.org/article/100/crisis-in-chechnya (accessed 22 November 2012).
Agence Frange-Presse, "Chechen President Declares War on the Warlords," Reliefweb, 21 October 1998, http://reliefweb.int/report/russian-federation/chechenpresident-declares-war-warlords (accessed 23 September 2013).
  108 Szaszdi, 48.   
Dr M. A. Smith, "The Second Chechen War: The All-Russian Context.," in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne Aldis (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 6.
Lorenzo Vidino, "How Chechnya Became a Breeding Ground for Terror," The Middle East Quarterly 12, no. 3 (Summer 2005): 60.
Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, "Putin Outlines Plan to Isolate Chechnya," Newsline, 15 September 1999, http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1141992.html (accessed 23 September 2013).
RT News.  "Effect of Dagestan Invasion was Similar to 9/11," 7 August 2009, http://rt.com/news/effect-dagestan-invasion (accessed 23 September 2013).
Kathy Lally and Will Englund. "Kidnapping Foreigners becomes Chechen Industry Lawlessness Escalates After Rebellion Fails," The Baltimore Sun, 29 October 1997, http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1997-10-29/news/1997302082_1_chechnyachechen-kidnapping (accessed 28 August 2013).
Smith, "The Second Chechen War," 6.    
James Hughes, Chechnya: from Nationalism to Jihad (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007), 109-110.
Blandy, 12.   
Main, "Counter-Terrorist  Operation in Chechnya on the Legality of the Current Conflict," 26-27.
Ibid., 21.    
Lieven,[107][108] 
Main, "Counter-Terrorist  Operation in Chechnya on the Legality of the Current Conflict," 25.
Timothy Thomas, "Manipulating the Mass Consciousness: Russia and Chechen 'Information War' Tactics in the Second Chechen-Russian Conflict," in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne Aldis (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 115.
Ibid., 110.    
Pictures from the 1994 Chechen conflict of the charred remains of Russian soldiers greatly swayed the Russian public's perception of the conflict. The pictures shocked the public who demanded answers from President Yeltsin.
Lieven,[107][108] 
Thorton, "Organizational Change in the Russian Airborne Forces: The Lessons of the Georgia Conflict," 17.
Dr Steven J. Main, "North Caucasus Military District: Defending Russia's Interests in the Caucasus," in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne Aldis (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 38.
Ibid., 41.   
Robert Schaefer,  The Insurgency in Cechnya and the North Caucasus (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2011), 189.
BBC News, "Scars Remain Amid Chechen Revival," 3  March 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/from_our_own_correspondent/6414603.stm (accessed 31 August 2013).
Dr TRW Waters, "Human Rights in Chechnya-a Lost Cause?, in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne Aldis (Shrivenham: The Strategic and Combat Studies Institute (in association with The Conflict Studies Research Centre), 2000), 141.
Ilyas Akhmadov and Miriam Lanskoy, The Chechen Struggle (New York: Palgrave Macmillian, 2010), 176.
Dodge Billingsley with Lester Grau, Fangs of the Lone Wolf (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2012), 5.
Ibid., 124.   
Anna Politkovskaya, A Small Corner of Hell Dispatches from Chechnya (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2003), 131-132.
Mark Kramer, "The Perils of Counterinsurgency: Russia's War in Chechnya," International Security 29, no. 3 (Winter 2004/2005), 22.
Ibid., 27.   
Ibid., 23.    
Politkovskaya, 86.    
Simon Shuster, "How the War on Terrorism did Putin a Favor," Time World, 19 September 2011, http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2093529,00.html (accessed 5 September 2013).
Ibid.,[219][220] 
Schaefer, 241.    
Editor, World Politics Review, "Global Insider: Russia's North Caucasus Insurgency Shows Little Sign of Slowing," World Politics Review, 3 April 2013, www.worldpoliticsreview.com/trend-lines/12845/global-insider-russia-s-north-caucasusinsurgency-shows-little-sign-of-slowing (accessed 6 September 2013).
On 26 September 2013 Ukraine announced the preparing of implementation of Association Agreement. This agreement will further open European markets to Ukrainian products and aligns the Ukraine closer with Europe. Interfax. "Ukraine Preparing Program of Implementation of Association Agreement with EU, says Foreign Ministry," http://en/interfax.com.ua/news/general/168539.html (accessed 26 September 2013).
Ronald Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World (New York: Palgrave Macmillian, 2010), 57.
Per Gahrton, Georgia  Pawn in the New Great Game (London: Pluto Press, 2010), 177.
David Smith, "The Saakashvili Administration's Reaction to Russian Policies before the 2008 War," in The Guns of August: 2008 Russia's War in Georgia, ed. Svante Cornell and Fredrick Starr (New York: M. E. Sharp, 2009), 122.
Svante Cornell, "War in Georgia, Jitters All Around," Current History 107, no.  711 (October 2008), 311.   
George Donovan, "Russian Operational Art" (Strategy Research Project, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA, 2008), 11.
Felgenhauer, "After August 7: The Escalation of the Russian-Georgian War," 165.
Cohen and Hamilton, 28.   
Smith, "The Saakashvili Administration's Reaction to Russian Policies before the 2008 War," 129.
Popjanevski, 148.   
C. J. Chivers, "Georgia-Russia Tension Escalates Over Downed Drone," New York Times, 22 April 2008, www.nytimes.com/2008/04/22/world/europe/ 22georgia.html?_r=0 (accessed 30 September 2013).
VVSDCN, Russian MIG-29 Shooting Down Georgian Drone, Updated 22  April 2008, www.youtube.com/watch?v=F6b35gjZ9cc (accessed 1 December 2013).
Popjanevski, 145.    
Goltz,[252][253] 
Paul Goble, "Defining Victory and Defeat: The Information War between Russia and Georgia," in The Guns of August: 2008 Russia's War in Georgia, ed. Svante Cornell and Fredrick Starr (New York: M. E. Sharpe, 2009), 180.
Smith, "The Saakashvili Administration's Reaction to Russian Policies before the 2008 War," 138.
Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World, 142.
Ibid., 151.    
Nilsson, 91.    
Gahrton,[176][177] 
Felgenhauer, "After August 7: The Escalation of the Russian-Georgian War," 162.
Cohen and Hamilton, 42.    
Ibid., 30.   
Ibid., 24.    
Cohen and Hamilton, 34.    
Felgenhauer, "After August 7: The Escalation of the Russian-Georgian War," 170.
Cohen and Hamilton,[34][35] 
Ibid., 41.   
Felgenhauer, "After August 7: The Escalation of the Russian-Georgian War," 170.
Felgenhauer, "After August 7: The Escalation of the Russian-Georgian War," 166.
Cohen and Hamilton, 31.    
Ibid.
Roger McDermott, "Russia's Conventional Armed Forces and the Georgian War," Parameters (Spring 2009), http://strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pubs/ parameters/Articles/09spring/mcdermott.pdf (accessed 22 November 2013).
Rod Thorton, "Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces" (Monograph, US Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, Carlisle, PA, June 2011), iii.
The Soviet army possessed a large number of officers. Decisions were retained at higher levels requiring a large number of General Officers.
William Odom, The Collapse of the Soviet Military (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998), 40.
Dale Smith, "Commonalities in Russian Military Operations in Urban Environments"(Master's Thesis, Command and General Staff College, Fort  Leavenworth, KS, 2003), 1-2.
Alexi Arbatov, The Transformation of Russian Military Doctrine: Lessons Learned from Kosovo and Chechnya, Marshall Papers, No. 2 (Deutschland: George C Marshall Center, 2000), 5.
Global Fire Power, "Russia Military Strength," 4 December 2012, http://www.globalfirepower.com/country-military-strength-detail.asp?country_id=Russia (accessed 4 December 2012).
Smith, "Commonalities in Russian Military Operations in Urban Environments," 37.
Haas.   
Ibid., 37.    
Ibid.,[19][20] 
Period from the signing of the Khasavyurt Accords to the August 1999 response to the Dagestani crisis.
My most sincere appreciation to my wife Sara, for her patience and understanding during the many sacrificed weeknights and weekends. My committee (
Dr. Kalic
Mr
Stephenson, and 
Mr. Pilloni
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
could dislodge the Chechen fighters from the border areas between Chechnya and Dagestan, then they possessed a suitable area to mass forces for an invasion of Chechnya.
Additionally, Russian military forces used this operation as a lead in "to Federal military intervention into Chechnya at the beginning of October 1999." 
140
Additionally, this fight served to demonstrate to Russian soldiers how the enemy fought. Unlike the first Chechen war where the Russians expected weak resistance, this brief fight demonstrated to the front line soldiers the tenacity of their foe. The stage was set for Russia's movement into Chechnya.
By October 1999, Russian forces successfully engaged and blocked any Chechen forces that could attack across the border. It was now time to go on the offensive. Russian politicians understood the lessons from the first war. To be successful, Russia needed public support. Yeltsin's impeachment hearings made this readily apparent. To ensure public support they needed legal justification. Putin and Yeltsin found this justification in Russia's criminal code. They used a Ministry of Justice report that stated "the activity of the Chechen bandit formations and terrorist groups is directed and financed by external extremist organizations." 141 By classifying the activities of the Chechens as terrorist and foreign, Russia had legal recourse to respond. "In unleashing military hostilities against 140 Ibid.
No longer would western nations voice opposition to Russia's actions in Chechnya. The west after all, now fought the same threat of Islamic terrorism. Through his political maneuvering, Putin severed any potential ties between the Chechens fighting for their independence and western nations who could provide monetary assistance and more importantly legitimization for their cause. The world would not support the Chechens.
The Kremlin knew it was now time for Russia to finish the operation. The only question would be how?
The occupying force rarely wins counter insurgencies through brute force. Russia understood this and as a result began a gradual policy shift to a Chechen government led operation. This began with the "Chechenization" of a pro-Russian security force and slowly developed into other governmental systems. By March 2003 Chechnya held a referendum on a constitution and the following October elected the Moscow backed Akhmad Kadyrov. The election however was a farce for two reasons. The first was the Moscow backed opponent Kadyrov ran basically unopposed. The second reason was that Maskhadov was not removed by the whole Chechen parliament, as a result, he was still technically the president. 
202
The ability for the government to return some semblance of normalcy back to the population greatly assisted in the counter insurgency operations. Although the Russians never gained the trust of the Chechens, they were through their own methods, able to 
202
276
277
278
Although some tactical development occurred between the two Chechen conflicts, Russia did not begin an honest assessment until after the 2008 Georgian war. What the Georgia war demonstrated, was the need for a massive reform of the entire Russian military apparatus. Everything from the command structure to upgrades in weaponry and tactics needed development.
During Serdiukov's tenure, he replaced the military districts and command structure from the Soviet era. Russia substituted the former Soviet command structure for four strategic commands (north, south, east, west) which would be overall responsible for all soldiers including ministry of the interior officers and border guards. 
340
At the tactical level, the Russian military initiated changes designed to enable flexibility and enhance operational capability. The Russians accomplished this by mirroring western militaries. The core of the old Soviet armies, the division, has been replaced by a modular brigade which possesses internal combat support and combat service support assets. 
341
During a fight against a symmetrical opponent, communication and the ability for commanders to control their forces may be the difference between victory and defeat. 
340
341
What we see today with Russia, is an army in transition. Russian military and political leaders possess a vision for where the military is headed. However financial and organizational restrictions continue to hamper transformation. As a result, the Russian military continues to rely on the doctrine and methods of the Soviet army. Although still reliant, Russia is simultaneously developing command, control, communications, computers and intelligence systems that will make this method of warfare obsolete.
Russian senior leaders (Shoygu and Putin) are thus walking a fine line between the development of doctrine and material that support future war fighting efforts and the need based on manning and currently fielded equipment to fight utilizing the Soviet methods.
Finally, with the more assertive international stance taken by President Putin, the readiness and capability of Russia's military becomes more important. It is hence imperative for Russia's military to continue development and transition to a modern army. Understanding this is also imperative for western policy makers as a more assertive Russia will utilize the developing military capability to enhance their international policy.