# ID: 370034a743b847acaf8edec70831e652
# Title: The Influence of law on Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Strategists must understand the legal dynamics that are exerting an increasingly powerful influence on the legitimate use of violence. Law has become a weapon of war-a practice that has come to be termed as "lawfare"-used by weak states and non-state actors to block a strong state's legitimate use of armed force. Strong states also use lawfare to shape strategic narratives or to achieve objectives that not long ago might only have been achievable using force. Comparing how strong states and weak actors use lawfare reveals that the international legal arena is not a level playing field, and that only strong states are capable of practicing lawfare in a truly strategic sense. Strong states are adopting and adapting to the use of lawfare by weak states and non-state actors because strong states are better poised to extract continuing advantages from international law. No strong state will allow its vital interests to be litigated away.
"The power of law is that it legitimizes power."
-Ganesh Sitaraman, "The Counterinsurgent's Constitution: Law in the Age of Small Wars," 17.
Strategy, the British military historian Hew Strachan reminds us, "is a profoundly practical business: it is about doing things, about applying means to ends."
1
The thesis of this paper is that developments in international humanitarian law (IHL) are introducing fundamental changes to the international strategic operating environment, primarily by challenging the principle of sovereignty. The analysis is not intended to judge whether or not this trend is politically desirable, but to recognize that lethal force is but one of many factors affecting outcomes in war. Strategists and policymakers must understand the legal dynamics that are exerting an increasingly powerful influence on the legitimate use of violence. This paper will examine some of the unintended consequences of trends in international law that are likely to increasingly affect strategy. For example, Hew Strachan argues that the state no longer dominates the direction of war, in part because "international law has arrogated the decision to go to war, except in cases of national self-defence [sic], to the United Nations." 
2
Strategy and international law are inextricably linked by the growing reach of international laws, treaties, and tribunals. There has probably always been a connection between law and strategy. "Silent enim leges inter arma" noted Cicero, suggesting that law's influence in war has historically been weak. 
3
4
5
3 "In times of war, the laws fall silent." Cicero "Pro Milone", accessed December 15, 2015, http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/cicero/milo.shtml. 
4
5 Some scholars argue that Clausewitz's observations on international law do not necessarily reflect those of his age or of his model, Napoleon Bonaparte. A recent study of Napoleon's writings suggests he incorporated international law into his strategy, and "the extent to which he adhered to the limitations fixed by the law of nations has not been sufficiently stressed." See Bruno Colson, trans. Gregory Elliot, Napoleon: On War (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 37.
The origins of IHL are found in the desire to restrict the ruthless application of hard power. International law had its modern beginnings following a period of unrestricted warfare, when the states of Europe reflected on the consequences of the excessive military violence inflicted during the Thirty Year's War. In the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia, principles first set forth by Dutch lawyer Hugo Grotius helped usher in an age of limited wars. 
6
Prior to the Treaty of Westphalia, sovereignty was divided among a variety of actors who vied with the state over which would exercise basic political, legal, and military authorities. The state emerged from the struggle of the Thirty Year's War as the dominant actor in international affairs. From the beginnings of the Westphalian system to the end of the Cold War, the principle of state sovereignty stood as a pillar of international law that in theory limited the intervention of one state into the internal affairs of another state.
The sovereignty-based international order is now under stress as humanitarian principles affect the system. One former UN official warns that "sovereignty in its traditional state-centered form is being challenged throughout the international system." 7 The balance is being tested "between an emerging global norm of protecting people from violence and a traditional norm of states insisting on absolute sovereignty." 8 International law has evolved to exercise a limiting effect on sovereignty through institutions such as UN criminal tribunals that are not treaty-based and can act without prior agreement by the affected states. 
9
Humanitarian concerns in war also emerged after the Thirty Year's War as a curb on the extremes of violence. Humanitarian law incrementally grew in importance over the ensuing centuries, but progress accelerated in the wake of the highly destructive wars of the 19th and 20th centuries. The trend toward emphasis on humanitarian law over sovereignty has manifested itself in the UN's adoption of a principle called the Responsibility to Protect (R2P) that now declares it a potential duty for member states to intervene in the internal affairs of another sovereign state.
As humanitarian law principles receive greater emphasis, the relative importance of sovereignty becomes less clear. This has implications for strategy as various actors seek to take advantage of the shifting priorities. As one current strategist notes, "there is also a time for the ruthless application of hard power." 11 However, will the growth of humanitarian law allow states room for the legitimate application of hard power?
In this paper, changes in the international legal operating environment will be linked to some emerging developments in strategy. The first section will examine how weak powersgenerally non-state actors and small states-have developed strategies to exploit the shifting priorities of international law. Examples will include Central Asian states that use the norms and values of Western powers to shield their oppressive regimes, non-state actors such as Hamas that leverage humanitarian law to extract battlefield advantages from their opponents, and the use of 9 Dieter Grimm, Sovereignty: The Origin and Future of a Political and Legal Concept (New York: Columbia University Press, 2015), 86. 10 Ibid., 87.
11 James Stavridis, "NATO's Turn to Attack," Foreign Policy (November 14, 2015), accessed November 15, 2015, https://foreignpolicy.comtt/2015/11/14/natos-turn-to-attack-paristerrorist-isis/. lawsuits by private organizations and individuals to intimidate critics of Islamist causes. These practices are often cited as examples of "lawfare," a controversial term whose recent emergence exemplifies efforts to come to intellectual grips with the effects of international law on strategy.
The second part of this paper will address how the major powers themselves use international law in strategy. The concept of lawfare also applies to some of these state actions, but strong states practice lawfare differently than weaker powers. Lawfare for major states is used to support the legitimacy of military action because international law is one of the keys to the politics of justifying force. States also use lawfare as part of a more complex campaign to exploit the gap between war and peace by using measures short of war, to include the introduction of non-state military forces-including proxies, contractors, and Private Military Companies (PMC)-onto the battlefield. Examples of major states using lawfare include Russia's manipulation of international law to justify its actions in Ukraine, the growing use of PMCs and mercenaries in war, and the incorporation of lawfare into strategic planning such as the West's counterinsurgency doctrine and modern Chinese strategic theory.
The paper will conclude with observations on some suggested trends in the relationship between strategy and international law. Comparing how states and non-state actors approach lawfare reveals that strong states still retain significant strategic legal advantages. The primary challenge to strategists is to identify which strategic concepts and which deeply embedded assumptions about the nature of war must be re-examined in light of the ongoing transition in international law.
The shifting relationship between humanitarian law principles and sovereignty provides opportunities that state and non-state actors exploit in numerous ways, with some of the most creative methods being employed by weaker powers who view international law as a tool to extract otherwise unobtainable advantages from major powers. This section will discuss three different examples in which weaker powers have used international law in their relations with stronger powers. One example is Central Asia, where the post-Soviet states of Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan have used the West's own humanitarian and democratic principles against them to protect their regimes. A second example will examine Hamas' exploitation of IHL to gain battlefield advantages against Israeli Defense Forces in Gaza.
The final example is of individuals and private groups aligned with non-state actors engaged in warfare with the West who are using lawsuits to intimidate opponents, quash public criticism, and accuse Western governments of violating international laws. The strongest practitioners of this method have arguably been Islamist supporters. 
12
These states have found that by enacting and paying a minimal amount of lip service to token measures, such as laws to protect minorities, they can manage a certain degree of exploitation of these same minorities without outside interference. By avoiding the most outrageous acts that would trigger intervention, these governments articulate policies with enough rhetorical support to international humanitarian values to ensure they have a relatively free domestic hand.
One way in which Central Asian states balanced international demands with domestic concern was by conflating democratization with regime integrity in the wake of the Color Revolutions. In "reacting to the threat to regime integrity posed by so-called Western-style democracy and human rights appeals, the Central Asian states grafted a set of alternative norms, practices, and institutions, supported by Moscow and Beijing, which stressed the importance of sovereignty and cultural relativism." 13 Kazakhstan's leaders have "been one of the leading proponents of this cultural relativism." 14 Turkmenistan's president "painted with a broader brush, accusing all external efforts to raise issues of democracy or human rights as unacceptable infringements on Turkmen sovereignty." 15 By cloaking their interests in the language of international norms and values, these states sowed enough confusion over the true nature of their programs to block negative international reactions.
Central Asian states "strategically and expediently used the norms and justifications provided by foreign powers to guard and support their own domestic political practices." 
16
14 Ibid., 112 
15
16
18
Central Asian countries used the sovereign democracy concept to justify crackdowns on NGOs that allegedly threatened their unique domestic form of developing democracy and therefore managed to "de-universalize democratic standards and values." 
19
Primary targets were NGOs such as Freedom House and Amnesty International. 
20
NGOs between 2004 and
2007. 21
22
Such instrumentalization of law to achieve security objectives has come to be termed "lawfare." Lawfare is defined as "the strategy of using-or misusing-law as a substitute for traditional military means to achieve an operational objective." 23 Lawfare is a deliberate strategy "to gain advantage from one side's greater allegiance to international law and its processes." 24 Also considered as lawfare is the abuse of IHL to destroy public support for military operations while "making the US fight with one hand tied behind its back." 25 Lawfare is also described as the use of law as a weapon of war and an obstacle to the state's legitimate use of armed force. 26 
19 Cooley,
Great Games,
Local Rules,
112. 20
27
28
29
Of course not all legal advantages lie with the weaker powers, and some question whether labeling adverse legal actions as lawfare is an attempt by stronger states to intimidate weaker powers. To these critics, the lawfare concept is used by some governments to cast legitimate causes of action in a negative light. These critics view lawfare as a politically-charged word "coined within the United States military and subsequently adopted by right-wing ideologues as a way of stigmatizing legitimate recourse to legal remedies, particularly within an international law context." 30 From this perspective, the term lawfare, "is being mobilized by 
27
28
29
30
The US government, according to these critics, depicts some valid legal procedures with which it disagrees as somehow unpatriotic by stigmatizing them as lawfare. Critics charge that the "notion of lawfare has been developed to buttress this attitude. Lawfare, as it has been applied recently, is intended to intimidate and silence lawyers; it equates them with the enemy and suggests that their arguments contain at least a seed of treason."
33
34
36
To these observers of lawfare, "manipulation by belligerents of the law, for instance by hiding amongst the civilian population and leading the other party to commit possible violations of (international humanitarian law), is better described as a war crime than an act of lawfare." 
37
Weaker powers, however, have effectively targeted the legitimacy of military operations by alleging battlefield IHL violations. Examples of this type of lawfare have been used against Israel and its operations in the Gaza Strip. Israel in turn has responded with its own forms of lawfare. The use of lawfare has evolved to such an extent in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that Kittrie describes it as "the closest thing the world has to a lawfare laboratory." 
38
39
36 Ibid.
37 Jamie A. Williamson, "The Knight's Code, Not His Lance," Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law 43, no. 1 & 2 (Fall 2011): 448. 
38
Kittrie,
Lawfare,
197. 39
40
41
42
Critics complained that the report unjustly placed the blame and culpability for human rights violations heavily upon the Israelis. The report was simply "far more willing to draw adverse inferences of intentionality from Israeli conduct and statements than from comparable 
40
41 Milena Sterio, "The Gaza Strip: Israel, Its Foreign Policy, and the Goldstone Report," Case Western Reserve Journal of International 
Law 43, no. 1 & 2 (Fall 2011): 229. 42
Palestinian conduct and statements." 
43
44
45
46
47
48
51
52
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
The use of Western norms and institutions against the West itself is not new to Islamists.
For example, the so-called "Project" memorandums-notes from a 1991 Muslim Brotherhood meeting outlining their strategic goals for North America-advocate gradually using the West's own institutions against it, and "frequently uses the Western-based international legal system." 
68
65
67 Bel Trew, "London Underground," Foreign Policy (September 27, 2013), accessed November 30, 2015, http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/09/27/london-underground/.
historically "refused to recognize legal systems other than its own." 69 For example, "the modern international system, born of the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, relies on each state's willingness to recognize borders, however grudgingly. For the Islamic State, that recognition is ideological suicide." 
70
Strong states also use international law in a conflict and appear to do so with more strategic effect. Strong states are able to extract enduring strategic advantages from international law, although some states are more inclined to exploit these advantages than others. It is one of the conclusions of this paper that strong states are strategically resilient and remain capable of exhibiting rapid innovation and novel adaptations in the changing international legal environment because strong states can draw upon greater legal resources. their own narrative to justify using military force. Finally, strong states have developed alternatives to state-sponsored military forces that allow them to exploit some of the gaps in international law, granting them greater flexibility in the use of force. Like weaker powers and non-state actors, larger and more powerful states are also poised to take advantage of the transition in international law by alternatively emphasizing different principles to benefit themselves.
Lawfare is not restricted to weaker powers and non-state actors, and "modern State military forces do legitimately use the law to achieve military outcomes." 
72
73
74
Many states, with some notable exceptions, have yet to fully embrace the concept of lawfare. Exceptions include China, which systematically wages lawfare across the strategic operating environment, to include maritime and aviation lawfare, space lawfare, and cyberspace. 
75
72
76
77
78
79
80
84
85
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
Faced with a similar flotilla leaving Greece in June 2011, Israeli lawyers used legal measures to stop the ships from leaving port. The measures included threatening legal action against companies providing the ships essential services such as maritime insurance. In letters to these companies, Israeli lawyers referenced the US Supreme Court case of Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project to argue that providing services to the flotilla was illegal because it supported terrorism. The legal letters proved persuasive. By rendering the ships unable to secure the necessary services to gain permission to leave their Greek ports, Israel succeeded in stopping the 2011 flotilla without firing a shot. 
89
90
88
89
90
The concept of self-determination and its relationship with humanitarian interventions was central to Russia's justifications for intervening in Ukraine. The self-determination debate arose earlier when NATO intervened in Kosovo. NATO used legitimate humanitarian concerns as justification for trumping Serbia's sovereignty. The West's argument would later be turned on its head and used by Russia with respect to the Crimean crisis.
The Kosovo experience was an instructive one for Moscow. In his Kremlin speech on March 18, 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin cited the "Kosovo precedent -a precedent our Western colleagues created with their own hands in a very similar situation, when they agreed that the unilateral separation of Kosovo from Serbia, exactly what Crimea is doing now, was legitimate." 91 Moscow criticized the West over its legal justifications for the Kosovo war at the time and its subsequent independence, but found the arguments useful and "Russia adopted this rhetoric itself, regarding Crimea." 
92
93
92
93
94
95
98
95 Borgen,
"Law,
Rhetoric,
Strategy,
" 266. 96
97
98
of the North Atlantic Treaty because the "use of the rhetoric of self-determination can be used to befuddle and confuse treaty obligations and military strategy." 99 NATO faces a potential dilemma in considering how it will respond to an unclear Russian threat to seize a small slice of a NATO ally because to ignore such an act undermines Article 5, but to respond with force risks escalation over ambiguous stakes.
The use of alternatives to the state-sponsored military force, whether through proxies, by contractors, or via mercenaries, is another increasing phenomenon since the end of the Cold War.
Russia also used proxy forces in the Crimea and Ukraine and concealed the use of its own military forces to sow confusion and obscure its actions. Russia's motives probably were to obscure its involvement in what it wanted to depict as an internal uprising and exploit the gap between peace and war long enough to forestall a more decisive NATO response. By using proxy forces and denying the role of Russian troops, Russia succeeded in depicting the situation in Ukraine as a civil war such that Western media would often refer to Kiev's opponents as rebel forces without acknowledging the presence of Russian personnel. 100 Russia strove to "create doubts and anxieties on the part of western governments and the public whom they serve, knowing that no democratic country commits readily to support a cause fraught with ambiguity." 101 Russia's legal arguments didn't need to be completely convincing to everyone, it merely needed to foster enough uncertainty over the true nature of the conflict for long enough to create facts on the ground that favored its preferred outcome. argues that IHL unintentionally helps create a new market for hired military forces because a more humane emphasis in warfare is changing the nature of the Western way of war. 102 Using contracted forces instead of their own troops allows major powers to reduce their casualties "thereby giving the appearance of humanizing warfare." 
103
104
From one perspective, PMCs represent a weakening of the state's monopoly on the use of force, but from a different perspective using PMCs arguably shows that states have the resiliency and flexibility to adjust to the complexities of a changing legal operating environment.
State adaptability is also demonstrated by accommodating the use of law into doctrine and strategic thought. The West's doctrine for counterinsurgency operations exemplifies this adaptability, because humanitarian law in a counterinsurgency goes hand in glove with sound strategy. The nature of a counterinsurgency is by necessity more political because it is tied to winning the population over, and one way to lose popular support is to act against accepted international laws and norms. As US counterinsurgency doctrine states, "the international community must see a host nation's security force as a force for good that respects human rights 102 Sean McFate, The Modern Mercenary (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 44.
103 Ibid., 
45. 104
The focus of using law in the context of counterinsurgency is arguably more defensive in nature because it relies on avoiding IHL violations the enemy can exploit to undermine the legitimacy of military operations. Counterinsurgency strategy "aligns with the underlying goals of the laws of war because strategic self-interest pushes counterinsurgents to operate in accordance with the dictates of humanity." 
106
107
105
106
107 Ibid.
108 Ganesh Sitaraman, The Counterinsurgent's Constitution: Law in the Age of Small Wars, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 83. advantages from international law. States tend to exploit more sophisticated legal areas such as financial regulations that leverage a non-state actor's greater vulnerability to the disparate costs and benefits of compliance. States have the strategic culture to incorporate international law into their strategic thinking. States control the international law venue that makes the rules. Finally, strong states and weaker actors are both willing to manipulate, change, or simply ignore international law if necessary to further their vital interests. The unintended consequences of this behavior for the international order probably place strong states at risk more than other actors in the system.
First, central to how states and non-state actors leverage international law are their different approaches to legitimacy. International law is a system created by states and it is natural for states to pin their legitimacy to compliance with the agreed-upon rules. States, whether strong or weak, are more concerned with appearing to act in accordance with international law and to depict their use of force as justified and legitimate. Non-state actors use international law to cast doubt on the legitimacy of their state opponents rather than to bolster their own. Rather than defensive, the use of international law by non-state actors in these terms is almost entirely offensive. It is more difficult for states to use IHL in offensive lawfare against non-state actors, for many non-state actors do not consider all international norms as entirely valid. They find legitimacy through other means such as popular support, leading to a compliance-leverage disparity with respect to international law. At one extreme are the jihadists who dream of an entirely new system of international order based on Islam, and on the other extreme are those who push for humanitarian considerations to trump more traditional concepts of international law.
Chinese thinkers have already contemplated the different approaches various actors take toward lawfare. It is noted in Unrestricted Warfare that whether or not states acknowledge the law "often depends on whether or not they are beneficial to themselves." Another difference is that small states "hope to use the rules to protect their own interests, while large nations attempt to utilize the rules to control other nations. When the rules are not in accord with the interests of one's own nation, generally speaking, the breaking of the rules by small nations can be corrected by large nations in the name of enforcers of the law." 109 Weak powers, however, have little inherent power to enforce the rules, and look more often to the growing influence of international tribunals or to the court of public opinion for leverage over stronger powers. 
110
112
110
111
112
indispensable home-front support for a given war." 
113
Second, strong states have proved adept at exploiting the gaps in the international legal order as well as, perhaps better than, weak powers and non-state actors. NATO and the West successfully intervened in Kosovo and secured its independence. Russia has manipulated international law to justify absorbing part of a neighboring country. China is using lawfare to try to force changes in the customary international Law of the Sea. States have proved able to successfully use legal measures to help secure their strategic objectives.
There are some who argue that the US has yet to fully tap into its potential lawfare capabilities. The US does not possess a comprehensive approach to lawfare strategy as China or Israel have developed. Kittrie describes how parts of the US government have nevertheless successfully used legal techniques to achieve strategic results, such as the US Treasury and its use of international financial laws against Iran. 114 Also, some of the most effective US lawfare has been the work of private sector attorneys rather than the US government. Kittrie provides several examples of litigation using the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1990. A significant case was Boim vs Holy Land Foundation, in which attorneys working on behalf of the family of a US victim of terrorism secured a judgment against Islamic fundraising organizations, drying up a significant source of financial support to Hamas. 
115
113
114
Kittrie,
Lawfare,
111. 115 Ibid.,
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
343.
117
118
120
117 Kittrie,
Lawfare,
30. 118 Ibid.,
38. 119
120
121
For weaker powers, the shift in priorities from sovereignty to IHL can be a double-edged sword. On the one hand, humanitarian law principles can restrict the use of military methods used against weaker powers and provide political leverage against larger powers. On the other hand, the corresponding decrease in emphasis on sovereignty leaves weaker powers more vulnerable to intervention by a larger power professing to act out of noble-sounding ideals.
There are some critics who caution that "the case for humanitarian intervention is essentially misdirected. A history of black intentions clothed in white has tainted most possible applications of the doctrine." 
122
124
126
127
It is the leading theorist of war from the previous era who probably gives us the best reason for questioning the assumptions of his day. Clausewitz observed that the "first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish by that test the kind of war on which they are embarking, neither mistaking it for, nor trying to turn it into, something which is alien to its nature." 
128
125
52. 126
International law has come to play an expanded role in the use of force. This expanded role has elevated evolving humanitarian law concepts over the longstanding preference for sovereignty, and has contributed to the state losing its uncontested control over the direction of war. The "state therefore has an interest in re-appropriating the control and direction of war." As Hew Strachan notes "that is the purpose of strategy." 129 Arguments about international law are part of diplomacy, and "diplomatic arguments are a means to an end. They are part of a strategy." 130 For this reason, in the tight relationship between law and politics, law has a Clausewitzian link to war. Competitors such as Russia, who view international law as a weapon show that "to simply ignore legal argument is to cede a strategy, to concede multiple positions." 131 To leave legal arguments unchallenged not only cedes strategy, it cedes a guiding hand in the shaping of the strategic operating environment, and perhaps the nature of contemporary strategy itself. As one study of Russian legal maneuvers on Ukraine concludes, "to 
129
130
131
132
First, the evolving nature of international law is imposing new obligations on the state.
Responsibility to Protect (R2P) is a relatively new international concept that emerged out of the UN in the aftermath of the wars of the 1990s and the world's failure to prevent genocidal acts R2P asserts that states have a responsibility to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing. R2P holds that "should a state fail to meet this responsibility, the United Nations General Assembly has recommended that the Security Council should step in to provide protection, including by military measures if necessary." 
135
There is a growing expectation that states and alliances will formally incorporate humanitarian law principles into their strategic planning. This has already been explicitly called for by the UN under R2P. The UN declared that to uphold R2P in practice, member states should declare "atrocity crime prevention and response a national priority, undertake a national risk assessment and articulate an actionable whole-of-government strategy for both domestic and international policy." 137 States are not only expected to intervene when necessary in the affairs of other states for humanitarian reasons, they are now also expected to incorporate these humanitarian concerns into the development of their national strategy.
Second, some assumptions and ideas about strategy probably have to be re-examined in light of a legal environment increasingly rooted in humanitarian principles. For example, strategy historian Beatrice Heuser has opined that the Clausewitzian dictum on compelling an opponent to do our will may not be as suitable for an era when there is less emphasis on crushing an opponent and more emphasis on the post-conflict transition to peace. She questions whether "we would do well to discard the notion derived from Clausewitz that the aims of strategy should be to 'impose 
135 Doyle,
The Question of Intervention,
7. 136 Ibid.,
113. 137
139
Heuser notes that one of the historical trends in strategy is thinking about strategy in relation to the peace one wants to achieve characterized by the post-1945 shift back to concerns of humanitarian awareness. 
140
142
International boundaries and lines on a map mean little to opponents who do not accept the state as a legitimate construct and think in terms of a universal transnational struggle.
The changes in the legal operating environment outlined above compel strategists to consider the growing implications of international law and lawfare. China political analyst Dean Cheng suggests several strategic considerations for the US regarding lawfare. For example, Cheng advises that the US should try to mesh "legal warfare countermeasures into U.S. operational planning and training." 143 Specifically, at "the strategic level, the growing Chinese interest in legal warfare highlights the need to examine new international commitments carefully." 
144
146
143 Cheng,
Winning Without Fighting,
10. 144
for defensive lawfare and its continued lack of any strategy and structure for offensive lawfare are clearly and unnecessarily self-defeating." 
147
148
78 Dean Cheng, 80 Ibid., 51.
78 Dean Cheng, 80 Ibid., 51.
Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2013), 155.2 Ibid., 42.
Hugo Grotius, The Rights of War and Peace, ed. Steven C. Neff (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), xiv-xxxv.
Michael Doyle, The Question of Intervention: John Stuart Mill & the Responsibility to Protect (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2015), ix.
Ibid.   
Brooke Goldstein and Aaron Eitan Meyer, "Legal Jihad: How Islamist Warfare Tactics are Targeting Free Speech," ILSA Journal of International and Comparative Law vol. 15:2 (2009): 395.
Scott Horton, "The Dangers of Lawfare," Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law 43, no. 1 & 2 (Fall 2011): 168.
David Luban, "Carl Schmitt and the Critique of Lawfare." Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law 43, no. 1 & 2 (Fall 2011): 462.
Clarion Project, The Muslim Brotherhood, 16, accessed November 22, 2015, http://www.clarionproject.org/sites/default/files/Muslim-Brotherhood-Special-Report.pdf.
Charles Dunlap, "Lawfare: A Decisive Element of 21 st Century Conflicts?" Joint Forces Quarterly 54 (3rd Quarter 2009): 35.
Kittrie, Lawfare, 165.   
Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument With Historical  Illustrations, 3rd ed. (New York: Basic Books, 2000), xi.
"Human rights movements frequently view sovereignty as morally unacceptable because it places national interests above universal values." SeeGrimm, Sovereignty, 123.    
Clausewitz, On War, 88.   
Michael A. Newton, "Illustrating Illegitimate Lawfare," Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law 43, no. 1 & 2 (Fall 2011): 261.
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty, The Responsibility to Protect (Canada: International Development Research Centre, December, 2001), 11.
Samantha Power, A Problem From Hell:  America and the Age of Genocide,(New  York: Basic Books, 2002), 503-516.   
Kittrie, Lawfare, 96.   
Kittrie, Lawfare, 30.    
Clausewitz, On War, 260.   
Leadership Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12