# ID: 37098e1755c446c3841640252ec2a3a3
# Title: Artificial Intelligence: The Means to Defeat Low Yield Battlefield Nuclear Weapons
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
History provides an accurate picture of nations who wield technological advancements to be victorious in war or deter a conflict.
Former Defense Secretary Mark Esper understood the importance of technological advancement when he stated, "History informs us that those who are first to harness once-in-a-generation technologies often have a decisive advantage on the battlefield for years to come.
"0 F 1 What will be the next technology that will change how wars are fought and won?
Adversaries such as Russia and China see the next technological advancement that defeats America to be low yield battlefield nuclear weapons (LYBNWs).1 F 2 Russia and China envision a scenario where American ground forces are maneuvering on the battlefield with limited air defense protection and terrain channeling them into a massive kill box.
Russia or China will then use LYBNWs with a mixture of tactical ballistic missiles (TBMs) to target American ground forces and key areas such as wet gap crossings, support areas and logistical lines.2 F 3 Leaders in the American military have focused on a broad range of technological advancements from long-range fires, tactical nuclear, hypersonic missiles, drone swarm, and space capabilities.
With so many new technologies crowding the battlespace one capability that has attracted the interest of the military and civilian sectors is artificial intelligence (AI).
In the Army, AI is an underdeveloped weapon system that can be the next technological advancement in war.
AI will give the US Army the means and advantage on the battlefield, just like the cannon and airpower.
Additionally, AI will assist the US Army in detecting, classification, and nullifying LYBNWs in a large-scale fight.