# ID: 37162af50b1e4683be6b23430fbf1dfd
# Title: Military Trends and the Future of Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Where will the next war occur? Who will fight in it? Why will it occur? How will it be fought? Researchers with RAND Project AIR FORCE's Strategy and Doctrine Program attempted to answer these questions about the future of warfare-specifically, those conflicts that will drive a U.S. and U.S. Air Force response-by examining the key geopolitical, economic, environmental, geographic, legal, informational, and military trends that will shape the contours of conflict between now and 2030. This report on military trends and the future of warfare is one of a series that grew out of this effort. The other reports in the series are
This report examines some of the most significant factors shaping the future of warfare over the next ten to 15 years: changes in the size, quality, and character of military forces available to the United States and its potential adversaries. In it, we follow sponsor guidance to focus on overarching trends rather than to provide an adversary-byadversary analysis, and we avoid trends covered in other volumes of this series. Instead, this volume identifies six significant trends that will shape who and where the United States is most likely to fight in the future, how those wars will be conducted, and why they will occur. 
1
S
As the table indicates, the risks of war over the next ten to 15 years will derive largely from perceptions of shifts in regional correlations of force. With U.S. conventional forces reduced in size, China-and, to a lesser extent, Russia-will narrow the qualitative gap and might calculate that the United States lacks sufficient capacity to respond effectively. China and Russia, however, likely will prefer to achieve their objectives "on the cheap"-i.e., with the least cost in international reproach and the lowest risk of provoking military conflict with the United States. Instead, both likely will ramp up their use of gray-zone tactics-employing incremental aggression, information warfare, proxy forces, and covert special operations forces to obtain their regional objectives but staying below the U.S. threshold of conventional response.
Iran and North Korea do not have-and are unlikely to developcapabilities to match those of the United States and its regional allies. Consequently, these nations are developing selected asymmetric capabilities to deter U.S. intervention and developing gray-zone strategies for obtaining their aggressive objectives. If such strategies ultimately lead to war, U.S. forces will need to find ways to neutralize these asymmetric capabilities and destroy substantial portions of those adversaries' large but less-sophisticated forces.
The use of substate actors as proxy fighters in these strategies will continue a long-term trend of weakening the state's monopoly on violence in many areas of the world. As aggressive states arm individuals and groups in regions they seek to destabilize or annex, weaker states will have difficulty containing the resulting violence and likely will turn to the United States for support.
Developments in military applications of AI might help U.S. forces obtain objectives in both conventional and unconventional operations, thereby mitigating some of these trends. However, these capabilities come with serious risks that will need to be managed, and the United States will not have a monopoly on access to them. U.S. leaders will need to find ways to maximize the benefits they offer while mitigating their inevitable risks. 
The 2018 National Defense Strategy proclaims that the Department of Defense (DoD) is at a critical juncture. It argues that "we are emerging from a period of strategic atrophy, aware that our competitive military advantage has been eroding," and that "inter-state strategic competition, not terrorism, is now the primary concern in U.S. national security." 
1
After briefly outlining the methodology used in this analysis, we identify six significant trends. The first is the diminishing size of U.S. conventional military forces that has occurred throughout the post-Cold War era. This phenomenon is particularly worrisome in juxtaposition with the second and third trends, which are the increasing modernization and professionalization of the military forces of near-peer competitors and the fact that second-tier powers are focusing on selective asymmetric capabilities to offset superior U.S. and allied forces. The fourth trend we examine is how potential opponents are using gray-zone tactics, such as proxy groups and covert military forces, to obtain objectives while staying below the threshold of U.S. military response. This contributes to a fifth trend, a weakening of the state's monopoly on violence. Finally, we consider a sixth trend, one that could change much about how wars are fought in the future: the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) and related advances in military technology. Taken together, these trends suggest the true meaning of an "eroding" competitive military advantage: The real danger for the joint force is not that it will be replaced in 2030 as the world's dominant military actor but that it will be spread so thin across regions, adversaries, and threats that it will lose its dominant position in any single type of conflict. This risk of defeat-by-piecemeal is, perhaps, particularly acute for the U.S. Air Force (USAF) because air, space, and cyber power will likely play crucial roles regardless of the region, adversary, or type of conflict with which the United States might engage in the future.
With an almost infinite number of possible trends that could shape the future of warfare and only a finite amount of space for this report, we applied three limiting factors to select the trends on which we focus. First, at the sponsors' request, we avoided a strictly adversarybased analysis-looking at China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, and terrorist groups individually. Instead, we focused on broader, crosscutting trends. 
2
3
The six trends discussed here still do not represent a comprehensive list of all the military trends that could affect the future of warfare. For example, we discuss U.S. and adversary military trends but largely exclude allied military trends. 
4
5
One of the most direct ways of measuring a state's military power is to consider the size of its conventional forces. By this simplistic metric, the United States is visibly less powerful than it was at the end of the Cold War and could grow even weaker in the future. Of course, decreases in the size of U.S. forces are partially offset by improved military quality during the same period because advances in technology have made each U.S. force element considerably more lethal than it was a quarter of a century ago. However, "quantity has a quality all its own," as an oft-repeated adage goes. No matter how capable a state's military forces are, smaller numbers cannot provide the degree of presence across multiple regions that larger numbers can. The composition of a state's military forces is also important; as we demonstrate in this chapter, U.S. forces have shifted in composition in ways that could leave them less prepared for emerging challenges in the coming ten to 15 years.
Classical military theory and a substantial body of empirical research suggest that military force size affects not only the likelihood of war, but also the chances of victory. Prussian military theorist Carl von Clausewitz emphasized that in tactics and strategy, "superiority of numbers is the most common element in victory." 
1
3
4
5
After the end of the Cold War, the U.S. military shrank dramatically. One of the most visible signs of these reductions in capacity is the total number of U.S. active-duty military personnel (see Figure 2.1). With the demise of the Soviet Union and no credible state threat on the horizon, U.S. leaders and the public alike were eager to draw down excess military forces and enjoy the "peace dividend" expected from reduced military spending. 
7
2
As important as the overall numbers, however, is where these troops have been located. At the end of the Cold War, the United States drew down its overseas presence, especially in Europe and, to a lesser extent, in Asia. Without the Soviet Union, Europe seemingly faced little conventional threat and disbanding units from overseas was an easier political hurdle than closing bases in the United States and taking jobs out of congressional districts. After the start of the Global War on Terrorism, overseas presence went back up, especially in the Middle East. After Russia's invasion of Crimea in 2014, the United States began returning forces to Europe. Nonetheless, as depicted in Figure 
2
8
2
9
9
2 0 1 6  2 0 1 4  2 0 1 2  2 0 1 0  2 0 0 8  2 0 0 6  2 0 0 4  2 0 0 2  2 0 0 0  1 9 9 8  1 9 9 6  1 9 9 4  1 9 9 2  1 9 9
10
10
2 0 1 6  2 0 1 4  2 0 1 2  2 0 1 0  2 0 0 8  2 0 0 6  2 0 0 4  2 0 0 2  2 0 0 0  1 9 9 8  1 9 9 6  1 9 9 4  1 9 9 2  1 9 9 0  2 0 1 6  2 0 1 4  2 0 1 2  2 0 1 0  2 0 0 8  2 0 0 6  2 0 0 4  2 0 0 2  2 0 0 0  1 9 9 8  1 9 9 6  1 9 9 4  1 9 9 2  1 9 9 0   2 0 1 6  2 0 1 4  2 0 1 2  2 0 1 0  2 0 0 8  2 0 0 6  2 0 0 4  2 0 0 2  2 0 0 0  1 9 9 8  1 9 9 6  1 9 9 4  1 9 9 2  1 9 9 0  2 0 1 6  2 0 1 4  2 0 1 2  2 0 1 0  2 0 0 8  2 0 0 6  2 0 0 4  2 0 0 2  2 0 0 0  1 9 9 8  1 9 9 6  1 9 9 4  1 9 9 2  1 9 9
Importantly, this shift in size, posture, and composition of the U.S. military was not accompanied by corresponding reductions in U.S. military commitments. To the contrary, some U.S. alliancessuch as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization-expanded during the post-Cold War period, and the frequency of U.S. use of military force increased after the Cold War period. 
12
13
DoD has recognized this trend and plans to reverse it. Stating that "great power competition is now the primary focus," DoD's fiscal year (FY) 2019 budget request petitions Congress for $74 billion over that provided in the FY 2018 continuing resolution (CR), which would amount to 10-percent real growth in defense spending. 
15
16
2
With multiple competing domestic spending priorities and a burgeoning budget deficit, getting congressional approval for this spending increase and then sustaining political support for higher defense budgets over the long term is by no means a foregone conclusion. On the other hand, a broader examination of DoD spending in the post-Cold War era indicates that spending cuts in the past five years have not been as draconian as Figure 
2
2
6-1.   2 0 1 6  2 0 1 4  2 0 1 2  2 0 1 0  2 0 0 8  2 0 0 6  2 0 0 4  2 0 0 2  2 0 0 0  1 9 9 8  1 9 9 6  1 9 9 4  1 9 9 2  1 9 9
Personnel and operation and maintenance are necessary and inescapable burdens, but given DoD's request for a substantial increase in spending in FY 2019 to restore capabilities and better prepare for great-power competition, it is instructive to examine how DoD plans to allocate its budget in the out years. Figure 
2
The sand chart on the left side of Figure 
2
All of this suggests that it will be difficult to restore conventional warfighting capabilities lost in the post-Cold War era, even if Congress approves DoD budget requests through 2023. The majority of the defense budget is devoted to supporting military personnel and operations and maintenance, areas in which costs are relatively stable. Costs would decline somewhat if the United States were to end or reduce its involvement in overseas contingencies, but costs would probably need to increase for DoD to add conventional forces. DoD projections for budgets beyond FY 2019 do not reflect substantial increases in funding for procurement and RDT&E, the essential areas for restoring conventional warfighting capabilities and preparing for future challenges. It will take persistence and political will to develop and maintain a spending program that provides the capabilities that might be needed in the coming ten to 15 years. 19
With fewer conventional capabilities available, U.S. forces are stretched thinner across regions in which the United States has important interests than they were during the Cold War. Today, the United States faces five principal competitors-China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, and terrorist groups-all simultaneously challenging the United States in different parts of the globe. 
20
19
21
22
23
Some of the declines in capacity and forward presence can be partially offset by improvements in capability-but only to a certain extent. First, U.S. defense strategy prioritizes forward posture as central to deterring adversaries and reassuring allies. 
24
The United States has long relied on the technological superiority and higher standard of training and professionalization to offset numerical inferiority. Relying on these advantages, U.S. forces, armed with "transformational" capabilities-such as stealth technology, precisionguided weapons, force-enhancement support from space, and systems networking-defeated Iraq and Serbia so handily that former nearpeer competitors China and Russia were prompted to begin reforming their antiquated and poorly trained forces. These efforts took considerable time to bear fruit, particularly in Russia, but they have finally begun to manifest and could have serious implications for USAF in the next ten to 15 years.
Over most of its history, the People's Republic of China has relied on a military establishment built around a massive army featuring light infantry forces. As late as the mid-1990s, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) consisted of approximately 2.9 million soldiers, most of them poorly trained and operating Chinese versions of early Cold War-era Soviet equipment. China's navy and air force were similarly limited in capability, with submarines and aircraft based on 1950s-vintage Soviet designs. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
The Russian Federation inherited a military establishment of considerable size when the Soviet Union dissolved in 1992, but the political, social, and fiscal realities of the post-Cold War environment soon forced Russian leaders to attempt institutional reforms. The Russian government made several attempts over the next decade and a half to reduce the size of its military establishment and modernize its forces, but all of these efforts failed, largely because of political strife and financial constraints. The Russian armed forces remained bloated, antiquated, poorly trained, and poorly equipped.
This changed dramatically after the 2008 war with Georgia. Although Russian leaders trumpeted their victory in the conflict, the poor performance of their military forces provided an impetus for undertaking aggressive military reforms. With unusual candor, government and military officials from then-President Dmitry Medvedev on down conceded that Russia's armed forces "were in need of a mas-sive overhaul."
7
8
9
10
11
12
Another objective of the reforms was to improve the quality of Russia's military personnel. Russia entered the Georgia war with a topheavy force of far too many officers and not enough properly trained enlisted personnel. After the war, Serdyukov reduced the armed forces from 1.2 million in 2008 to fewer than 1 million in 2012, with the bulk of the cuts coming from the officer corps, which was reduced from 350,000 to 150,000. Meanwhile, the reformers set out to develop a corps of skilled noncommissioned officers (NCOs) to take up leadership positions in technical specialties, such as motor rifle, reconnaissance, and transportation. 
13
14
15
16
Russian leaders have made spotty progress in obtaining these goals. Flush with cash from soaring oil and gas prices from 2009 to 2014, Moscow committed an increasing amount of Russia's rising gross domestic product to military spending, going from an estimated 
13
14
15
16
17
With the collapse of oil and gas prices in 2014 and the economic sanctions imposed for its behavior in Ukraine, it remains to be seen whether Russia can sustain its military spending in the years ahead. Nevertheless, Russia's military performance in Syria and Ukraine suggest that its forces are much more capable than they were during the Georgia war. Russian forces have demonstrated a notable ability to conduct joint expeditionary operations integrating fixed-and rotarywing operations and missile strikes with ground forces, although the range and complexity of the operations they have undertaken do not yet compare with those that U.S. forces can conduct.
China's military capabilities are clearly on an upward trajectory. The PLA has a well-articulated military doctrine, and the Chinese government provides the military with ample economic resources despite facing increasing levels of debt. China should be expected to continue adding precision-guided missiles, advanced combat aircraft, and modern submarines and surface combatants to its arsenal, and it will soon be adding more-exotic weapons as well. In June 2017, China announced that it had developed a hypersonic ramjet that could be mated with a wide range of weapon systems. 
18
19
20
21
22
Russia is also developing hypersonic missiles,
23
19
20
21 Heginbotham et al., 2015, pp. 34-35
22
24
25
26
27
28
24
29
Implications for the U.S. Air Force and the Future of Warfare
The United States has long relied on the qualitative edge that its military forces possess to offset local numerical advantages enjoyed by regional adversaries. That edge is progressively narrowing-particularly in the Western Pacific, where Chinese forces have developed a doctrine to defeat U.S. force projection efforts and the advanced systems needed to put it into action. The risks that this shift in the balance of power presents are obvious: It will be more difficult to deter China from acting aggressively in disputed territories around its periphery and more difficult to defeat Chinese forces if deterrence fails. This is particularly threatening to the USAF, with assets concentrated on several large bases on the Japanese islands of Honshu and Okinawa within range of hundreds of precisionguided MRBMs and even greater numbers of air-and ground-launched cruise missiles. USAF and naval air power would also be challenged by increasingly capable SAMs and air-defense fighters in the event of war with China. The addition of hypersonic weapons will further complicate these challenges.
The implications for the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Europe are less clear. Russia has improved its forces significantly since 2008, but its force numbers are still only a fraction of those of NATO when viewed as a whole and possess less capability. 
31
29
30
Russia, nonetheless, will continue to possess several military advantages over NATO, particularly when operating close to its borders in its "near abroad." Many European countries shed their heavy mechanized forces to better conduct expeditionary counterterrorism operations, but Russia has retained the ability to conduct combined arms maneuver warfare. 
32
34
35
The modernization and professionalization of the Chinese and Russian forces should drive further USAF investments in several 32 Michael Shurkin, The Abilities of the British, French, and German Armies to Generate and Sustain Armored Brigades in the Baltics, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1629-A, 2017; Boston et al., 2018, p. 5.   33 Boston et al., 2018, pp. 8-18.   34 
Shlapak and Johnson, 2016. 35
36
In the meantime, China and Russia are more likely to pursue their objectives along the lines of a trend discussed in Chapter Five: operating in the gray zone and relying on incremental aggression or using covert military forces. While the military forces of near-peer competitors are becoming more capable, Iran's and North Korea's conventional military capabilities are, in many respects, stagnating. To compensate for these problems, both countries have developed asymmetric strategies and niche capabilities in efforts to offset superior U.S. and allied forces. This will likely be a growing trend in the next ten to 15 years.
The Islamic Republic of Iran maintains a formidable conventional military force on paper. With more than 1,500 main battle tanks, more than 6,798 artillery pieces, 334 combat capable aircraft, more than 300 naval surface combatants, 21 submarines, and more than a halfmillion active-duty personnel, Iran's military capabilities are among the most formidable in the Middle East. 
1
Balance, Vol. 118, 2018
, pp. 333-337. 2 IISS, 2018, p. 337.
3
4
Similarly, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has sizable conventional military forces, but its military capabilities are also eroding under the weight of extended economic sanctions. Despite an estimated 1.28 million active-duty military personnel, North Korea's conventional military is an increasingly hollow force with underfed soldiers and obsolete equipment. 
5
6
7
8
4
To compensate for their conventional vulnerabilities, both powers have developed asymmetric strategies and niche capabilities that they are likely to rely on increasingly over the next ten to 15 years. Iran exploits its geographical proximity to the Persian Gulf and Strait of Hormuz to hold U.S. interests at risk and to threaten the security of other actors transiting those waters. Iran has developed a strategy of using its craft to sow mines in critical waterways, attack ships transiting there, and even conduct swarm attacks on U.S. Navy warships if necessary. Iran also has expanded its area-denial capabilities. For instance, it acquired a Russian S-300 anti-aircraft system to deny access to the airspace in selected areas (such as the capital, its nuclear development sites, and the Strait of Hormuz) and has invested in a variety of other weapons, from advanced mines to anti-ship missiles, to target vessels transiting the Strait. 
9
10
9
10
11
12
13
14
The need to counter Iran's and North Korea's asymmetric strategies will put specialized demands on U.S. forces. Given the high lethality of some of these capabilities (particularly North Korea's chemical and nuclear weapons-and possibly Iran's, if it develops comparable weapons in the next ten to 15 years), the United States will need to focus on developing tools to neutralize them. U.S. forces will need to employ these capabilities early on in a conflict, before the regime can strike the United States or one of its regional allies and partners. Iran's and North Korea's asymmetric investments pose other challenges, too. The United States will need more-advanced antimine and antisubmarine warfare capabilities, and the Navy will need ship-defense weapons that can quickly acquire, target, and destroy small, fast-moving vessels, shifting from one target to the next at high rates of speed. The USAF will need more-advanced electronic warfare, longer-range standoff weapons to defeat advanced IADS, more capability to strike deeply buried facilities, and more capable ISR-including, potentially, more special operations forces-to locate chemical and nuclear storage facilities, hidden artillery, and mobile missile launchers. And of course, all U.S. forces will need more-effective missile defenses.
Since the beginning of the post-Cold War era, U.S. adversaries could not directly challenge U.S. conventional military power. Instead, they developed gray-zone strategies, employing such tactics as proxy groups and covert military forces to obtain objectives while staying below the threshold of U.S. military response. The need to counter gray-zone strategies will be a significant challenge for the United States in the next ten to 15 years.
China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea have all developed different flavors of gray-zone strategies based on their own interests and abilities, but they share one common factor: They are all pursuing interests that threaten the United States or its regional allies. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
12
March 15, 2016, p. 2. 13
14
15
17
All four of these states will likely continue using gray-zone strategies in the coming years, but they will do so for different reasons. Iranian and North Korean conventional capabilities are deteriorating, so gray-zone strategies are the most promising alternatives. Tehran, in particular, has found these strategies to be very successful. Thanks to U.S. intervention and Iranian behind-the-scenes influence, Iran's most threatening neighbor, the Baathist Sunni government of Iraq, was replaced with an Iran-friendly Shiite government, and the most recent parliamentary election in Iraq has brought to power the political party of longtime U.S. adversary Shia militia leader Moqtada al-Sadr. 
18
19
20
21
China and Russia will also probably continue their gray-zone strategies, although both states' conventional capabilities will likely grow during the next ten to 15 years-especially China's. Neither nation relishes a direct military confrontation with the United States, making gray-zone operations more attractive for anything short of an extreme contingency. China's tactic of incremental aggression in the South China Sea has been quite successful. China first began dredging sand onto reefs to build the artificial islands in support of its territorial claims there in 2014. In 2015, President Xi Jinping assured then-President Barack Obama that China had no intent to militarize the islands. But by 2017, China was building infrastructure on these islands capable of supporting military aircraft. Since then, the PLA Air Force has landed fighters on some of the islands and installed radar-jamming equipment and missiles there. 
22
23
Russia has been less successful in Eastern Ukraine but will also probably continue using gray-zone strategies. When conflicts involving Soviet-supported (and, later, Russian-supported) separatist movements in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and the Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions of Georgia bogged down in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Moscow mediated cease-fires between the belligerents, creating "frozen conflicts" in which active fighting was suspended without peace agreements. When Georgia took steps toward joining NATO in 2008, Russia resumed its agitation in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and ultimately intervened with conventional military forces on the separatists' behalf when Georgia attempted to rein in the wayward regions. It is debatable whether Eastern Ukraine is now a frozen conflict-repeated cease-fire agreements have failed and low-level fighting continues-but separatist forces effectively control the Donbas region and analysts observe that Russia can conserve its resources and wait for better conditions to escalate the fight. 
24
May 3, 2018
. 23 Felke, 2018. 24
both Estonia and Latvia have substantial concentrations of ethnic Russians living in their major cities and their eastern counties along the Russian border, with the density of Russian speakers exceeding 80 percent in Ida-Viru county in northeast Estonia. 
25
26
27
Just as each opponent employs its own particular gray-zone approach, strategies to counter these activities will need to be tailored to the challenges presented. In the South China Sea, this will entail continuing to conduct-and possibly increasing-freedom-of-navigation missions in the waters and airspace that China illegally claims as its territory. In northeast Asia, South Korean forces-and U.S. forces, if attackedwill need to respond to each of the North's violent provocations with proportionate force, communicating to Pyongyang that these attacks will not break the allies' will to resist and will result in costly punishment. Defeating Russia's gray-zone strategy will require develop-25 Aimar Altosaar, "Ida-Viru County and Russia," Maailma Vaade, No. 24, 
March 5, 2018. 26
27
28
All of these strategies will also put significant burdens on air and space support for high-quality ISR. Special operators and proxy groups might think they are invisible when they shed their uniforms, but cyber and signals intelligence can identify organizations and command relationships, and imagery can monitor the movement of vehicles and weapons across borders and waterways. 
29
The rise in gray-zone strategies will also place new demands on the other parts of the joint force. Given the prominence of cyberattacks in gray-zone strategies, cyber defenses will be increasingly important for neutralizing these threats. Furthermore, given that many gray-zone strategies operate in the murky world between conflict and criminality, the joint force will need to develop mechanisms to better coordinate its actions with law enforcement agencies, and there will be increased demand for forces that straddle both worlds. In the maritime domain, this could result in newfound importance for the U.S. Coast Guard. On land, this might increase the utility of gendarmerie-type forces. Above all, gray-zone strategies often focus on manipulating the information domain, so the joint force will need to rethink how it conducts information operations to be better able to expose; publicize; and, ultimately, counter these subversive actions.
According to Max Weber, a state is "a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory." 
1
2
The weakening or collapse of state authority in several regions of the world since the end of the Cold War has resulted in a proliferation of weapons to nonstate actors, fueling political and civil violence. This violence can be particularly intense when substate groups have access to heavy weaponry or are supported by outside actors, as occurred in the Balkans, Central Asia, and the Horn of Africa in the 1990s and as has occurred in Africa, the Middle East, southeastern Europe, and Central and South Asia since 2001. 
3
4
5
6
The democratization of violence will continue over the next ten to 15 years. If trends in state failure from the past decade persist, substate violence will not decline appreciably. On the other hand, the data suggest that it probably will not get much worse. As we have explained, the democratization of violence is closely tied to the inability of states to effectively govern their territories. As Figure 
6
This figure displays data from the Fragile States Index (called the "Failed States Index" until 2014), which provides an annual measure of each state's level of fragility based on quantitative and qualitative assessments of a dozen indicators across cohesion, economic, political, and social dimensions. States are scored and sorted into categories ranging from "very high alert" (the uppermost at-risk category) to "very sustainable" (the most stable condition). Most states in the "very high alert" category are in open civil war or have governments that are failing in multiple dimensions. In 2018, these states were the Dem-ocratic Republic of Congo, Central African Republic, Syria, Yemen, Somalia, and South Sudan. 
7
If trends from the past dozen years continue, we should expect about the same numbers of states failing or struggling to maintain order in the next ten to 15 years as we have seen in the past. This suggests that the democratization of violence in the less-developed world will continue at about the same rates. Although there is a strong correlation between state fragility and the democratization of violence, 
7 Messner et al., 2018
As early as 1976, the Central Intelligence Agency identified transnational terrorism as a rising phenomenon, defining it as terrorism "carried out by basically autonomous nonstate actors, whether or not they enjoy some degree of support from sympathetic states." 8 Indeed, as Figure 
6
The rise and fall of the frequency of these attacks reflect changing world conditions and changing motives driving the violence. Most of the incidents from 1970 to 1992 were state-sponsored attacks related to proxy wars between the United States and Soviet Union or other Cold War-related substate conflicts. When the Cold War ended with the fall of the Soviet Union, the frequency of terrorist attacks declined, only to increase again with the rise of Islamic extremism after 2000. Although many incidents in the latter era took place in Afghanistan and Iraq, most of them did not (as the figure indicates). Still, a common thread running through all of these eras is that most terrorist attacks are related to ongoing conflicts. This is confirmed in Figure 
6
As the figure indicates, the numbers of terrorist attacks occurring in conflict countries and nonconflict countries were comparable from 
8 Central Intelligence Agency, International and Transnational Terrorism: Diagnosis and Prognosis, PR 76 10030, April 1976
6
Groups carrying out dangerous transnational terrorist attacks often do not originate in the most fragile states, nor do they launch their attacks from these states. Furthermore, the targets of these attacks are often located in the most-developed nations. Stewart Patrick argues that states categorized as mid-range in the Index-those typically more Total terrorist attacks capable than the states most at risk but less capable than the mostdeveloped nations-are actually the ones that provide the best launching pads for transnational terrorism. 
9
9
Another reason that incidents of substate violence could occur more in the next ten to 15 years than trends in the Fragile States Index would suggest is because third-party states could become more involved in regional conflicts. As already mentioned, third-party state involvement was the source of much of the substate violence in the late Cold War era. That violence subsided when the Cold War's ideological competition ended and interstate conflict declined. The first decade of the post-Cold War era was a time of increased cooperation between permanent members of the United Nations Security Council that increased the effectiveness of mechanisms for conflict management, such as peace operations and international dispute mediation. Although an analysis of changing global relationships is beyond the scope of this report, if relations between the great powers were to deteriorate in the next ten to 15 years, the Security Council could become paralyzed, mechanisms for conflict management could break down, and states could increase their involvement in regional conflicts. That would likely result in democratization of violence at higher levels than trends in the Fragile States Index would suggest. 
10
10
11
12
13
cisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it." 
1
2
3
4
5
6
The most publicized advances in robotics have probably been in the field of self-driving vehicles, but robots are also being employed in a host of other areas, such as industrial assembly; entertainment; and operations in environments hostile to human life, such as outer space, areas of nuclear contamination, and combat. In military applications of AI, one of the latest capabilities to emerge is robotic swarming, large numbers of autonomous vehicles or weapons programmed with rules that, when applied in aggregate by the entire group, exhibit emergent behavior that makes them much more effective in combat than would be possible by the same number of devices under human control.
7
Some experts maintain that advances in the next ten to 15 years will be even more dramatic, potentially changing the character of warfare. 
8
9
10
11
AI will allow warfighters to bring "big data" to bear in the analysis of volumes of information that would be impossible for humans to process. Machine learning systems will employ advanced pattern recognition to these data, identifying enemy tactics and hidden targets, improving accuracy, and supporting command decisionmaking with levels of speed and reliability not possible with human-only staffs. 
12
13
By making weapons and decision-support systems more autonomous, AI will tighten the observe-orient-decide-act loop, resulting in quicker but not necessarily better decisions. Intelligent systems might not be able to distinguish between combatants and noncombatants as accurately as human warfighters can, and when there is uncertainty, autonomous weapons will decide whether to strike based on mathematical probabilities rather than human conscience. 
14
15
16
Intelligent weapons and decision-support systems might not be sensitive to the subtle nuances of political tension, restraint, and brinkmanship in a crisis. They might not respond to deterrent threats or understand the concept of escalation management. They could cause deterrence to fail or could strike at the wrong times, places, or levels of intensity, quickly escalating minor conflicts into major wars. 17 Furthermore, if both sides are employing autonomous systems, these systems might interact in a rapidly escalating fashion that AI researcher Paul Scharre describes as "flash war." 
18
19
The United States' closest near-peer competitors, China and Russia, are aggressively developing autonomous weapons and other military applications of AI. China, in particular, is investing heavily in developing autonomous vehicles in all domains (particularly air and ground operations), and automated systems for command-and-control, ISR processing, equipment design, and training. 
20
18
Scharre, 2018, pp. 207-210. 19
21
22
Implications for the U.S. Air Force and the Future of Warfare AI will likely change the character of military operations to some extent in all domains during the next ten to 15 years, and the United States cannot afford to allow any potential adversary to dominate this field. The capabilities this technology offers will enhance military missions at all levels of conflict. For instance, the USAF will benefit from autonomous standoff weapons when missions require penetrating denied airspace, and machine learning analysis of ISR data will assist in target identification and tracking. China and Russia are pressing ahead in the development of autonomous weapons even as they lobby the international community to ban them in efforts to tie the hands of the United States. Both countries hope their military applications of AI will offset the technological advantages that U.S. forces currently possess. For its own security, the United States must press ahead with its own developmental programs.
The risks that attend the proliferation of military applications of AI will be substantial. Autonomous weapons could attack the wrong targets, and they could prosecute attacks in areas or at intensities that human judgment would consider inappropriate, triggering escalation. Even more seriously-at least, in the eyes of many citizens in the United States and elsewhere-the prospect of machines deciding to take human life and acting on those decisions without human intervention is morally repugnant. It could also violate the laws of armed conflict.
Therefore, as the United States develops various military applications of AI, DoD and its service components will need to educate the public on why these capabilities are so important. Such education needs to emphasize the nation's commitment to adhering to the highest ethical, moral, and legal standards in development and employment of these capabilities. The USAF should explain that the principal focus of its AI development efforts is on applications that offer high reward at lower risk-systems to assist in ISR analysis, logistics, and force protection-and not on the so-called killer robots that critics are so concerned about.
Ultimately, as the United States presses ahead in this field, U.S. leaders, system developers, and military practitioners will need to work together to determine what balance of human-machine teaming will maximize the benefits of autonomy while keeping within the boundaries of acceptable risk.
Given these trends in the size, quality, and character of U.S. conventional military forces in relation to those of potential adversaries, the United States will likely face serious challenges in the next ten to 15 years. Table 
8
As the table indicates, the risks of war over the next ten to 15 years will largely derive from perceptions of shifts in regional correlations of force. With U.S. conventional forces reduced in size, China-and, to a lesser extent, Russia-will narrow the qualitative gap and might calculate that the United States might lack sufficient capacity-in some cases, the capability-to respond effectively. Such wars, if they occur, will be multidomain conflicts fought under an ever-present risk of nuclear escalation.
China and Russia, however, likely will prefer to achieve their objectives "on the cheap"-i.e., with the least cost in international reproach and the lowest risk of provoking military conflict with the United States. Instead, both will likely ramp up their use of gray-zone tactics. Countering these strategies will require the United States to persistently confront such aggressive tactics and to be prepared to fight at multiple levels of conflict, from subconventional through conventional.
Iran and North Korea do not have-and are unlikely to developcapabilities to match those of the United States and its regional allies. However, they will have selected asymmetric capabilities to deter U.S. intervention and the ability to employ gray-zone tactics in pursuit of their regional objectives. If their aggressive strategies ultimately lead to war, U.S. forces will need to find ways to neutralize those asymmetric capabilities and destroy substantial portions of those adversaries' large but less-sophisticated forces.
The use of substate actors as proxy fighters in gray-zone strategies will continue weakening the state's monopoly on violence in many areas of the world. As aggressive states arm individuals and groups in regions they seek to destabilize or annex, the weaker states will have difficulty containing the violence that results and likely will turn to the United States for support. Given U.S. interests in maintaining stability and the territorial status quo in many of these regions, the United States will need devote resources to these missions even as it is trying to restore its conventional capabilities for great-power competition.
Developments in military applications of AI might help in both of these arenas, providing advanced systems that restore U.S. qualitative advantages in conventional warfare and providing capabilities to process ISR data in ways that enable U.S. forces to identify and target substate adversaries more effectively. As the nation's military service with the preponderance of ISR, rapid deployment, and deep strike capabilities, the USAF will be on the leading edge of military applications of AI. However, these capabilities come with serious risks that will need to be managed, and the United States will not have a monopoly on access to them. Barring strong and verifiable arms control agreements limiting the development or employment of these technologies-which appears highly unlikely at this point-the United States cannot afford to not develop them while China and Russia are pursuing them so aggressively. U.S. leaders will need to find ways to maximize the benefits they offer while mitigating the inevitable risks.
Taken together, these six trends give new meaning to what the National Defense Strategy describes as the growth of "interstate strategic competition" and the United States' "eroding" competitive military advantage. It is not so much that the United States risks being replaced wholesale as the dominant global military power by any single adversary, at least in the near term (although this might be a concern in China's case over the longer haul). More, it is that the United States risks needing to confront so many different types of threats simultaneously that it cannot respond to any of them effectively. 
1
2
For the USAF and the joint force, then, erosion of the U.S. competitive military advantage will force harder choices about where to allocate a finite number of resources and demand that the United States take even greater risks in 2030 than it does now-and much greater risks than it took after the Cold War. Perhaps, this is what National Defense Strategy means by "we are emerging from a period of strategic atrophy." 3 By 2030, strategic choices will have even greater consequences, and trying to do it all might no longer be an option. 
1 DoD, 2018, p. 1. 2
3 DoD, 2018, p. 1.
9 7 8 1 9 7 7 4 0 2 9 7
3  
SOURCE:
SOURCE:
27 Kosnik, 2016.   28  
8  
20
For an overview of the key geopolitical, economic, environmental, geographic, legal, informational, and military trends that will shape the contours of conflict between now and
2030, see the study's summary report. Raphael S. Cohen, Nathan Chandler, Shira Efron, Bryan Frederick, Eugeniu Han, Kurt Klein, Forrest E. Morgan, Ashley L. Rhoades, Howard J. Shatz, and Yuliya Shokh, The Future of Warfare in 2030: Project Overview and Conclusions, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2849/1-AF, 20 .
DoD, Summary of the
National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge, Washington, D.C., 2018, p. 1.
Allied contributions are discussed at length in Cohen, Han, and Rhoades, 20 , and to a lesser extent inShatz and Chandler, 20 .   
For example, the National Defense Strategy calls out advanced computing, "big data" analytics, AI, autonomy, robotics, directed energy, hypersonics, and biotechnology as potentially significant areas for the future of warfare. Although AI is specifically named, four of the other seven areas also fall into the class of technologies generally described as AI.DoD,  2018, p. 3.   
See, for instance, Richard Nixon, "Save the Peace Dividend," New York Times,November 19, 1992.  
  8  Stacie L.Pettyjohn, U.S. Global Defense Posture, 1783-2011, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-1244-AF, 2011; Kristen Bialik, "U.S. Active-Duty Military Presence Overseas Is at Its Smallest in Decades," Pew Research Center, August 22, 2017.
Office of the Undersecretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Defense Budget Overview: United States Department of Defense Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Request, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Defense, February 2018a, p. 1-2.
  16  Office of the Undersecretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, 2018a, p.3-3.   
For the impact of removing Army troops from congressional districts, see Christopher M. Schnaubelt, Craig A. Bond, Frank Camm, Joshua Klimas, Beth E. Lachman, Laurie L. McDonald, Judith D. Mele, Paul Ng, Meagan L. Smith, Cole Sutera, and Christopher Skeels, The Army's Local Economic Effects, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1119-A, 2015.
The current National Defense Strategy recommends something less than a full two-war strategy ("defeating aggression by a major power; deterring opportunistic aggression elsewhere") but the bipartisan congressionally appointed National Defense Strategy Commission concluded, "A two-war force sizing construct makes more strategic sense today than at any previous point in the post-Cold War era." Eric Edelman and Gary Roughead, Providing for the Common Defense: The Assessment and Recommendations of the National Defense Strategy Commission, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute ofPeace, 2018, p. 66
.23  There is an argument that U.S. forward presence could provoke U.S. adversaries and actually increase the chances of conflict, short of war. Statistical analyses of historical cases, for example, show that increased forward presence generally decreases interstate conflict but increases the chances of militarized disputes. (See Angela O'Mahony, Miranda Priebe, Bryan Frederick, Jennifer Kavanagh, Matthew Lane, Trevor Johnston, Thomas S. Szayna, Jakub P. Hlávka, Stephen Watts, and Matthew Povlock, U.S. Presence and the Incidence of Conflict, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1906-A, 2018.) That said, if Russia's actions in Ukraine or China's actions in the South China Sea are driven by motivations other than a negative reaction to U.S. forward presence, the greater chances of deterrence might be worth the added risk of provocation.
Heginbotham et al., 2015, pp. 29-34.   
Matthew Kosnik, "Russia's Military Reform: Putin's Last Card," Journal of Military and  Strategic Studies, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2016.   
Russia's defense spending in 2018 is projected to be at 3.90 percent of gross domestic product. See IISS, "Russia and Eurasia," Vol. 117, 2017, p. 191; IISS, 2018, p. 175.    
Gianpaulo Colitti, "China Unveils Its New Hypervelocity Missile Programme," UK Defence Journal,
June 13, 2017.
Kelsey D. Atherton, "Don't Believe the Hype About Russia's Hypersonic Missile," Popular Science, June 18, 2017; "Russia 'Test-Fires Hypersonic Kinzal Missile,'" BBC News,
March 11, 2018.
For a detailed analysis of possible investments, see Chapters Two and Three of Ochmanek et al., 2017; and David Ochmanek, Restoring U.S. Power Projection Capabilities: Responding to the 2018 National Defense Strategy, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, PE-260-AF, 2018.
The authors owe an intellectual debt to Brad Roberts, whose
book identified these gray-zone strategies, which it described as "theories of victory." See Brad Roberts, The Case for U.S. Nuclear Weapons in the 21st Century, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2016.
For the seminal work on the use of salami tactics, see Thomas C.Schelling, Arms and  Influence, New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1966, p. 68.    
As will be discussed in this chapter, Chinese leaders first said that no military capabilities would be put on the artificial islands, but the PLA has progressively developed them into substantial air and naval bases. Although these installations contribute to China's growing force deployment capabilities, they would be vulnerable to U.S. and allied A2/AD capabilities. SeeKelly et al., 2016, p. 106; Jesse Johnson, "China Confirms Deployment of Fighters to South China Sea Island for the First Time," Japan Times, December 2, 2017; Bethlehem Feleke, "China Tests Bombers on South China Sea Island," CNN, May 21, 2018.
4
.
5
Thomas Rid, "Cyber War Will Not Take Place," Journal of Strategic Studies, Vol. 35,  No. 1, February 2012.   
Jack Kim, "North Korea Mounts Long-Running Hack of South Korea Computers, Says Seoul," Reuters,
June 13, 2016.
"North Korea Hacks South's Military Cyber Command," BBC News, December 6, 2016; "N. Korea Likely Hacked S. Korea Cyber Command: Military," Yonhap News,
December 6, 2016.
Tim Arango, "Iran Dominates in Iraq After the U.S. 'Handed the Country Over,'" New York Times, July 15, 2017; Manish Rai, "Iraq Is a Client State of Iran," International Policy Digest, November 9, 2017; Isaac Kfir, "Iraq as a 'Client State' of Iran," The Strategist, March 7, 2018; Raya Jalabi and Michael Gregory, "Cleric Moqtada al-Sadr's Block Wins Iraqi Election," Reuters, May 18, 2018.
Bucala and Kagan,  
2016, p. 2. 20 Choe San-Hun, "Reunification with North Korea Unappealing for Younger South Koreans," The Star, January 28, 2018; Clint Work, "What Do Younger South Koreans Think of North Korea?" The Diplomat, February 2, 2018. 21 "Majority of South Koreans Feel That North Korean Attitude Is Changing," Hankoreh, March 18, 2018.
All of this refers, of course, to the destabilization and covert operations phase of Russia's gray-zone strategy. If the conflict escalates to conventional war, simply challenging Russian propaganda and attempting to address citizens' grievances will not be sufficient.
Paul D. Shinkman, "Russia Has Deployed Thousands of Tanks, Troops to Ukraine, Top Official Says," US News, November 24, 2017.
Max Weber, "Politics as a Vocation," one of a series of lectures delivered to the Free Students Union, Munich,
January 28, 1919.2  Abdel-Fatau Musah, "Privatization of Security, Arms Proliferation, and the Process of State Collapse in Africa," Development andChange, Vol. 33, No. 5, 2002, pp. 911-933.   The term democratization of violence refers to the growing ability of individuals and groups, other than state authorities, to use violence. The expression first appeared in 1958 and grew in currency throughout the Vietnam War before sharply declining in frequency in 1973. Fareed Zakaria revived it in 2003 when he used it to describe international terrorism. See Fareed Zakaria, The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad, New York: W. W.Norton, 2003.   
Michael T. Klare, "The Deadly Connection: Paramilitary Bands, Small Arms Diffusion, and State Failure," in Robert I. Rotberg, ed., When States Fail: Causes and Consequences, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003; Josef Danczuk, "The Global Spread of Arms: The Link Between State Collapse, Small Arms Proliferation, and Global Conflict,"Military Review, Vol. 96, No. 5, September-October 2016.    
J. J.
Messner, Nate Haken, Patricia Taft, Ignatius Onyekwere, Hannah Blyth, Charles Fiertz, Christina Murphy, Amanda Quinn, and
Esther Chelule, "Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons: Challenge to Development, Peace and Security in Africa," IOSR Journal ofHumanities and Social Science, Vol. 19,  No. 5, May 2014.   
Emma Björnehed, "Narcoterrorism: The Merger of the War on Drugs and the War on Terrorism," Global Crime,Vol. 6, No. 3, November 2004.   
This assumes that state fragility has equally destabilizing effects in all of these regions, but post-Cold War conflict trends indicate that this might not be the case. They suggest that violence by radical substate groups will be greater in the Middle East and South Asia than in sub-Saharan Africa.Watts et al., 2017, pp. 41-47, 202-205.    
For more analysis, seeOchmanek et al., 2017, pp. 77-94.    
See Valerie Insinna, "The Light-Attack Aircraft Competition Will Be Down to Two Competitors," Defense News,August 6, 2018.   
See A. M. Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," Mind, Vol. 59, No.  
236, October 1950; J. McCarthy, M. L. Minsky, N. Rochester, and C. E. Shannon, "A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence,"
August 31, 1955
4
5
Sepp Hockreiter and Jurgen Schmidhuber, "Long Short-Term Memory," Neural Computation, Vol. 9, No. 8, November 15, 1997.  
7 Paul Scharre and Shawn Brimley, "20YY: The Future of Warfare," War on the Rocks, January 29, 2014;Kaplan, 2016, pp. 49-53; Paul Scharre, Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the Future of War, New York: W. W.Norton, 2018, pp. 17-22.   
Aaron Mehta, "AI Makes Mattis Question 'Fundamental' Beliefs About War," C4ISR-NET, February 17, 2018. For a deeper discussion, see Robert H. Latiff, Future War: Preparing for the New Global Battlefield, New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2017.
 9 Scharre, 2018, pp. 23-24; "Autonomous Weapons Are a Game-Changer," The Economist,
January, 25, 2018.
   10 Scharre, 2018, pp. 222-227;
Deepak Dutt, "2018:
2018.11 Guia Marie Del Prado, "These Weapons Can Find Targets All by Themselves-and Researchers Are Terrified," Business Insider, July 30, 2015.
President of Russia, "Presentation of Era Innovation Technopolis," Moscow: Kremlin, February 23, 2018; Samuel Bendett, "Russia Wants to Build a Whole City for Developing Deadly Weapons," National Interest, March 29, 2018.
Agence France Presse/Jiji Press, "China Using Big Data and 'Predictive Policing' in Xinjiang Region to Round Up Perceived Threats: HRW," Japan Times, February 28, 2018; "Russia: Assault on Internet Freedom, Cyber Security," Human Rights Watch, April 30, 2018.
This study would not have been possible without the help of several key people. First and foremost, we would like to thank 
Brig Gen David Hicks
Col Linc Bonner
Scott Wheeler
Air Force
A5S
Paula Thornhill
Stephen Watts
Giselle Donnelly
Nixon, Richard, "Save the Peace Dividend," New York Times
N. Korea Likely Hacked S. Korea Cyber Command: Military
Yonhap News
2016/12/05/0200000000 AEN20161205010451315
assists the Air Force in assessing trends in the future strategic environment for the next Air Force strategy. This report should be of value to the national security community and interested members of the general public, especially those with an interest in of the 
RAND Corporation
U.S. Air Force
Force Modernization and Employment
Manpower, Personnel
FA7014-16-D-1000
Additional information about PAF is available on our website: www.rand.org/paf.
Many people attribute the birth of AI to Alan Turing's 1950 essay, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," but the term artificial intelligence was first used as a title to a conference held at Dartmouth College in 1955, at which the organizers proposed that "every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle be so pre- 