# ID: 399989f4ee33491fa355f9892d288f57
# Title: Thucydides on Great Power Competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
"The absence of romance in my history will, I fear, detract somewhat from its interest; but if it be judged useful by those inquirers who desire an exact knowledge of the past as an aid to the understanding of the future, which in the course of human things must resemble if it does not reflect it, I shall be content. In fine, I have written my work, not as an essay which is to win the applause of the moment, but as a possession for all time." 
1
2
The timeless nature of Thucydides's History of the Peloponnesian War provides insight on modern relations between the US and other great powers, with underlying notions that can inform grand strategies and illuminate how fear, honor, and interest drive great power competition. The purpose of this thesis is not to portray the US or any specific nation as strictly analogous to Athens or Sparta, rather it is to draw those lessons from Thucydides which can guide aspects of modern US strategy.
From the earliest times, the quality of the soil in the Hellas (modern Greece) influenced the spread of civilization and the geopolitical arrangement of Greek city-states. The regions with the most arable land were the destination of migrants who would cultivate the land, and the subject of conquests which would drive out the inhabitants at the hands of more powerful clans.
The lands of Attica were particularly poor for agriculture and thus the city of Athens became the home of peoples driven from other regions, causing the city's population to reach such a size that it was forced to send colonists out from the city. During the seven centuries following the Trojan War, continual turmoil and local conflicts occurred throughout the native city-states of the Hellas and the Peloponnesus, and colonies spread throughout all the coastlines and islands of the Aegean Sea, as well as Italy and Sicily. 
3
During the same period, the Persians under King Darius conquered all of Ionia (modern Turkey), and in 490 BC sought to subjugate all of Greece, until they were defeated by the Athenians at the Battle of Marathon. Ten years later, his son King Xerxes again attempted this conquest, spurring the Spartans to temporarily unite with the Athenians and famously mount a defense at the Battle of Thermopylae. The Persian army successfully drove the Athenian people from their city, but were repulsed by the combined naval and military forces of Athens and Sparta respectively, thus ending the Persian invasions in 479 BC, although the Persian War persisted until 449 BC. 
4
10
11
Unlike what Machiavelli would do two centuries later, Thucydides does not articulate principles or prescribe actions to be followed by statesmen or strategists. Rather, to learn from the History, one must be willing to draw lessons from a greater understanding of the Peloponnesian War, the dynamics inherent in the conflict, and the nature of the political system and warfare at the time. According to historian Christian Wendt, Thucydides imparts his timeless observations through a description of a war in which states and their leaders destabilized a political order without realizing the long-term consequences of their decisions. Thus, the History imparts lessons in what not to do. 
12
13
14
National character, according to author Robert Luginbill, "consists of that peculiar degree of willingness to act that a national group can characteristically be expected to exhibit." 
15
16
17
18
Anyone who wished to speak at the assembly could do so, therefore influential citizens could use their power of rhetoric to convince the masses to make a swift decision. For better and worse, this enabled quick decision-making and matched the Athenian proclivity for continual activity. 
19
20
In addition to their internal focus of continually quelling a Helot rebellion, the Spartans were slow to action, as compared to the Athenians, because of their form of governance and strict adherence to their laws. The Spartan people had two hereditary kings who were subservient to five Ephors, who were elected yearly. Any military action the kings desired was required to be approved by the Ephors, who could hold a vote by citizens only if they chose. 
21
23
While this obligation to follow the rule of law is not disputed here, a commitment to adhere to international laws and a desire to uphold the moral high ground does cede the initiative to those who do not maintain the same ideals.
In their book, Thucydides on Strategy, Athanasios Platias and Konstantinos Koliopoulos described the Hellenic application of the strategies of exhaustion versus annihilation and direct versus indirect approaches. 
24
While 21 st century warfare is evolved far beyond hoplites and triremes, the theory of exhaustion versus annihilation is still applicable to a US-Russia conflict as well. Nuclear weapons create a dynamic of mutual vulnerability which reduces the likelihood a direct approach which would involve NATO nations fighting in Russia or vice versa. 
25
It is possible to imagine many plausible scenarios where a seemingly minor incident between the US and another great power escalates into a war that no one wants, and the Peloponnesian War offers a framework for examining these possibilities. In 432 BC, the year before the war started, members of the Peloponnesian League convinced Sparta to call an assembly to hear complaints of Athenian aggression and arguments for initiating a war against Athens. After hearing accusations of the Spartans' allies, the Athenian envoy declared that fear, honor, and interest were three of the strongest motives which determined state action. In defending the advance of the Athenian Empire, he said "…fear being our principle motive, though honor and interest afterwards came in… And no one can quarrel with a people for making, in matters of tremendous risk, the best provision that it can for its interest." 
26
Fear is the most simplistic of the three and is the basis of any individual or collective response to a perceived threat which inspires a fight or flight reaction. This is the fundamental underpinning of self-defense, and considered by modern legal theory as an appropriate justification. Robert Luginbill provides an explanation of fear's effect on man: "An aggressive human nature is the historical constant for Thucydides, but the degree to which its instincts can produce action is determined in the History largely by the psychological state of the individual or group at the time, with hope rendering men more likely, and fear making them less inclined to undertake the risks the politico-military situation may stipulate." 
27
In the pre-war debates described above, the Athenians attempted to justify their grand strategy of expanding their empire as a response to fear of Spartan military power. Likely, they recognized the legitimacy of an argument based on fear as a basis for defense and used this line of reasoning as an attempt to justify the growth of their power, even though the Spartans throughout their history had shown no indications of conquest against the Athenians.
Thucydides, himself an Athenian, attributed the underlying cause of the war to Spartan fear of Athenian power, which was being used for conquest and tyranny. During the Sicilian Expedition, in the 17 th year of the war, the Athenians again attempted to rationalize their conquest of Sicily under the guise of a response to fear; "Now, as we have said fear makes us hold our empire in Hellas, and fear makes us now come, with the help of our friends, to safely order matters in Sicily." 
28
29
Fear has historically been the basis of arms races and defensive escalations. When viewed from the perspective of nuclear-capable nations outside of NATO, many of their actions can be attributed to a reaction to fear for their own security. Since the beginning of the nuclear age, these nations have attempted to offset the superior strength of the US military and economy by developing and maintaining nuclear arms to deter an attack by other nuclear-capable nations.
According to author Richard Lebow, "As realists have long recognized, concern for security can rapidly be made self-fulfilling through a reciprocal process of escalation. Precautions are interpreted as indicative of intentions, which provoke further defensive measures, intensify conflict, and can lead to war through preemption, loss of control, or a decision to support a threatened third party." 
30
In this light, Russian attempts to strengthen its position in relation to the US are a logical outgrowth of the fear caused by American nuclear weapons and conventional overmatch.
According to strategist Colin Gray, "Even if a Thucydidean fear does not grip the United States, it has to be judged likely that such a dangerous condition of anxiety may well grip Beijing or Moscow, of course, with potentially dangerous consequences for us." 
31
32
33
34
Just as the Peloponnesian League felt justified to react to growing Athenian power with its own consolidation of power, other nations are likely to justify actions taken to address their geographical vulnerabilities and offset their military disadvantage as a response to US hegemony. This is known as the security dilemma, which is "a structural notion in which the self-help attempts of states to look after their security needs tend, regardless of intention, to lead to rising insecurity for others as each interprets its own measures as defensive and measures of others as potentially threatening." 
35
36
The concept of honor as a motive for action could take several forms. First, honor could mean the credibility formed by demonstrating the resolve to uphold treaty obligations. 
37
First, the mixed-ethnicity citizens of Epidamnus who were experiencing civil difficulties The cumulative effect of these three issues provided the catalyst for Sparta to go to war, at the behest of her allies, against Athens. 
38
The second manner in which Thucydides's concept of honor could become a major influence is in the traditional realm of a nation maintaining its reputation or retaliating against real or perceived grievances. This is the realm of unintended escalations that occur when diplomacy and cooler heads do not prevail or when Clausewitzian passion usurps rational decision-making at the national level. Democracies and authoritarian governments such as Putin's are equally susceptible.
During the pre-war debates of 432 BC, the Spartan king Archidamus offered a levelheaded and characteristically non-aggressive argument against the war, adding that "complaints, whether of communities or individuals, it is possible to adjust; but war undertaken by a coalition for sectional interests, whose progress there is no means of foreseeing, may not be easily or credibly concluded," 39 and "if we undertake the war without preparation, we should by hastening its commencement only delay its conclusion." 40 Nonetheless, his desire for restraint was overruled when the ephor Sthenelaidas conjured a feeling of indignation among the Spartan assembly, telling them "let us not be told that it is fitting for us to deliberate under injustice; long deliberation is rather fitting for those who have injustice in contemplation." 
41
In 2019, the American public and its Executive Branch are easy to enflame and this carries the strong potential for a lack of restraint. Attributable to the pervasive usage of social media, a shift in traditional media focus, a President who flaunts the capability of his military and is willing to engage continually with the public, and other factors, the US appears highly susceptible to emotional decision-making. Clausewitz describes this temperament of "men whose passions are easily inflamed, in whom excitement flares up suddenly but soon burns out," and goes on to state "inflammable emotions, feelings that are easily roused, are in general of little value in practical life, and therefore of little value in war." 
42
Interest, Thucydides's final category of national motivation, can be viewed as the political goals that a state wishes to pursue. Interest is potentially the broadest of the three drivers of great power competition, as it can encompass anything that an individual leader or a state desires to accomplish to achieve some gain for itself. The Spartans' singular interest was their own security; maintaining their homeland, way of life, and their own existence as a culture was the overriding factor in nearly every decision they made. This was borne out by preventing a Helot revolt and supporting its allies only insomuch as that contributed to the preservation of their own security. By contrast and as already described, the Athenians were an ambitious and continually active people, who "were born into the world to take no rest themselves and to give none to others." 
43
44
45
After the terrorist attacks of 9/11, the US quickly responded by going to war against Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan to remove their ability to operate from safe havens within the region.
Although supported by NATO when it invoked Article V, the US war on terror has gradually morphed for 18 years into an open-ended conflict in numerous countries against virtually any organization that is willing to take up arms against the US. While these terror groups are nonstate actors and US actions are hardly comparable to the Athenians' at Melos, the US clearly wields its power to employ violence in the interest of preventing future attacks against it.
In the last 15 years particularly, Russia has demonstrated its willingness to take increasingly aggressive actions on behalf of its national interest. These actions bear even more resemblance to Athenian ideas of power. The Russo-Georgian War in 2008, the annexation of Crimea in 2014 and current power projection in the Black Sea and Syria are the most notable examples. The most important characteristic of these Russian actions has been the ability to conduct their operations without provoking any significant international response. By a large measure, Russia does not have the military strength to directly combat that of the US or NATO and has effectively developed strategies to tailor its wars of interest in such a way as to avoid direct confrontation with other great powers. 
46
48
49
In the spirit of cooperation and security, states with mutual interests have always stood to benefit by forming alliances. The plethora of city-states and alliance interactions in the History provide ample material for analysis and comparison to modern great power politics. At the end of the Persian invasions, the Spartans characteristically withdrew to the seclusion of their homeland, leaving the Athenians with the veneration of the many smaller and less powerful citystates of the Aegean. The continuing conflicts of the Persian Wars necessitated a common defense and the Athenians were a natural fit for leadership of the Delian League, which came to comprise over 200 city-states. Members were required to pay annual tribute to Athens, most in the form of currency and some in the form of ships or timber. This financial tribute and Athens' corresponding political and administrative organization enabled the Athenians to develop the largest and most powerful navy. All members of the Delian League had equal say in decisions, but over time, the Athenians acquired such influence that no dissenting voices had the power to overrule Athenian wishes. The Athenians also exported democracy throughout their allies by coming to the aid of democratic governments and helping overthrow oligarchic factions within the league. 
50
51
52
Throughout that period, the Argives repeatedly based their decisions on what would most benefit their city-state, rather than a loyalty towards a higher ideal, ethnicity, or political organization. 
53
Political scientist John Mearsheimer explains the strategies of balancing and buck-passing as methods of preventing a great power from altering the status quo. Both the Delian and Peloponnesian Leagues are examples of balancing, as each side worked to consolidate power to offset the strength of the other. Buck-passing is a term to describe when a lesser power attempts to convince another state to counter the aggressor while remaining on the sideline and avoiding direct conflict itself. 
54
For Athens and Sparta, the anchors of the two opposed alliances, the decision to accept or compel the allegiance of various city-states also was based purely on their interests rather than a reflection of morality or ethnic loyalty. Athens relied on the raw resources (timber, silver, and agriculture) of city-states of the north Aegean Sea and the Black Sea, the naval power (ships and sailors) of all the Aegean city-states, and the financial contributions of all its allies. Sparta relied on other hoplite armies to augment its own powerful but small army and allied navies such as Corinth, due to its own non-existent navy. In the 20 th year of the war, Sparta entered into agreements with the Persians, who provided the financial means for Sparta to build a navy that could compete with the Athenians. This tepid alliance with their historical enemy became the key component of Spartan strategy which enabled their eventual total victory over Athens. After 27 years of fighting which ravaged all the Hellas before the Peloponnesian War concluded, both the Athenians and the Spartans had lost sight of why they were originally fighting, bent only on the destruction of the other.
While the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs from 1989 to 1993, Colin Powell displayed a framed Thucydides quote in his Pentagon office: "Of all manifestations of power, restraint impresses men the most." 
55
I am grateful to 
Dr. Bradford Wineman