# ID: 3a5cf7e134b740cb93c69921b076b528
# Title: Application of Operational Art-The German 8th Army at the Battles at Tannenberg 1914
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Application Of Operational Art-The German 8th Army at the Battles at Tannenberg 1914, by LTC Kim 0.
In 1914, Germany faced the strategic challenge of a two front war with insufficient forces to fight the enemy on both fronts with a favorable force ratio. As such, Germany made the strategic decision to accept risk of an unfavorable force ratio in Eastern Prussia to enable decisive operations in the West. 
1
An analysis ofTannenberg assists in the explanation of how the function of operational art was successfully executed in an historic operation. The approach of this monograph enhances the understanding of the role and function of operational art, and provides an opportunity to reevaluate today's doctrinal concept.
The commander and staff of 8th Anny at Tannenberg in 1914 essentially applied an art of operating, which is in current US Anny doctrine defined as operational art. This research identifies that the commanders of 8th Anny synchronized defensive operations in the northeastern part of East Prussia with offensive operations in the southern part, while conducting movements to concentrate forces for the decisive operation against the 2nd Russian army. The 8th Anny 1 Theobald von Schaefer, Tannenberg: In Schlachten des Weltkrieges, Reichsarchiv, Vol. 19 (Berlin, Germany: Druck und Verlag Gerhard Stalling, 1927), 15.
2 Ibid. 15. 1 orchestrated maneuver elements, decisive actions, and movements within Eastern Prussia based on reliable intelligence to successively defeat two Russian armies. Further, the trust among the German military leaders and headquarters coupled with the acceptance of prudent risks facilitated the success.
This study is arranged in three parts. Section 2 describes the German operational thought at the beginning of World War I, by comparing Germany's paradigm of warfare with the concepts of operational art and mission command defined in ADP 3-0. 
3
The contemporary understanding of operational art, viewed in an historical context provides the theoretical framework for this research. The author relates the contemporary understanding of operational art with historical actions, a concept alien to the commanders at that time, to validate and increase the comprehension ofthe current US definition of operational art.
A comparison of theory and history enables an assessment of the actions at Tannenberg through the lens of current US doctrine. The author does not focus on the US elements of operational art and operations design, but focusses his assessment on three selected criteria. 
4
5
6
Evidence in support of this argument consists of a combination of current US doctrine, German doctrine of 1914, and empirical data. The doctrinal sources include Joint Publication 5-0 Joint Operation Planning (JP 5-0); Army Doctrinal Publications 3-0 Unified Land Operations (ADP 3-0), Army Doctrinal Publications 5-0 The Operations Process (ADP 5-0); Army Doctrinal Reference Publication 3-0 Unified Land Operations (ADRP 3-0) and Army Doctrinal Reference Publication 5-0 The Operations Process (ADRP 5-0). 
7
4
5 ADP 3-0, 5.
6 ADP 6-0, 2.
Grundzuege der hoeheren Truppenfuehrung (Principles for troop leading at higher echelons) (D.V.E. Nr. 53) is the key doctrine for military operations at higher tactical and operational level. Understanding the German military thought at the beginning of the 20th century requires understanding of the key influencing variables. This understanding begins with appreciating the political and social implications on the German military. Using this as a baseline, the author will characterize the German military in 1914 by elaborating on the impact of patriotism, military education and training of officers, leadership philosophy, and doctrine. This approach will illustrate a holistic picture of the German operational thought prior to and at the beginning of World War I.
The political and security situation significantly limited German policy discretion and demanded seizure of the initiative at the outbreak of any war. Germany and its ally Austria-Hungary were politically isolated. Germany, by its political and geographical position in Europe, had a strategic challenge -it was facing threats on at least two fronts. 
9
JO
11
Until 1914, Germany had continuously and unsuccessfully attempted to mitigate its disadvantage of a central position in Europe through political channels. 
12
13
14
The German society of the early 20th century created a growing middle class, and saw a decline of the Junker's influence on social life. The rising pride of the middle class was also reflected in the affection for and understanding of the soldiers within the military. 
15
16
The influences of politics and society are reflected in the German military's organization, education leadership philosophy, and doctrine. These elements as a whole characterize the German operational thought of 1914. Therefore, the following paragraphs will address these elements and how they inter-relate. Furthermore, the author indicates the links to the assessment criteria of synchronization, trust, and risk.
Germany's limited human and natural resources influenced the German way of war. If a war had to be won, it had to be short and decisive. 17 Mainly influenced by the experience of the wars of 1870 and 1871, German military planners relied on a combination of firepower, numbers, and moral superiority. 
18
19
20
21
Cohesion, discipline, and firepower created a military tailored for short and decisive operations. The German Army's organization, recruitment, and planning of the early 20th century focused on the corps as its main element. 
22
20 Ibid.,
[67]
[68]
22 Showalter, Tannenberg Clash ofEmpires 1914, 117.
Auftragstaktik and Weisungen (as roughly equivalent to US Army understanding of the term 'doctrine'), created a spirit of initiative, offensive operations, and an orientation towards goals of the higher levels of war and command. The leadership philosophy ofAuftragstaktik, emphasized initiative in order to utilize opportunities in the execution of decentralized operations. 26 The idea to empower subordinates to employ initiative based on a shared understanding and common procedures became the mantra of the German General Staff. 27 Every soldier in the German Army had to understand and act within the higher intent, displaying creativity and initiative. 28 "The improvement in firepower made a successful [attack] more challenging; but the discipline and the high level of training of our army as well as the fact that 
23 Showalter, Tannenberg Clash ofEmpires 1914, 117. 241bid. 25 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 15. 26
1807
-1945
(Graz, Austria: Ares Verlag, 2009), 158. 27 1bid., 159. 28 Ibid., 158.
29
German institutional education and training created an officer corps which worked and thought within the above described paradigm based on the idea of Aufklaerung. 
30
31
32
33
34
30
Erziehungs-und Bildungswesens in der Zeit 1871
-1939, 19. 31 Ibid., 53. 32 Ibid., 61. 33
34
35
The German doctrine at the beginning of World War I depicts a paradigm of warfare characterized by maneuver, initiative, offensive operations, main effort, interior lines, tempo, surprise, and annihilation. 36 These attributes had developed over time and reflected 'lessons learned' from previous wars in the 19th century. 
37
38
39
40
35
40
41
42
The German Grundzuege der hoehren Truppentruppenfuehrung (GdTF) (Basics for Senior Force Commanders) of 1910 clearly reflects the offensive spirit based on Bewegung (maneuver), initiative, and short but decisive operations. 
43
Clausewitzian theory also influenced the German warfare. In the preface of GdTF, the German Kaiser emphasized that he did not intend to prescribe fixed rules but general principles to allow more freedom for his subordinated commanders. 
44
45
46
GdTF demanded quick and decisive offensive operations to achieve victory. 
47
48
49
50
51
The German doctrine also addressed the impact of technology and modernization of its developed paradigm of warfare. To mitigate the increase in enemy firepower, maneuvers should be agile and weit ausholend (enveloping). 
52
53
54
Synchronization and trust are important elements in the German operational thought prior to World War I; both elements were intrinsic in the planning and execution of operations. Further, both influenced German operational thought and the Auftragstaktik (German command philosophy). The synchronization of movement and Aufmarsch were immense. Not only had the structure of the General Staff reflected this effort, as indicated above, but also the function of general staff officers. Their responsibility had transitioned from heroic leaders to professional facilitators of art and science in warfare. 
55
56
54
55
56
Moltke the Elder was convinced that only facilitated initiative from the private to the general could utilize opportunities and exploit favorable conditions. 
57
58
59
60
Trust is both specified and implied throughout German operational thought of 1914, specifically in terms ofAuflragstaktik. The decentralized execution and the embedded cognitive linkage to higher objectives indicate that the German army entrusted its soldiers and commanders with immense responsibility to achieve mission success. The GdTF specifically addressed the 
57
61
62
Risk was a common element of operational ideas at all levels of war. The German inferiority required rapid and bold but calculated actions. The idea of operating on interior lines was inherently risky. Only a profound assessment at strategic level could lead to success. A highly trained army and skillful commanders were the elements to mitigate these risks. 
63
64
62
63
64
Unified Land Operations (ULO) describes the US Army concept for military operations.
Operational art and mission command are concepts within the US Army's construct ofUL0. 
65
66
69
66
67 ADP 3-0, 9.
68 ADRP 3-0, 4-1.
69 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, New Jersey, USA: Princeton University Press, 1989), 148. staffs in the application of operational art. 
70
71
72
Trust enhances the creativity in centralized and parallel planning. Trust also empowers decentralized execution. The US Army guides and synchronizes the available freedom and effort through a shared understanding of the operational environment and the commander's intent, which communicates the purpose, key tasks, and end state of the operation. 
73
74
75
ULO reflects synchronization within two domains. First, operational art cognitively synchronizes tactical actions among each other orientated towards a common purpose. Second, 70 ADRP 3-0, 4-1.
71 ADP6-0.
72 ADP 6-0, 2.
73 Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 5-0, The Operations Process (Washington, DC: GPO, May 2012), 1-5. 
74
75
76
77
78
79
The intent to compare German operational thought with US Army operational art implies there will be a structure of similarities and differences. However, the concepts themselves are mainly similar in their purpose and elements. Both systems characterize operations based on initiative, tempo, and offensive action to achieve success. Both nations' military thoughts stressed the importance of trust, however the comprehension of risk and synchronization varies.
Furthermore, the two concepts envision the same relationship between military operations and politics. The German operational thought of 1914 and current US Army definition of operational art both identify the need for nesting the military operations into a political purpose or objective.
The predominant difference between the two concepts lies in the quality of trust, synchronization, and risk.
76 ADP 3-0, 7-9.
77 Ibid., 9.
78 Joint Publication (JP) 5-0, Joint Operation Planning (Washington, DC: GPO, August 2011), N-46. 
79
The German Auftragstaktik and US Army mission command both rely on trust as a basis for decentralized execution. German strategic to tactical operations relied heavily on the trust in training level, will, and morale of the German Army. The assumed superiority of these three attributes was the prerequisite for German operational thought. Although ULO also addresses these elements, the US Army does not plan to operate in inferiority and therefore does not rely on the elements as the German Army did in 1914. US Army doctrine appears to ignore these factors, or to assume either their presence or, if lacking, a superiority that mitigates them.
For German operational thought, risk is a common element. It is not limited to the operational or tactical level. The geographical circumstances and the relative combat power of the German Army forces the assumption of risk at all levels of war. US Army doctrine identifies risk as necessary to create opportunities. US Army commanders seek to identify and accept prudent risk to achieve their objectives, while German commanders operate within a strategic environment, which is characterized by risk to the political objective.
Cognitive synchronization is common to both nations and affects the operational planning and execution. Germany emphasized synchronization and detailed planning especially in the Aufmarsch as precondition for the strategic approach. This detailed synchronization was the military effort to mitigate the risk on strategic level. During the execution, the German system relied upon the synchronizing effect ofAuftragstaktik to ensure mission success on the one hand and maximum flexibility for the commander on the other hand. The US Army system stresses the need for synchronization in execution. The ULO tenet 'synchronization' envisions a more detailed preplanned synchronization of efforts during the operation, which on the one hand facilitates synergy but, on the other hand, limits the flexibility of the commander. Hence, the difference herein is that Germany focusses on cognitive synchronization and provides by this more leeway for the commander, while US Army concepts have operationalized synchronization to a much higher degree.
The different interpretations of operational art require a definition of the assessment criteria for this monograph. Risk, trust, and synchronization are three inextricably linked elements derived from the two concepts of operational art and mission command. Additionally, these criteria are recognizable in the German paradigm of warfare. At the same time, all three elements distinguish the two concepts in a qualitative dimension. Hence, the author uses risk, trust, and synchronization to assess the battles at Tannenberg in a way which applies to both concepts.
Risk is an element of operational art. Commanders account for risks in the development of an operational approach. The acceptance of these risks creates opportunities, which enable success. Commanders assume risk through decentralized execution, too. Acceptance of prudent risk is a principle of mission command. The leadership philosophy requires this attribute to create opportunities to avoid defeat. 
80
Trust is a principle of mission command. Trust among commanders and staffs at all levels of war is crucial for smooth planning and execution of operations. Trust provides the leeway for creativity and decentralized initiative. The author uses this principle of mission command as criteria to evaluate whether the commanders at Tannenberg operated within the same philosophical framework as envisioned in current US Army doctrine. The analysis focuses on the question if the identified level of trust during the battles facilitated or hampered the application of operational art.
The last criterion is the synchronization of tactical actions of large maneuver units on the battlefield. This criterion analyzes the synchronization of task and purpose in space and time during the planning and the execution at operational level. The evaluation focuses on how the 8th 80 ADP 6-0, 5.
Army commander envisioned, planned, and directed the tasks and purposes at the operational level and in relation to the assigned objectives. Using these criteria, the following section explains the circumstances, key actors, and the progress of the battles ofTannenberg. The application of operational art is assessed in relation to risk, trust, and synchronization at the operational level. 
The campaign in Eastern Prussia was nested in a strategic approach, which had evolved over time and had consciously adapted. Section 2 described that, if the political level was not able to set favorable conditions for German prosperity and security in Europe, the military had to fight a multi-front-war and defeat the most imminent adversaries first. The major threats to Germany materialized as France and Russia; their defeat was the first strategic military goal. Although Germany and Austria-Hungary were isolated, no coordinated and common defense-plan existed. 
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
83
84
85
86
90
91
92
93
The German Army and its principal actors in Eastern Prussia differed in character but were common in education and training. The attributes of the German military leaders in key 
89
This passage divides assessment of the application of operational art at battles at Tannenberg into two perspectives -planning and execution. A description of the military situation at the operational level, the area of operation, and the employed forces commences prior to the assessment of planning and execution from a German perspective.
The situation at the operational level mirrored the challenges identified at strategic level.
The Aufmarsch, with its initial decisive action in the west against France, assigned the 8th Army in the east the mission to defend Eastern Prussia and to defeat Russian forces. 
101
102
103
102 Ibid. 
103
Ludendorff. 105
106
108
109
The Area ofoperation comprised Eastern Prussia. It bordered the Baltic Sea in the north, Russia in the east and south, and the river Weichsel to the west. The Masurian Lakes divided the terrain into two avenues of approach suitable for an attack of not more than one army. The 104 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 17. 
105
106 Jbid.
107 Erich von Ludendorff, Meine Kriegserinnernungen 1914-1918 (Berlin, Germany:  Ernst Siegfried Mittler und Sohn, 1921 ), 15.
108 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 18.
109 Ibid., 16. Russian situation. 1 st Njemen Army, on the north avenue, with four corps and five cavalry divisions, was employed along the Angerapp River between Gumbinnen and Angerburg and orientated towards west-south-west. This disposition allowed the 1 st Njemen Army to pursue the German forces along the western avenue of approach and to threaten the fortress of cavalry divisions, was moving to contact on the southern avenue of approach and had crossed the border between Russia and Germany. 
111
116
117
118
119
120
122
In first place we opposed a thin center to Samsonoff's solid mass. I say thin not weak. For it was composed of men with hearts and wills of steel... While this center was engaged two important groups on its wings were to carry out the decisive attack ... Ist Corps ...from the north-west ... 17th Corps and I st Reserve Corps ... from north and north east. .. we had to annihilate [Samsonoff]. Only thus could we get a free hand to deal with ... Rennenkampf ... Only thus we really and completely free our old Prussian land ... 
116
117 Ibid., 83. 
118 Ludendorff, Meine Kriegserinnernungen 1914
-1918, 16. 119
120
121 Ibid., 85.
122 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 29.
Everything must be thrown in which could prove of slightest use in maneuver warfare and could at all be spared. 
123
124
125
126
127
Based on this approach the operation consisted of two efforts; First the defeat of 2nd Narew Army and second, the defeat of 1st Njemen Army. The defeat of the 2nd Narew Army required several tactical actions, which had to be sequenced in time and space to get to mutually supporting effects against the army of Samsonov. XX Corps had to defend against 2nd Narew Army to fix 2nd Narew Army in order to protect 8th Army's southern flank and set conditions for the later attack against it. The purpose was to delay 2nd Narew's attack towards north by keeping Samsonov in a position in which Rennenkampf could not support him. 
128
124 Showalter, Tannenberg Clash ofEmpires 1914, 196.
126 Ibid., 21.
127 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 25.
128 Ibid., 28 to attack 2nd Narew Anny together with the mass of gth Anny as soon as I Corps had arrived. !st Corps was to march by train into the vicinity of XX Corps and position on its right flank. Followon mission was to attack in conjunction with XX Corps against 2nd Narew army's main body. I Reserve Corps and XVII Corps had to break contact with 1st Njemen Anny and withdraw to the west. I Reserve Corps then had to march south towards 2nd Narew Anny, then attack further south and support the attack against 2nd Narew Anny's main body. The follow-on task for XVII Corps was not defined at that time. 1st Cavalry Division delays 1st Njemen Anny. These actions were aimed at shaping the conditions for the decisive operation for the first effort, when all corps of gth Anny mass against 2nd Narew Anny in the south and attack simultaneously. 
129
Narew Anny was defeated, gth Anny had to attack 1st Njemen Anny north east of the Masurian Lakes. 
130
131
132
130
131 Showalter, Tannenberg Clash ofEmpires 1914, 152. 132 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 46-47. 133
The planned operational approach clearly indicated the cognitive effort, which current US doctrine understands as operational art. Ludendorff and Hindenburg orientated their planning towards the assigned strategic goal. Both understood that a withdrawal to the Weichsel River would fail to meet the strategic objective and allow the Russian armies to concentrate their combat power against the German forces. ADRP 3-0 postulates that commanders include the desired end state and conditions into military planning. 
134
135
However, Hindenburg and Ludendorff accepted this risk to create mass in the south in order to conduct the decisive operation against the 2nd Narew Army. The economy of forces in the north with a cavalry division delaying against the enemy had three levels of risks. First, the loss of the only cavalry element within the 8th Army would significantly deteriorate reconnaissance capabilities for follow-on operations. Second, the tactical risk of employing a German unit in a delay operation was not reflected in training or doctrine. 
136
If the eastern theater had not met its objective, the western theater had to shift additional forces to the east. This contradicted the intent of the approach at the strategic level. Hindenburg and 134 ADRP 3-0, 4-3.
135 Ibid., 4-2. 
136
Ludendorff were aware of these risks and weighed them against the created opportunities. 
137
138
139
141
142
137 Ludendorff, Meine Kriegserinnernungen 1914
-1918, l 6 -17. 138
139
140
141 Ibid., 91. 
142 Ludendorff, Meine Kriegserinnernungen 1914
-1918, 167
143
The developed operational approach was executed beginning August 23, 1914.
The challenges in leading a modem mass-army can only be overcome, if the army commanders are constantly aware of their belonging to a greater whole. 
144
154
155
156
The trust in the accuracy ofthe collected intelligence on the enemy intent and situation, coupled with the capabilities of 1st CavDiv was enormous. If one of these elements turned out to be unworthy, the operation would fail, subsequently leading to a failure to achieve this strategic objective. In US ATP 5-19, this risk is labeled as "catastrophic" due to the consequence of complete mission failure. 
157
Through the lens of operational art, the 'arranging tactical actions in pursuit of strategic objectives, while accounting for risk' and 'balancing risk and opportunity', this decision 154 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 49.
155 ADRP 3-0, 4-2.
156 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 45.
emphasized the commitment of the 8th Army to achieve the assigned strategic objective. 
158
173 Ludendorff, Meine Kriegserinnerungen 1914-191 8, 17.
184
186
187
Assumed risks, trust in capabilities and morale, and consequent synchronization of efforts and movements led to the success of the 8th Army. Hindenburg had assumed significant risk to the strategic goal in Eastern Prussia by developing an operational approach, which employed very few forces against a whole enemy Army, while he concentrated the majority of forces against the 2nd Narew Army. The complexity of the required movements and mutually supporting efforts was a risk at operational level itself. The leadership of the German Forces in Eastern Prussia understood the strategic context of its operation and accepted the unfavorable force ratio to avoid a weakening of the strategic effort of Germany against France. Mitigating this risk were three elements. First, deception; the delay of 1st CavDiv against 1st Njemen Army in the north, which deceived the enemy by indicating that the 1st Njemen Army was facing stronger German forces in the north. The second mitigating factor was situational awareness. The available German air and signal intelligence provided a clear and accurate picture of enemy disposition and intent. Finally, 
184
Army had an unfavorable force ratio for this task indicates that the OHL trusted in the capabilities of Hindenburg and Ludendorff. The fact that after the initial battle at Gumbinnen solely the commander was replaced while the force posture was maintained supports this interpretation.
Trust among the members of the staff and in their capabilities facilitated planning and reduced frictions during the planning. Hindenburg's trust in the motivation and capabilities of the employed forces is especially obvious when his numerically inferior forces (XX Corps) opposed the 2nd Narew Army initially. Hindenburg's and Ludendorff's belief in the capabilities of their forces and headquarters is also implied in the fact that the developed operational approach was not simple in the execution and required synchronization. German military doctrine and thought of the early 20th century demanded synchronized military actions at and in between all levels of war. The two quotations at the beginning of this sections are separated by 100 years. However, the message remains constant. Military actions need to be nested to the higher level of war and synchronized in the execution. This is the core of operational art and reflected in the battles ofTannenberg.
188 D.V.E. Nr. 53, 16 (translated by the author).
189 ADP 3-0, 9.
36  
36  
93  
93  
176 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 142.
176 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 142.
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command (Washington, DC: GPO, May 2012), 1.
Army Doctrinal Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: GPO, May 2012); Army Doctrine Publication (ADRP) 5-0, The Operations Process (Washington, DC: GPO, May 2012).
Kriegsministerium, Grundzuege der hoeheren Truppenfuehrung (D. V.E. Nr.53) (Berlin, Germany: Reichsdruckerei, 01January1910).
Markus Poehlmann, Der erste Weltkrieg 1914-1918. Der deutsche Aufmarsch in ein kriegerisches Jahrhundert (Muenchen, Germany: Bucher Verlag, 2014), 12.
Poehlmann, Der erste Weltkrieg 1914-1918. Der deutsche Aufmarsch in ein kriegerisches Jahrhundert, 12.
Showalter, Tannenberg Clash ofEmpires 1914, 108.    
Ibid., 110.   
Gross, Mythos und Wirklichkeit: Geschichte des operative Denkens im deutschen Heer van Moltke d.Ae. bis Heusinger, 109.
Schaefer, Tannenberg, 28.   
Gross, Mythos und Wirklichkeit: Geschichte des operative Denkens im deutschen Heer von Moltke d.Ae. bis Heusinger, 99.
Dupuy, Der  Genius des Krieges: Das deutsche Heer und der Genera/stab1807 -1945,  188.   
Michael Duffy, "Who is Who -Maximilian von Prittwitz," firstworldwar.com (August 2009): accessed November 18, 2014, http://www.firstworldwar.com/bio/prittwitz.htm.
Hindenburg, Out ofMy Life,
9.
Ibid., 57.   
Michael Duffy, "Who is Who -Paul von Rennenkampf," firstworldwar.com (August 2009): accessed November 18, 2014, http://www.firstworldwar.com/bio/rennenkampf.htm. JOO Michael Duffy, "Who is Who -Alexander Sansonov," firstworldwar.com (August 2009): accessed November 18, 2014, http://www.firstworldwar.com/bio/samsonov.htm.
0 Showalter, Tannenberg Clash ofEmpires 1914, 9.Ill Ibid.
D.V.E. Nr.53, 16.    
Schaefer, Tannenberg,
45.
Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 5-19: Risk Management (Washington, DC: GPO, April 2014), 1-9.
Hindenburg, Out ofmy Life,[87][88] 
26.127. August. In this period the 8th Army fought two battles against elements ofthe 2nd Narew Army. Russian Situation: Still the 1st Njemen Army did not decisively engage the German forces in the north. The 2nd Narew Army employed I and XXIII Corps against the German I.
Corps and XX Corps. The Russian XV And XIII Corps were able to advance further north. 
161
163
164
165
168
169
170
167 Ludendorff, Meine Kriegserinnernungen 1914
-1918, 18.
169 Schaefer, Tannenberg, 118.
However, the effort against Rennenkampf was the final phase of the campaign in Eastern Prussia .
/ .--... The elaborations on the German society and political influences in section 2 highlighted that the German situation demanded action due to the geographical position of Germany and its political isolation. The numerical inferiority of military forces was mitigated through acceptance of higher risks at all levels of war. Patriotism and cohesion in the society supported this approach. The military educational system created cognitive cohesion and mutual trust in capabilities and procedures. Further, the common military education and training created shared understanding in procedures. The trust in military capabilities led to higher risk acceptance. While identified risk in today's US Army's operational art encourages mitigation where possible, the German operational thought cognitively mitigated risk. In Germany, risk was present before planning and execution commenced; the political and geographical constellation created a risk heavy environment. Trust in the German military's capabilities and military entities had mitigating effect. Today's US Army's operational art applies risk acceptance to create opportunity. German operational thought saw risk as common element of operational planning and execution.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff operated in this risk heavy environment. The 8th Army executed its operation by synchronizing their actions in time, space, and purpose permanently orientated at conditions and nested in the strategic goal. Hindenburg cognitively synchronized his operations with the OHL's intent and physically synchronized the maneuvers of his corps on the battlefield.
The aspect of synchronization in today's operational environment has gained complexity through additional actors, asymmetry, and air operations. Current synchronization of military planning and execution of operations has lost flexibility -it demands more technical synchronization to achieve 'deconfliction' of air, land, sea and civilian domains. This monograph has identified the role of synchronization on a contemporary battlefield as a possible aspect for further analysis. Particularly the tension between mission command with its intent to enable flexibility, versus synchronization with its constraining effect of time driven coordination The German 8th Army at Tannenberg 1914 applied operational art as US Army doctrine understands it today. However, the difference between Germany operating at Tannenberg in relation to risk and US Army operational art is obvious and based on the German political and social environment in the early 20th century.