# ID: 3bd0cad5f8154242979323ffea00c2dc
# Title: Learning to win when fighting outnumbered: operational risk in the US Army, 1973-1982, and the influence of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
In October 1973, Israel fought and won a ferocious three-week war against a large, capable, highly motivated, and well-equipped Arab coalition, illuminating key lessons about the evolving nature of modern, mid-intensity combat. The Israel Defense Force (IDF) overcame the seemingly unprecedented lethality, intensity, and density of the modern battlefield through bold operational maneuver and risk-taking on both fronts. This thesis seeks to explore how Israel's performance in the war influenced an evolved conceptualization of, preparation for, and response to operational risk within the U.S. Army between 1973 and 1982. It defines and applies a more neutral definition of risk: the effects of uncertainty upon one's objectives. It argues that the U.S. Army learned a great deal about operational risk from the IDF. Although it largely succeeded in integrating those insights into its capstone doctrine and concepts, it failed to operationalize them fully within its warfighting elements because of a number of cultural and institutional differences between the two armies.
15.
As war continues, it generally becomes an affair of chances, chances from which [neither side] is exempt, and whose event we must risk in the dark.
-Thucydides, quoted in Robert Strassler, The Landmark Thucydides   War is the realm of uncertainty; three quarters of the factors on which action in war is based are wrapped in a fog of greater or lesser uncertainty . . . War is the realm of chance. No other human activity gives it greater scope: no other has such incessant and varied dealings with this intruder. Chance makes everything more uncertain and interferes with the whole course of events.
-Carl von Clausewitz, On War Background On 6 October 1973, Egypt and Syria launched a massive, coordinated attack against Israel, employing combined-arms maneuver-of unprecedented scale and success-across the Suez Canal and through the Golan Heights, respectively. This twofront war by an unexpectedly capable enemy caught Israeli political and military leaders by surprise. It shattered the sense of superiority and resulting overconfidence that had set in following Israel's dominating victory over a large Arab coalition in the Six-Day War of 1967. Arab successes in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War exposed flaws in Israel's strategic doctrine and new operational vulnerabilities given the proliferation of advanced modern weapons. Since 1967, Israel had adopted a more defensive strategy in which its previous doctrine of preemption was replaced by one of containment and counteroffensive. 1 3 remarkable performance on the battlefield, at the tactical level for sure, 6 but especially at the operational level. For the United States, the 1973 Arab-Israeli War not only demonstrated the devastating effectiveness of the new precision-guided weapons, but also suggested that America's current doctrine of deterrence and counter-offensive for a subnuclear, conventional war against the Warsaw Pact was no longer sufficient to adequately counter the threat to Western Europe.
In 1973, the U.S. Army was at an inflection point: it was dramatically drawing down the decade-long war in Vietnam, reducing its overall force structure, cutting its budget, and transforming into an all-volunteer force-all while sustaining its presence in Europe to deter the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact. General William DePuy assumed command of the Army's newly formed Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) in July 1973. 
7
6
19-87. 7
8
9
TRADOC then tasked the Combined Arms Center (CAC) to form and direct a Special Readiness Study Group (SRSG). Brigadier General Morris Brady led the team, which, in July 1974, produced a massive report detailing 162 specific recommendations for the Army. DePuy wrote a crisp summary of the SRSG's findings and submitted them directly to General Abrams. 
10
11
12
DePuy's successor at TRADOC, General Donn Starry, recognized this deficiency. He had spent a significant amount of time in Israel after the 1973 War and engaged senior Israeli commanders on doctrinal concepts at both the tactical and operational levels. He understood that both the Army's immediate post-Vietnam doctrine (i.e., the 1976 version of Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations) and the professional military education for 
11
officers lacked appropriate emphasis on the operational level of war, and he saw it as his responsibility to ultimately address those deficiencies. 
13
14
13
14
The 1973 Arab-Israeli War revealed multiple areas on which the U.S. Army needed to focus developmental energies and resources-from training standards for infantry and tank crews to materiel solutions to counter the "new lethality" of precisionguided weapons. 
16
15
16
17
18
First, what were the available lessons with respect to operational risk from the IDF and its performance during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War? Second, how did the U.S. Army interpret this evidence, and to what extent and how did the U.S. Army integrate these lessons about operational risk into its capstone doctrine and concepts? Third, to what and how did the U.S. Army operationalize its evolved doctrinal concepts concerning operational risk within the warfighting force. 17 Michael Carver, "Conventional War in the Nuclear Age," in Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986), 797-798. 
18
This study is a qualitative historical analysis: a study of social and military phenomena using records and accounts. 
19
Army. 20
1
19
20
will then analyze how the U.S. Army interpreted those lessons and integrated those interpretations into its capstone doctrine. Concurrently with the study of the doctrinal integration, it will examine how the Army attempted to operationalize these new doctrinal concepts with respect to risk within it warfighting elements. In order to effectively isolate the concept of operational risk for analysis in the primary-and secondary-source documents available for study, suitable definitions of operational risk and the associated actions taken to prepare for or respond to (i.e., accept, reject, and or mitigate) that risk are required. The subject of risk is a difficult one for theorists in any field, let alone the military. The Prussian war theorist, Carl von Clausewitz, famously grappled with the question of risk in his discussion of war's "paradoxical trinity." Clausewitz aligned war's enduring and fundamental characteristics with the following entities: with the people, the powerful forces of "primordial violence, hatred, and enmity;" with the government, the responsibility to leverage reason to subordinate war as an instrument of policy; and finally, with the military, the responsibility to wrestle with war's complex demands to "allow the play of chance and probability within which the creative spirit is free to roam."
21
22
23
Recent work by Major David Lamborn on operational risk offers a definition that this study will apply: "Any friendly decision, enemy action, or environmental change that presents opportunity or poses a threat, is filled with uncertainty, and requires action." 
25
26
2
24
25
26
27
28
29
28
29
30
31
32
(3) operational reach and terrain; (4) phasing and transitions; and (5) higher-headquarters guidance. 
33
30
Meredith,
5. 31
32
34
The U.S. Army learned a great deal about operational risk from the IDF's experience during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. It largely succeeded in integrating those insights into its capstone doctrine and concepts, but failed to operationalize them fully within its warfighting elements because of a number of cultural and institutional differences between the two armies. These factors include an overreliance and emphasis upon superior technology; a corporate-style, top-down-driven management system; a deep-rooted and growing cultural risk aversion, especially given an increasing emphasis on casualty avoidance; and the absence of a truly existential, sub-nuclear/conventional military threat.
This study provides an assessment of how a transitioning U.S. Army analyzed and responded to lessons regarding how to identify and then respond to operational risk from an allied, but culturally different army. This study is not intended to serve as a comprehensive historical analysis of the U.S. Army's reform and modernization from 1973 to 1982; others have handled this in great detail (see Chapter 2, "Literature Review"). Additionally, although the influence of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War will serve as the primary analytical focus, other factors, such as the study of evolving Soviet doctrine and the influence of military history and theory, will also be considered.
Chapter 2 will provide a survey and analysis of the most significant works within the several distinct bodies of literature over which this study ranges. Specifically, this chapter will explore three main literatures: works on risk, both broadly and through a more specific lens; the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, including the operational and strategic context of the preceding period; and the U.S. Army's efforts to reform and modernize in the 1970s and 1980s. Finally, this chapter will identify the collections of available primary-source materials that are critical to the examination of this study's topic.
The three subsequent body chapters address the aforementioned research questions in detail. Through an assessment of how the IDF prepared its officers for the effects of uncertainty and how they responded to it during the 1973 War, chapter 3 will develop and articulate the IDF model of operational risk-taking potentially available to the U.S. Army in the period of study, engagement, and reflection that followed.
Chapter 4 will explore the first tranche of lessons that the U.S. Army extracted from that conflict with respect to operational risk, and then how it integrated those lessons into a dramatically revised version of its capstone manual, FM 100-5. Chapter 5 will consider the second tranche of lessons that the Army extracted from the 1973 War, and then how it integrated those into another dramatic revision of FM 100-5.
Additionally, this chapter will examine the impact of the Army's concurrent reforms in training, education, leader development, and equipment modernization-and the extent to which they facilitated or hindered the Army's ability to implement its evolving ideas concerning operational risk.
Finally, chapter 6 will offer some conclusions, in three parts. The first will provide a concise summary of the argument over the principle period under study (1973-1982) and a discussion of some of the overarching themes that emerged over the course of this inquiry. The second part will provide a brief epilogue of some of the additional reforms that the Army carried out over the subsequent decade as well as an assessment of the Army's performance, with respect to operational risk, during the 1991 Persian Gulf War. The purpose is two-fold: (1) to provide a better assessment of how effectively the Army implemented its evolved understanding of operational risk; and (2) what this extended two-decade period of reform and modernization suggests about the so-called American Way of War. The chapter concludes with some observations concerning the value and applicability of this study to the contemporary Army.
Scholars have never undertaken a formal inquiry concerning the influence of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War on the ways in which the post-Vietnam U.S. Army conceptualized, prepared for, and responded to operational risk. This is a specific topic, but one that ranges across several distinct bodies of literature. Therefore, this chapter will survey and analyze the most significant works in these individual (and sometimes, overlapping) literatures: risk, defined both broadly and militarily; the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, including both the IDF and the Arab armies of the period; and the U.S. Army's efforts to reform and modernize in the 1970s and 1980s. These literatures reveal many of the related events, concepts, and efforts that, when considered together, illuminate key insights concerning this study's topic. Of particular interest in these literatures are the IDF's and U.S. military's approaches to command and control, the operational level of warfare, and operational art-all of which help to inform how both militaries considered and engaged uncertainty at the operational level, both before and during conflict. Finally, this chapter will identify the collections of primary-source materials that are critical to the examination of this study's topic.
The literature on risk in the organizational sciences is vast, but is dominated by financial and business contexts. Of particular concern for this study is defining risk and the actions that organizations take both to prepare for and respond to it. Scholars in the field have frequently noted the instability of risk as a concept, with disciplines often using different definitions 
35
36
Bernstein's sweeping history, Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk, argues that a "mastery" of the concept was perhaps the primary catalyst enabling humanity to cross modernity's threshold. 
37
Cline's work sits astride two important domains: those of both the academic and military spheres. In his study of risk's etymology 38 and in a recent white paper written for 
35
36 Stanley Kaplan, "The Words of Risk Analysis," Risk Analysis 17, no. 4 (1997): 407-417. 
37
38
41
Standardization, a standard-setting body comprising representatives from various national standards organizations, currently defines risk as "the effect of uncertainty upon objectives." 42 This broad definition of risk is more useful to this study because it does not 39 Preston Cline, "Risk Management for U.S. Army Special Operations: Addressing the Need to Continuously Adapt to a Changing Problem Set" (White Paper, U.S. Army Special Operations Command, Fort Bragg, NC, 2013), 1-18. 40 R. Cotgrave and C. Hollyband, A Dictionarie of the French and English Tongues (London: Adam Islip, 1611), quoted in Cline, "The Etymology of Risk," 9. 41 T. Blount, Glossographia: Or a Dictionary, interpreting all such hard words of whatsoever language, now used in our refined English tongue with etymologies, definitions, and historical observations on the same (London: Thomas Nevv, 1661), quoted in Cline, "The Etymology of Risk," 12. 
42
43
44
43
44 Bousquet,
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
45
This study focuses on the period during which the West, especially the U.S. military, transitioned from the cybernetic to the chaoplexic regime. The illusion of control and certainty promised by the rise of computers, information science, and operations research and systems analysts during the Vietnam period was beginning to fade. In their place, thinking emerged that placed increased emphasis on war's inherent complexity and uncertainty-characteristics that leaders could exploit and embrace rather than assiduously avoid. This new thinking would have considerable impacts on the approach to military risk, especially at the operational level. For example, General Stanley McChrystal, who commanded the Joint Special Operations Command and later the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, argued that the availability of vast amounts of data "can seduce leaders into thinking that they understand and can predict complex situations-that they can see what will happen. But the speed and 
45
47
The first of these, Major Jon Meredith's "Operational Risk and the American Way of War," explores American doctrine from 1949 to the present "to identify the risk tendencies of modern U.S. ground forces and their roots" and leverages a case study of the primary Korean War campaign from November 1950 from two perspectives, that of the U.S. X Corps and its opponent, the Chinese People's Volunteer Army. 
48
46 General Stanley McChrystal,
Tantum Collins,
David Silverman,
and Chris Fussell,
Team of
48
49
50
Although none of the literature specifically treats this topic with any real depth, on the whole these materials provide importance context: how Israel set conditions to effectively engage and respond to operational risk as well as how it performed (and why) when confronted with uncertainty during the conflict.
Shortly after the war's thirtieth anniversary, the Israeli scholar Uri Bar-Joseph noted that the conflict has never received the appropriate amount of formal academic attention that it deserves.  and Space Museum Walter J. Boyne. Originally, there was no substantive criticism levied against the IDF for its lack of preparedness; but, over the last twenty years, a more honest, scholarly evaluation of some Israeli military mistakes has emerged. Topics for criticism include the IDF's overreliance on the tank, its lack of combined-arms integration, and its shift in strategic doctrine to something more defensive in orientation. 
53
Although the book's editors rejected the use of footnotes, the contents draw readily on complementary accounts of the war, including multiple media sources in the West, Israel, 
53
Horowitz. It provides detailed analysis of the IDF's evolution from an underground force during the 1948-1949 War for Independence to the modern, professionalized force of the 1960s and beyond. It examines the reasons (internal and external) behind its changing doctrines, approach to leadership, and the modernization of its equipment as well as a detailed assessment of its performance in the 1967 Six-Day War and the period of transition that followed. 
58
59
59 Shamir,
Transforming Command,
[82]
[83]
[84]
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]
60
61
62
The historiography on the U.S. Army between the Vietnam and Persian Gulf Wars lacks the depth or synthesis of other interwar periods in the service's history. The likely reason for this is the institution's pervasive discomfort with the specter of (strategic) defeat in Vietnam. The number of formal, external-to-the-Army scholarly works are limited, although there are some important exceptions. Most of the literature on this important period of reform and modernization comes from command historians and soldier-scholars, many of whom were disgruntled by the experience of Vietnam. 
63
64
The author also considers the roles played by TRADOC's first two commanders, comparing DePuy's intense focus on tactics, training, and weapons to Starry's emphasis on the operational level of war, pursuit of a better balance between firepower and maneuver, and stress on integrating a finer understanding of the human dimension of combat. 
65
66
In the second work, U.S. Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror, historian Walter Kretchik provides the most detailed, analytical exegesis of the Army's capstone doctrine in the literature set against the backdrop of the Cold War and in response to the condition in which the Army found itself after Vietnam. In addition including competing foreign agendas and evolving Soviet doctrine, which would influence the U.S. Army's approach to operational risk. 
69
He frames the debate that occurred during the period as one between maneuverists and attritionists, with the former ultimately prevailing through a more nuanced study of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. Additionally, the maneuverists employed insights from the classical military theorists, both German and Soviet theory and doctrine, as well as the history and philosophy of war, particularly those writings that emphasized war's enduring qualities: something that was fundamentally uncertain, human, and a clash of wills. 
70
Jensen explores the dynamics underpinning doctrinal change in an entrenched, conservative bureaucracy like the U.S. Army. Significant to the present study, he compares and contrasts the methods employed by Generals DePuy and Starry during their respective tenures as the commanding general of TRADOC, particularly their varying use of "incubators" and advocacy networks" to develop key concepts and principles and then 
69
70
71
With respect to the 1973 War, this study will use two types of primary-source materials. The first are those materials that detail how the war was planned and prosecuted by both sides. Available materials include the English-language participant accounts discussed earlier in this literature review. Additionally, more formal, academically-arbitrated Israeli efforts to discern lessons in the war's immediate aftermath will prove useful. 
72
General William DePuy, who served as TRADOC commander from 1973
-1977, 73 General Donn Starry,
Europe, and
TRADOC commander from 1973-1981;
74
75
Army CGSC,
SAMS,
and War College. 76
The purpose of this chapter is to examine the IDF's conceptualization of, preparation for, and response to operational risk before and during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. In other words, it seeks to determine the potential insights that were available to the U.S. Army, which would study this conflict extensively over the subsequent decade, drawing lessons that would influence its capstone doctrine and approach to fighting on the modern, mid-intensity, conventional battlefield. This chapter begins with an analysis of how the IDF conceptualized and prepared for risk in its training, education, planning, and preparation. Next, it looks specifically at the IDF's performance with respect to risk during the 1973 War. It attempts to bound operational risk by examining the dynamics of strategic and tactical risk during the conflict. Then, it concludes with an analysis of the role that operational risk played along both fronts during the war.
(Operational) Risk and the IDF: Conceptualization and Preparation On the eve of the Six-Day War in late May 1967, the newly appointed Israeli Minister of Defense, Moshe Dayan, compared Egyptian dispositions and decisionmaking in battle to those of the IDF: "One of our basic advantages over the enemy is our ability to improvise during the course of a battle and to do so quickly. Thus, our plans [need a design] to create situations in which the Egyptians [will] have to make operational changes, which they [will] do slowly and ineffectually." 
79
Simply put, the IDF's attitude toward military risk was that it was unavoidable. 
80
Inculcated into and demanded of leaders at every echelon were the following traits: individual daring (heaza), maintenance of aim (dvekut bamatara), improvisation (iltur), and resourcefulness (tushia). 
81
82
82
83
Cadre identified officers and non-commissioned officers through their initial performance and demonstrable potential (the cream of which went to the combat arms) and then channeled them into rigorous, high-attrition selection programs. 
84
85
86
What many call a deep-rooted anti-intellectualism in the IDF should be alternatively interpreted as a dedication to developing an aggressive, practically-oriented, and open-minded learning organization. 
87
Army War College, they did develop a staff college modeled on the U.S. Army's CGSC as well as a policy to identify and select more senior officers to attend advanced civilian academic educations. 
88
89
90
87 Some scholars have commented on the anti-intellectualism of the pre-1973 IDF. See for example, Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors on the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the U. S., and Israel  (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010), 119-122; Shamir, Transforming  Command, 88. However, one should interpret this more as an aversion to traditional military academies and the deep study of military theory (in an abstract sense) than as a lack of creative and critical thinking amongst the officer corps. The IDF's leaders were more practically oriented than many of their Western peers. 
88
89
90
Despite the assertions of some, 91 many others assess that the IDF's senior commanders proved adept at the operational level. 
92
93
94
95
96
91
92
Citino,
Kober,
[166]
[167]
[168]
[169]
[170]
[171]
[172]
[173]
[174]
[175]
[176]
[177]
94
95
96
with both rigor and creativity. For example, on the eve of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the editors of Armed Forces Journal conducted an issue-length examination of Israel and the IDF. They interviewed an IDF officer who had attended both the IDF and U.S. Army staff colleges. When asked to compare the two experiences, he responded: "To be number one [at the U.S. Army Staff College], know the school solution. In Israel, you flunk out if you can't come up with an original plan." Similarly, they interviewed Yehuda Vallach, a professor of military history at the University of Tel Aviv, who offered the following observation: "First, we're not tied down to theories and dogma: our thinking is open-minded. Second, it's the 'strategy of indirect approach'-doing the unexpected in space, time, and direction." 
97
98
99
98
99
approach was thus attritional, acknowledging the political and strategic reality that Israel neither could afford nor was it optimized for an extended, grinding, and high-casualty fight. 
100
101
As discussed in chapter 1, Major David Lamborn developed definitions for strategic, operational, and tactical risk that this present study will apply. He defines 100 John A. Lynn, Battle: A History of Combat and Culture from Ancient Greece to Modern America (New York: Westview Press, 2003), 85. Lynn argues, "maneuver requires tactical flexibility and improvisation guides by accurate and timely intelligence, and Arab military culture . . . repeatedly found these abilities to be elusive. Thus, Arab armies have suffered in present day conflict where maneuver warfare has proven its superiority. Yet by military alchemy, the Egyptians created a set-piece battle ruled by attrition in October 1973." strategic risk as "balancing ends (political objectives) with means (national resources) over an extended and unknown period of time." He argues further that appropriate actions taken in response to such risk include "setting achievable aims, committing sufficient resources, and working continuously to bolster public and international support." 102 During the 1973 War, the key Israeli strategic decision makers were Prime Minister Golda Meir (and the Israeli Parliament or Knesset), her so-called "Kitchen Cabinet," Minister of Defense Moshe Dayan, and IDF Chief of Staff David Elazar. This study argues that they made at least four key decisions to address risk at the strategic level during the war, excepting the ever-ambiguous question of Israel's presumed nuclear arsenal and its potential deployment. 
103
Despite the aggregation of increasingly menacing evidence along both the southern and northern fronts over 4-5 October, the enduring influence of the "concept" continued to discourage Israel's strategic leadership from coming to grips with the imminence of a 102 Lamborn, 29.
103 A fifth such strategic decision concerned whether or not to deploy Israel's presumed nuclear arsenal. However, since Israel pursued a policy of "nuclear ambiguity" (never formally acknowledging nor denying their possession of such weapons), the decision-making and risk calculus concerning their potential deployment in the war is addressed unevenly in the literature. Of note, Boyne argues that Dayan's dominant role in Israel's nuclear program may have adversely affected his decision-making approach during the war; see Boyne, 7. Additionally, current scholarship argues that at no point did Israel use the threat of deploying its nuclear weapons as leverage to facilitate increased U.S. materiel support during the conflict; see Simcha Dinitz, "The Yom Kippur War: Diplomacy of War and Peace," in Kumaraswamy, 118.  large-scale Arab attack. 
104
105
106
Second, the prime minister decided against conducting a preemptive strike at the aforementioned meeting of the Kitchen Cabinet on the morning of 6 October. Dayan argued that such a strike, even one far more limited in scope than what the IDF had executed in 1967, "would burden [their] prospects of securing the full support of the United States."
107
Third, Israel needed to decide which front to designate as the initial strategic main effort. Israel's defensive plans had long called for fighting along only one front at a time so the simultaneity of the Arabs' two-front attack caused a strategic dilemma. After Dayan observed the desperation of the holding action along the Golan front, he initially recommended to Meir the execution of a tactical withdrawal and the establishment of a defensive line along the escarpment overlooking the Jordan Valley. Elazar's subsequent decision to deploy Brigadier General Musa Peled's reserve division to the Golan prevented the withdrawal and the assumption of such a defensive posture. 
108
109
Israel's defensive plans were a natural extension of its evolving doctrine. Their territorial gains from the 1967 War had provided them with much-needed strategic depth, more so along the southern front than in the north. Consequently, their approach shifted from one of preemptive attack to containment and counterattack. 110 Defenses along both fronts were designed to allow the IDF to blunt or contain the initial Arab assault, buying time for mobilized reserves to deploy and counterattack. Israel's war aims were the retention of the occupied lands and to carry the fight into the Arab territory in advance of the anticipated superpower-imposed ceasefires. 
111
112
109
110 Shamir,
Transforming Command,
[90]
[91]
112 See Brecher, 172-173 for a catalogue of these decisions.
surprised their counterparts in Washington, DC. 
113
114
115
Tactical leaders had to find ways to mitigate or counter the capabilities of the new precision-guided weapons, essentially rediscovering and re-implementing the combinedarms tactics from which they had strayed before the war. For example, prior to launching Tactical risks also included dealing with the potentially debilitating effects of heavy casualties, fear, destroyed equipment, fatigue, and dehydration. The burden of managing these risks largely fell on the backs of the IDF's small-unit leaders. The IDF's approach to these risks was less a deliberate calculus than an outgrowth of the ways in which these tactical leaders were assessed, selected, and trained. 
118
War in 1967. 119
116
117 Chaim Herzog, The Arab-Israeli Wars: War and Peace in the Middle East 
(New York: Random House, 1982), 255-256. 118
119 "Israel's Officer Casualties Soar," Armed Forces Journal, 111, no. 7 (March  1974): 18. This blurb also compares the IDF officer casualty rates with those of the U.S. Army during the Vietnam War (9 percent) and World War II (7 percent). occasionally, to the acceptance of unnecessary risks, limiting the ability of some officers to coordinate and control the broader battle. 
120
121
Combining insights from Lamborn and Major Jon Meredith, this study applies the following definition of operational risk: "Any friendly decision, enemy action, or environmental change that presents opportunity for or poses a threat to the reason for which the operation was conceived in the first place, is filled with uncertainty, and 120 Jonathan M. House, Combined Arms Warfare in the Twentieth Century (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2001), 235. As an example, he discusses an incident that occurred on 8 October, the day of the IDF's failed counterattack in the Sinai, during which several field-grade commanders risked themselves in personal efforts to rescue an isolated Bar Lev strongpoint, leading to problems with the synchronization, command, and control of the broader fight; for more, see Adan, On the Banks of the Suez, 139-142. 
121
123
124
3
122
123
124 Meredith,
[6]
[7]
[8]
56.
125
125
128
129
127
128 With respect to the precision-guided munitions, the IDF had observed the effectiveness of the Syrians' anti-tank weapons, especially the RPG-29, during several "battle" day encounters in 1972 and earlier in 1973. However, the Syrians' Soviet advisors had insisted that the Syrians demonstrate greater restraint in their employment of their new integrated air defense system; for example, during an air battle over Syria on 13 September, the Soviets denied them the fuses for their SAMs, effectively allowing the Syrian fighters to be shot out of the sky by the IAF's Phantoms and Mirages. See Dunstan, The Yom Kippur War (1), 23, 26.
SAM umbrella put considerable pressure on the defenders. 
130
131
3
The second day of fighting, 7 October, was a pivotal day along this front; actions set conditions for the IDF to resume the initiative. On the Syrian side, Minister of Defense, Major General Mustafa Tlas, who was double-hatted as the overall military commander of the war, maintained a rigid hierarchical command structure and insisted upon close adherence to the original plan, greatly constraining available tactical maneuver to his forces. 
132
133
On the Israeli side, the IDF's mobilizing reserves began to arrive and, at least initially, commanders piecemealed them into the defensive line. It was during this time that the IDF's decentralized, more fluid system of command began to demonstrate its advantages. Although Hofi remained resilient and capable throughout the conflict, the arrival of Peled and Laner paid huge dividends in returning a sense of focus to the fight.
Both commanders exercised prudent judgment as their rapidly mobilizing divisions approached the zone of contact. Laner worked out more effective sectors of responsibility with Brigadier General Rafael Eitan, who had previously been commanding the entire tactical fight, splitting their respective areas roughly along the Benot Ya'akov-Kuneitra road. 
134
135
Hofi was laboring under the intense stress of the fight, focusing almost exclusively on how to strengthen the IDF's faltering defense. Upon Peled's arrival, the 
133
134
135
136
Peled convinced Hofi, Bar Lev, and ultimately Elazar of the utility of a counterattack, as it would threaten Syrian lines of communication, forcing them to withdraw forces from where they had made their most considerable gains. 
137
Over the next three days, the counterattack met considerable resistance, especially since the IDF's lack of combined-arms integration continued to make them vulnerable to anti-tank weapons, but succeeded in forcing the Syrians off the Golan Heights (see figure 
3
In their wake, the Syrians left 867 destroyed or abandoned tanks along with thousands of other vehicles, anti-tank guns, and air-defense systems. 
138
139
140
For the counterattack, Musa Peled's division remained in the defense along two thirds of the Golan, while the divisions of Eitan (the main effort) and Laner attacked from the north along the route to Damascus (see figure 
4
138
139
140
141
Finally, their approach to operational risk allowed them to dictate the fighting's tempo and drive the psychological momentum in their favor, a key factor in competitive cycles of decision-making. 
142
The situation along the southern front shared many similarities with that along the Golan Heights, but was also distinguished by several significant differences. Similar to Northern Command, Southern Command's operational purpose (codified in Operation Dovecote) was to retain the Sinai through containment of the initial assault followed almost immediately by aggressive counterattacks into Egyptian territory. 
143
142
143
144
Command,
Southern Command,
Major General Ariel Sharon. 145
146
The historiography is inconsistent about how to frame the fighting along the southern front into phases, but this study will use four: (1) the initial Egyptian canal crossing and consolidation of their gains on the east bank (6-7 October); (2) the fight for the bridgeheads (7-13 October), including the failed IDF counterattack on 8 October;
(3) the failed Egyptian offensive (14 October); and (4) the IDF's operational-level counteroffensive, highlighted by its ambitious crossing of the Suez Canal and ultimate 
144 Rabinovich,
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
147
The ferocity, precision, and mass of the initial Egyptian onslaught crushed the IDF's thin line of resistance (see figure 
6
148
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
152
Gawrych,
33. 153
6
154
155
156
157
158
On 9 October, Syria called for more aggressive offensive action from its Egyptian allies as its position against the IDF continued to deteriorate along the Golan Heights.
The Egyptians had planned and rehearsed, in excruciating detail, the fighting that they had executed through this stage of the operation, but they had only reluctantly considered potential follow-on actions. 
159
6
160
161
That same day, unaware of accelerating plans for a major Egyptian offensive, the IDF began designing a plan to cross the Suez. Believing that defeating Egypt, especially in a decisive fashion, was no longer viable in the near term, Elazar promoted the decision to cross as a means by which to provoke a cease-fire and provide the IDF with sufficient time to rebuild its battered army. Among the IDF's senior leaders, at both the strategic and operational levels, there was still much uncertainty: crossing the canal might provoke an extended attritional battle, which the IDF could not afford; the Israeli Air Force was, according to its commander, Major General Benny Peled, at its red line; and the Egyptians still had considerable quantitative advantages complemented by their dense formations of precision-guided weapons. However, by 12 October, the Mossad received and communicated a critical piece of intelligence that energized and gave greater focus to the IDF planning and decision-making: the Egyptians planned to assault two distant objectives (the Mitla Pass and the Rafidim base) on either 13 or 14 October with a heliborne paratroop force, a known precursor to larger-scale armored attack. 162 Thus, IDF guidance, always aggressive and seeking the initiative, gained a greater degree of precision with the acquisition of more detailed knowledge concerning Egypt's intent.
On 14 October, Egypt, abandoning its original limited objectives, launched a massive offensive across the width of the Sinai for which the IDF was prepared and thus defeated decisively (see figure 
5
163
164
162
163
164 Brigadier General S.A. El-Edroos remarked: "The catastrophic defeat suffered by the Egyptian tank corps reflected the inability of Egyptian commanders, from divisional to troop level, to conduct mobile, flexible, and fluid armor operations;" quoted in Brigadier General S. A. El-Edroos, The Hashemite Arab Army, 1908-1979 (Amman:  Amman Publishing Committee, 1980), 508; cited in 
Pollack, 117. since Kursk in 1943. 165
166
Egyptian situational awareness already suffered from an overly hierarchical command structure which constrained decentralized decision making and information flow. 
167
168
165
166
167
168
169
170
We've built our plan on sound military thinking. If I thought there was a risk of disaster, I wouldn't propose it. The plan is not built on luck. We're not going to all this trouble so that if a bridge is hit, then the show is over. The outcome of a battle can only be presumed. It can't be divined with absolute certainty. I believe that the chances of failing are pretty meager and the odds of success are good. How great the success will be I can't say, but it may be very great. 
171
The timetable of the Israeli crossing plan ultimately proved unrealistic, and they were consequently forced to fight through heavy resistance, on both sides of the canal, to achieve their operational objectives (see figure 
6
172
6
173
In summary, the arc of the fighting along the Sinai front reflects a similar pattern to that exhibited along the Golan front. There were two key inflection points, where increased uncertainty and a decision-making environment rich in risk had stalled the tempo of the fighting: on 7 October, after the Egyptians had successfully crossed the Suez Canal, breached the Bar Lev line, and were consolidating their gains along the canal's eastern bank; and, on 14-15 October, after the IDF had decisively defeated Egypt's attempted offensive to seize the strategically significant passes further east.
Again, the IDF pursued the riskier, less certain operational option in both cases (see figure 
9
173
Prior to the 1973 War, the IDF failed to fully appreciate the lessons from the Six-Day War. Its tactical approach had become distorted, disproportionately favoring armor at the expense of integrating the other arms. Moreover, its intellectual preparation and organizational planning were deficient, especially at the operational level of war.
Nevertheless, they managed to overcome considerable odds during the conflict's first two days and prevail militarily.
Although, in retrospect, the IDF's actions over the final two weeks of the war may look inevitable, much uncertainty and risk still confronted the IDF's tactical and operational commanders throughout the fighting, even after the initiative had swung in its favor. In the war's opening stages, the Egyptian and Syrian Armies executed detailed, well-rehearsed plans, while the IDF fought through a fog made thicker as a result of its overconfidence and failure to correctly interpret and respond to readily available intelligence. Yet, the IDF succeeded in blunting the initial onslaughts and ultimately carried the fight into the territories of both adversaries. On both fronts, military logic seemed to recommend a lower-risk approach, one in which the IDF should have committed mobilizing elements to a less mobile defense in depth, but this was not the option its leadership pursued.
On what model was this approach then based? The answer lies in the IDF's relentless pursuit of qualitative superiority (in peace) and the initiative (in war). Elazar attributed the IDF's qualitative advantages to three factors: (1) the will of the soldiers to fight;
(2) the "level of the people," to include their sense of national identity and level of cultural and technological sophistication; and (3) the "efficiency, organization, specialization, discipline, and ability of its junior and senior officers to command." 
174
10
War demonstrated, on combined-arms integration and cooperation. On top of this tactical excellence, the IDF based their approach to battle on: (1) a maneuver-oriented doctrine with a bias for the offense;
(2) a decentralized and fluid command and control system;
(3) the selection and cultivation of leaders with the willingness and ability to dare, improvise, maintain the higher commander's intent, and to be resourceful; and (4) an appreciation of technology as a powerful tool in the hands of a human decision maker (vice a panacea for the challenges of modern war). The IDF then engaged uncertainty through a consistent effort to relate its operational purpose to the higher command's guidance, knowledge of its own forces and those of the enemy, the phasing and transitions of the fighting, and operational reach.
Unlike its Syrian and Egyptian adversaries, the IDF never lost sight of its operational aims. Over the course of the fighting, these aims informed the iterative guidance that flowed down the chain of command as well as the operational reach and phasing of its dynamic plans. Furthermore, to accomplish these aims the IDF deepened its understanding of Egyptian and Syrian capabilities and dispositions and took serious stock of their own organization, tactics, and command structure, making adaptations to increase its effectiveness.
The combined effect of this foundation and approach to risk was the ruthless pursuit of the initiative. After the war, Elazar highlighted the importance of gaining, maintaining, and exploiting the initiative: "In order to win, one must attack, and the sooner the better . . . Not all our counterattacks were successful . . . All the counterattacks, however, did achieve their strategic aims of stopping the enemy's offensive initiative, and of dictating conditions favorable to the IDF for continued fighting." 
175
The IDF understood the psychological value of such momentum: to impose its will on the course of the battle in an effort to shatter the enemy's coherence and will to resist. More simply, the IDF had pierced its adversaries' decision cycles. Both sides demonstrated remarkable resiliency, but the IDF's tactical superiority; decentralized, fluid system of command; maneuverist, offensively-oriented doctrine; exceptional combat leadership; and use of technology as an enabler allowed it to orient on uncertainty 85 as a protagonist in the battle and risk as the opportunity for gain (versus potential for loss). With this approach, the IDF reversed the momentum of the fighting and achieved military victories along both fronts.
In chapter 3, this study argued that the question of risk is central to a commander's ability to make judgments and decisions under conditions of uncertainty.
The IDF believed that uncertainty and risk were unavoidable in war. It therefore prepared for the effects of uncertainty upon its objectives through training, education, and planning so its commanders would be ready to dynamically respond to these effects in combat.
The dilemma that commanders, especially those at the operational level, must confront in their decision-making consists of waiting to make a decision until one has a nearly complete information or making the best possible judgment with the information available. However, such delays in decision-making may result in yielding the initiative to the adversary. This is particularly true in armies that are institutionally risk averse, i.e., those that view risk as the potential for loss.
The purpose of this chapter is to analyze the initial tranche of lessons with respect to operational risk that the U.S. Army drew from its study of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War and how it integrated those lessons into its doctrine. This chapter begins with an analysis of the U.S. Army's approach to operational risk in the early 1970s as made evident through its behavior during the Vietnam War. This approach represents the Army's starting point with respect to risk for the ensuing period of change and reformation; it was also the mindset through which its leadership would interpret the IDF and its performance during the 1973 War. Next, this chapter examines the lessons that the U.S. The American Army that fought the Vietnam War did so in an environment shaped by unprecedented access to information and communication technologies. A deluge of information was suddenly available to drive commanders' thinking and decision-making. However, the abundance of information and the increasingly complex organizations created to manage this information often contributed to greater uncertainty rather than helping to reduce it. Historian Martin van Creveld argues that a "pathology for information" arose within the U.S. Army: "Designed to produce accuracy and certainty, the pressure exercised from the top for more and more quantitative information ended up producing inaccuracy and uncertainty." Van Creveld insists that advanced communications and data-processing technologies are vital to the prosecution of modern war, but warns that leaders and organizations must tailor their command system and decision-making methodologies to retain sufficient agility and adaptability. Techniques such as operations research and systems analysis seemed to promise that commanders could eliminate, or at least dramatically reduce, the uncertainty and complexity inherent to war. 
177
178 See for example, Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr. The Army and Vietnam (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986), 34-35. 90 John Keegan famously warned about how these shifts in the characteristics of war seemed to be blinding military leaders from war's true nature in which "uncertainty and doubt, misinformation and misapprehension" had been and would always be present. 
180
181
The U.S. Army's capstone doctrine, FM 100-5 (Operations of Army Forces in the Field), during the final years of the Vietnam War painted a muddled picture with respect to risk. In the discussion of the principle of security in chapter 5, the manual asserted that "since risk is inherent in war, application of the principle of security does not imply undue caution and the avoidance of calculated risk. Security frequently is enhanced by bold seizure and retention of the initiative, which reduces the enemy's capability to interfere." 182 Later in this same chapter, the doctrine addressed risk more specifically and distinguished it from vulnerability, the latter of which it defined as "susceptibility of a force to damage by enemy action." The manual reiterated that risk is inherent to war, and emphasized that "risk is also related to gain; normally, greater gains involve great risk." However, the doctrine advised commanders to carefully evaluate each course of action through the lenses of relative risk and vulnerability, revisiting the plan if they found the risk to be unacceptable. Furthermore, commanders "must recognize risks to be assumed by subordinate commanders in accomplishing their missions." 
183
There were several other factors that strengthened institutional risk aversion within the U.S. Army of the early 1970s. First, the media's increased access to and thus ability to report on the stark realities of combat created yet another check on the willingness of commanders to embrace uncertainty and take risks, especially for the limited-objective, lower-intensity conflicts into which the United States increasingly found itself being drawn into the period after World War II. A RAND study examining the influence of casualties on public opinion and presidential policy in Vietnam concluded that "casualties to U.S. personnel are the most visible and least tolerable cost of direct U.S. combat involvement in sustained limited wars. Mounting casualties tend to undermine public support and serve as a lightning rod for public dissatisfaction with other issues." 184 Second, senior commanders had serious concerns about what they considered to be uneven, unreliable leadership at the lower echelons. For example, General Paul Gorman, recounting his experience as an infantry brigade commander in Vietnam, discussed the challenges the lack of junior leadership imposed on his command:
[Most of the leaders in] the usual company came in the Army in the same year: the draftees, the shake-and-bake NCOs that were pulled out of the training centers, given a get-rich-quick course and a sergeant's stripe. They were sent straight into the jungle; the lieutenants out of the ROTC or OCS . . . They were all the same age and were in the same class of ignorance . . . If you come in as a replacement, you copy the guys that got there before you. Standards deteriorate. Regression sets in. 
185
185
186
Moreover, the U.S. Army of the Vietnam era did not yet explicitly think in terms of the operational level of war in its doctrine, complicating any effort to conceptualize and prepare for risk at this echelon. Despite this, scholars recognize the operational level's conceptual presence in the U.S. Army's approach to warfighting during this period. For instance, historian Robert Citino argues that the United States demonstrated proficiency in operational art in Vietnam, when given an opportunity to engage in conventional (versus counterinsurgent) fighting and to leverage its considerable advantages in firepower. 187 However, it was this tendency to default to superior firepower that served to further exacerbate the Army's cultural risk aversion. The ability to kill the enemy without having to engage its elements from close quarters with friendly maneuver forces reduced the potential for loss to the line infantry and armor formations. The willingness and ability to bring America's superiority in technology and firepower to bear against the enemy married with the statistical-minded analytical approach of senior headquarters ultimately helped to corrupt the U.S. strategy in Vietnam. 
188
188
189
Army Logistics Center, as well as many of TRADOC's subordinate schools and centers.
Evaluate combat data from the Arab-Israeli War to determine the lessons learned as they effect U.S. tactics, techniques, organization, training, equipment effectiveness and vulnerability, and weapons system acquisition. Disseminate the tactical and technical results of the evaluation to the schools, combat developers, and materiel developers for action. 
190
194
195
Reserve Armored Division had played a critical role in the encirclement of Egypt's Third Army during the 1973 War and was, by late 1974, assigned as the IDF's military attach at the Pentagon, observed, "The American army had dozens of officers engaged in learning lessons of the Yom Kippur War. Tens of thick volumes were produced: tactics, organizational structure, changes required in weapons arsenals . . . With the Americans, there is a scientific process of data collection" 
196
Evaluation Group teams aggressively pursued the collection of as much data as possible and subsequently conducted rigorous quantitative analysis to generate their specific recommendations.
Mostly obscured by this institutional emphasis upon quantitative analysis were the more qualitative lessons concerning the war's human factors; command, control, and planning at the operational and strategic levels; and the role that risk-taking played in the conflict. However, there is evidence that the war's qualitative lessons did not go completely unnoticed. Abrams afforded both Starry and Talbott the freedom to pursue a more qualitative approach. Prior to their departures, he provided similar, broad guidance.
From Talbott, he asked for "the truth, to sort out fact from fancy, to talk to airmen, soldiers, headquarters and battalions and to find out what really happened." 
197
198
198
199
Combining these two lessons, Williams argued that the most important take-away was the value of well-trained leaders, given a chance to learn and make mistakes in order to more effectively prepare them for the uncertainty and intensity of modern combat. 
200
201
Of the SRSG report's 162 recommendations, 139 related directly to these three subject areas, unsurprising given the study group's objectives and mission. The balance were recommendations for organizational and personnel-policy reforms. Interestingly, the only recommendation that fell outside of these categories was one to "introduce situational 'no solution' tactical problems into all basic and advanced courses to encourage the full range of officer resourcefulness, innovation, and flexibility"-exactly the characteristics that the IDF sought and cultivated into its officer corps to prepare them for the uncertainty and risk inherent to the modern battlefield. 202 operations. 
209
Namely, risk then represented the potential for loss, especially considering the Army's assessed lack of readiness for a future war with the Warsaw Pact. 
208
209
Bronfeld,
following observation with respect to many of the doctrinal and training changes that TRADOC was attempting to drive: There's no groundswell against us, at least not one I can detect. But there's a lot of opposition. So simplicity, fat manuals, better gunnery, etc. will not suffice as rationale for what we're doing. We have to have a groundswell for us, and my guess is we haven't much time to get it swollen . . . While I believe that what we're about needed to be done anyway, it is nonetheless convenient for a number of reasons to tie it at least loosely to the October War. 
215
218
219
222
The schools and centers hustled to publish branch-specific doctrinal manuals and training circulars to bridge the now-evident gap between the current and evolving capstone doctrine. These efforts integrated insights from discussions with the Army's operational commanders (at multiple echelons), the U.S. Air Force's Tactical Air Command, and senior commanders from the primary NATO allies of the United States.
By late 1974, DePuy's approach to the evolving doctrine was clear: he wanted how-to- 
221
223
We have now participated in enough discussion, listened to enough briefings and seen enough demonstrations to have the best consensus on how to fight that has probably ever existed in the school system of the United States Army. It is now time to institutionalize and perpetuate this consensus through doctrinal publications. In this respect, I look to each of you personally to bring this about. If necessary, you must write them yourselves, as I hold each of you personally responsible for achieving the objective I have set. 
224
225
223
224
226
Because the lethality of modern weapons continues to increase sharply, we can expect very high losses to occur in short periods of time. Entire forces could be destroyed quickly if they are improperly deployed. Therefore, the first battle of our next war could well be its last battle . . . This circumstance is unprecedented: we are an Army historically unprepared for its first battle. We are accustomed to victory wrought with the weight of materiel and population brought to bear after the onset of hostilities. Today, the US Army must, above all else, prepare to win the first battle of the next war. 
227
Of the manual's many themes and evolutions, the new priority given to the conduct of defensive operations (over those of the offense) is arguably the most striking.
DePuy set conditions for this operational bias in the sketched concept enclosed to his aforementioned Pot of Soup letter. Over the subsequent months, FM 100-5's key contributors refined this concept's key elements. The doctrine's writers gave priority to the defense, acknowledging that DePuy's initial concept represented "a considerable change in US doctrine" and shift in this direction. It was imperative for the Army's leadership "to come to a mutual understanding of the philosophy which must underlie our defensive scheme." 228 TRADOC's leaders emphasized defensive operations more significantly in their re-examination of existing Army doctrine because "that would be the first order of business for any commander on the European battlefield." Based on the new lethality of modern weapons and the evolving Soviet doctrine of mass, momentum, and continuous operations, the doctrine's writers believed that a Soviet multi-echelon deliberate attack and rapid exploitation would be the "toughest operation to oppose." 
229
230
Thus, the doctrine writers considered all of these concepts to be too cumbersome and insufficient for the fast pace and stark lethality of modern combat. 
231
232
232
233
233
235
236
237
Another distinguishing characteristic of this doctrine was its heavy emphasis on the importance of combined-arms integration and cooperation. In the immediate 
235
236 HQDA, FM 100-5 (1976), 5-2. 
237
238
238
240
241
[now] combined to form a weapon system . . . But doing so meant that the Army had relegated people to being components of a machine . . . In promoting technology, the Army had replaced the soldier as its cultural icon." 
242
243
244
242 Kretchik,
198.
244
DePuy's thinking about the degree of control required for the U.S. Army to survive on the modern battlefield was clear:
To win when fighting outnumbered, it is necessary to concentrate forces at the critical point and at the critical time on the battlefield. In other words, in order to move to the right place, you've got to see the battlefield better than the enemy sees it so you know where to go and when to go. In order to move rapidly to that critical point, you must have total control over your combat elements; so that when you order a battalion to move, it will move. 
246
247
246
248
The strength of our Army lies in the decentralization of responsibility and authority to the commander on the ground. We cannot avoid to lose that additional combat effectiveness which derives from the intelligent actions of trained leaders operating under a flexible system of mission-type orders. Thus, each officer must be imbued with the idea that success will depend upon the skill, initiative, and imagination with which he seeks to accomplish the assigned mission within the concept and intent of the commander. 
249
250
248 HQDA, FM 100-5 (1976), 3-11;
quoted and discussed in Ancker, 46. 249
250
252
251
252
The 1973 Arab-Israeli War provided TRADOC's new leadership with a data-rich environment to better understand the accelerating lethality, intensity, and density of the 
253 Kretchik,
254
At a broad level, military doctrine not only provides a common philosophy, language, and purpose,
255
256
An aversion to uncertainty and risk thus permeated the 1976 version of FM 100-5.
In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the IDF offered a model with respect to operational risk taking. Upon the aforementioned foundation of expert combined-arms tactical proficiency, the IDF layered a maneuverist doctrine with a bias for the offense, a strong commitment to the power of technology (but as an enabler in the hands of human decision-makers), and a fluid, decentralized system of command in which pursuit of the 124 initiative was the priority. The doctrine that the U.S. Army published after its initial study of the 1973 War reflected the IDF's emphasis on tactical proficiency, but postured the Army in the opposite direction concerning all of the other features of the model (see figure 
11
Third, this chapter will examine the incongruity between the concepts of Active Defense and the battlefield realities of Central Europe. This section will pivot on the experiences of Starry, who, as the commanding general of V Corps, recognized that, even if expertly implemented, Active Defense was ultimately insufficient for the scope of the problem then confronting the Army and its NATO allies. Starry's experiences spurred reengagement with the lessons of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, providing him with an opportunity to finally appreciate the full scope of the lessons offered by the IDF with respect to operational risk from its performance during that conflict. During this period, the Army also re-examined, evolved, and ultimately expanded its understanding of the broader range of military problems confronting it.
Finally, this chapter will analyze how TRADOC transformed the Army's capstone doctrine to reflect its new understanding of these military problems. During Starry's tenure as commanding general of TRADOC, he broadened and elevated the aperture through which the Army and its commanders perceived and interpreted these problems and their attendant risks. The complexity and uncertainty of battle became increasingly apparent during this period of study and reflection-hard, enduring truths that the antiseptic, quantitative methodologies of Active Defense aspired to eliminate. The Army's new capstone doctrine, AirLand Battle, sought to gain, maintain, and exploit the initiative amidst the chaos and fluidity of the modern battlefield. With growing confidence in the tactical proficiency of their combat formations, Army commanders were once again told that the offense was the decisive form of war and that to win they must attack.
Response to the 1976 Version of FM 100-5:
An Ambition for More
The publication of the 1976 version of FM 100-5 forced the U.S. Army, as an institution, to confront its current capabilities and level of readiness. The doctrine was a bold statement of what Army elements forward deployed against the Warsaw Pact would have to do in order to survive and prevent the enemy from achieving the rapid, decisive victory it desired. Additionally, the manual's description of how to fight struck a chord with many Army officers and planted seeds of ambition that would germinate over the coming decade; many aspired to fight in more dynamic, advanced ways. The delta between the present and the desired future generated the angst, sense of urgency, and professional focus that would catalyze the subsequent sequence of doctrinal revisions.
In response to the publication of the 1976 version of FM 100-5, the military journals lit up with commentary, and the reviews were decidedly mixed. 
257
258
Army and its allies] toward the projected battle in northwest Europe against Warsaw Pact forces," signaling a clear "strategic transition point."
259
requiring the development of superior counter-weapons systems and the employment of combined-arms tactics; and (4) an original contribution to the theory of the defense. Jones also commended the manual's emphasis on a "return to fundamentals."
260
Kretchik,
[201]
[202]
However, the manual also inspired an uproar of negative criticism. One of the earliest and most cogent dissenting voices was that of William S. Lind, an Ivy Leagueeducated legislative aide to Senator Gary Hart. In his piece, Lind questioned the validity of four aspects of the 1976 version of FM 100-5: (1) the requirement to fight outnumbered and win; (2) the imperative to win the first battle; (3) the emphasis on firepower and attrition at the expense of maneuver; and (4) the elevation of small-unit defensive tactics to the higher-tactical level, implying, in Lind's view, a shift in the Army's thinking toward something approximating a "Maginot mentality."
261
Historian John Romjue has previously summarized the six most significant and consistent criticisms of the doctrine. 
262
We do not have enough soldiers. We must rely on a large resource of on-call reserves. It is a lot like [the U.S.'s] problems in Germany. I will not suggest how [you should] do it, but I will say that you must maintain flexibility and the ability to attack the enemy, to stop the enemy at the point he attempts to break through you, and reseize the initiative. My opinion is that this is the mission of the reserve force. 
263
Although TRADOC would contest much of this criticism, claiming that the critics' characterizations were inaccurate or taken out of the broader context, 264 the 1976 version of FM 100-5 nevertheless served several important functions. For one, it provided the Army of the mid-1970s with a clear, concrete statement of how to fight-a clarion call for a return to the fundamental skills required for an army to compete on the modern, mid-intensity battlefield. In so doing, it announced to the institution that it had enormous work to do in order to regain and sustain the necessary levels of tactical and technical proficiency. Additionally, the new doctrine also generated an important, urgent, and focused dialogue within and outside of the Army. In his review of FM 100-5, Loomis presciently stated that the manual's "major importance flows from its potential for precipitating a strategic debate of major proportions," replacing the focus on Vietnam, which had been the central security issue of the 1960s and early 1970s. 
265
264
Given this study's focus on operational risk, the Army's efforts to operationalize its evolving doctrine through concurrent changes in its training, education, leader development, and equipment merit consideration for two reasons. On the one hand, these parallel reforms provided the Army's elements in the field with the warfighting proficiency and tools-and thus the confidence-that they needed to fight against the Warsaw Pact in Central Europe. As discussed in chapter 3, the IDF's ability to engage uncertainty and take risks at the operational level were built on a foundation of tactical proficiency. In setting conditions to gain and sustain similar proficiency, the U.S. Army provided itself an opportunity to think about the more abstract, conceptual challenges of modern war. 266 However, the quantitative, immediate focus of many of these reforms and 266 A decade after his retirement, Starry would claim that, as early as 1974, the evidence from the 1973 Arab-Israeli War "served to illuminate the follow-on echelon problem. But there was no immediate solution, technically or operationally, and tactically there was much work to do. So we started with that." See Starry, letter to Dr. Richard Swain, U.S. Army School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 7 June  1995, 10.  modernization programs also played to the Army's managerial and corporatist tendencies. 
267
Over the course of his tenure as the Commanding General of TRADOC (1973-1977) poor state of the Army's mechanized-fighting readiness: "The basic purpose of a tank is to shoot and shoot well. In too many of the U.S. Army Forces Command tank units, the personnel status and gunnery training to accomplish that purpose are not being met."
268
269
The Army required a more analytically rigorous, comprehensive, and focused approach to training and readiness. Gorman was convinced that readiness could be measured and that the Army needed to take a systems approach to understand and improve all of the interdependent components that influenced it. 
270
Although a full accounting of the subsequent training reforms exceeds the scope of this study, a brief summary of these efforts is necessary to understand the direction in which the Army was headed for the next generation and their impact on the Army's understanding of and relationship with risk. 
272
Gorman,
Cardinal Point,
[66]
[67]
272
274
276
274
275
276
On the one hand, the emerging ability to quantify a given unit's readiness afforded commanders greater confidence in the tactical and technical proficiency of their organizations. On the other hand, the ability to measure one's readiness also seemed to imply that one could quantify or probabilistically determine one's likelihood of success in combat. Much like the principles of the Active Defense doctrine, the Army's new approach to training sought to crush out uncertainty, avoid the play of chance and risk, and impose maximum control on the course of a unit's development. Moreover, the new compliance mechanisms, most notably the Army Training and Evaluation Programs, Skill Qualification Tests, and NTC rotations, could, in the hands of an unimaginative commander, reward the technician over the innovator and create a "checklist" approach to training. 277 Such an approach would be inconsistent with the imagination, resourcefulness, and willingness to dare required to fight and win within the fluid, uncertain environment of the modern battlefield. These programs could also create opportunity for confirmation bias with linear technical solutions against complex adaptive problems. 
278
The focus on training came at the expense of professional military education.
Upon his return from Israel in late summer 1976, DePuy was explicit about the relative roles of training and education in his letter to then-CSA, General Fred Weyand: 
277
Kretchik,
201. 278
It may be appropriate at this point to emphasize that the Israeli Army trains its soldiers, sergeants, and officers. It does not educate them. There are no frills. In the officer's course 70% of the instruction is in the field in a unit with weapons and equipment. This is true even though their officers have not been to college or a university. They are, on the average, 19 years old. College comes after service as a lieutenant. 
279
281
279
280
281 Ibid.
convince DePuy that the Army's schools should educate officers as much as they endeavored to train them. 
282
283
284
283
284
285
DePuy's approach to the relative values of training and education also influenced his thinking about leader development. In his 1976 letter to Weyand describing his trip to Israel, DePuy marveled at the IDF's system for selecting and developing leaders. In his view, the IDF's combat-arms commanders and leaders emerged only after having successfully navigated a ruthless assessment and selection system and proven themselves worthy in combat: "Real authority stems from the general recognition that leaders have earned and demonstrated their right to lead-they are not merely appointed." 286 By 1977, largely through TRADOC's approach to training and education, DePuy had put his stamp on institutional leader development; leaders were to be trained, with an emphasis on technical and tactical proficiency. The intrusion, over the previous decade, of educational topics in management science, behavioral science, and other academic electives seemed less relevant to the demands of the modern battlefield and thus significantly curtailed. 
287
The ability to prepare for and conceptualize risk at the operational level of war requires officers to be able to frame and solve problems, often enshrouded in uncertainty, in environments where they are unable to directly observe and influence the actions of subordinate units. DePuy's approach to education and leader development sought to produce tactically competent, combat-proven leaders, who could dig (or directly 
286
287
VIII
A final area of reform and modernization developed and implemented during DePuy's tenure as TRADOC commander that would significantly influence the Army's culture for the next generation, and thus its understanding of and relationship with risk, was materiel development. By design, TRADOC had acquired the Army's combat developments function from the discontinued U.S. Army Combat Developments Command during the 1973 STEADFAST reorganization. The merger integrated this effort into a command that also possessed the responsibilities for developing new organizations and doctrine for forces in the field. Materiel development was a joint effort between TRADOC (combat developer) and the U.S. Army Materiel Command (materiel   development). In order to ensure an "integrated systematic approach" to materiel development, TRADOC implemented the concept of the total weapons system, which pivoted on the efforts of TRADOC's system managers and their Army Materiel Command counterparts (project managers). 288 288 Anne W. Chapman, Carol J. Lilly, John L. Romjue, and Susan Canedy, Prepare the Army for War: A Historical Overview of the Army Training and Doctrine  Command, 1973-1998 (Fort Monroe, VA: U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command,  1998), 37-40.
The 1973 Arab-Israeli War had vividly illuminated the "new lethality" of rapidly evolving precision-guided weapons, tanks, infantry-fighting vehicles, integrated airdefense systems, and electronic-warfare technologies. In order to gain and maintain a qualitative advantage against the Warsaw Pact, the U.S. Army required a new generation of major combat systems. 
289
290
291
293
294
295
Starry was, in many ways, the ideal leader to grapple with this challenge. He was intellectually rigorous, a master tactician, and open-minded. Moreover, he was an officer thoroughly committed to framing and solving first-order problems. Years after he retired, an interviewer asked Starry to describe the most important leadership lesson from his long career. In response, he recalled an engagement with then-Lieutenant Colonel Creighton Abrams, his first battalion commander, during which he received a "first-rate ass-chewing" for only providing an assessment of a problem without a proposed solution.
Reflecting on the experience, Starry explained that, as a leader, he had the responsibility to "keep [his] mouth shut about problems until [he had] worked up a better solution.
Romjue, "Development of Doctrine," transcript of oral history interview with General Donn A. Starry, 19 March 1993; reproduced in Sorley, vol. 2, 1271-1272.  Never criticize the way things are unless you can also say how they should be."
296
297
298
299
Early on, a brigade commander resisted his guidance, claiming that the already-approved manual would be rejected by the CSA; Starry relieved him on the spot and sent a strong message to his Corps: "I am telling you as the corps commander that this is the way we're going to fight the war here until somebody tells us not to." 300
In a regular series of missives, called "Commander's Notes," Starry sought to "convey to subordinate commands [his] philosophy of command, operations, and management, relating to subjects ranging from tactics, to administration, to community affairs."
301
He defined decentralization as the "delegation of responsibility and authority for executing a mission to the lowest level of command which has, or to which can be made available, the requisite resources to accomplish the mission," and noted that decentralization was part of the broader concept of mission-type orders in which commanders provided their subordinates with the "what" of the mission (i.e., what to do, 
300 Spruill and Vernon,
[263]
[264]
As discussed in chapter 4, Starry held very strong views about decentralization; he believed it was the means by which the most effective organizations structured their command and control systems, but that, in order to do so well, the organization and its operationalize both the new doctrine and the Army's evolving, performance-oriented approach to individual and collective training. On the other hand, he wanted to make clear that he expected his commanders to think critically and remain actively engaged in assessing their environment, mission, and organization-and then to plan accordingly.
For an Army still rehabilitating itself and processing the new doctrine, thinking through its training in this way would thus prepare the corps, as a whole, to fight against the complex problem with which they were confronted in Europe. Starry made his subordinate division and brigade commanders develop, rehearse, and back-brief detailed plans for how they would defend against an attack by the Warsaw Pact. Starry was not a micro-manager, but he understood that for Active Defense to work, commanders at all echelons had to understand the doctrine and then train their organizations to fight in accordance with its precepts. As the corps commander, he understood that he had to set and articulate clear priorities and then reinforce them through his personal behavior and presence. Although Starry's initial efforts to operationalize the new doctrine were frustrating and he had to use his positional power often to overcome stubborn resistance within his organization, his intent eventually gained traction. As the leaders in V Corps continued to refine the full scope of their defensive plans, their confidence began to soar.
During one such terrain walk in 3rd Armored Division's sector, Starry recalled a brigade commander telling him that "You know, General, I think we've won the damn battle."
Starry remembered feeling pride in the Corps and the work they had done to earn such confidence: "All I did was take [them] out there and make [them] work out the equation.
They convinced themselves that they were going to win." 304 After having overcome the resistance internal to his organization, Starry was finally in a position to fully operationalize the doctrine and then to assess if it effectively countered the problem for which it had been designed. As he composed a more comprehensive defensive scheme, the first doctrinal deficiency he observed was its failure to address the dramatic difference between the responsibilities of commanders of divisions and below and those of corps and higher. Command at higher echelons required a decidedly different perspective, planning horizon, and sense of depth and complexity than for those at the tactical level. In response, he crafted a narrative that he originally called the "Corps Battle," which he shaped through rigorous battlefield calculus and the employment of a target-servicing methodology. 
305
304
305
306
307
Therefore, the active defense relies on the depth of the battle areas, and on the ability to concentrate quickly over shorter distances into positions which have been thoroughly developed." 
308
309
310
American weapons systems would be completely depleted Second, as discussed above, given the limited, localized nature of the defending force's counterattacks, there was no real opportunity to gain, maintain, and exploit the initiative over the course of the fight.
Starry was convinced that the "outnumbered side wins more often than not; and that in the end victory in battle is not determined by numbers at all, but by the courage of soldiers, the quality of leadership, and the excellence of training in the use of military equipment and tactical schemes devised for its employment." 311 Nonetheless, he was beginning to sense the insufficiency of the doctrine for the problem with which he was confronted. 
312
313
312
313
The modern battlefield will require commanders to think clearly about some very complex situations, to decide quickly what must be done, and to issue clear-cut, simple instructions about who is to do what, where and when, in order to get done what the commander has decided upon . . . Therefore it is necessary that, to the extent possible, complex situations be perceived, solutions thought through, and reasonable courses of action postulated in advance, in order to foreshorten the decision-making cycle-turning it, in time, inside that of the enemy . . . More often than not the outcome of battle defies the traditional calculus used to predict such outcomes . . . The outcome of battle at tactical and operational levels will be decided by factors other than numbers . . . In the end, the side that somehow, at some time, somewhere in the course of battle seizes the initiative and holds it to the end, will be the side that wins. 
318
Even though there were still many unanswered questions about the Soviets' doctrinal changes, Karber drew what to many was becoming an increasingly obvious conclusion:
NATO "must make some changes in direct relationship to the changes occurring in Soviet tactical doctrine." 320 Moreover, leading defense thinkers and leaders were emphasizing another significant flaw of the Active Defense doctrine. For example, the burgeoning, Oxfordeducated strategist and political scientist, Colin S. Gray, wrote a piece in early 1978 in which he provided a brief assessment of the new FM 100-5 within the context of a broader discussion on force planning, political guidance, and the decision to fight. While he lauded FM 100-5 as an "excellent new operations manual," he did call into question the U.S. government's disproportionate emphasis on the European theater at the expense of other potential contingencies against Soviet proxies in the Middle East and East Asia. 
321
321
322
327
328 Brigadier General Edward A. Dinges and Major Richard H. Sinnreich,  "Battlefield Interdiction: Old Term, New Problem," Field Artillery Journal 48, no. 1  (January-February 1978): 14-17.
Army now "aimed at more ambitious goals than just fractional attrition or harassment;" instead it sought "to create periods of friendly superiority in which the initiative can be seized with enough time to act. The longer and more frequent these windows can be made, the greater the chance of winning."
330
331
In addition to introducing the concept framework into TRADOC's planning, Starry also developed a new doctrinal development process, including the creation of the either our soldiers or our mission." 
334
335
336
338
339
Elevated to this level, the available "defeat mechanisms"
340
Although the new manual formally defined risk as something approximating the potential for loss-danger to men and materiel as well as danger to accomplishing the mission-the evolved doctrine, in stark contrast to the 1976 version of FM 100-5, advocated the imperative to engage the inevitable uncertainty and to take risks. Doing so as "the battle becomes more complex and unpredictable" would give friendly commanders a competitive advantage over that of the enemy. 
341
342
343
344
However, firepower was cast as the servant of maneuver; the former enabled the latter to obtain positions of relative advantage in order to "threaten destruction of the enemy" and "focus maximum strength against the enemy's weakest point." 349 Importantly, such aggressive maneuver, especially at the operational level, required friendly commanders to be more comfortable with uncertainty and more prepared to take risks. 
350
the role and value of "courageous, well-trained soldiers and skillful, effective leaders," which FM 100-5 identified as the "most important" fundamental of AirLand Battle. 
351
349 HQDA, FM 100-5 (1982)
350
Army. 351 HQDA, FM 100-5 (1982)
352
353
354
355
During the period when the Army was evolving its doctrine from Active Defense to AirLand Battle, the British military historian John Keegan published his sweeping study of battle's continuities, The Face of Battle. Although not specifically cited in the 1982 
353
354
356
357
358
359
The AirLand Battle operational concept emphasized surprise, concentration, violence, and speed in the execution of deep attack in order to unbalance the enemy and create windows of opportunity to defeat him in detail. Over the course of the preceding years, the writings of U.S. Air Force Colonel John Boyd had begun to permeate the discourse on the theory of maneuver. William Lind, who, as discussed earlier, was one of the first and most vocal critics of the Active Defense doctrine, believed that "whoever can go through this 'Boyd Cycle' or 'OODA [observe-orient-decide-act] Loop' consistently faster gains a tremendous advantage, primarily because by the time his opponent acts, his own action has already changed the situation so as to make the opponent's action irrelevant." He based this analysis on the Clausewitzian maxim that war is "dominated by uncertainty, rapid and unexpected changes, and friction;" thus, successful commanders would "thrive on chaos." 360 Although Starry and the other 
360
The goal is destruction of the enemy's vital cohesion-disruption-not piece-bypiece physical destruction. The objective is the mind of the enemy commander, not the bodies of his troops. The principal tool is moving forces into unexpected places at surprisingly high speeds. Firepower is the servant of maneuver . . . The conflict is more psychological than physical. Effort focuses on the operational, not tactical level. 
362
Starry, 20 August 1981, Starry Papers, Box 59, Folder 6. 362
363
364
In place of the 1976 manual's insistence on excessively tight control, risk aversion, and exquisite synchronization, the 1982 manual prescribed a more decentralized, fluid approach to command and control. 
365
[S]ubordinates must act independently within the context of an overall plan. They must exploit successes boldly and take advantage of unforeseen opportunities. They must deviate from the expected course of battle without hesitation when opportunities arise to expedite the overall mission of the higher force. They will take risks, and the command must support them. Improvisation, initiative, and aggressiveness-the traits that have historically distinguished the American soldier-must be particularly strong in our leaders. 
366
367
Determines and forms our philosophy of command and control considerably . . . It requires every soldier to be prepared to act on his own in accordance with the mission given. This calls for the readiness to share responsibility at all level -at the same time, however, it necessitates mastering the respective military task so that independent action can take place at all levels. A common sense of responsibility and mutual trust, combined with a healthy self-confidence in one's own military abilities are therefore the foundation of mission-type tactics . . . Mission-type tactics above all make demands on the superior. He must have the ability to give orders for distinct, long-range objectives and must have the courage to rely on the subordinate to find the way towards that objective independently, to a large extent. This also means that the superior must share the risk for mistakes made in good faith by his subordinates. 
368
366 HQDA, FM 100-5 (1982)
367
Although the 1976 manual had certain strengths, the Army had to fundamentally transform its doctrine in order to gain the initiative and hold it to the end of the fight. 
369
In the following years, in addition to a fresh examination of the 1973 War's lessons, the Army also carefully studied evolving Soviet tactics and operational art, a more global range of potential threats, and the work of prominent military historians and theorists. Whereas the 1976 doctrine had advocated ruthlessly efficient but conservative 
369
First, the manual restored the institution's bias for the offense; Active Defense was replaced with AirLand Battle, a deep, expanding attack dependent upon the imperative to gain, maintain, and exploit the initiative. The manual also shifted the previous version's emphasis on firepower back in favor of maneuver. AirLand Battle restored the primacy of the human dimension (over technology) and articulated a more fluid, decentralized system of command and decision-making, as well. The last point was central to the spirit of the Army's new doctrine. Drawing on the lessons of history (rather than an anodyne emphasis on quantitative analysis and reasoning) and the ideas of military theorists, the new version of FM 100-5 emphasized the fundamentally psychological nature of combat: technology was important, but these devices were tools in the hands of human decision makers vulnerable to war's inherent chaos, chance, and unpredictability. War was and would always be a contest of wills. AirLand Battle understood and embraced the need to embrace the inevitability of battlefield uncertainty and thus the need to take risks.
Yet there was still some evidence that the Army's desire to impose some sort of control on the inevitable disorder, uncertainty, and risk of modern combat persisted. In earlier drafts of the new version of FM 100-5, the writers had offered the following as tenets: initiative, violence, integration, and depth. Meyer approved initiative and depth in 182 annihilating the enemy through the exquisite synchronization of all available assets, with a heavy emphasis on fires, as the prelude to "victory." 
373
373
-General Donn A. Starry, "Extending the Battlefield"
The employment of maneuver units in the deep battle is obviously a highrisk undertaking. It will never become routine. But when it is done-or even attempted-it can have a disproportionately strong effect on the battle or campaign.
-Lt Col Leonard D. Holder, "Maneuver in the Deep Battle"
Changing Perceptions of Risk: From Aversion to Embrace, at Least Doctrinally This study's purpose was to examine how the U.S. Army's understanding of and relationship with risk at the operational level of war changed in the decade following its withdrawal from Vietnam. Simply put, it explored how the Army expected its operational-level commanders to make judgments and decisions under conditions of uncertainty. How comfortable were they with uncertainty at this more abstract, conceptual level of war; did they view its impact as a potential advantage amidst the chaos and unpredictability of battle, or as the potential for loss and something to be avoided, managed, or controlled?
The impact of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War upon the U.S. Army's conceptualization of, preparation for, and engagement with operational risk was significant. Although it largely captured the elements of the IDF's model for operational risk-taking within its capstone concepts and doctrine, the Army was never able to fully implement this approach. First, although Starry would later take a more balanced approach to the role and impact of rapidly evolving technologies, the allure of these technologies always seemed to promise a near complete picture of the battlefield in real time-holding forth the potential for higher-level commanders to deliberately control all aspects of the fighting. On the eve of FM 100-5's 1982 publication, distinguishing the U.S. Army's psychology from that of the IDF. 
376
Finally, as discussed in chapter 3, the IDF's senior leaders up through and including 1973 were shaped in a military that placed value on unconventional, specialoperations-like approaches to navigating uncertainty. Many, like Dayan and Sharon, transferred this improvisational, risk-taking method of decision-making into their subsequent roles within the conventional army. The U.S. Army, in contrast, drew a sharper distinction between conventional and unconventional operations, especially within the period under study. During this period, the Joint Special Operations Command 377 and the Army's Special Forces 378 were formalized and subsequently developed sub-cultures different than those of their conventional counterparts. The impact of these developments upon the broader Army's relationship with risk is an area for further research. 
376
They drew accurate but incomplete lessons from their quantitatively focused study of the war. They attributed the IDF's military victory in 1973 to its superior tactical proficiency, combat-tested leadership, and a ruthless training regimen. In taking such a narrow perspective, they failed to see the benefits of the IDF's maneuverist and offensivelyoriented doctrine, its decentralized and fluid system of command and control, and its careful balance between the roles of technology and those of the human decision-maker.
As a result, TRADOC developed a capstone doctrine that was fundamentally riskaverse. DePuy and his subordinates viewed rigid, tight control as well as meticulously synchronized concentrations of combat power in the defense as the only means by which to avoid defeat and to prevent the Warsaw Pact from achieving its objectives. Yet, in the years following the publication of the 1976 version of FM 100-5, during which the Army's operational elements gained greater proficiency and thus confidence, the ambition to wage a more offensively-and maneuver-oriented style of warfare emerged.
Crucial to this evolutionary process were the experiences, thinking, and leadership of Starry, who drove change from the insights he gained in key command positions within both the institutional and operational Army. Moreover, he remained open-minded about and in constant intellectual contact with the lessons and protagonists of the 1973 War. Thus, when as V Corps commander, he began to recognize the incongruities between the principles of Active Defense and the battlefield realities with which he was confronted, he was able to project the judgments and decision-making of the IDF's operational-level commanders onto his own problem set. He recognized that in order to win, one must attack and that in order to attack effectively, one must gain, maintain, and exploit the initiative. Doing so would necessitate taking risks at the operational level, where the depth, breadth, and complexity of a commander's thinking, in time, space, and purpose dramatically exceeded those at the tactical level.
Therefore, as he transitioned from V Corps to TRADOC, he elevated and expanded the aperture through which the Army framed and evaluated military problems.
In so doing, he and the rest of TRADOC began to appreciate the chaos, unpredictability, and risk inherent to battle. They then devised an operational concept and capstone doctrine that acknowledged and incorporated this uncertainty into its design. Instead of taking actions to eliminate uncertainty, AirLand Battle sought to impose its effects upon the enemy commander. If uncertainty in battle was inevitable, successful commanders would need to prepare themselves for its effects and actively pursue opportunities to inflict them on a less prepared adversary.
Over the course of this study, several over-arching themes emerged that illuminate the challenges of thinking about and preparing for risk at the operational level of war. First, the Army's new institutional leadership had to define what it meant by winning. In the immediate aftermath of Vietnam, this meant simply surviving the Warsaw Pact's numerically superior, multi-echeloned break-through assault: avoiding defeat by preventing the enemy from achieving the rapid, decisive victory its own doctrine demanded. Over time, as the U.S. Army's confidence in its tactical proficiency grew, the doctrine became more classically "win-oriented" and directed toward positive aims: gaining, maintaining, and exploiting the initiative to disintegrate the enemy's cohesion, thus shattering its will to resist and setting conditions to accomplish friendly objectives. 
379
Third, the Army's approach to analysis underwent an important transformation during the period under study. The pathology for information that emerged from Vietnam and dominated the initial lesson-learning of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War as well as the design of the Active Defense was gradually rebalanced with more qualitative techniques, including the robust study and integration of military history and theory. While the ability to understand and relate opposing rates of movement and fire, the measurable effects of terrain and weather, and the ratios of combat power remained important in support of a commander's battlefield calculus, the more qualitative aspects of combat, including the persistent presence and effects of fear, friction, and fog, rose in importance. The Active Defense and its employment of intensively quantitative analytics sought to eliminate risk; commanders could and should measure as much as possible, calculate probabilities of success or failure, and directly control all aspects of a deliberately planned fight. In sharp contrast, AirLand Battle, tempered by its recognition of combat's continuities, including the omnipresence of uncertainty and risk, encouraged commanders to actively seek opportunities to unbalance the enemy through competitive cycles of decision making. The Army's new doctrine recognized that war was a fundamentally human experience-a contest of wills-in which competence "underpinned" an organization's ability to perform, but in which courage reigned supreme since it represented the willingness "to take a risk despite fear." 380 Finally, it is far easier to advocate the active engagement of risk in the Army's doctrine than to operationalize that guidance. The organizational scientist Benjamin Jensen has recently defined doctrine as "a formalized theory of victory prescribing how the military professional should execute critical tasks in support of national security objectives." 
381
Organizational culture influences both how an army learns, develops, and integrates new approaches to fighting into its doctrine. 
383
384
385
Looking Forward: Further Doctrinal Reform and the Challenges of Implementation As the U.S. effectively rebalanced the emphasis between maneuver and firepower as well as between the offense and the defense. Maneuver would "rarely be possible without firepower and protection." Additionally, not only would firepower provide the "destructive force essential to defeating the enemy's ability and will to fight," but, in relation to maneuver, firepower could "facilitate" it, "exploit" it, and "be used independently" of it.
390
Although the new manual asserted that "the offensive is the decisive form of war-the commander's ultimate means of imposing his will upon the enemy," it also stated that the defense was "the stronger [albeit less decisive] form of war," an acknowledgement conspicuously absent in its 1982 predecessor. 
391
392
393
The second effort was the continued expansion and maturation of the Combat Training Centers, a more comprehensive umbrella plan to synchronize collective training 391 Ibid., 91, 129.
392 HQDA, FM 100-5 (1986), 10. In addition to the introduction of the concept of operational art, the 1986 version of FM 100-5 also introduced the "Key Concepts of Operational Design," including centers of gravity, lines of operation, and culminating points. HQDA, FM 
100-5 (1986), 179-182. 393 Ibid., 15-16.
397
398
Third, following DePuy's tenure as the TRADOC commander, the Army sought to strike a more even balance between training and education. 
399
There was an intent to create a command climate that would produce and support a force ready to go to war quickly and effectively; a command climate that would encourage and ensure the development of leaders able and willing to show initiative and to use common sense in achieving their commanders' objectives, a command climate that would tap the potential of all soldiers, would enhance morale and commitment, and thereby would promote the readiness of the organization to operate as a whole when possible, and as independent elements when necessary. 
403
404
403 Babbitt et al.,
vii. 404
411
409 Citino, 288. 410 Shimon Naveh, In Pursuit of Military Excellence: The Evolution of Operational Theory (New York: Frank Cass, 1997)
411 Swain,
"Lucky War,
[91]
[92]
157,
[176]
[177]
[178]
Citino,
290. 203
412
413
415
413
414
(Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1991), 269;
quoted and discussed in Shamir, Transforming Command, 134. 415
419
420
kilometer sanitary zone between their two elements in which no target, even if positively identified as Iraqi, would be engaged in order to avoid fratricide; see Scales, Jr., 302-303. However, on balance, the need for such control measures was likely appropriate given the unprecedented tempo and lethality of modern combat combined with divergent views of the battlefield that developed between echelons and the neighboring corps; see John S. Brown, "The Maturation of Operational Art: Operations DESERT SHIELD and DESERT STORM," in Krause and Phillips, 466-468. (commander's intent, mission orders, and disciplined initiative, respectively). 
429
In re-introducing mission command to the Army, General Martin Dempsey explained that what distinguished it from the previous doctrine of "battle command" and "command and control" (C2) was the "increasing need for the commander to frequently frame and reframe an environment of ill-structured problems to gain the context of operations by continuously challenging assumption both before and during execution."
He argued that in order to be able to do this effectively leaders at every echelon would need to "co-create" this context through collaborative dialogue with other leaders in their units."
430
429 Lamborn,
19.
435
436
Review 23, no. 3 (July 1998): 393-404. 436
proficiency required to gain his trust and confidence, setting conditions to decentralize and accept risk.
So what does this period, spanning from 1973 to 1991, suggest about the role of risk within the oft-debated American Way of War? Most discussions on the subject begin with historian Russell Weigley's thesis that Americans have consistently demonstrated a cultural preference for wars that are offensive, fast, technologically-oriented, and decisive-so-called wars of annihilation, as opposed to grinding, less decisive wars of attrition or exhaustion. 
437
The U.S. military establishment is a product of and reflects American geography, culture, society, economy, and history . . . one should not be swept off one's feet by the romantic illusion that Americans can be taught to fight wars the way Germans, Israelis, and even British do. That would be both ahistorical and unscientific . . . The United States is a big, lumbering, pluralistic, affluent, liberal, democratic, individualistic, materialistic (if not hedonistic), technologically supremely sophisticated society. Our military strategy should and, indeed, must be built upon these facts. The way we fight necessarily will reflect the way we live. 438 
437 Weigley,
to achieve its broader political objectives and deny those of its Arab adversaries. Unlike in the 1956 conflict, from which Egyptian President Gamal Abdal Nasser had emerged with greater prestige and the status of a pan-Arab leader, the goals of the 1967 War included not only the seizure of enough territory to provide Israel greater strategic depth but also the humiliation of Nasser and the Arab militaries. 
443
444
445
443 Gawrych,
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
445
The expansion of the Cold War into the Middle East further complicated the struggling diplomatic efforts, most notably through the Soviet infusion of weapons into Egypt, enabling Cairo to sustain hostilities against Israel during the so-called War of Attrition (1967-1970). 
451
In it, Egypt and Syria would conduct a simultaneous, surprise two-front attack against Israel oriented on limited military objectives in order to achieve their ultimate political goals: reacquisition of the territories that Israel captured in 1967 and the rejuvenation of Arab pride. Syria's war aims were simpler than those of Egypt. It would attack with three mechanized infantry divisions (each of which was reinforced by an independent armored brigade) and two armored divisions (as the exploitation force). They were to capture, within thirty-six hours, the entire Golan Heights and three critical bridges to the south example, Elizabeth Monroe and A. H. Farrar-Hockley, The Arab-Israel War, October  1973: Background and Events (London: The International Institute for Strategic Studies,  1975), 1-13; Itamar Rabinovich, "The Politics of the Region," in The Impact of the Six-Day War: A Twenty-Year Assessment, ed. Stephen J. Roth (New York: St. Martin's Press,  1988), 42-52. armored brigades had been integrated, would spearhead the crossing, while the remaining balance of combat power would remain postured on the west bank. 
456
457
456 Dunstan, The Yom Kippur War 1973 (2), 19-27. 457
(Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2013), 16-19. 458
Additionally, the Egyptians and Syrians had carefully studied the IDF's strengths and vulnerabilities since the 1967 War. They conceded the IDF's superiority in open, highly mobile armored ground and offensive air warfare. To counter these advantages, both Arab armies employed an attritional approach. 
459
463
The reforming Army in which Starry played such a central role sought to bury the lessons of Vietnam. 
464
Today's Army does itself a disservice if it equates the obviousness of the problem it confronted in the 1970s and 1980s (a large-scale conventional attack by the Warsaw multinational teams, provides multiple options to the Nation's leadership, integrates multiple partners, and operates across multiple domains to present adversaries with multiple dilemmas and achieve sustainable outcomes;" see TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, vi.
However, it was not just information collection and communication technologies that impacted the U.S. Army's relationship with risk; it was also how leaders used that information. The historiography of this period frequently targets the deleterious influence of operations research and system analysis within the Department of Defense.
However, it was not just information collection and communication technologies that impacted the U.S. Army's relationship with risk; it was also how leaders used that information. The historiography of this period frequently targets the deleterious influence of operations research and system analysis within the Department of Defense.
383
Eitan Shamir, Transforming  Command: The Pursuit of Mission Command in the U.S., British, and Israeli Armies (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,
2011), 90-91.
Paul H. Herbert, Deciding What Has to Be Done: General William E. Depuy  and the 1976 Edition of FM 100-5, Operations, Leavenworth Papers No. 16 (Fort  Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute, 1988), 26-27.    
Romie L. Brownlee and William J. Mullen III, Changing an Army: An Oral History of General William E. DePuy, USA Retired (Washington, DC: U.S.Army Center  of Military History, 1988), 190.    
Herbert,[30][31] 
Ibid., 2.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Peter Paret and Michael Howard (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 89.
Antoine Bousquet, The Scientific Way of Warfare: Order and Chaos on the Battlefields of Modernity (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009), 9-10. Bousquet argues that theorists of war have long struggled to "understand the potential and limits of organized violence, all in an effort to bring order and predictability to activities which would otherwise be left entirely to chance and uncertainty."
See Peter L. Bernstein, Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1996), 7; Preston Cline, "The Etymology of Risk" (Master's thesis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 2004), 9-13.
Lamborn, 29.   
Michael Howard, "The Use and Abuse of Military History," The Journal of the Royal United Services Institution 107, no. 625 (1962): 4-10.
Martin van Creveld, Command in War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985), 189-231.
Avi Kober, "The Rise and Fall of Israeli Operational Art, 1948-2008,"  in The Evolution of Operational Art: From Napoleon to the Present, ed. John Andreas Olsen and Martin van Creveld (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011),166-194.    
Kenneth M.Pollack, Arabs at War: Military Effectiveness, 1948-1991 (Lincoln:  University of Nebraska Press, 2002), 14-147, 447-551.   
Saul Bronfeld, "Fighting Outnumbered:  The Impact of the Yom Kippur War on the U.S.Army," The Journal of Military History 71, no. 2 (April 2007): 465-498.    
John L. Romjue, From Active Defense to AirLand Battle: The Development ofArmy Doctrine, 1973
-1982
Benjamin Jensen, Forging the Sword: Doctrinal Change in the U.S. Army (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2016), 25-86.
See for example, LouisWilliams, ed., Military Aspects of the Israeli-Arab  Conflict (Tel Aviv: University Publishing Projects, 1975), 238-265. In particular, see the papers presented by Lieutenant General David Elazar, Major General Binyamin Peled, and Lieutenant General Chaim Bar-Lev, who, during the 1973 war, served as the IDF chief of staff, commander of the Israeli Air Force, and commanding general of Southern Command (post-8 October 1973), respectively.
Ample materials on both the U.S. Army CGSC and SAMS are available in the archives at the Combined Arms Research Library in Fort Leavenworth, KS. Similar materials for the U.S. Army War College are available at the U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center in Carlisle Barracks, PA.
Documents for both elements of the Combat Training Center program are available at the TRADOC archives at Fort Eustis, VA.
See for example,Bettina Babbit, Sally A. Seven, Lawrence E. Lyons, and  Ronald J. Sparks, Fort Hood Leadership Study (West Lake, CA: Essex Corporation, 31  December 1985). Additionally, Dr. T. Owen Jacobs, who conducted field research as an organizational psychologist with the Army Research Institute, has generously provided copies of documents associated with both the Fort Hood Leadership Study and with the Army Research Institute's efforts to develop and codify operational and strategic leader competencies.
Moshe Dayan, Story of My Life: An Autobiography (New York: William  Morrow and Co., 1976), 322.    
Shamir, Transforming Command, 96.   
Sharon,  
85-87. 85 Don Horowitz, "Flexible Responsiveness and Military Strategy," Policy Sciences (1970): 191-205; quoted in Luttwak and Horowitz, 174. 86 Williamson Murray, Military Adaptation in War: With Fear of Change (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 268-275.
As discussed in chapter 2, this is a favorite and well-trod topic in the literature on the 1973 War; see 
Herzog, The War of Atonement, 47-54; The Insight Team of the London Sunday Times, 107-113.
Michael Brecher, Decisions in Crisis: Israel, 1967 and 1973 (Berkeley, CA:  University of California Press, 1980), 192-200.    
Stuart A. Cohen, "Operational Limitations of Reserve Forces: The Lessons of the 1973 War," in Kumaraswamy, 82-85.
Dayan,[460][461]. However, it should be noted that the United States did not explicitly hold Israel back from conducting a pre-emptive strike. See for example, the minutes of a meeting of President Nixon's cabinet on 18 October 1973; Nina Howland and Craig Daigle, eds., Foreign Relations of the UnitedStates, 1969-1976, Volume XXV:  Arab-Israeli Crisis and War, 1973 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,  2011): 588-590.
Herzog, The War of Atonement,[97][98] 
The loss of Mt. Hermon, which was not recaptured until 21-22 October, rendered the IDF effectively blind during most of the fighting. It was only once the IAF had overcome the SAM umbrella and through the ground commanders' effective use of elevated terrain that the IDF was able to visualize the scope and scale of the enemy confronting them.
Jerry Asher and Eric Hammel, Duel for the Golan: The 100-Hour Battle that Saved Israel (Pacifica, CA: William Morrow and Co., 1987), 80-202.    
Of particular note was the performance of Lieutenant Colonel Avigdor Kahalani's 77th Tank Battalion in the battle of the "Valley of Tears." See Avigdor Kahalani, The Heights of Courage: A Tank Leader's War on the Golan (New York: Praeger, 1992),37-192.    
See for example, Pollack, 502-509. Pollack criticizes the performance of the Syrian general staff in their management of the fighting, beyond the initial invasion plan. Rigid adherence to the original plan, unacceptable delays in deciding where and how to exploit success, and willingness to reinforce failure (especially with respect to their efforts against the IDF's 7th Armored Brigade along the northern part of the front) were only exacerbated by the Syrian Army's largely abysmal tactical performance.
Quoted inRabinovich, 209.    
Herzog, The War of Atonement,[116][117][118] 
Rabinovoch, 318; Herzog, The War of Atonement,[140][141][142][143] 
Sharon,[218][219][220][221][222][223][224][225][226][227]. The ever-political and abrasive Sharon clashed often with Lieutenant General Chaim Bar Lev, who, as IDF chief of staff from 1968-1971, had ordered the construction of the defensive line following the Six-Day War. Sharon, as general officer in command of Southern Command from 1969-1973 and a fierce advocate of more open, maneuver-based armored warfare, did his best to undermine the forts, while seeking to set conditions for the counterattacks to be able to cross the Suez.
Dunstan, The Yom Kippur War (2), 23.   
Pollack,[108][109][110][111][112][113][114][115][116][117][118][119][120][121][122][123] closest to this study's proposed phasing. Compare with Herzog, The War of Atonement, 128-250; he divides the fighting into an initial onslaught, fighting along the Bar Lev line, the failed IDF counterattack, and the crossing, but elides the decisive tank battle on 14 October with the period of uncertain and risky transition from 9-13 October.
Lynn,[299][300] 
Herzog, The War of Atonement,[191][192] Herzog is exceptionally critical of the IDF's attack on this day, criticizing not only the lack of combined-arms integration but also the failure to concentrate sufficient forces to achieve a penetration and set conditions for a canal crossing and subsequent exploitation.
Sharon, 303.    
van Creveld, 231. His chapter, "Masters of Maneuver Warfare," is a case study of the 8 October counterattack through the lens of the IDF approach to command and its doctrine of maneuver war. Its failure, in large part, was the result of a corruption of the system of "indirect control," in which IDF risk taking lacked the framework to respond, adapt, and succeed.
In contrast to the northern front, several of the senior commanders on the southern front, most notably, division commander, Major General Ariel Sharon, and his "boss," Major General Shmuel Gonen, allowed ego and politics to interfere with their decision-making and respect for the chain of command. Unity of effort, especially in the fighting's open phases suffered as a result. The depth and breadth of these tensions became increasingly evident after the war's conclusion; see for example,William  Mehlman, "Israel's Generals . . . Too Much Politics?" Armed Forces Journal 111, no. 7  (March 1974): 30-34.    
Adan,[163][164] His memoirs is acknowledged, by many, as one of the fairest and most balanced of those written by IDF flag-officer participants. The whole second part of his book (pages 91-164) covers the failed counterattack, including Lieutenant General Elazar's initial plans, Major General Gonen's uncoordinated changes, its execution, and his personal assessment of the operation.
As discussed previously, Ismai'il had focused almost exclusively on just crossing the canal and consolidating his gains along a thinly penetrated defensive line on the Suez east bank. He was reported to have said that all that was needed was "the canal crossing and ten centimeters of the Sinai;" quoted in Avraham Sela, "The 1973 Arab War Coalition: Aims, Coherence, and Gain Distribution," Israel Affairs 6, no. 1 (Autumn 1999): 47; cited and discussed inPollack, 101.    
el Shazly,[241][242][243][244][245][246] 
 
Adan,[254][255][256] 
Boyne, 150.   
Lieutenant General David Elazar, "The Yom Kippur War: Military Lessons,"  in Williams, 247.   
John Keegan, The Face of Battle (New York: The Viking Press, 1976), 303.    
Ibid., 18.    
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations of Army Forces in the Field (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1968), 5-2.
HQDA, FM 100-5 (1968), 5-7.
Special Readiness Study Group, "Analysis of Combat Data-1973 Mideast War," Volumes 1-8 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, July 1974), (Secret-Information used is Unclassified), The 1973 Arab-Israeli War Collection, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command Military History and Heritage Office
Weapons Systems Evaluation Group, "WESG Report 237-Data from the October 1973 Middle East War," Volumes I-VII(Arlington, VA: WESG, 1974
-1975)
Lieutenant General John J. Hennessey, "The United States Military Visit to Egypt, 14-23 July 1974," 31 July 1974, Lieutenant General Orwin C. Talbott Papers, The U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center, Carlisle Barracks, PA, Box 2, Folder 1. Hereafter referred to as Talbott Papers. The team, led by Hennessey, then commanding general of the U.S. Fifth Army, was designed to ensure representation from all four services as well as the Joint Staff, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
In addition to Prillaman's visit and those discussed in this thesis, there were numerous other visits and study teams of varying levels of formality and scope, including
Talbott's Papers do not contain a full version of his trip report; however, they do include a transcript of the briefing he gave based on this report. SeeLieutenant  General Orwin Talbott, "1973 Mideast War Briefing," 1974, Talbott Papers, Box 1.    
Major General Donn A. Starry, "October 1973 Mideast War," 12  May 1975, General Donn A. Starry Papers, The U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center, Carlisle Barracks, PA, Box 59, Folder 3. Hereafter referred to as Starry Papers.
Major General Avraham  Adam, On the Banks of the Suez (Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1980), 466.
Colonel Bruce Williams, letter to Lieutenant General Talbott, 24 June 1974, Talbott Papers, Box 1, Folder A.
Colonel Bruce Williams, letter to Lieutenant General Talbott, 24 June 1974, Talbott Papers, Box 1, Folder A.
General William E. DePuy, letter to Lieutenant General Talbott, July 1974,  Talbott Papers, Box 1, Folder A.   
Major General Donn Starry, "Rationale for Changes in Tactics, Gunnery, ATT, ATP," back-channel message toGeneral William DePuy, 8 July 1974, Starry  Papers, Box 2, Folder 12. Emphasis in the original.
Brigadier General Paul Gorman, "How to Win Outnumbered,"  sent as an enclosure to a letter to MajorGeneral Donn Starry, 8 January 1974, Starry Papers, Box 2,  Folder 7.   
The seminal study concerning how DePuy leveraged his personal influence and positional power to drive the doctrinal change during this period is Herbert, Deciding What Needs to Be Done; for a more recent look at this process of doctrinal change through the lens of organizational science and theories of innovation, seeJensen, 
Major General Donn A. Starry, letter to Major Wilder M. Snodgrass, 25  November 1975, Starry Papers, Box 3, Folder 12.    
HQDA, FM 100-5 (1976), 1-1.
HQDA, FM 100-5 (1976), 3-4.   
Clinton J. Ancker, "The Evolution of Mission Command in U.S. Army Doctrine, 1905 to the Present," Military Review 93, no. 2 (March-April 2013): 46-47.
Robert Doughty, The Evolution of U.S. Army Tactical Doctrine, 1946-1976,  Leavenworth Papers No. 1 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute, 1979), 41.   
General George Decker, address to the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 16 December 1960; quoted in School of Advanced Military Studies, Art of Design Student Text, ver. 2.0 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: School of Advanced Military Studies, 2009), 35.
Barry  Posen, The Sources of Military Doctrine (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1984), 14.
Brigadier General Dan Loomis, "FM 100-5, Operations: A Review," Military  Review 57, no. 3 (March 1977): 66.
Archer Jones, "The New FM 100-5: A View from the Ivory Tower," Military Review 63, no. 2 (February 1978): 27-36.
William S. Lind, "Some Doctrinal Questions for the United StatesArmy,"  Military Review 57, no. 3 (March 1977): 54-65.
Romjue, From Active Defense to AirLand Battle,[13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21] 
Major Geoffrey G. Prosch, "Israeli Defense of the Golan: An Interview with Brigadier General Avigdor Kahalani, Israeli Defense Forces," Military Review 59, no. 10 (October 1979): 13.
General Walter T. Kerwin, "Kerwin Sends: Tank Gunnery Training," message to FORSCOM and TRADOC Commanders, 4 January 1974, Starry Papers, Box 2, Folder 7.
Generals William E. DePuy and Walter T. Kerwin, untitled eyes only backchannel message to General Creighton Abrams, dated 15 March 1974, Starry Papers, Box 2, Folder 9.
  270  Although not a school-trained Operations Research and Systems Analyst, Gorman deployed many of the discipline's methods in his approach to training and readiness. He attributed his employment of these methodologies to his experiences as a staff officer in the Pentagon in the 1960s and while serving as the G-3 for the detail-
For a summary of these efforts and their impact on the Army's doctrinal developments, seeJensen,
[73]
[74]
DePuy viewed that one of TRADOC's three most significant roles was "bringing combat development forward into the world of today's technology and getting it out of the vague distant future, while systematizing TRADOC's involvement in weapons systems acquisition;" seeBrownlee and Mullen, III, 189.    
Starry aggressively pursued advanced technologies during his tenures as commandant of the Armor School and commanding general of TRADOC, but he remained skeptical of the procurement process, believing that those responsible for materiel development (especially those conducting the advanced basic and applied research) often worked in a vacuum divorced from the operational context. See John L.
Lieutenant Colonel Charles G. Cavanaugh, Jr., "This Is Tough Business," Soldiers magazine interview withGeneral Donn A. Starry, October 1985; reproduced in  Sorley, vol. 2, 1222.    
Even years after his retirement, the virulence of much of the initial criticism of the 1976 version of FM 100-5 stung Starry. He accused Lind of being "Senator Gary Hart's gadfly" and was convinced he had not "even read the damn thing in any detail." Moreover, Starry was also convinced that much of the opposition to the manual was generated by the dissatisfied leadership at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas who, as a result of their opposition to the Active Defense, had been largely eliminated from the writing process. SeeSpruill and Vernon,[266][267] 
Major General Donn A. Starry, letter to Major Wilder M. Snodgrass, 25  November 1975, Starry Papers, Box 3, Folder 12, 1.    
Starry assumed command of V Corps in February 1976, but, once he knew that General Weyand had approved the final draft, he was able to acquire and disseminate advanced copies before its formal publication in July 1976.
Lieutenant General Donn A. Starry, "Commander's Notes, No. 1: The System," 30 April 1976, Starry Papers, Box 59, Folder 1.
Lieutenant General Donn A. Starry, "The Corps Battle," briefing script, 12  June 1977, Starry Papers, Box 60, Folder 7, 5-6.   
General Donn A. Starry, letter to Dr. Richard Swain, U.S. Army School of  Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 7 June 1995, 16-17.    
General (Retired) Donn A. Starry, "TRADOC's Analysis of the Yom Kippur War," briefing transcript, 16 March 1999, The Jaffee Center Military Doctrine Joint Conference, Casarea, Israel, 4-5, inSorley, vol. 1,[220][221][222][223][224][225] 
Phillip Karber, "The Tactical Revolution in Soviet Military Doctrine, Part I,"  Military Review 57, no. 11 (November 1977): 84.
General Donn A. Starry, "Armor Conference: Keynote Address," Armor 87, no. 4 (July-August 1978): 32-36.
General Donn A. Starry, "The Air Land Battle," message for commandants  and commanders, 29 January 1981; reproduced in Romjue, From Active Defense to  AirLand Battle, 98-99.   
General Donn A. Starry, "Extending the Battlefield," Military Review 61, no. 3  (March 1981): 31-50.    
Headquarters, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5, Operational Concept for the AirLand Battle and Corps Operations-1986 (Fort Eustis, VA: U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, 1981), 2, 7.
General Donn A. Starry, "The Soldier and Training," cavalry ball speech  transcript, Fort Carson, CO, 9 January 1981; reproduced in Sorley, vol. 2, 714-717.    
General Donn A. Starry, "Military History," letter to Lieutenant General  Richard E. Carey, U.S. Marine Corps, 25 January 1982; reproduced in Sorley, vol. 1,  626.    
General Donn A. Starry, "The Principles of War," Military Review 61, no. 9 (September 1981): 2-12.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1982), 2-1.
Ibid., 2-2 -2-4.
Lieutenant Colonel John S. Doerfel, "The Operational Art of the AirLand Battle," Military Review 62, no. 5 (May 1982): 3-10. While at the Field Artillery School, Doerfel was the lead action officer for the development of the "Integrated Battlefield" concept; seeRomjue, From Active Defense to AirLand Battle,[35][36][37] 
Major Michael S.Lancaster and Jon Clemens, "AirLand Battle Defeat  Mechanisms," Armor 92, no. 1 (January-February 1983): 35-37. The authors saw three broadly available defeat mechanisms in the new doctrine: (1) firepower-based disruption (interdiction); (2) maneuver-based force disruption (victory through disruption of enemy's ability to apply combat power); and (3) firepower-based force destruction (victory through destruction of the enemy's combat power).
HQDA, FM 100-5 (1982), 2-7.
In anticipation of the new FM 100-5's publication, its two primary authors wrote an extended article in which they articulated the reasons for the revision as well as the key principles and concepts underpinning the new doctrine. They claimed that the Active Defense had been a "radical departure from the Army's operational tradition. It [had] underrated the key elements of depth, maneuver and initiative, and it paid insufficient attention to the human element in battle;" see Lieutenant Colonel Huba Wass de Czege and Lieutenant Colonel Leonard D. Holder, "The New FM 100-5," Military Review 62, no. 7 (July 1982): 55. This study remains indebted to Kretchik for his clear and considerate analysis of the doctrinal shifts between offense/defense, maneuver/firepower, and human element/technology; seeKretchik, 205.    
During the writing of the manual, the movement away from an attritional focus was important to both Generals Starry and Meyer. In commenting on an early 1981 draft of FM 100-5, Meyer wrote to Starry and endorsed the greater balance between firepower and maneuver and the elimination of the "impression we are only attrition oriented" (emphasis in the original); General Edward Meyer, letter toGeneral Donn A. Starry, 21  March 1981, Starry Papers, Box 59, Folder G.    
HQDA, FM 100-5 (1982), 9-1 -9-19.
Lieutenant General Richard Cavazos, the commanding general of the U.S. Army's III Corps, directed the attention of the doctrine writers to Keegan's Face of Battle in order to "highlight the human side of war-the moral dimension of combat, involving leadership, courage, endurance, and fear;" see Romjue, From Active Defense to AirLand Battle, 53-55.
Keegan, 303.    
On the pedantry of the 1976 version of FM 100-5, see Brigadier General Donald Morelli, letter toGeneral Donn Starry, 20 February 1980, Morelli letter to Donn  A. Starry, 20 August 1981, Starry Papers, Box 20, Folder 3.    
Grant's victory at Vicksburg in 1864 and the German's Army's triumph at Tannenburg in 1914 open the chapters on offensive and defensive operations, respectively; see FM100-5 (1982), 8-2, 10-2. Moreover, the authors often wove illustrative historical anecdotes into the doctrinal narrative, including four references to the IDF's 1967 campaign in the Sinai against the Egyptian Army to help readers visualize the importance of the use of unexpected avenues of approach, the impact of seizing decisive terrain, the importance of concentration, and the imperative for deep attacks; see FM100-5 (1982), 3-5, 7-3, 8-4, and 8-5.  On the motivation of the authors for the use of history as both inspiration for and illustration of doctrinal principles and concepts, see Wass deCzege and Holder, 57, 70.   
General Donn A. Starry, "Command and Control: An Overview," Military  Review 61, no. 11 (November 1981): 2-3.
Preston Cline, telephone conversation with author, 29 April 2016. For a historical perspective on the influence of Boyd's thinking, seeBousquet,[187][188][189][190][191][192][193][194][195][196] 
The best, most concise analysis of the 1982 version of FM 100-5's approach to command and control is Ancker, 47-48. This paper helped drive this study's analysis of command and control through the lens of operational risk.
Colonel Thomas A. Miller, Jr., Senior TRADOC liaison officer to the Army of the Federal Republic of Germany, "Mission-Type Tactics," memorandum forGeneral  Donn A. Starry, Starry Papers, Box 59, Folder 8.   
Meyer, letter toGeneral Donn A. Starry, 21 March 1981.  Enclosed to this letter was a working draft of FM 100-5 that Meyer had marked up; on page 2-4, Meyer wrote "OK" next to initiative and violence, but circled violence and integration and wrote "I share some concerns about these terms and explanations."
Lind, "The Theory and Practice of Maneuver Warfare," 8.
General William E. DePuy, letter to Lieutenant General William Richardson,  12 April 1981, Starry Papers, Box 59, Folder 6   
Then-Lieutenant Colonel (later Lieutenant General)  Leonard D. Holder, one of the primary authors of the 1982 version of FM 100-5, described the manual as "winoriented;" quoted inSorley, vol. 1, xiii.   
Edgar H.Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, 4th ed. (San  Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2004), 18.    
Roger Spiller, In the School of War (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2010), 222.
Shamir, Transforming Command,[6][7] 
See for example, Archer Jones, "FM 100-5: A View From the Ivy Tower," Military Review 64, no. 5 (May 1984): 17-21.
Kretchik,[209][210][211] 
Lieutenant Colonel Leonard D. Holder, "Doctrinal Development, 1975-1985,"  Military Review 55, no. 5 (May 1985): 50-52.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1986), 12.
Major Sam Endicott and Earle Pence, NTC Leadership Lessons Learned (Fort Irwin, CA: U.S.Army National Training Center, 1986), 30.    
Endicott and Earle Pence, 13.   
This council comprised the Deputy Chiefs of Staff for Personnel and Operations on the Army Staff, the TRADOC Commanding General, and the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Reserve and Manpower Affairs.
For example, Lieutenant Generals Gary Luck and Frederick Franks, the commanders of XVIII Airborne and VII Corps, respectively, decided to establish a five-
Shamir, Transforming Command,[135][136][137] Gordon and Trainor,[430][431]  Swain, Lucky War,[333][334][335][336][337][338][341][342] 
Keith L. Shimko, The Iraq Wars and America's Military Revolution (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 89-90;Swain, Lucky War,[338][339][340] Scales, Jr.,[364][365][366][367][370][371][372][373] 
General Martin Dempsey, "Mission Command," Army 61, no. 1 (January 2011): 44.
See for example, David A. Korn, Stalemate: The War of Attrition and Great Power Diplomacy in the MiddleEast, 1967
-1970
Lieutenant General Herbert R. McMaster, "Continuity and Change: The Army Operating Concept and Clear Thinking About Future War," Military Review 95, no. 2 (March-April 2015): 7-12.
Harry Summers's book, On Strategy: The Vietnam War in Context  (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1981)  provided much of the Army with the cathartic argument it needed to psychologically get beyond its failures in Vietnam; in short, Summers argues that the Army lost because it had not been allowed to attack the enemy's true center of gravity (North Vietnam) and had instead been asked to conduct nation building in South Vietnam. For an historical analysis of the book's impact, seeLinn,[194][195] 
fight out to be fought, without himself sharing in the stress and danger." 470 He stepped forward, as both an institutional and operational leader, and fully committed himself to ensuring the Army was postured to fight and win. 470 Theodore Roosevelt, "The Duties of Privilege," in American Idea: The Best of the Atlantic Monthly, ed. Robert Vare and Daniel B. Smith (New York: Doubleday, 2007): 555. Roosevelt's original essay was published in the Atlantic Monthly in 1894.
(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
An examination of DePuy's executive communications with respect to the lessons of the 1973 War, including three letters to the CSA over two and half years, reveals a striking continuity of thought. He wrote the first letter following the return of Colonel Prillaman's team in January 1974; the second immediately after the publication of the SRSG report in July 1974; and the third following his own visit to Israel in the late summer of 1976. 
210
211
210
211
-General Donn Starry, Letter to Dr. Richard Swain
The chaos of battle will not allow absolute control. As the battle becomes more complex and unpredictable, decision-making must be more decentralized. [The imperative to use mission orders] will require leaders to exercise initiative, resourcefulness, and imagination-and to take risk.
-Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 100-5, Operations ( The covering memorandum described the paper as "a conceptual methodology that can be used to describe an approach to training effectiveness. It is not an all-inclusive method for attacking training effectiveness problems, however, it may be helpful in describing an approach to be used." had previously conceived, he now saw the lessons of the war as being able to illuminate potential solutions to the intractable problems he confronted as a corps commander. 
314
315
316
314
315
325
326
TRADOC would generate over twenty such concepts over the next four years, but those most crucial to the revision of the Army's capstone doctrine were the evolving series of top-level concepts. The first concept, presented in late 1979, "integrated the 
325
326
332
333
While TRADOC under Starry continued to use quantitative analysis to better understand those things that could and should be measured, Starry also believed that the Army had "raised the art of quantifying-the ability to put a number on anything-to a religion, or at least an obsession." He did not believe that the hard questions of command, soldiers, or the Army more broadly could "be reduced to a bar graph presentation of statistics." Thus, Starry insisted on integrating qualitative analysis and "putting a break on the meaningless collection of unrelated and irrelevant statistics-irrelevant because they don't measure 
332
333 Jensen,
[84]
[85]
[86]
345
346
The increased emphasis on maneuver was essential to the new operational concept. Leveraging B. H. Liddell Hart's writings on the indirect approach, AirLand Battle advocated rapid, violent, unexpected, and deep maneuver against the enemy's weak points in an effort to unbalance his decision making and shatter his will to resist. 
348
345
346
347
371
Furthermore, in the 1980s, the Army Research Institute made a major commitment to research leadership requirements at various levels of command. The effort brought together social scientists from outside and inside the Army and received senior military leader patronage from the Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel on the Army Staff, Lieutenant General Robert Elton. He provided the critical access to the Army general officer corps. 
405
406
The researchers discovered significant differences in the competencies required of leaders at the direct (tactical), organizational (operational), and strategic levels, especially with 
405
416
417
418
416
to compel enemy action requires putting something of value to them at risk." 
421
then respond." 422 Thus, the former (simple, complicated) is the realm of exquisitely rehearsed battle drills and the disciplined execution of the Army's military decisionmaking process, whereas the latter (complex) is the realm of operational risk. 
423
Additionally, while outside the scope of this study, the evidence presented in this thesis offers important insights concerning the role of strong institutional leadership and the challenges of learning real during a period of reform and modernization (see Appendix B).
As part of its ongoing Doctrine 2015 initiative, the U.S. Army published and is currently working to implement its evolved mission command philosophy. 
424
423
424
Despite relatively recent commentary and scholarship, attempting to illuminate other, more frequently exercised methods of warfare in the American tradition, 439 there is still much validity to the Weigley thesis.
Intellectually-and often doctrinally-the U.S. Army, at the tactical and operational levels of war, aspires to fight in a more ambitious, audacious manner, like the IDF during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War or the German Army at its height during the first several years of World War II. In this aspirational approach to fighting, the U.S. Army is lean, highly professional, and profoundly comfortable with uncertainty. It takes risks; it encourages and exploits the initiative; and it dominates the enemy in competitive cycles of decision making. However, even acknowledging the caveats that a search for a "way of war" is prone to caricature, the under-recognition of contrary evidence, and the excessive expectation of continuity, Americans consistently seem to prefer an approach to fighting that is over-reliant upon superior technology, firepower, and logistics; and characterized by strategic impatience and a preference for conventional, decisive, largescale conflict. 
440
This is what makes this seemingly-abstract philosophical conversation so relevant and important; American geographic isolation, wealth, and relative security have, for at least two centuries, shielded it from the vulnerability of a truly existential threat in mid- The 1973 War was the fourth (some would say fifth) major conflict that Israel fought with its Arab neighbors in the quarter century since achieving statehood. First, from 1948 to 1949, Israel won a desperate, violent struggle for its independence with a disparate mix of quasi-modern security forces and militias. 
441
442
441 Herzog,
446
448
450
446
447
448
449
450
452
453
454
452
453
461
462
462
Much of the Army's current thinking revolves around two problem sets: lowerrisk, lower-intensity counterinsurgency or counterterrorism threats and those offered by ascending peer or near-peer adversaries like China and Russia. While the Army's capstone doctrine and operating concept must nest with the U.S. government's strategic guidance, which was admittedly clearer in the 1970s and 1980s, the Army's current bipolar and diffused thinking has diluted and jeopardized its efforts to effectively reform and modernize. 
465
466
468
469