# ID: 3c1634489c464be0af260033e3d76c1c
# Title: Implications for US Special Operations Forces and the Interagency in Phase Zero: Case Studies in the Pacific Theater, 2000 to 2014
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Using a qualitative case study methodology in this thesis, I explore how USSOF and the interagency support chiefs of mission and geographic combatant commanders in achieving national security objectives. Analysis of national security documents, research literature, and US phase zero counter terrorism campaigns in the Philippines and Indonesia reveals four major themes. First, threat groups exploit instability, and voids in phase zero engagement prevent the United States from understanding that exploitation. Second, authorities can be mutually supportive for the DoS and USSOF, but they can also unintentionally narrow the scope of phase zero operations and create an "authorities trap." Third, the contemporary operating environment is complex, and the US lacks a strategy that synchronizes all the elements of national power to navigate that environment effectively. Finally, understanding the operational environment is paramount for USSOF to effectively execute phase zero operations. These four themes support three recommendations: the legislative foundation of the US national security structure needs to be updated; a national security council level directorate needs to be established to develop and execute phase zero strategy; and Theater Special Operations Commands need to drive national strategy through comprehensive, regional phase zero campaign planning that is integrated at all levels of the GCC and US country team.
Using a qualitative case study methodology in this thesis, I explore how USSOF and the interagency support chiefs of mission and geographic combatant commanders in achieving national security objectives. Analysis of national security documents, research literature, and US phase zero counter terrorism campaigns in the Philippines and Indonesia reveals four major themes. First, threat groups exploit instability, and voids in phase zero engagement prevent the United States from understanding that exploitation. Second, authorities can be mutually supportive for the DoS and USSOF, but they can also unintentionally narrow the scope of phase zero operations and create an "authorities trap." Third, the contemporary operating environment is complex, and the US lacks a strategy that synchronizes all the elements of national power to navigate that environment effectively. Finally, understanding the operational environment is paramount for USSOF to effectively execute phase zero operations. These four themes support three recommendations: the legislative foundation of the US national security structure needs to be updated; a national security council level directorate needs to be established to develop and execute phase zero strategy; and Theater Special Operations Commands need to drive national strategy through comprehensive, regional phase zero campaign planning that is integrated at all levels of the GCC and US country team.
USSOF, USPACOM, USSOCPAC, Philippines, Indonesia, JSOTF-P, OEF-P, phase zero, gray zone, unconventional warfare, irregular warfare, asymmetric warfare, hybrid warfare, political warfare, JIIM, i t
To defeat this threat we must make use of every tool in our arsenal-military power, better homeland defenses, law enforcement, intelligence, and vigorous efforts to cut off terrorist financing. The war against terrorists of global reach is a global enterprise of uncertain duration. America will help nations that need our assistance in combating terror. And America will hold to account nations that are compromised by terror, including those who harbor terrorists-because the allies of terror are the enemies of civilization. The United States and countries cooperating with us must not allow the terrorists to develop new home bases. Together, we will seek to deny them sanctuary at every turn.
-George W Bush, National Security Strategy of the United States
The events of September 11th, 2001 redefined the American paradigm of security-no longer was the threat of American military power enough to deter large scale attacks on the homeland. In the year that followed that historic day, President George W. Bush laid out a vision for ensuring American security that set a precedent for preemptive action unseen in modern foreign policy. The Bush Doctrine, as it became known, was codified in the 2002 National Security Strategy of the United States. In the introduction, the president stated that "the United States will use this moment of opportunity to extend the benefits of freedom across the globe. We will actively work to bring the hope of democracy, development, free markets, and free trade to every corner of the world." 1 For the first time in American history, the foundation of securing the American people meant projecting power across the globe and creating free-market democracies to prevent attacks on the homeland. As Pulitzer Prize winning author and Yale University professor John Lewis Gaddis reflected on this change: "a nation that began with the belief that it could not be safe as long as pirates, marauders, and the agents of predatory empires remained active along its borders has now taken the position that it cannot be safe as long as terrorists and tyrants remain active anywhere in the world."
2
The military actions in Afghanistan and Iraq that followed are well known to the public at large. Lesser known operations, but foundational to the President's global counterterrorism (CT) and preemption efforts, were those executed by United States Special Operations Forces and their interagency partners outside declared theaters of armed conflict. In places like the Philippines and Indonesia, United States (US) diplomats and military commanders pursued one of the president's top CT priorities to, "strengthen alliances to defeat global terrorism and work to prevent attacks against us and our friends."
3
The national security strategy of the US has evolved since President Bush left office, but the legacy of the Bush Doctrine permeates the tenants of US Foreign Policy.
The US continues to use its power, both hard and soft, to identify and preemptively interdict threats before a crisis occurs. The balance between diplomacy and force, between carrots and sticks, is what former Assistant Secretary of Defense and Harvard Kennedy School Professor Joseph 
Nye coined "smart power." 4
5
Phase zero is any and all activities that happen before the first phases of traditional military operations that serve to shape the environment and prevent or deter future conflicts from emerging or escalating. 
6
The U.S. European Command (USEUCOM), headquartered in Stuttgart, Germany, is fighting a new kind of campaign in the global war on terror. . . . These dangers require new thinking and a new understanding of the differences between theater security cooperation (TSC) and traditional warfighting . . . the command is fighting the war on terror using a new approach, focusing of terrorism's longterm, underlying conditions. This deliberate strategy of engagement is called Phase Zero, but in truth it is much more than just a new phase of systematic campaign planning; it is a new form of campaign in and of itself.
7
Following the publication of this JFQ article, the Special Operations community adopted the term phase zero as a relevant descriptor of regular operations, actions, and activities (OAAs) conducted by US Special Operations Forces (USSOF) during Theater Security Cooperation (TSC) events. These events are bi-and multi-lateral events that progress the objectives laid out in the geographic combatant commanders Theater Campaign Plan (TCP) to enhance partner force capacity and interoperability, shape the operational environment, prevent the escalation of armed conflict, and promote US interests.
Successful phase zero operations also serve to develop infrastructure in order to offer a gambit of policy options if armed conflict does erupt and increased military intervention is required.
Phase zero operations, actions, and activities (OAAs) are the primary venue for USSOF to expand its global network and develop the capacity of its partners to counter threats to US interests. USSOF is currently, and will continue to, execute the majority of these phase zero activities in sovereign nations under the auspices of the US ambassador, or chief of mission (COM), and the objectives of his or her diplomatic mission. In this environment USSOF and the interagency work hand and hand to achieve US national and regional security interests. The integration of USSOF and American diplomats is a new reality in the post 9/11 national security environment.
The nature of executing a blend of diplomacy and special operations outside a declared theater of armed conflict is complex. The contemporary operating environment involves not just transnational terrorist groups like Al Qaeda (AQ), but a dynamic range of actors that challenge existing international norms in pursuit of their own self interests.
Established powers like China and Russia are turning more and more to legal, cyber, and political warfare and the use of proxy forces to avoid direct attribution and military confrontation with the US. Meanwhile, non-state actors take advantage of cheap, lethal technologies to empower resistant and insurgent movements, and exploit regions with relative instability. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton observed that for this type of environment, "we need Special Operations Forces who are as comfortable drinking tea with tribal leaders as raiding a terrorist compound. We also need diplomats and development experts who understand modern warfare and are up to the job of being your partners."
8
The United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) describes the complex environment that requires smart power projection as the "gray zone." US Navy Captain Philip Kapusta of USSOCOM Directorate of Strategy, Plans, and Policy writes that the gray zone is: "competitive interactions among and within state and non-state actors that fall between the traditional war and peace duality. They are characterized by ambiguity about the nature of the conflict, opacity of the parties involved, or uncertainty about the relevant policy and legal frameworks." 
9
10
USSOF is inherently the Department of Defense (DoD) force of choice when operational or strategic effects are required in an environment that falls somewhere between diplomacy, law enforcement, and armed conflict-in the gray zone. In this environment, the US policy makers and executioners face difficult decisions: How do we respond appropriately? What are the right tools to deter or counter non-state and state sponsored naval, ground, air, cyber or terrorist militias? How do we employ these tools without escalating the conflict or delegitimizing our regional partners?
Phase Zero in the Pacific Theater
The Pacific theater is an ideal venue to explore USSOF and interagency phase zero operations. These vignettes are particularly relevant for several reasons. Due to differing operational environments, a stark contrast exists in how the USG executed its CT missions in the Philippines and Indonesia. This contrast provides an opportunity to juxtapose two campaigns that took place within one GCC. Just as importantly, as these countries addressed their internal terrorism threats, Chinese aggression in the South China Sea threaten interests of both the Philippines and Indonesia. This geopolitical tension adds to the complexities of the gray zone in this region, and creates a unique set of challenges for each (COM) and geographic combatant commander. The nature of these conflicts raises the question of whether or not the structures built by USSOF and the interagency are adequate to respond to gray zone challenges faced by the US and its partners in the region.
These two cases provide a unique lens through which to study how special operations and the interagency support COM and geographic combatant commander objectives for several reasons. First and foremost, both of these campaigns were executed within the borders of, sanctioned by, and conducted by, with, and through the host nation government. Additionally, both of these campaigns were initiated in response to an AQlinked terrorist threat and embedded in the broader Global War on Terror (GWOT).
Because of the connection with the GWOT, these two campaigns are described as CT campaigns, even though they were executed through foreign assistance programs. In the Philippines, USSOF utilized a broad foreign internal defense (FID) and COIN approach to execute their CT Mission, but it was a CT operation nonetheless. In 
The major assumption accepted to pursue this research is that a qualitative case study methodology, based in part on literature written by participants of the events described, can provide an objective reflection of tensions and effectiveness in executing phase zero operations. With the Philippines case study in particular, most of the literature reviewed was published by former commanders of the Joint Special Operations Task Force-Philippines, or historians and researchers contracted by the United States Army Special Operations Command (USASOC). Although a variety of assessments are provided throughout the literature, personal bias cannot be eliminated from those authors who write about their past experiences.
The methodology used in this thesis delimits the analysis to a description of two case studies in order to provide a broad understanding of the environment and provide common themes useful to phase zero planners. The use of only two case studies without quantitative metrics, however, prevents any broad conclusions on causality or correlation between specific actions of the US and the effects on the environment. The examination of the case studies is also not inclusive of all foreign assistance the US provided to the countries examined. Although the many different types of foreign assistance are identified in the literature, only the foreign assistance programs tied directly to the CT campaigns in Indonesia and the Philippines are discussed. Additionally, the case studies examine two lead agencies and two specific CT campaigns within the sovereignty of the respective countries. This thesis does not examine some of the regional cooperation and CT efforts developed in Southeast Asia, or the lead efforts of other USG agencies like the Central Intelligence Agency or the Drug Enforcement Agency. 
12
12
Groups like Abu Sayyaf and JI are not monolithic. During the timeframe of this study, significant infighting within these groups created factions and splinter cells. The allegiances of these groups are influenced by the success and notoriety of other groups like AQ and Daesh. More importantly for this study, their objectives and regional alliances changed as the political and military environment changed. As the Philippine Government negotiated with the Islamic separatist group the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), the MILF cut ties with ASG. As a result, the ASG lost active sanctuary in the critical southern islands of Mindanao. In Indonesia, as the CT police forces effectively decapitated the JI leadership in the mid-2000s, the group shifted their terror attacks from western targets to primarily police forces. Additionally, JI and ASG actively worked together during the timeframe of this study, had dozens of local and regional threat group associations, and continually redefined these relationships.
To account for this dynamic environment, this thesis will focus only on the CT efforts against JI in Indonesia and ASG in the Philippines between 2000 and 2014. This study will not attempt to dissect the local dynamics of war or evaluate the root causes of instability in the Philippines or Indonesia. Instead, this study will focus on the declared threat by the US and host nation governments, and the effects of the campaign to thwart those threats. The timeframe reflects the initial intervention of USSOF into the Philippines following the kidnapping of US citizens in 2000. This study ends in 2014, due primarily to the limited amount of data available after that time.
A major limitation to this study is classification. Phase zero operations, while not inherently classified, are codified by geographic combatant commanders in their Theater Campaign Plans (TCPs). These TCPs, and the corollary documents provided by the Theater Special Operations Command to support the TCP are classified. Without the ability to dissect the details of these planning documents, assessing the effectiveness of a specific USPACOM line of effort in Southeast Asia is both naïve and ineffective. Instead, analysis of openly cited events and operations will assess first, US policy, and then the challenges in executing that policy in terms of building the global SOF network. In this regard, the scope of this paper is limited to the unclassified level of discussion.
These limitations and delimitations require that I do not attempt to describe the effectiveness of the USPACOM TCP or United States Special Operations Command Pacific's (USSOCPAC's) execution of phase zero operations within that TCP. Instead, I will provide a short discussion of how USSOF and the interagency work to achieve national security objectives in phase zero. Through the discussion of two vignettes, I hope to elucidate current challenges and identify potential solutions to improve the effectiveness of USSOF and interagency phase zero operations in the gray zone.
Country Team: "The country team is the heart of Embassy operational decision making, in virtually all posts overseas, including consulates outside the capital." It includes the heads of all Embassy sections and the heads of each USG agency at post. 
13
Foreign Internal Defense (FID): Joint Publication 3-22 defines foreign internal defense as "the US activities that support an host nation's (HN) internal defense and development strategy designed to protect against subversion, lawlessness, insurgency, terrorism, and other threats to their security, consistent with US national security objectives and policies." 
15
16
19
Security Force Assistance: According to Joint Publication 3-05 Special Operations, "USG security sector reform (SSR) focuses on the way a HN provides safety, security, and justice with civilian government oversight. The DoD's primary role in security sector reform is to support the reform, restructure, or reestablishment of the HN armed forces and the defense aspect of the security sector, which is accomplished through security force assistance." 20 Special Operations: This thesis will use the doctrinal term for special operations as defined in Joint Publication 3-05 and Joint Publication 1-02: "Operations requiring unique modes of employment, tactical techniques, equipment and training often conducted in hostile, denied, or politically sensitive environments and characterized by one or more of the following: time sensitive, clandestine, low visibility, conducted with and/or through indigenous forces, requiring regional expertise, and/or a high degree of  (September, 2012). 
27
29
The first initiative, win the current fight, establishes USSOCOM's commitment to the enduring international efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, and its mandated mission to CT worldwide. As conventional forces withdraw from Afghanistan, SOF is inheriting a larger burden of the task to achieve national objectives in that region, while continuing to execute special operations activities against the Islamic State (IS) in Iraq and North Africa. Furthermore, USSOCOM retains a legal mandate to execute CT operations globally as a functional combatant command. 
30
We simply cannot surge trust at the time of crisis." 31 This initiative directly supports the strategic guidance to expand joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multilateral 22 cooperation, and build regionally postured, globally networked force that is flexible and scalable as directed by the President, the Secretary of Defense, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
32
33
37
Based on this view of the contemporary operating environment, "the central idea of the OHD [Operating in the Human Domain] Concept is that SOF need to develop and implement a comprehensive Human Domain discipline to identify, understand, and influence-through words, deeds, and images-relevant individuals, groups, and populations." 38 Critical to this concept is the premise of trust. The Operating in the Human Domain concept is based upon USSOF building trust at the personal and organizational level across the JIIM structure to shape the environment in support of US interests.
The strategies outlined by SOCOM will increasingly occur in an environment that span diplomacy, rule of law, and conflict known as the gray zone. In his 2015 testimony before the Housed Armed Services Committee, General Votel introduced the idea of the gray zone by describing the actions of belligerents in this environment: "Actors taking a 'gray zone' approach seek to secure their objectives while minimizing the scope and 37 Ibid., 7-8. 
38
40
"The Gray Zone" goes on to describe some of the major implications for operating in this type of environment. It states:
Our responses to gray zone challenges display several clear deficiencies. As separate U.S. government agencies strive to achieve their individual organizational goals, they seldom act in integrated ways to support wider government objectives. The National Security Act of 1947 served us well, but in an era far removed from the Cold War, the United States needs a new construct for the 21st century. 
41
40
Kapusta,
7. 41
42
The vision and strategy laid out by USSOCOM are nested within joint publications that outline the core capabilities and missions of Special Operations. JP 3-05 Special Operations is the overarching document that describes the conduct of special operations within the context of the joint force. It describes the makeup and organizational command structure of USSOCOM, which includes USASOC, Naval Special Warfare Command, Air Force Special Operations Command, Marine Special Operations Command, and the Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC). 43 JP 3-05 also defines the core activities of special operations as direct action, special reconnaissance, countering weapons of mass destruction, CT, unconventional warfare (UW), FID, security force assistance, hostage rescue and recovery, COIN, foreign humanitarian assistance, military information support operations, and civil affairs operations. 
44
Most importantly for this thesis, JP 3-05 clearly articulates the role of USSOF in the interagency environment and while conducting foreign assistance. It states that, "Special operations provide joint force commanders (JFCs) and chiefs of mission with discrete, precise, and scalable options that can be synchronized with activities of other interagency partners to achieve United States Government (USG) objectives." 45 Special operations are instrumental in supporting the interagency and joint force in achieving US objectives abroad. The first of these relevant QDDR priorities is "Preventing and Mitigating Conflict and Violent Extremism." Under the Secretary of State's guidance, the DoS and USAID will build their capacity to focus on the prevention of conflict and violent extremism. The QDDR identifies two lines of effort within this priority: "expand prevention efforts to counter violent extremism;" and "strengthen our ability to prevent and respond to internal conflict, atrocities, and fragility." 48 Under Secretary Kerry's direction, regional bureaus and chiefs of mission will prioritize security objectives complementary to the DoD's phase zero operations. 
46
To support the QDDR, the DoS and USAID also publish a Joint Strategic Plan (JSP). This document is "is a blueprint for investing in America's future and achieving the goals that the President laid out in his National Security Strategy and those in the Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review." 
51
50
American people and people everywhere." 
52
Across the globe, each US country team develops an Integrated Country Strategy (ICS) to advance the vision of the COM within that country and support the host nation's internal defense and development planning. As discussed in chapter 1, the ICS is classified as Sensitive But Unclassified and will not be discussed in detail. Generically speaking, the ICS lays out the COM's priorities, goals, and objectives for the US mission in the country. The ICS articulates how the US Country Team will synchronize all the elements of national power available to achieve US objectives.
Collectively, the documents discussed above provide the legislative, executive, and strategic context for the execution of foreign assistance by the DoD and DoS abroad.
The following academic literature review provides some context for these official documents, and offers different analysis as to how the US approaches foreign assistance in line with U.S.C and strategic guidance. A recurring theme throughout the reviewed literature is a gap between the execution of special operations policy and an overarching strategy to employ special operations in phase zero. This is reflected by a number of active duty and retired special operations officers, academics, and think tank research  
53
Petit then argues that phase zero operations need a design methodology different from those used during other major military operations. His analysis examines the operational design process, and the associated tensions with that process, by using two vignettes and one case study. He describes these tensions in terms of policy, programs, and posture, and uses his vignettes and case study as a vehicle to illuminate existing challenges to the implementation of his operational art concept. Most importantly for this thesis, Petit explores the tensions inherent in this complex process to execute foreign assistance. He explains that, "competing agendas, entities, and agencies, both US and foreign, pursue their interests. Within this pursuit exists the persistent tension of calculation, posturing, and seemingly small actions with oversized effects." 
54
In his Indonesia vignette, Petit describes how congressional legislation can represent a policy dilemma for special operations in phase zero. Specifically, he discusses the effects of the 1997 change to the Foreign Assistance Act, known as the Leahy Amendment, on phase zero operations in Indonesia. The Leahy Amendment barred US foreign assistance to any unit of a nation's security forces if there was any evidence that the unit has committed a gross violation of human rights. According to Petit, in the early 2000s, Indonesia showed progress in security sector reform including human rights, and representative government. Additionally, the US GWOT sought out increased access and visibility of Southeast Asian terror networks transiting between Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. The Leahy Amendment, however, prohibited the growth of bilateral military engagement with the Indonesian Armed Forces and hurt perceptions of the US among Indonesians. This lack of access and popular support of the Indonesian public limited understanding and intelligence gathering for the US in Southeast Asia. 
55
56
54
55
56
57
Although Petit describes the natural tensions in synchronizing different cultures and priorities in the phase zero environment, he identifies the biggest hindrance to effective execution of phase zero as a lack of a national grand strategy. 
58
59
In a 2007 article from the peer-reviewed academic journal Third Word Quarterly, Naval Post Graduate School instructor Hy S. Rothstein argues that the "US success against irregular threats is inversely related to the priority senior officials (civilian and military) attach to the effort." 60 Through examination of three case studies based on operations in El Salvador, the Philippines, and Afghanistan, Rothstein makes the case that the American way of war characterized by massive economic and military resources 
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
In a 2014 RAND study funded by and prepared for the USASOC titled, "Improving Strategic Competence: Lessons from 13 Years of War," the authors attempt to consolidate the lessons learned from 13 years of war and place them in the context of the future operating environment. They argue that the, "policy process is not optimized to 61 Ibid., 282-287. 
62
63
64
65
Author, journalist, and national security contributor Linda Robinson articulates that due to the changing operational environment and the nature of constrained resources, the future of special operations must increasingly rely on an indirect approach to counter threats. Although precision strikes and direct action raids are highly glamorized in the press and in Hollywood, Robinson states that there are less noticed, and very successful special operations occurring outside of Iraq and Afghanistan:
Two of the most successful recent U.S. special operations partnerships took place in Colombia and the Philippines. In both cases, over the course of a decade, and with relatively modest investments, a few hundred U.S. special operators were able to strengthen those countries' security forces and dramatically reduce threats from insurgents, terrorists, criminals, and armed separatists. 
66
In this literature review, I briefly summarized the key literature to develop the strategic and regional context of this study. Also provided is the framework to study how 
The methodology used in this study is qualitative, using two different case studies to compare different foreign assistance campaigns within the Pacific Theater. This type of methodology, according to Professor of Educational Psychology at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and author of multiple books on research methodology, John C.
Creswell, is "an inquiry process of understanding based on distinct methodological traditions of inquiry that explore a social or human problem." 
67
69
75
In the ensuing decade, without U.S. support and the benefits of a U.S.-Philippines professional military relationship, the operational capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, or AFP, declined rapidly. That military erosion allowed latent insurgencies, some of which had ties to international terrorism, to flare to the point that they posed a threat to the viability of the Philippine Government. 
76
The threat groups in the Philippines are diverse in both demographic composition and agenda. In addition to multiple Islamic separatist and terrorist groups, the Philippines is home to a persistent communist insurgency, the New People's Army that strikes out violently against the GRP and undermines the rule of law. 
77
75
79
78 Chalk et. al.,
34
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
Briscoe,
16. 87
88
89 David Johnston, "U.S. Indicts 5 Filipino Men in Kidnapping of Americans," The New York Times, July 24, 2002, accessed February 3, 2016, http://www.nytimes. com/2002/07/24/international/asia/24INDI.html; Maxwell, 20. 
90
94
103
104
Operation ENDURING FREEDOM-Philippines was successful because it maintained a small SOF U.S. Military footprint in a politically sensitive environment to be in agreement with the HN constitution. This operation applied interagency concepts because the operation was completely synchronized between the JSOTF-P Headquarters, U.S. country team, TSOC, and GCC. In addition, the JSOTF-P staff operated in close coordination with the military assistance advisory group to interact with Philippine national-level headquarters to facilitate nation assistance. This mutual effort enabled the JSOTF-P to assist our partner nation along four lines of operations that were balanced and executed simultaneously. 
105
105
106
In the findings of one RAND study, "The intervention benefited from its proactive nature: The US did not wait until the Philippine Government was near collapse or ASG on the brink of overrunning the government. Because the situation was not dire, it was also relatively less costly to deal with." 107 In 2014, the combat mission in the Philippines officially ended when USSOCPAC dissolved JSOTF-P. However, the foreign assistance, Phase Zero Campaign endures today as part of the COM's country strategy through multiple SOF operations, actions, and activities that occur annually in the Philippines. This includes the bilateral exercise Balikatan, which marks its 15th consecutive year in 2016. 
106
110
111
112
113
114
111 Dana Priest, The Mission: Waging War and Keeping Peace with America's Military (New York: W. W. 
Norton and Co., 2003), 216. 112
113 Ibid., 216-217. 114 Ibid., 217. 53 between 1965 and
1991. 115
118
119
120
121
122
The collapse of the Suharto regime in 1998 created a relative vacuum of governance that allowed many formerly restricted Islamic extremist groups to openly recruit, train, and expand their operational capacity. Sectarian violence and major Christian-Muslim clashes erupted in several islands of Indonesia that fell outside the immediate control of the central government. By the early 2000s, the two major islands 121 Ibid., 33-34.
122 Sarah Khederian, "Indonesia's Returning Foreign Fighter Threat," Georgetown Security Studies Review, November 14, 2014, accessed January 22, 2016, http://georgetownsecuritystudiesreview.org/2014/11/14/indonesias-returning-foreignfighter-threat/.
of Maluku and Sulawesi were immersed in full scale sectarian civil wars, and the Islamic extremist group JI came to prominence as a regional terrorist group. 
123
124
125
126
127
129
130
131
In early 2003, the Indonesian Government did not have the institutional capacity or necessary capabilities to effectively wage a CT Campaign against JI. Yet, popular sentiment in Indonesia would not support a large US Military presence like that in the Philippines. As a predominately Muslim country, many Indonesians felt that the GWOT 130 US Department of State website, http://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/other/des/ 123085.htm. 
131 Chalk et al.,
153. 132
133
134
135
While the Bush Administration and leaders in USSOCPAC attempted to find creative ways of vetting and developing the Kopassus to take a role in the GWOT, the US country team in Indonesia pursued the development of new capabilities to thwart the threat of JI and other Islamic terrorist groups. Specifically, the US DoS developed the Indonesian police CT and rule of law capabilities through a variety of Title 22 funding mechanisms. The largest portion of US funding to Indonesia came in the form of Economic Support Funds, part of which were spent bolstering the country's police and security forces. These funds amounted to nearly $80M between 2003 and 2007. 
136
133
134 
Chalk et al.,
153. 135
136
Chalk et al.,
[153]
[154]
In conjunction with the aggressive CT activities of DET 88 and the Terrorism and Transnational Crime Task Force, Indonesia developed de-radicalization and counterradicalization programs to build popular resilience against Islamic extremism. 141 These efforts included, "prison reform, rehabilitation programs and counterpropaganda. The purpose of these measures [was] to disengage terrorist convicts from future activities and prevent or disrupt the radicalization process of Indonesian society." 
142
143
142 Ibid. 
143
144 Vaugh, 8.
As a result of these reforms in civil society, significant US policies changed towards Indonesian security cooperation and foreign assistance after 2005. Specifically, these policies addressed the ban on military support to the TNI, resurrecting the IMET, restarting non-lethal Foreign Military Sales, and waiving Foreign Military Financing restrictions. 
145
Similar to the campaign in the Philippines, the campaign to counter terrorists in Indonesia between 2003 and 2014 is considered a success by contemporary analysts and policymakers. The investment by the US and the development of Indonesia's CT capabilities had measurable impact, and many recognize that it has paid considerable dividends in the Southeast Asia CT fight. 
146
Indonesia's success is measured in part by the approximately three hundred JI militants that were killed or captured between 2003 and 2014, including key organizational leaders. 
147
145 Chalk et al.,
16. 146
147
In November 2005, Densus 88 turned the tide in Indonesia's war against JI. A Densus 88 sniper shot Dr. Azahari Husin, the JI mastermind behind the 2002 and 2005 Bali bombings and the JW Marriot and Australian Embassy bombings, during a raid on Husin's hideout in Batu, East Java. An accomplice set off a suicide explosive killing himself and a third man who had joined Husin in engaging the counterterrorism force in an intense gun battle. After Husin, Densus 88 eliminated JI's other top operatives in near succession. 
148
148 Jacob Zenn, "Indonesia's 'Ghost Birds' Tackle Islamist Terrorists: A Profile of Densus 88," Terrorism Monitor 9, no. 32 (August 2011), accessed February 6, 2016, http://www.jamestown.org/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=38312&no_cache=1#.Vr Zz5ZMrKT8. 
149
CHAPTER 5 ANALYSIS Success in the future demands unprecedented levels of trust, confidence, and understanding conditions that can't be surged.
-United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020: Forging the Tip of the Spear
Review of the pertinent literature and the US phase zero CT campaigns in the Philippines and Indonesia revealed four major themes. First, threat groups exploit instability, and voids in phase zero engagement prevent the US from understanding that exploitation. Second, authorities can be mutually supportive for the DoS and USSOF, but they can also unintentionally narrow the scope of phase zero operations and create an "authorities trap." Third, the contemporary operating environment is complex and the US lacks a strategy that synchronizes all the elements of national power to navigate that environment effectively. Finally, understanding the operational environment is paramount for USSOF to effectively execute their phase zero tasks.
Before discussing these four themes in further depth, an important discovery should be discussed-phase zero is not a USSOF-specific activity, and USSOF is not required for phase zero in every environment. Phase zero must be conducted as a wholeof-government campaign, with USSOF utilized as one tool among many in that campaign. Some environments, like the environment characterized by popular anti-American sentiment in Indonesia during the first several years of the Global War on Terrorism-are not conducive for USSOF to shape the environment. Therefore, the definition of phase zero used throughout this thesis should be amended to include all the elements of national power at the disposal of the geographic combatant commander and COM.
Theme #1: Threat Groups Exploit Instability, and Voids in Phase Zero Engagement Prevent the US from Understanding that Exploitation
For any casual student of history, foreign policy, or sociology, the first part of this statement may sound not only like a shallow observation of the obvious but a law of human nature and a fundamental rule of how societies interact. A nuanced reflection of this idea, however, is important in the context of how the US secures its interests abroad.
Based on the two case studies explored, this exploitation appears to have greater effects when the US is not actively involved in a holistic Phase Zero Campaign in those regions.
In the context of US foreign assistance abroad, understanding the nature of this exploitation is paramount. When national interests are at stake the USG has a plethora of This first theme about exploitation and engagement provides a premise for the next three themes involving authorities, complexity and strategy, and trust. These three themes are all predicated on understanding the environment and effectively addressing the root problems that threaten US interests abroad. This first theme does not portend that phase zero operations can mitigate every threat to the US. Instead, this theme reflects the complexity of the environment and that a lack of phase zero engagement inhibits phase
The largest individual group [for terrorist attacks] was the New People's Army, a communist organisation, which claimed responsibility for 30 per cent of deaths in 2013. . . . In total, 103 people were killed by assassinations in 2013 which is more than five times higher than 2012. The use of these tactics and targets demonstrates that many of the terrorist groups in the Philippines are seeking to directly change the political system. Around 34 per cent of deaths from terrorist attacks were targeting the government, with business leaders, private citizens and police representing between ten and seventeen per cent of deaths.
156
USSOCPAC executed a campaign in the Philippines, and the Indonesian country team executed a campaign in Indonesia. The intersection of governed spaces, however, is the environment most highly exploited by those threat groups phase zero campaigns intend to target.
In the case of Southeast Asia, the lack of a coherent national or regional strategy prevented the development of an effective campaign to address the border areas in the Celebes and Sulu seas. A 2007 Asia Times article succinctly summed up the threat from the maritime space between the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia:
Decades of poor governance, economic and political marginalization, lack of state capacity, and separatist conflict have turned this area into an "ungoverned space" and hence a haven for transnational criminals, including terrorists. Addressing transnational threats in this area not only requires greater security cooperation among the three countries, but also increased assistance from external powers who have much to offer in terms of capacity building. 
159
Theme #4: Understanding the Operational Environment is Paramount in the Development of Effective Phase Zero Operations
The landscape in Southeast Asia is reflective of a larger struggle for identity in a globalizing world. What renowned author, teacher, and foreign policy expert Samuel Huntington described decades ago as the "Clash of Civilizations" is personified in places like Indonesia and the Philippines where traditionalist seek to preserve a way of life in an environment that is rapidly changing. 
160
On the small island of Bali, Indonesia, for example, westerners flock to the beaches for the exotic nightlife and world-class surfing. International companies develop the pristine landscape to cater to these tourists and to capitalize on the western desire for means that, to be effective, USSOF and diplomats must understand the nuances of the local culture, politics, and geography, and the geopolitical implications of armed US Military Personnel in a foreign country. This is an incredibly high expectation, and requires time in the region developing relationships and trust with host nation partners. In the Philippines case study, this trust was built upon small teams and liaison at all levels of the host nation's military and the US country team. The enduring, day to day presence facilitated the development of personal, not just organizational, relationships. In the Indonesia case study, understanding the local perceptions and popular sentiment against US Military presence prompted a non-military approach to what appeared to a military security problem.
According to USSOCOM, "Special operations are 'special' because their success depends on long-term relationships with indigenous forces and populations and knowledge of the cultural, societal, economic, and political environments in which they occur. . . . The greater the environmental knowledge and extent of relationships, the more likely the outcome will be successful. This, more than any other single factor, defines the nature of special operations."
162
Phase zero is a whole-of-government approach that seeks to synchronize the shaping of the environment and preventing, deterring, and preparing for conflict. The two case studies examined identify tensions in applying interagency authorities and capabilities in a coherent, national and regional phase zero strategy. Those tensions beg the question of whether or not the current structures and organizations to execute foreign assistance and phase zero operations are conducive to addressing the complexities of the threats in the current operating environment.
Political warfare is the logical application of Clausewitz's doctrine in time of peace. In broadest definition, political warfare is the employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives.
-George Kennan, "Policy Planning Staff Memorandum," February 1948
In undertaking this research, I sought to understand how USSOF and the interagency achieve national security objectives during phase zero operations. To scope the research into a manageable body of work, I narrowed my discussion to a review of how national security strategy is formed and authorized at the national level, and then executed by chiefs of mission and geographic combatant commanders. The analysis in chapter 5 revealed four themes about a complex operational environment, adaptive threat groups, a lack of phase zero strategy, and challenges with the interagency structures and authorities.
Many of the authors reviewed in this thesis built their studies on a premise that the current operating environment is something new, foreign, and increasing in complexity. This claim fails to account for a basic characteristic of warfare that has endured throughout history-war is a complex human endeavor stressed by fog and friction. Contemporary authors are, in a sense, substituting the benefit of hindsight with simplicity. Modern US history is teeming with examples of military and diplomatic leaders describing the environment they face as more complex and more irregular than ever before. President John F. Kennedy, in his 1962   Secretary of Defense Ash Carter is proposing to update some provisions of the 1986 Goldwater-Nichols Act through what he calls the "Force of the Future" initiative.
Among other things, his initiative seeks to reform the human resourcing and acquisition processes, and clarify some of the roles and functions of senior DoD officials. The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Senator John McCain, has also mentioned recently that the US Congress is working on a legislative update to Goldwater-Nichols. 
164
The acknowledgement of antiquated legislative structures is an implicit acknowledgement that the national security apparatus lacks an effective agency to coordinate, synchronize, and execute effective phase zero strategy. Nearly 70 years ago, the father of the US containment strategy during the Cold War, George Kennan, described the execution of US policy in this environment as political warfare. He said, "Political warfare is the logical application of Clausewitz's doctrine in time of peace. In broadest definition, political warfare is the employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives."
165
In the execution of phase zero and political warfare, the geographic combatant commander and COM must employ all the elements of national power at his or her disposal, including USSOF, to achieve national objectives. In adversarial states, this should include influencing, coercing, deterring, and resisting state aggression in conjunction with unconventional, hybrid, irregular, and asymmetric means. In friendly and allied states, this means supporting the existing regime with foreign assistance and FID. These efforts, however, must be synchronized across the JIIM environment and regionally focused by a national level agency.
The US needs a National Security Council level headquarters to develop strategy, synchronize the interagency, and execute political warfare in phase zero. In a 2016 Joint Forces Quarterly article, four senior ranking officers in the special operations community-including the former commanders of both USSOCOM and USASOCmake this very argument. They claim that, President Eisenhower once considered appointing a National Security Council (NSC)-level 'director of unconventional or non-military warfare,' with responsibilities including such areas as 'economic warfare, psychological warfare, political warfare, and foreign information.' In other words, he saw the need for an NSC-level director of political warfare, someone to quarterback the habitually interagency effort. This need still exists to achieve unity of effort across all aspects of national power (diplomatic, information, military, and economic)  across the continuum of international competition. As Max Boot has observed, political warfare has become a lost art which no department or agency of the U.S. Government views as a core mission. 
166
Currently, there is an academic discussion within the US Special Operations community as to how to define, describe, and operate in the environment outside of declared, armed conflict. Several white papers from USSOCOM and USASOC concisely describe these challenges and potential responses. These include the gray zone, "SOF Support to Political Warfare," and "Unconventional Warfare," to name a few. The public policy research organization RAND has also published extensively on these topics. With this thesis, I hope to contribute to that discussion, and suggest that USSOF be widely used in the phase zero environment across the spectrum of gray zone threats. As the nature of conflict between and among states evolves, the role of US Special Operations Forces must evolve as well, and geographic combatant commanders and chiefs of mission must view USSOF as a dynamic tool that can operate across the spectrum of conflict between and among states.
The interactions between USSOF and the interagency during phase zero warrant further exploration. This study analyzed relationships only in the Pacific theater, and primarily between the DoS and USSOF. Expanding this research to include several other case studies or vignettes from a variety of GCCs could provide further insight as to how USSOF and the interagency interact at the country team and GCC level. This should include examination of other USG agencies like the Central Intelligence Agency and Drug Enforcement Agency, and interagency or multinational organizations that address regional transnational crime, drugs, and terrorism. Additionally, identifying quantitative measures to support the qualitative analysis in this thesis might provide more correlative support to the effectiveness of different phase zero approaches. Additional research into this topic may provide insight into the fog and frictions that hinder the achievement of national security objectives during phase zero, and may also illuminate innovative solutions to alleviating the tensions across the JIIM environment.
The strategic rebalance to the Pacific theater outlined by the Obama Administration in 2011 highlights the importance of the region and the relevance of the phase zero discussion in the United States Pacific Command (USPACOM). 11 The first case study will explore the U.S. Military CT and counterinsurgency (COIN) operations in the Philippines. This vignette is unique. Unlike the operations with other Southeast Asian nations, a joint task force was established in the Philippines in 2002 as part of Operation Enduring Freedom-Philippines (OEF-P). This joint task force demarcated several southern Philippine islands as a combat zone for US troops. The US combat mission in the Philippines focused on advise and assist operations against AQ affiliated terrorist organizations such as the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG). The second case study will discuss the United States Government (USG) campaign in Indonesia to counter the Islamic extremist group Jemaah Islamiyah (JI). JI is an AQ affiliated terrorist organization that came to global prominence after the 2002 Bali night-club bombing that killed over two hundred people. The group also has links to the attack on the United States Ship (USS) Cole in 2000, and the attacks in the US on September 11, 2001.
48  
48  
98  
98  
As discussed in chapter 2, Colonel Petit argues that the US has replaced strategy with engagement. Accepting that premise has some significant implications for Phase Zero Campaign planning.
US Executive Office of the President of the United States, National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House,
2002).
John Lewis Gaddis, Surprise, Security, and the American Experience (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004).
US Executive Office of the President of the United States, National Security Strategy of the United States of America (2002), 5.
Joseph S. Nye, Jr., "Get Smart: Combining Hard and Soft Power," Foreign Affairs 88, no. 4 (July/August 2009): 160-163.
US Executive Office of the President of the United States. National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House, 2015), 10.
Charles Wald, "New  Thinking at EUCOM: The Phase Zero Campaign," Joint Forces Quarterly (4th Quarter October 2006):
72-73.   
Wald, "New Thinking," 72.   
Hillary Clinton, "Remarks at the Special Operations Command Gala Dinner," US Department of State, May 23, 2012, accessed May 4, 2016, http://www.state.gov/ secretary/20092013clinton/rm/2012/05/190805.htm.
Philip Kapusta, USSOCOM White Paper, "The Gray Zone" (MacDill Air Force Base, 2015), 1.
US Department of Defense. Joint Publication (JP) 3-05, Special Operations (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2014), ix.
White House, "Resourcing the Rebalance toward the Asia-Pacific Region," April
12, 2013
US Department of State, "RS401, Introduction to Department of State Agency Culture," accessed May 4, 2016, http://www.state.gov/courses/rs401/page_25.htm.
US Department of Defense. Joint Publication (JP) 3-22, Foreign Internal Defense (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2010), II-1.
United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020: Forging the Tip of the Spear (MacDill Air Force Base, FL: USSOCOM, 2014), 6.
US Agency for International Development, "Integrated Country Strategy: Guidance and Instructions," accessed March 25, 2016, http://pdf.usaid.gov/ pdf_docs/PBAAA879.pdf.
US Department of Defense, Joint Publication (JP) 3-22, Foreign Internal Defense (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2010), II-1.
US Department of Defense, Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Department of Defense,
2011).20 US Department of Defense, JP 3-05, xi.
US Department of Defense, Joint Publication (JP) 1-02, Dictionary of Terms (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2016),
U.S.C., Title 10, Armed Forces, accessed March 26, 2016, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title10/pdf/USCODE-2011-title10-subtitleA-partI-chap6-sec167.pdf; United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020, The Global SOF Network (MacDill Air Force Base, FL: USSOCOM, 2014), 3.
 23  United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020: The Global SOF Network, 3; U.S.C., Title 10, Armed Forces
. 24 U.S.C. Title 22, Chapter 32, Subchapter II, Military Assistance and Sales, accessed March 26, 2016, https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/22/chapter-32/subchapter-II.
United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020, The Global SOF Network, 4.
United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020, Forging the Tip of the Spear, 2.
Ibid., 1.
United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020, Forging the Tip of the Spear, 4-5.
United States Special Operations Command, SOCOM 2020, Forging the Tip of the Spear, 1.
United State Special Operations Command, Operating in the Human Domain Concept (MacDill Air Force Base, FL: USSOCOM, 2015), 3.
US Department of State, Joint Strategic Plan 2014-17, accessed March 26, 2016, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/223997.pdf, 2.
Brian S. Petit, Going Big by Getting Small: The Application of Operational Art by Special Operations in Phase Zero (Denver, CO: Outskirts Press, 2013), e-book location 215 of 3744.
Bruce Vaughn, Indonesia: Domestic Politics, Strategic Dynamics, and U.S.  Interests Congressional Research Service (Washington, DC: Congressional Research  Service, January 2011), 6-7.    
Ibid.   
Priest,[224][225] 
Vaugh, Indonesia: Domestic Politics, summary.    
Ibid., 33.   
Ibid., 89.   
9/11 Commission, 9/11 Commission Report, accessed April 17, 2016, http://avalon.law.yale.edu/sept11/911Report.pdf, 73.
Austin Wright and Jeremy Herb, "Global Terrorism Index Report: Measuring and Understanding the Impact of Terrorism," Institute for Economics and Peace, accessed April 15, 2016, http://economicsandpeace.org/wp-content/uploads/ 2015/11/Global-Terrorism-Index-2015.pdf.
James Kiras, Special Operations and Strategy from World War I to the War on Terrorism (London: Routledge, 2006), 62.
Ian Storey, "Triborder Sea' is SE Asian Danger Zone;" Asia Times, October  18, 2007, accessed April 21, 2016, http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/ IJ18Ae01.html.
United States Special Operations Command, "SOF Imperatives," accessed April 21, 2016, http://www.soc.mil/USASOCHQ/SOFImperatives.html.
United States Special Operations Command, Publication 1, Doctrine for Special Operations (MacDill Air Force Base, FL: USSOCOM, 2011).
Austin Wright and Jeremy Herb, "Military Reform Effort Claims Latest Casualty," Politico, April 18, 2016, accessed April 21, 2016, http://www.politico.com/ story/2016/04/defense-pentagon-brad-carson-222064.
George Kennan, "Policy Planning Staff Memorandum," Department of State, May 4, 1948, accessed March, 3, 2016, http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/ document/114320.
Joseph L. Votel et al., "Unconventional Warfare in the Gray Zone," Joint Forces Quarterly 80 (1st Quarter 2016): 108.
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
zero planners from the following: avoiding an authorities trap that limits planners view of the problem to the tools they have at their disposal; providing strategic assessment of the operational environment and effectively shaping regional or national strategy; and building the global SOF network and requisite understanding of the operational environment to tackle local, nuanced problems. Developing AFP capabilities to CT in the southern Philippines, however, did not translate to a whole-of-government approach to build enduring security and stability. One problem lay in that fact that the Islamic extremist groups targeted in OEF-P represented only one part of the multi-faceted security threats and sources of instability faced by the GRP. Because GWOT authorities existed, both the geographic combatant commanders and chiefs of mission narrowed the focus of their foreign assistance, or Phase Zero Campaign, on Islamic extremism. This is an authorities trap for phase zero plannersboth USSOF and DoS phase zero planners. While the GWOT was arguably the most pressing national security concern to the US, the inherent value of a Phase Zero Campaign is that it provides access for US policy makers to understand and shape the environment. When a CT Campaign becomes a replacement for an overarching Phase
Zero Campaign, as it did in the Philippines, other strategic threats can be overlooked. In the case of the Philippines, for example, political violence, communist insurgency, transnational criminal organizations and rising aggression by China collectively posed a much greater threat to Philippine security than Islamic extremism did.
During the timeframe of this study, political violence was rampant in the Philippines, and it continues today as a significant threat to the stability of the GRP.
During election cycles, violent attacks and assassinations of political leaders, their supporters, and their family members spike dramatically. Leading up to the 2009 presidential elections in the Philippines, 57 politicians, journalists, and political supporters were murdered. 
151
153
154
The New People's Army, a Maoist-based revolutionary movement, has waged the world's longest communist insurgency and is considered by the AFP as the greatest threat to the country's stability. 
155
The mission of JSOTF-P from 2002 to 2014 justifiably focused on the threat of Islamic extremism. The CT nature of the authorization for OEF-P, however, facilitated an environment for the chiefs of mission and geographic combatant commanders to focus on countering Islamic terrorism, and not necessarily addressing the widespread symptoms of instability in the Philippines that fostered the rise of Islamic extremism in the first place.
The former was a CT Campaign, the latter would have been a Phase Zero Campaign: this is the authorities trap.
The observation of the authorities trap is not a criticism of the holistic COIN and CT Campaign waged by JSOTF-P from 2002 to 2014. JSOTF-P's activities during OEF-P are considered a great interagency success in countering the Islamic extremist threat in the southern Philippines. JSOTF-P effectively integrated intelligence activities, civil-military operations, humanitarian assistance, and military information support activities with effective military training, advising, and assisting to build the local infrastructure, win the support of the population, isolate the insurgency, and target bad actors. In the context of complex and bureaucratic JIIM relationships, these achievements cannot be overstated. The observation of the authorities trap simply states that when sent on a mission to CT with specific Title 10 CT authorities, that is what USSOF will do.
Additionally, the amount of resources tied to Title 10 authorities may hinder the overarching US mission from a whole-of-government Phase Zero Campaign that seeks to understand the root causes of instability and shape that environment accordingly. The lesson learned is that specific USSOF missions should not replace an overarching Phase Zero Campaign, and a CT Campaign like OEF-P should be one line of effort in a broad, whole-of-government approach to shaping the environment.