# ID: 3c71b5b9bf4b43398d4c74b3f40c1a2e
# Title: Russian fires capability gap: a United States North Atlantic Treaty Organization coalition answer
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
After 17 years of conducting counter-terrorism operations, the U.S. and its NATO partners have divested and reduced their ability to support maneuver operations with effective and lethal field artillery in Large Scale Combat Operations (LSCO). While we have focused on the Global War on Terrorism, our adversaries have continued to invest in and develop sophisticated fires and Anti-Access/Area Denial (A2/AD) capabilities. This thesis examines U.S., NATO, and Russian ground-based indirect fires by analyzing current doctrine, organizations, and material in the fires warfighting function. To further define the problem, this thesis analyzes current U.S.
We can't know with absolute certainty what the future of warfare will hold, but we do know it will be exceedingly complex, unpredictable, and -as they say in the staff colleges -"unstructured." Just think about the range of security challenges we face right now beyond Iraq and Afghanistan: terrorism and terrorists in search of weapons of mass destruction, Iran, North Korea, military modernization programs in Russia and China, failed and failing states, revolution in the Middle East, cyber, piracy, proliferation, natural and man-made disasters, and more.
-Hon. Robert M. Gates, Department of Defense Archive
The United States military and its multinational partners-allies are in the crux of a warfighting function challenge. Studies such as the Russian New-Generation Warfare
Study and recent activities in Ukraine show that the last 17 years of conflict and shifting fiscal policies have left gaps in the nation's large-scale ground combat (LSGC) capability. In direct terms, the U.S. is out-gunned, out-ranged, and out-manned in the surface-to-surface fires realm. As a field artillery officer, and more broadly a fire supporter, this reality is troublesome. This thesis will further address how the U.S.
military and its multinational partners at large, are inadequately prepared for future armed conflict in the fires warfighting function by analyzing relevant material, doctrine, and organizations.
Though capable, U.S. fires platforms, do not match the current threat, nor the projected threat 10-15 years into the future. U.S. 155mm cannon systems (M777A2, M109A6) are currently outranged by our strategic competitors by nearly twice the maximum range. U.S. rocket systems (M270A1, M142) face a similar mismatch. In order to match our competitors, we must increase the number of systems (formations), range, and rate of fire.
Capable platforms are essential, but are they are only as capable as the munitions they deliver. I will delineate munition characteristics into two primary categories, range and lethality. In the short term, the U.S. can develop munitions (shells, rockets) with enhanced ranges to maximize the capabilities of our current platforms. The Army's Fires
Center of Excellence and long-range precision fires Cross Functional Teams are testing new technologies. Burgeoning technologies such ramjet, hypervelocity rounds, and more powerful propellants are on the horizon. But the threat is here and now, it is critical, stop gap measures such as longer-range munitions must be employed.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, are systems. The systems our military designs and implements to control fires, are as important as the platforms and munitions themselves. In order to counter our peer and near-peer threats, we must refine our systems to best fight LSGC. A key component of this, is joint and multinational interoperability. In the conduct of LSGC, the U.S. military must be able to, with and through, leverage the assets brought to bear by our friends and allies. A key element of our strength lies in our coalitions and alliances. However, a disjointed or ineffective coordination system (in this instance fires) degrades the threat and deterrence capability of our combined force.
While the U.S. and western military forces spent the last 17 years fighting extremists and the Global War on Terrorism, our adversaries have analyzed our weaknesses and developed systems to mitigate our capabilities. The ability to conduct surface-to-surface fires is a critical arm of the U.S. Army's unified land operations construct specifically. The U.S. military must work quickly to enhance existing platforms, introduce new ones, and invest in the latest technologies. Our country's ability to execute LSGC and protect and support ground forces is in the balance.
The intent of this thesis is to broadly analyze the fires capabilities of the U.S. and NATO partners in comparison to our Russian competitors. The U.S. and its NATO partners face a fires capability gap. By analyzing key material, organizational, and doctrinal elements this thesis will attempt to quantify the size and significance of that capability gap, highlight current discussion on the topic, and finally propose protentional solutions and areas of future investment and research. To accomplish this task, this thesis will use a blended compare and contrast, descriptive research, and case study methodology to evaluate proposed solutions for validity.
How can we use multinational-joint fires to bridge the coalition fires capability gap?
Secondary Research Questions 1. What are the current coalition fires capabilities?
2. What are the current Russian centric fires capabilities?
3. Why do the U.S. and its coalition partners need to combine fires efforts?
4. What are the current impediments to the use of joint-multinational fires?
5. What upgrades and modernization efforts are the U.S., NATO, coalition, and partners making??
Qualifications I am a Field Artillery Officer that has served in a variety of assignments from the team to Division Artillery (DIVARTY) level with over ten years of operational experience. I have deployed three times in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Throughout my operational deployments and tactical level experience I have primarily worked with the U.S. Army's towed howitzer systems.
Bias I came to the realization, that when presented with the idea that the United States, and by our extension our allied partners, do not have complete dominance in a discipline, there must by default, be a capability gap. Despite actively attempting to have a much more open and "joint" perspective, I found myself relying on the United States as the true litmus test of capability. I neglected to truly incorporate and respect the capabilities and investment many of our international partners bring to the table. It is easy to assume that if the U.S. does not have it, no one does; but this is not the case. Many of our friends and allies in NATO have made continued and significant strides in developing and investing in fires technologies and systems, often surpassing that of the U.S. To truly present analysis on how to bridge the capability gap, I need to better appreciate the tools of the greater team.
The dominate assumption throughout this thesis is that the U.S. military and its NATO partners acknowledge a coalition fires capability gap. This thesis assumes aggregately, a fires capability gap exists that is not negated by peripheral factors such as superior command and control or special munition. A second assumption is the U.S.
military and its NATO partners are able and willing to cooperatively, through mutual investment and interest, address this strategic problem set. The third assumption is that Russian forces abided by their current fires doctrine demonstrated during their activities in Ukraine. Limited information exists, particularly in the unclassified or open-source arena, regarding Russia's current fires doctrine and posture. Though actions in Ukraine were limited in scope, they provide the best and most recent example western analysts can use to analyze Russian warfighting doctrine and will be used in this thesis. This third assumption is founded on the theory that armies generally follow their doctrine, allowing for accurate analysis and study.
In the course of my research I was presented with the idea that the "gap" may not be so much a "capability" gap, but more precisely an "interoperability" gap. As mentioned in the presenter's biases, we can easily jump to the conclusion that a lack of superiority in a discipline equates to a capability gap. This however, neglects the capabilities provided by our fellow NATO members. Thus, the problem may lie in our ability to effectively operate together, hence an "interoperability" issue.
Alliance. A relationship that results from a formal agreement (e.g., treaty) between two or more nations for broad, long-term objectives that further the common interests of the members. Operations conducted with units from two or more allies are referred to as combined operations.0 F 1
Coalition. An ad hoc arrangement between two or more nations for common action. Coalitions are formed by different nations with specific objectives, usually for a single occasion or for longer cooperation in a narrow sector of common interest.
Operations conducted with units from two or more coalition members are referred to as coalition operations.1 F 2
Fires. The use of weapon systems or other actions to create specific lethal or nonlethal effects on a target.2 F 3
Fire Support. Fires that directly support land, maritime, amphibious, and special operations forces to engage enemy forces, combat formations, and facilities in pursuit of tactical and operational objectives. Unified Action. The synchronization, coordination, and/or integration of the activities of governmental and nongovernmental entities with military operations to achieve unity of effort.6 F 7
Unified Land Operations. How the Army seizes, retains, and exploits the initiative to gain and maintain a position of relative advantage in sustained land operations in order to prevent or deter conflict, prevail in war, and create the conditions for favorable conflict resolution.7 F 8
War Fighting Functions. A group of tasks and systems united by a common purpose that commanders use to accomplish missions and training objectives.8 F 9
This thesis will center on the U.S. Army as the mechanism in the multinationaljoint fires discussion. The fires warfighting function is a vast enterprise. The inclusion of every service's fires systems and capabilities would result in a capabilities overview rather than keep the study focused on addressing the research question.
The subject of fires capability and interoperability is a continually burgeoning topic, ability to pull data from international partners perspective is more limited. New technologies, processes are classified beyond the reach of this project. This thesis will discuss projected coalition equipment and technologies. On the contrary, information on future Russian systems, potentially poised to further develop the coalition fires capability gap in the new future, is not available and will not be analyzed. Accurate and comprehensive Russian fires and operational doctrine is limited in availability. For the purposes of doctrinal comparison, Russian focused doctrine will be in limited detail and developed partly through deduction based off of Russian capabilities and strategic focus.
The Russian-Ukraine case study (presented in chapter four of this study) will assist in uncovering Russian fires doctrine.
The fires warfighting function is very diverse and includes numerous activities. This thesis will not explore, but may mention, areas such as electronic warfare, cyber, and aviation support. For several decades now, the U.S. and by extension its NATO partners, have heavily invested and relied on air superiority to offset and mitigate any conventional fires capability gaps. The topic of air superiority-supremacy and fires mitigation, deserves its own extensive research and will not be included. This thesis will also avoid discussing other non-lethal fires, maneuver company-battalion mortar systems, and air defense.
Analyzing joint capabilities can be extensive and could easily dominate the study.
There are too many competing and interwoven systems and capabilities to be segregated and analyzed in required detail to provide an accurate system by system, force by force technical comparison. The capabilities of U.S. joint military community will be focused at the JFLCC level, with predominant emphasis on the conventional surface-to-surface fires.
Similarly, to joint focused capabilities analysis, multinational capability analysis and assessment is a vast and complex an area of study. This thesis will not thoroughly analysis the capabilities of every NATO partner. Rather this study will look comprehensively at the United States' multinational partners' combined fires capabilities.
To look at each country individually is not a practical approach for this study and would more likely result in a country encyclopedia of capabilities.
The topic of a coalition fires capability gap is of significant concern to current and future operations. It is significant because of its strategic importance. A fires capability gap affects our ability as western military forces to project land combat power and protect and enable the employment of air power.
A Chapter three presents the research methodologies used to support the thesis. It describes the evaluation methods and evaluation criterium used to evaluate validity of proposed solutions. Chapter four, using the aforementioned methodologies, will present the findings and analysis from this project. Finally, chapter five will present a conclusion and recommendations for further action and research in the subject area.
CHAPTER 2
Long-range precision Fires is the number one priority on the Army's list. Fires provides the ability to destroy, neutralize or suppress artillery targets at extended ranges, thereby shaping the close fight to a time and place of our choosing.
-MG Wilson Shoffner, Fires
This thesis addresses a burgeoning area of warfighting function inadequacy.
Nearly two decades of counter-insurgency focused warfare as well as the inherent instability of international relations have degraded our joint-multinational fires capabilities. The shift away from LSGC focus, not only resulted in a weapons capability gap, but also a gap in supporting modern joint fires doctrine. In decades past, U.S.
military doctrine (more specifically U.S. Army doctrine) centered on LSGC, heavily reliant on massed fires at every echelon across the various services. This chapter will work to examine the availability and relevance of current literature, look back to older materials-doctrine for answers, analyze current schools of thought, and search for relevant gaps.
As mentioned, the United States and its NATO partners are out-gunned, outranged, and out-manned in the surface-to-surface fires realm. This thesis will further address how the U.S. military and its NATO partners have inadequately prepared for future armed conflict in the fires warfighting function by analyzing the current situation and potential solutions.
Does doctrine provide adequate guidance for the joint force commander and subordinate fires and maneuver commanders? To fill that gap, this thesis will look to one primary and five secondary questions.
This thesis aims to add to the body of literature on the topic by pulling together current doctrine and schools of thought, analyzing their strengths and weaknesses, and finding gaps. These gaps are windows of opportunity for future research and investment by national, military, industrial authorities to shorten and eventually bridge the U.S.-NATO fires capability gap. Across the categories of literature on the research topic, there is a common missing component which would advance the problem set. No significant attention has been paid to providing short-term solutions, or workarounds, with current capabilities available. This is a serious gap in the relevant literature.
A capability gap is commonly acknowledged, specifically in professional publications and outside, independent articles, but interim solutions are rarely offered.
Solutions focus primarily on future technologies and procurement. Commanders and formations in the field are left without viable doctrinal solutions on how to fight and win with current capabilities against peer and overmatching threats. The planning factor of air supremacy as a capability gap mitigation is too often assumed by default. In review of the literature available, more attention needs to be applied to short-term solutions.
Professional publications highlight the preponderance and most relevant literature In order to extensively review the characteristics of this, and the following categories of the literature, elements of the DOTMLPF framework will be utilized. Most specifically, the dimensions of doctrine, material, and organization will be used. To include general schools of thought, numerous Fires contributors have written poignantly on related topics. The work of some of these contributors will be further reviewed for the reader.
The prevalence of articles related to the research question have continued to increase in recent years. Fires has shown increased focus on the subject of capability gaps and force modernization. This increase shows a shifting focus of leaders in the fire support community. Leaders are continuing to raise awareness and offer solutions, driving the problem set forward. This study will focus on a few of the most pertinent articles for analysis.
Fires, September-October 2016, poignantly addresses a multinational training imperative.9 F 1 Using trends observed during rotations at the multinational training center Joint Multinational Readiness Center (JMRC) Hohenfels, Germany, the authors stress key influencers in the realms of doctrine and organization. The authors discussed the relevance of true interoperability in a combined force, both in a singular and multinational force, "key to achieving true interoperability is to train Soldiers and leaders in an environment at the JMRC by task organizing multinational units under and adjacent to forces different from their own."1 0 F 2 The running theme of the article is a force, in particular the fire warfighting function, that is technically competent but tactically isolated.1 1F 3
The authors assert that our fire's formations and personnel are increasingly proficient in the doctrinal skills of the profession but lack cohesion and interoperability.
They make an interesting observation that a lack of interoperability in the joint force is one thing, but when that dysfunction is brought to the multinational force it is exponentially more difficult.1 2F 4 The safety net of a common language, culture, and national identity to work through friction points does not exist in the multinational force.
Continued emphasis on joint doctrine and organizational exposure is key to reducing friction.
The authors highlight a key analysis point of this study, the multinational task organization of the joint force. An inherent attribute of the artillery is its aptitude for use in varying support relationships (see figure 
4
Units are in contact with the opposition quickly and forced to maximize the capabilities of the combined force to shape and attrite the enemy. The authors elaborate on how the inability of the Tactical Airspace Integration System and Integrated Command and Control systems interoperate significantly impaired the greater fires fight of the JTF (see figure 
1
Temporary solutions were created such as routing air corridors between brigade boundaries, delegating airspace control to the brigades up to 2,500ft MSL (eventually to 10,000ft MSL), establishing artillery mission areas, and manual data input between systems.2 2 F 14 These temporary solutions worked to a point, but highlighted the dangers and inefficiencies of digital and systems interoperability. The chance for catastrophic occurrence is greater as the likelihood of user input error and fatigue is increased. The enemy also does not adhere to friendly designated boundaries and airspace corridors.
Cross-boundary fires must be executable in an efficient, timely manner.  The authors provided lessons learned and further temporary solutions which enabled the JTF in this instance, to complete its mission. They made an important assertion which supports the significance of this study; "if the premise is true that the United States will never fight alone again and will always commit to collective defense in support of NATO Article V, then NATO airspace doctrine should be updated to spell this decentralization out. Additionally, there must be a digital solution to optimize interoperability for multinational airspace management"2 4F 16 (see figure 
2
The authors briefly discuss ASCA, a multinational initiative, to streamline digital operations. The ASCA is a commonly discussed interoperability system which appears to be growing in use and popularity. They also mention the use of the U.S. Army Joint Support Team as a supplement to the ASCA initiative. showing a sizeable trend. A significant amount of Fires contributions have been allocated
to ASCA and its applicability to removing digital barriers. Doctrinal answers are not the only ones provided in Fires. Increasing analysis and recommendations have been offered
in the realms of material and organizational changes.
The second most productive literary resource on the study topic are online articles. These articles and publications are generally provided by independent authors, former military members, think-tanks, and for-profit or commercial agencies advocating future investment or military reorganization. Though the motivation and justifications of some of these articles should be questioned and reviewed, they do provide critically evaluated opinions on the current state of friendly and enemy capabilities. The lack of professional or employment ties to a government agency allows these authors increased latitude to question and contradict current and future policies in ways uniformed or civilian servicemembers may reserve. Literature provided by outside sources proved to be predominately focused on organizational and material problems and solutions. Wikipedia Searching the Combined Arms Research Library database resulted in four MMAS thesis's and one SAMS monograph which were found to be most relevant to this study.
This section will provide a synopsis of the insight and analysis provided by these studies. He proposed several changes to bridge his capability gap:
1. The acquisition of additional cannon artillery pieces to allow for larger quantities of massed fires to mitigated loss of the ICM. Johnson thoroughly analyzes ATP 3-09.90 "Division Artillery (DIVARTY)
Operations and Fire Support for the Division" as his cornerstone reference. This study will also examine ATP 3-09.90. The author uses the force management process, consisting of a functional needs analysis and functional area analysis, to complete a comprehensive assessment of fires at the divisional level.  In summation, FM 3-0, the U.S. Army's operations manual, states regarding the employment of fires: "…multinational coalition is even more challenging, and use of fires should be rehearsed during operations to shape as often as possible.  AJP-3.9, Joint Targeting, addresses the roles, responsibilities, processes, and products from the strategic, operational, and tactical commands, and the political guidance and oversight inherent in the multinational targeting process.8 0 F 72 It is written at the operational level and explains how joint targeting is planned, conducted, and assessed using the full range of military capabilities against a wide range of adversaries or opponents.8 1F 73 As with all multinational publications in this study, AJP-3.9 defines common terms and processes.
AJP-3.9 discusses the importance of targeting at the national level, leveraging diplomatic, military, and information efforts. It highlights various coalition targeting methodologies such as D3A (decide, detect, deliver, assess) and F3EAD (find, fix, finish, exploit, analyze, disseminate), political and legal considerations, intelligence sharing, and the roles and responsibilities of commanders and staffs. AJP-3.9 does mention fires as a component of land warfighting but does not acknowledge a fires capability gap nor, provide solutions for the combined force to employ.
AJP-5, Operational Level Planning, addresses the fundamentals of planning at the operational level. Planning at the operational level and in a multinational context has different considerations than found at the lower tactical levels. AJP-5 contains a very similar planning process to that of the U.S. Army's military decision-making process (MDMP). In regards to fires, this publication focuses the least amount of the beforementioned multinational publications. AJP-5 mentions the important nature of including and coordinating joint fires into the planning process, "a major coordinated effort by specific members of the JOPG will be required to synchronize joint targeting and the use of lethal and non-lethal means to generate the desired effects and resulting  This figure depicts the inherent field artillery responsibilities in army support relationships. These support relationships are not a command authority, rather they allow commanders to assign support relationships when subordination of one unit to another is unnecessary. Support relationships provide options and flexibility to commanders, allowing them to leverage specific capabilities at specific times, places, and under predetermined conditions. This system is commonly used in the fires community where one organization may be called to support multiple other organizations in different capacities simultaneously and provide priority.  Across the categories of literature on the research topic, the common missing component, a lack of doctrinal answers, was confirmed. There is a general lack of doctrine discussion amongst authors and contributors and a gap in fires doctrine as a whole. As earlier mentioned, a capability gap is commonly acknowledged, specifically in professional publications and outside, articles, but workaround solutions are rarely offered. Solutions focus primarily on new technologies and investment.
For the purposes of joint and multinational operations, the respective doctrine available is severely lacking. These two sources, key to effective joint-multinational efforts do not provide the necessary guidance to operate as a combined fires force. Fires leaders are left without viable doctrinal solutions on how to fight and win with current capabilities against peer and overmatching threats. Air supremacy as a capability gap mitigation seems to remain as the prevailing standard. Chapter three will describe the methodology used in this thesis to process the available information and literature on the research topic. This methodology shapes the analysis found in chapter four and formulate conclusions and recommendations found in chapter five.
They are disrupting what we see as our capabilities, especially our stand-off capabilities where we are able to identify the enemy from stand-off lanes and conduct precision strikes and we see some of those capabilities in eastern Ukraine today.
-LTG McMaster, Fires
The purpose of this study was to determine how the United States and its partners can use joint and multinational fires to bridge the coalition-Russian fires capability gap. It also aims to determine the size and significance, and propose potential solutions in the doctrinal, material, and organizational solutions for the capability gap.
To answer the primary and secondary research questions asked in this thesis, a compare and contrast and case study and construct using the DOTMLPF framework will The motivation for this endeavor were the activities researched attempted to provide tangible solutions and recommendations for future investment.
The following chapter will present the findings and analysis of this study.
Utilizing the methodology described in chapter three, chapter four will provide a thorough comparison and contrast of U.S.-NATO and Russian fires capabilities relying on doctrine, organizations, and material. Following this comparison, potential solutions will be offered and analyzed for viability. Zhirokhov reported that 152mm S219 SP howitzer, MSTA-B 152mm towed howitzers, and BM-21 MRLs (multiple rocket launcher) were used to destroy Ukrainian units near the Russian-Ukraine border. These systems were used to mass on prescribed areas and had devasting effects on Ukraine's 30 th Mechanized Brigade. He notes that as the conflict matured and Ukrainian actions adapted, so did the Russians use of artillery.
More precise point targets began replacing wider area targets, requiring targeting to become more accurate and timelier. Russian use of Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (SUAV) proved to be a lethal addition to their fire support system. SUAVs such as the Orlan-10, Forpost, and commercial "off-the-shelf" quadcopters, were used extensively to locate and target Ukrainian formations. Jane's reports that Orlan-10 and Forpost SUAVs highly effective and lethal mass area fire strikes.9 0 F 5 They have shown aptitude at using their sensors to rapidly mass fires formations on area targets, producing lethal results, and focusing less on precision strikes.
There are three critical components to the Russian method: the sensor platforms which are often used at multiple altitudes over the same target with complimentary imaging; a command-and-control system, which nets their input and delivers a strike order, and, an on-call ground-based delivery system which can produce strikes within short order.9 
1 F 6
The ATACMS, introduced in the late 1980's, is a long-range 610mm surface-tosurface missile. First used in the 1991 Persian Gulf war, it is a GPS and inertial guided area weapon. It is available in multiple variants but is armed with either cluster submunitions or a unitary high explosive warhead. The ATACMS can be fired from the M270A1 MLRS and M142 HIMARS launchers. In its current variant, the MGM-168 has a maximum range of 300km. The ATACMS continues to be used in combat and has proven very effective, providing commanders with a long-range surface fires option.
Plans are underway to upgrade the ATACMS and find an eventual replacement. Source: Created by author.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is an international diplomatic and military alliance of 29 nations primarily located in Europe and North America.
Formed in 1949, after the conclusion of WWII and the beginning of the Cold War, NATO has been a forum to establish dialogue and peaceful cooperation. A key tenet in structure of NATO is its Article-5 statute which states than an attack on one member is an attack on all members. Because of this, NATO is the primary arm of resistance and deterrence to Russian activities and aggression in the region.1 07 F 22 NATO has few permanent forces of its own and relies on the cooperation and commitment of its member nations to provide military forces in response when required. NATO's military arm consists of two NATO training exercises like Dynamic Front continue to build interoperability, partner capacity, and project visible adversarial deterrence.
To be sure, there is some recognition of this changing picture of Russia. Senior US and other allied officials and generals have noted this Russian conventional capacity and how it might have a negative impact on NATO and allied forces, noting, for instance, Russian anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) capabilities. Furthermore, in early 2016, the United States announced a quadrupling of its military spending in Europe over a two-year period as part of what Defense Secretary Carter stated was a "strong and balanced" approach to reassure Eastern European allies and to deter Russian aggression. "We must demonstrate to potential foes that if they start a war, we have the capacity to win," he said.1 
12 F 27
Renewed spending and emphasis on U.S. and NATO capacity in Europe indicates the concerns held by western leaders regarding the intentions and capacity of a resurgent Russia. Interestingly it mentions not only Russia's growing conventional capacity, but also its A2/AD ability, which directly threatens NATO's ability to successfully affect military operations in Europe and in satellite areas of contention.
The United Kingdom fields an impressive ground fires element. Centered around the AS-90, L118, and MLRS, U.K. field artillery is a formidable force. The AS-90 is a self-developed replacement for the U.S. M109A6, formally used by U.K. forces and introduced in the early 1990's. Like the M1096, the AS-90 is a self-propelled 155mm, 39-calibar howitzer. The AS-90 provides similar ranges as the M109A6/A7 but an increase in rate of fire. It is capable firing three rounds in ten seconds (burst), six rounds per minute for three minutes (intense), and two rounds per minute for six minutes (sustained). The L118 is a 105mm howitzer similar to the U.S. M119.1 13F 
28
forces, the M777A2 provides Canadian forces with a lightweight 155mm howitzer capable of delivering conventional and precision guided munitions. The Canadian Army maintains three combat brigades with the ability to deploy one brigade at a given time.
Each brigade holds one field artillery regiment (battalion equivalent). Each field artillery regiment consists of two M777A2 firing batteries, each with six howitzers, one target acquisition battery, and one headquarters battery. This number brings a total of three field artillery regiments and a maximum of 36 available M777A2 howitzers, with the ability to source additional howitzer sections from the reserve component if required. Similar to its NATO partners, Canada is exploring options for a mechanized howitzer replacement and more advanced munition options for increased range and lethality.1 14 F 29
Occurring over the span of three months, VOSTOK included Chinese and Mongolian forces. Primed for media attention, VOSTOK is largely labeled as a "show of force" by western officials. Nonetheless, it displays Russia's continued emphasis on advancement, readiness, and rapid large-scale mobilization.1 18F 33
The capabilities developed and practiced during VOSTOK and the other exercises can be brought to bear on NATO's flank as easily as they can be projected in any other strategic direction. Russia's are by far the largest military exercises in Europe and are unique for their aims, size and frequency -as well as their transparency.1 19 F 34
As stated earlier, the best and most current example of Russia's current fires The Reconnaissance Fire Complex complimented the RYK and served as the tactical equivalent. The ROC worked to link intelligence data, precise targeting, and firedirection centers and tactical artillery to destroy high-value targets in real-time.
A new method is the employment of combined arms tactical groups, each consisting of one or two battalions, each fighting on separate axes. Alongside the offensive, the combined arms formation may conduct defensive actions primarily by delaying and blocking actions as well as by conducting a dispersed defense utilizing brigade subunits. The dispersed defense can consist of platoon strong points combined with mine-field obstacles and a preplanned system of artillery fires. Artillery will be attached to the combined arms subunits or will provide artillery support under the direction of the senior commanders1 33 F 48 Cannon D-30
The D-30, introduced in the 1960's, is a 122mm towed howitzer. It is a widely used weapon known for its simplicity and rugged reliability. Manned by a crew of five, the D-30 can emplaced in nearly two minutes.1 34 F 49 The D-30's sustained rate of fire is sixeight rounds per minute. Its maximum range for standard high explosive projectiles is 14.5km and its maximum range is 21.9km with rocket assisted projectiles. Overall, the D-30 is a simple but highly effective howitzer popular in developing military forces throughout the world. 
The 2S35 "Koalitsiva-SV," introduced in 2015, is a 152mm self-propelled howitzer currently in testing for full employment in the future. The 2S35 is expected to eventually replace the 2S19. It is currently based on a T-90 chassis with the possibility of upgrading to the T-14 Armata chassis. The 2S35 is a highly automated howitzer system with ranges far exceeding current U.S. howitzers. It is reported to have a maximum range of 80km with precision-guided munitions and up to 40km with standard munitions. Its reported rates of fire at a maximum of 20 rounds per minute also greatly exceed U.S. comparable systems. Accuracy of the 2S35's capabilities may be questionable due its recent release and the reliability of Russian new sources.1 3 9F 54
The 2S5 "Giatsint-S," introduced in the early 1970's, is a 152mm self-propelled howitzer. It is chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear protected, capable of firing nuclear munitions, and is more advanced than its earlier counterparts such as the 2S3.
The 2S5 can fire standard projectiles up to 28km and rocket assisted projectiles with a maximum range of 40km. Its available munitions include: HE, high explosive anti-tank, cluster, smoke, and nuclear projectiles. The 2S5 can emplace in three minutes and fire a sustained rate of 5-6 rounds per minute. The 2S5 continues to be employed in operations and has used by Ukrainian forces in Donbass.1 40 F 
55
The 2S7 "Pion", introduced in the mid-1970's, is a nuclear-capable, 203mm selfpropelled howitzer built on a T-80 chassis and fires a larger projectile at greater ranges than the 2S5. It has a 5-6-minute emplacement time and can fire 2.5 rounds per minute.
The S25 can fire HE projectiles up to 37.5km and rocket assisted projectiles with a maximum range of 55km. The intense pressures produced during firing have the ability to incapacitate exposed personnel. The 2S7 has the ability to fire up to two rounds at long range and displace before those rounds impact. This gives the 2S7 increased survivability and reduced susceptibility to counter-battery fire. The 2S7 continues to be employed in operations and was also recently used by Russians and Ukrainians in the Donbass.1 41F 56
The BM-21, "Grad," introduced in the early 1960's, is a 40-barrel 122-millimeter MRL. The launcher is transported on a six-by-six truck. Manned by a crew of three, the BM-21 can be emplaced and ready to fire in three minutes and displaced within two minutes. The crew has the ability to fire the launcher from within the truck cab or via a 64-meter-long cable. The BM-21 can fire rockets in clusters, a single rocket at a time, or all 40 of its rockets within 20 seconds. Manual reloading operations can take ten minutes to complete. The BM-21 has a maximum range of 45km can deliver a variety of munitions such as HE, incendiary, illumination, scatterable mines, smoke, and radio frequency jamming. rockets. One battalion consisting of eighteen launchers can fire 720 rockets in one mission. The BM-21 is a very popular and highly effective system that is utilized by numerous countries.1 42F 57
The BM-30 "Smerch" also known as the 9A52-2, is a 12-barrel, 300mm MRL introduced in the late 1980's. It is mounted on an eight-by-eight wheeled chassis. The BM-30 is manned by a crew of four personnel, capable of emplacing in three minutes and displacing in two minutes. It contains a high level of automation which allows for rapid firing capability. The BM-30 can fire all twelve of its rockets in 38 seconds and reload in 20 minutes. Its munitions have minimum ranges between 20-25km and maximum ranges between 70-90km depending on projectile. Munitions available include: high explosive, cluster munitions, scatterable mines, high explosive antitank, and thermobaric. The BM-30 was recently employed in Ukraine and Syria.1 43 F 58
As stated, some of its missile variants have an advertised range in vicinity of 500km or more and carry a 700-800kg warhead. Weapon guidance is supported by optical homing and encrypted radio capabilities, providing reported accuracy within 5-7m. There is speculation that its latest missiles travel at hypersonic speeds and have the ability to pull "high-G" turns enabling them to evade anti-ballistic missiles, however these reports are questionable. Extended range cruise missiles also exist with reported ranges over 5,500km. The Iskander missile system is an advanced and dangerous strategic level weapon.1 4 6F 61 Why do the U.S. and its coalition partners need to combine fires efforts?
The need to combine fires forces and military forces in general in NATO is of renewed and increasing importance. As stated earlier, Russian forces are currently and actively practicing and preparing for the employment of ground fires in the LSGC environment. They are doing so against a worthy opponent in live-fire capacity. It has already been demonstrated that the Russians have renewed their doctrine of using maneuver forces to fix and artillery forces to destroy. The increased investment in new systems and formations and the employment of longer range, more lethal munitions, is evidence of their doctrinal intentions.
NATO is an alliance of nations with a key purpose of mutual protection. Member nations of NATO, either through budgetary requirements, political desires, or military necessity, have structured their defensive capability with the underlying expectation of an effective military alliance. With the presence of 29, likeminded governments, each with their own functioning economies and tax bases, it is most cost effective to combine efforts where possible.
Rather than each nation researching, developing, and producing every military capacity and technology, NATO members can benefit from sharing and distributing military costs. When pitted against a lone adversary, with a struggling economy, there is great benefit in leveraging the economic ability of member nations to share investment.
Simultaneously, respective member nations can specialize in and focus their investment or industry, in specific technologies and share those with the collective. Presenting a successful deterrent in the face of geopolitical or military aggression is better accomplished with a unified stance. Providing for the "collective defense," a key tenant of the U.N. charter, will likely be more successful if members can collectively agree to combine and compliment their efforts, reducing redundancy and finding efficiencies.
Russian military forces present a significant numerical advantage in fires capability. One NATO member alone cannot meet or exceed the volume of fire Russian forces can bring to bear. Through mechanisms such as the ASCA program and NATO multinational corps, NATO can begin to mitigate this Russian threat.
What are the current impediments to the use of joint-multinational fires?
The critical vulnerability in any joint-multinational military cooperation is the strength of the union and effectiveness of its interoperability. Napoleon's method of divide and conquer proved to be effective in the defeat of the European allies. Facing an overmatch in manpower and resources, Napoleon adeptly maximized the capability of his forces to defeat his adversaries from positions of tactical and operational advantage.
Continued examples can be seen in the Arab-Israeli wars in the 1960-1970's. The combined Arab forces maintained numerical superiority, but failed to effectively coordinate their actions with a unity of command and unity of effort. The vulnerability of the Arab coalition was not their size, it was their inability to coordinate their efforts resulting in a surprising defeat. This section will highlight a few of the current impediments in the use of joint-multinational fires.
Interoperability is perhaps the biggest hurdle in U.S.-NATO fires. Differing systems between members requires unique integration and logistical support. An example of integration and logistical complications can be seen between U.S. M109A7 and German PzH 2000 SP howitzer battalions. The operation of these two systems in coordination requires the management of two different ammunition variants. U.S. 155mm howitzers like the M109A7 fire 155mm 39-caliber rounds while the PzH 2000 fires 155mm 52-caliber rounds. A logistical mistake could put one of these battalions out of action until the correct ammunition could be delivered. The PzH 2000 can fire 39-caliber ammunition, but with significant range and accuracy degradation. The M109A7 can only fire 39-caliber ammunition.1 47F 62
In addition to ammunition differences, digital systems interoperability continues to be an impediment. Currently only there are only five active participates and five pending participants seeking full membership in the ASCA program. The remaining members have no direct and secure method passing fire mission data digitally. Fire mission requests, movement reports, battlefield geometries, and other key data, requires delivery by liaisons and hand drawing. These methods of passing fire support data incur significant risks of error and delay, while NATO adversaries are rapidly increasing digital capability. An overreliance on physical liaisons does not match the speed and dynamic nature of modern warfare. 148F 63
Using the premise that militaries generally adhere to their doctrine, the activities of Russia in Ukraine and Syria allow for the use of deduction in determining Russian fires doctrine.
Across the categories of literature on the research topic, the common missing component, a lack of doctrinal answers, was confirmed. There is a general lack of doctrine discussion amongst authors and contributors and a gap in fires doctrine as a whole. As earlier mentioned, a capability gap is commonly acknowledged, specifically in professional publications and outside, articles, but workaround solutions are rarely offered. Solutions focus primarily on new technologies and investment. For the purposes of joint and multinational operations, the respective doctrine available is severely lacking.
These two sources, key to effective joint-multinational efforts do not provide the necessary guidance to operate as a combined fires force. Fires leaders are left without viable doctrinal solutions on how to fight and win with current capabilities against peer and overmatching threats. Air supremacy as a capability gap mitigation seems to remain as the prevailing standard.
An accurate comparison of organizations and related weapon systems is difficult to do in an unclassified forum. Russian organizational structure is not broadly published in the same fidelity as western forces. Analysis does provide a comparison of each opponent's order of battle. Russian forces significantly out-weigh western artillery to maneuver force ratios. As stated earlier, Russian forces place greater emphasis on the use of artillery forces to achieve desire effects. The U.S. fields a total of 93 field artillery though not perfect for comparison, with its limited scope and lack of a testing control, provides the best, most recent, and closest comparison available today.
To provide further detail, this chapter included an extensive review of U.S., NATO, and Russian material, organizations, and doctrine. In greatest detail, U.S. and Russian equipment and munitions were explored. This provided a comprehensive comparison of the two largest actors in this problem set. Though more challenging to find, a thorough report of Russian fires employment and tactics was presented. Here, Russia's activities in Ukraine and their doctrinal employment of fires forces was analyzed. Paired with U.S. and NATO doctrine found in chapter two and Appendixes A-C, contrasts between the forces can be seen. Chapter four clearly demonstrated Russia's reliance and focus on a strong and robust fires force. The lists of fires tasks, planning classifications, and employment trends combined with their order of battle, described in the chapter, proves they fully intend to maximize the use of fires in LSGC.
Chapter four continued by outlining reasons why NATO should further combine forces and efforts for the betterment of the organization. It stressed the importance of unified effort in the face of an increasingly aggressive opponent with a singular purpose.
In line with the importance of combining forces, chapter four also highlighted current impediments the alliance must improve. Finally, the chapter described a few of the modernization efforts the U.S. and NATO members are currently undertaking to mitigate current and future threats. Chapter four ended with a brief synopsis of the doctrine, material, and organizational framework used to help define this thesis. non-lethal effects is ever more apparent. Hybrid warfare is the current trend, focusing solely on big buns and big organizations is over simplifying modern warfare.
The conduct of this thesis has led to five key recommendations. Throughout the process of reviewing literature and comparing NATO-Russian structures and ground fires capabilities, these recommendations have shown reasonable promise for success. The following recommendations will be addressed below for consideration and future investment.
The first recommendation provided by this study is the provision of organic MRL capability at each U.S. Army division. DIVARTYs once housed significant fires capabilities providing tactical commanders with significant ability to shape their deep fight, achieve fires overmatch, and weight efforts. The removal of assigned divisional fires has forced divisions and their DIVARTYs to rely on the attachment of fires units from outside their organization when the situation requires. In resource constrained environments, the availability of fires units above the division level may be in short supply or committed elsewhere. The reliance on fires units held in corps field artillery brigades to directly support DIVARTYs, spreads a limited resource and reduces the ability of corps to shape their own deep fights and provide general support and reinforcing fires to subordinate divisions.
The absence of organic long-range DIVARTY fires denies divisions the ability to shape their respective deep fight. FM 3-0 prescribes in its operational framework, that divisions maintain a "deep fight" in large-scale combat operations. Currently, however divisions only have the ability to surveil and employ rotary aviation assets beyond their forward line of troops. Action in response to the intelligence provided by these surveillance platforms, beyond attack aviation is limited. Beyond the use of air power, withholding of brigade cannon assets, or relying on the support of fires at the corps level, there are no other options to achieve kinetic shaping effects between the forward line of troops and fire support coordination line in U.S. Army divisions currently. In order to fully operationalize the operational framework described in FM 3-0, the provision of an organic MRL capability at the division level is recommended.
The second recommendation is the establishment of a NATO Fires Center of Excellence (FCoE). In similar fashion to the U.S. Army FCoE, a NATO FCoE would serve as the center of fires integration, advancement, and standards for the fires warfighting function in NATO. The pure nature of fires and its ability to provide highly destructive effects well beyond a local supported unit or across a boundary, supporting any number of customers requires an increased level of coordination, integration, and standardization. It could be argued that the need for fires to achieve and maintain these attributes is similar to that of military and commercial aviation. The ability of aviation assets to move rapidly across geographic areas in three-dimensional space, land at a wide variety of locations, interfacing with numerous languages, and perhaps international governmental agencies requires a high level of internationally recognized standards.
Otherwise, the relative ease, convenience, and safety of international air travel enjoyed today would not be possible. In light of these factors, the creation of a recognized organization to facilitate these standards is advisable.
In any U.S. Army field artillery organization, the unit "Redbook," serves as the repository of standardization policies, procedures, and requirements for a field artillery unit to operate within regulation, effectively, and safely. Fires employment can have devasting effects if not properly controlled and observed. Because of its destructive capability, the Redbook serves as a common rule book. It contains the certification standards for all essential positions and respective personnel to complete and abide by before employing field artillery systems or formations. These standards are in adherence with U.S. Army and garrison regulations and endorsed by the appropriate unit commander. As mentioned above regarding the aviation example, there needs to be a universal set of standards for the safe and accurate employment of fires effects. Standards could include certification by position, weapon system maintenance and tolerances, and accuracy to name a few.
Ideally, when working with a joint or multinational field artillery formation, commanders should have verifiable trust that the formations and systems they are employing, are operating in accordance with recognized standards and in the safety interest of the units they are supporting civilian populations as appropriate. These Further Future Research Topics 1. Increasing advancement of electronic warfare and its effect on fires. Fires technology has become increasingly digital reliant. Overlaid with advancement of jamming technologies, the employment of digitally aided weapons systems and munitions will become more challenging. A scenario which would serve as an excellent case study is the employment of a field artillery howitzer battery in a GPS denied environment. Simply relocating outside jamming range may not be the answer. Do we still maintain the capability to fire and locate in a pre-GPS world? 2. Implications on increased use of PGM. Western militaries have become increasingly reliant on the accuracy and precision of PGMs. As electronic warfare and denial capabilities continue to advance, PGM use may not be the reliable munition of choice in the future.
3. Continued use and growth of UAS and the methods used to counter and destroy them. This thesis highlighted the employment of UAS's in current LSGC operations. It should be expected that UAS's will see an increasing role in years to come. As these systems become more capable, cheaper, and more widely dispersed, commanders will be faced with new challenges.
4. Future fires in dense urban terrain. As urban population centers continue to grow, the fires warfighting function will have to adapt in order to shape and influence actions in exponentially more complicated terrain. 
This thesis highlighted capabilities comparison, new equipment and doctrinal needs in the fires warfighting function. In the future world of LSGC, an alliance or conglomerate of nations, reliant and vested in the strength of a coalition, needs to advance beyond traditional civil-military relationships. True interoperability, practiced and refined, will be required to maintain a strong deterrence and succeed on the battlefield. There may be a need for newly defined and structured relationships in the NATO alliance.
Chapter five saw the conclusion of analysis on the research topic. Five recommendations were offered to address the problem set. Each of these recommendations are worthy of further exploration and testing. As the U.S. and NATO enters a new era of warfare, the fires capability gap discussed in thesis, will require continued emphasis. New technologies in the electronic and cyber fields, to name a few, are ever-changing dynamics on the battlefield. Fires will no longer be dominated by the side which owns the longest range or largest caliber. Overmatch will be maintained by the side that is able to best incorporate multiple battlefield domains. Achieving effects and applying constant pressure on the enemy in multiple domains, will be crucial to success.
The ability to safely and effectively employ other warfighting functions and platforms specifically, such as aircraft, may again depend on the fires. A new order of operational precedence may be on the horizon. The last several decades saw establishment of aerial supremacy key to engaging in further combat operations. The advancement of fires and multidomain operations may require fires supremacy in the future, to provide stand-off, protect key infrastructure such as airfields and staging areas.
Future research ideas pertinent to this topic were presented. After thorough study and review of the topic, these items became apparent questions important to jointmultinational fires, but outside the intent of this thesis. Each of these research ideas poses significant questions and dilemmas for commanders.
For the purposes of this study, Russia was analyzed as the primary pacing threat for U.S. and NATO. The analysis and subsequent recommendations may be generally universal but cannot be seen as the ultimate solution to close a capability gap. Focusing too closely on the threat provided by Russia could likely distract western militaries from the threat posed by a growing China. 
formations, brigades or divisions, consisting of U.S. field artillery organizations and vice versa. This cross-pollination of organizations runs deeper than whole units, but also technical capabilities.
th Airborne Field Artillery's participation in seven NATO exercises and 22 training events that incorporated ASCA.3 4 F 26 Englis, in his complementary article, Employment of NATO Tactical Fires, reinforces the urgency behind the ASCA program.3 5F 27 As the U.S. Army NATO Rapid Deployable Corps-Spain Targeting Officer, LTC Englis was in a prominent position to see first-hand, the value of ASCA. Englis further elaborates on the development of the program and the desire to create a NATO land component fires headquarters and NATO fires center of excellence. Numerous authors have advocated for the advancement of the ASCA program,
conflict."4 6 F 38
conflict."4 6 F 38
some peer threats can deliver fires over an extended range and at a sustained volume. Threat forces also have the equipment and tactics to execute effective counterfire. and execution fire support. It stresses the need to plan for and utilize the full range of joint-multinational capabilities to maximize effectiveness. This publication depicts how the fires warfighting function enables operations listed in FM 3-0. The below listed items are selected throughout FM 3-90 and most closely relate to the study topic. They are valid points and offer a synopsis of the language used in the publication.6 1F
53
some peer threats can deliver fires over an extended range and at a sustained volume. Threat forces also have the equipment and tactics to execute effective counterfire. and execution fire support. It stresses the need to plan for and utilize the full range of joint-multinational capabilities to maximize effectiveness. This publication depicts how the fires warfighting function enables operations listed in FM 3-0. The below listed items are selected throughout FM 3-90 and most closely relate to the study topic. They are valid points and offer a synopsis of the language used in the publication.6 1F
locate targets and achieve accuracy within ten meters. Excalibur is fired solely at highangle allowing it to achieve its maximum range and aiding in GPS guidance. It is designed to attack point targets such as personnel, light materiel, within close proximity to friendly troops, and buildings in urban terrain with minimal collateral damage.
locate targets and achieve accuracy within ten meters. Excalibur is fired solely at highangle allowing it to achieve its maximum range and aiding in GPS guidance. It is designed to attack point targets such as personnel, light materiel, within close proximity to friendly troops, and buildings in urban terrain with minimal collateral damage.
Table 1. U.S. Ground Fires Capability .............................................................................67
Jason Carter and Robert Auletta, "Keeping the King on His Throne: The Purpose of Multinational Fires in Unified Land Operations," Fires (September-October
2016): 28.
2
I would first and foremost like to thank my wife, Michelle for her encouragement, patience, and support during this project. I would also like to thank 
Mr. Merrick
LTC Draves, and MG(R) Waff
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
Data for this study was collected primarily though descriptive research. Research consisted of searching through U.S. Army, U.S. Joint, and multinational doctrinal, professional publications, and research paper repositories for relevant sources. Opensource and online sources were extensively searched for outside, independent articles and studies. Data collection was oriented, steered, and refined by interviews with subject matter experts. The information provided by these experts in the field, filled gaps in collection and reinforce concepts. They were extremely beneficial in helping find and uncover unknown biases in myself and others. Their expertise provided a much more accurate picture of reality.
The primary component of data analysis in this study was the comparison and contrast, utilizing the DOTMLPF framework, to confirm the presence, size and significance of the joint-multinational fires capability gap. Three elements of the DOTMLPF framework were selected to narrow the focus, these are: doctrine, organizations, and material. After defining the characteristics of the capability gap, 
Jointness implies cross-service combination wherein the capability of the joint force is understood to be synergistic, with the sum greater than its parts (the capability of the individual components).
-Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States
The purpose of this thesis is to determine how the United States and its NATO partners can use joint and multinational fires to bridge the U.S.-NATO Coalition-Russian fires capability gap. It also aims to determine the size and significance, and propose potential solutions in the doctrinal, material, and organizational solutions for the capability gap. This chapter will present the findings and analysis of this project, resulting from extensive review of available literature described in chapter two and information provided by experts in the field. The points highlighted in this chapter will set the foundation for the conclusions and recommendations found in chapter five. This chapter begins by setting the stage for these findings through a brief case study of Russian activities in eastern Ukraine. Russian fires activities in Ukraine are useful to highlight the current state of affairs and need for continued technological advancement. This case study, though not perfect for comparison, with its limited scope and lack of a testing control, provides the best, most recent, and closest comparison available today. This chapter will also provide detailed description of the secondary research questions and the following points:
The Paladin's A7 upgrade, known as PIM (Paladin Integrated Management), is the U.S. Army's latest attempt to keep the Paladin competitive on the modern battlefield.
Upgrades, including the A7 PIM, have updated the Paladin's digital and fire control systems and crew survivability. Another significant upgrade of note, is the increase in electric power generation which leaves room for future updates and advanced technologies. The inclusion of the Bradley Fighting Vehicle chassis in the A7 PIM has improved reliability, maneuverability, and speed. The M109A7 is currently armed with a 39-caliber 155mm diameter barrel with the potential to upgrade to a 58-caliber barrel, allowing for significantly increased firing ranges. The Paladin's rapid mobility and digital interfaces allow it to emplace and displace quickly. It is able to fire four rounds per minute for one minute and sustain one round per minute. Its maximum ranges are the same as the M777A2, with a rocket-assisted high explosive maximum range of 30km and a range of 40km with precision guided munition (PGM) Excalibur.9 4F 9
The M777A2, introduced in the early 2000's, is a towed 155mm howitzer.
Designed to replace older and heavier towed howitzers, the M777 series has seen extensive use in by the U.S. Army and Marine Corps in the Global War on Terrorism. In fact, it is the only howitzer maintained by the U.S. Marine Corps. Its nearly 40% weight reduction over its 155mm predecessor, the M198, increased its ability to rapidly deploy across the battlefield by air and ground. As the U.S. military's first primarily digital towed howitzer system, the M777A2 has allowed for the continued growth and expansion of advanced precision munitions such as the Excalibur which will be highlighted later in this study. The M777A2 is manned by a crew of eight and can emplace and displace in between the two platforms is in the vehicle base and number of rounds each vehicle holds. The M142 is housed on a five-ton MTV (medium tactical vehicle) truck. It also only contains one rocket pod consisting of six rockets or one ATCAMS, 50% less than the M270A1. The M142 and M270A1 launchers fire the same projectiles and only differ in number of rounds they can hold. The M142's significantly lower weight and dimensions allow for it to be moved more rapidly around the battlefield. It is also VOSTOK 2018, a Russian large-scale, mobilization and training annual exercise is Russia's latest effort to flex its resurgent military prowess. Rumored to include 300,000 troops (75-100,000 combat troops), 1,000 aircraft, 80 ships, and 36,000 tanks and other vehicles, it was the largest known Russian exercise since the early 1980's.
The 9K512, also known as the BM-27 "Uragan," is a 16-barrel, 220mm MLRS, mounted on an 8x8 wheeled chassis. The BM-27 has a maximum firing range of 35km and fires HE, chemical, scatterable mine, and submunition rockets with warheads weighing between 90-100kg. It can fire its full payload in 20 seconds. Because of its rapid rate of fire, it is an excellent tool for emplacing scatterable minefields. The BM-27 and its variants continue to be employed today.1 44 F 59
The TOS-1A (Heavy Flamethrower System), also known as the BM-1, is a 24barrel, 220mm multiple launcher rocket system mounted on a T-72 tank chassis. The system is found with Russian chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear units and fires primarily incendiary and thermobaric munitions. The TOS-1A fires is able to expend its payload within 6-12 seconds with a maximum range of 6km. It is reported to have been used in Ukraine and Syria as recently as 2018. The TOS-1A is a short-range multiple launch rocket system capable of unleashing devasting firepower in a very short amount of time.1 45F 60
The 9K720 Iskander, also known as the SS-26 "Stone," is a mobile short-range ballistic missile system for theater level engagements. The 9K720 and its variants have a minimum range of 50km and maximum ranges of up to 500km. It is often carried on an 8x8 wheeled chassis carrying up to four missiles on the vehicle. The Iskander missile system is believed to be key evidence of Russia's non-compliance with the INF Treaty.
The lack of an inherent, organic, and integrated command and control fires infrastructure does not support the effective employment of fires in the LSGC environment. While improvements have been made in the tactical command and control fires realm with process like ASCA, NATO remains rudimentary at the operational level.
Multinational military operations are complicated in nature and contain numerous intricacies. These intricacies include to name a few: national caveats, rules of engagement, command relationships, gross domestic product (GDP) military spending rates, commonality, national political interests, language barriers, and software and intelligence vulnerabilities. For instance, member nations may individual rules of engagement which are more sensitive to infraction in the use of force and collateral damage. These individualized rules of engagement may not be fully published to the rest of NATO. This leaves room for confusion, mistrust, and further complications full interoperability. These items make efficient multinational operations more challenging.
In recent events, disparity in GDP military spending has caused consternation amongst leaders in the alliance. NATO's 2% national GDP spending goal is not adhered to by all members of the organization. Few members such as the U.S. and the U.K. actually meet the annual 2% threshold. The majority of member nations spend around 1% of their GDP for defense. This deficit has caused disagreement and contention, forcing NATO to rely on only a few of its members to shoulder the burden.
What upgrades and modernization efforts are the U.S., NATO, coalition, and partners making?
The U.S. and its fellow NATO members are making significant strides to upgrade and modernize, improving both their technological capabilities and interoperability. This 
There is limited ability for accurate comparison due to the availability of Russian doctrine. Russian fires employment is the best example of current Russian fires doctrine.
battalions of various systems (see Table 
1
This thesis attempted to provide a thorough review of ground fires platforms and systems. It also confirmed that Russia fields a sophisticated and effective fires fleet.
Nearly two decades of counter-terrorism operations have atrophied western use of massed fires in favor of precision capability. The U.S. and NATO's emphasis on precision capability may cause problems in LSGC. The volumes of fire required to successfully defeat enemy formations in LSGC does not support the use of limited and expensive precision munitions. Commanders must also consider the ever-evolving nature of electronic warfare and degraded signals operating environments.
While western forces do maintain very capable systems armed with leading-edge technology, these are limited in number. The key vulnerability of western artillery forces is amount and the ability to mass. Russia has invested in less expensive, tested equipment.
This chapter set forth to highlight analysis regarding how the U. 