# ID: 3c986de41b6549f09da25e3816206c48
# Title: Serving the Cause: Duty Concepts and Combat Effectiveness in War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis examines the relationship between duty and combat effectiveness in the Luftwaffe and the USAAF during World War II. The author argues that duty is a fundamental characteristic of a military institution. Commanders must develop and maintain devotion to duty in order to ensure combat effectiveness. To evaluate the validity of this argument, the author researched leading historical literature regarding the role duty played in the two air forces and also examined primary evidence such as unit histories, letters, personal diaries, and interrogation reports.
The Luftwaffe, during the heady years of victory, reaped the benefits of a strong sense of duty; and success strengthened the duty concept. Thus, the duty concept, combat effectiveness, and military effectiveness were mutually reinforcing. The Luftwaffe then went through a period of uncertainty and ultimately defeat. During these periods, combat effectiveness was degraded due to strategic misjudgments; the duty concept seemed to stay strong, but there were indications that it wore down at the margins. Ultimately, due to persistent strategic failure and combat ineffectiveness, devotion to duty was ultimately undermined and the Luftwaffe leadership openly plotted against Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring. Thus, the duty concept followed where both combat and military effectiveness led.
The USAAF experience was similar to the Luftwaffe. Although a strong duty concept initially magnified combat effectiveness, as the war progressed combat ineffectiveness had a seriously degrading effect on the USAAF morale. If left untended, this degraded morale could have led to a failure of the duty concept. The USAAF operational-level leaders were able to remedy combat effectiveness and restore devotion to duty by adapting a flawed doctrine to the new realities it faced. In short, combat effectiveness had a greater influence on devotion to duty than devotion to duty had on combat effectiveness.
The study concludes that duty and combat effectiveness are reciprocally related. Combat effectiveness both feeds on devotion to duty and reinforces it, but sustained combat ineffectiveness will initially degrade and eventually erode airmens' devotion to duty. Conversely, devotion to duty can for a time sustain an air force during periods of low combat effectiveness.
At the end of the day, the Americans outperformed their German opponents in maintaining a strong duty concept and combat effectiveness through a sound grand strategy, operational and tactical flexibility, and increasingly significant qualitative advantages in aircraft and aircrew.
The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author. They do not reflect the official position of the United States Government, Department of Defense, the United States Air Force, or Air University.
iii ABOUT THE AUTHOR Major Bert B. Jean was born in Cookeville, Tennessee and commissioned through the Reserve Officer Corps at Western Kentucky University in 1997. Graduating from the Defense Information School in 1998, he went on to serve as a public affairs officer at Falcon Air Force Base, Colorado and Andersen Air Base, Guam. In 1999, Major Jean was selected for undergraduate navigator training; he went on to fly on C-130s at Yokota Air Base, Japan. In 2002 Major Jean was selected for electronic warfare officer School; he went on to fly on the RC-135S Cobra Ball at Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska. He has achieved instructor and evaluator ratings in the RC-135S. Major Jean is a senior navigator with over 1500 flying hours. He has a bachelor's degree in broadcast communications from Western Kentucky University, a master's degree in international relations from Troy University, and a master's degree in military operational art and science from the Air Command and Staff College, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. In July 2009, Major Jean was assigned as a student to the School of Advanced Air and Space Studies, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. In June 2010 he will be assigned as the deputy director, A 3/5, 5 th Air Force.
A fighting force's concept of duty is a perennial subject of interest in military affairs. And no wonder -it is central to the fighting spirit that motivates individuals to risk their lives in combat. While widely recognized as an important issue, very little has been written concerning the role that duty plays in war. Carl von Clausewitz believed that war's moral factors were central to its conduct but could neither be classified nor counted, and that any attempt to do so would lead to platitudes proclaiming the obvious. 
1
Clausewitz noted that an accumulation of factors causes things to go wrong in war. He called the sum of these factors -friction.‖ The marshalling of qualities such as courage, stamina, and determination overcomes friction. Thus, the drive to reduce friction in war takes a toll on combatants. Duty exacts a price on the fighting force. It is therefore up to the military commander to determine how best to spend this valuable currency. Clausewitz said there were two qualities required of a commander: a keen intellect to give insight into the unforeseen and the courage to follow this insight wherever it might lead. 
2
3
4
These military virtues, Clausewitz argued, are brought out by the general who understands how to harness the qualities of courage and determination into a military spirit that encompasses the whole army.
He noted that military spirit -is one of the most important moral elements in war.‖ 
5
6
What Clausewitz described is integral to a duty concept. It is easy to publish orders or conduct training that tells an army it should be bold, but to have true boldness springs from the fighting men and women who have trained together and have been instilled with the sense of purpose necessary to fight. Their individual and cumulative ability to meet the intense demands of combat makes a duty concept important in both peace and of war. The dedication of one's life to a cause, to one's country, and to victory is something only a strong duty concept can produce. Although most military personnel have some understanding about -duty,‖ they need training and indoctrination to bring the concept into focus and make it a tool for producing collective effectiveness in war.
This thesis seeks to understand key components of the duty concept and determine whether there is a causal relationship between it and combat effectiveness. The air war during World War II provides useful evidence for examining airmen's particular duty concepts as they fought in fighters and bombers, an activity that carried inherent risks that only multiplied when they moved from training and indoctrination into combat. The following research question thus comes forth: How well did the Luftwaffe and the United States Army Air Forces develop a duty concept within their aircrews and translate that duty concept into combat effectiveness? Airmen who fought in World War II generally embodied their respective countries' duty concepts, which were themselves extensions of complex issues such as rationality, ideology, and political ambitions.
Throughout the war, governments called on their airmen to fly in the face of death, serious injury, or capture. These airmen faced not only the threat of the enemy, but also the fragility of their aircraft and the unforgiving air environment. Sending people to kill and, if necessary, die for their country's sake requires appealing to their sense of duty. Duty is developed in many ways, but of particular concern to this thesis is how a nation develops its people's devotion to duty and then sends them to fight for their country. The demonstration of a duty concept is especially important in three areas: the ability to complete training, the development of operational effectiveness, and the linkages these factors have to strategic outcomes. Despite the fact that emerging realities of technologically-based war seem to clash with a duty concept based on the image of the aviator as a heroic figure, these issues remain important in today's armed conflicts. This work's argument is both conceptual and evidentiary. It begins by examining in some depth the concepts of duty and combat effectiveness. For the purposes of this paper, duty is defined as the sense of obligation to do what is right. In peace, courage is not a central requirement to fulfilling one's duty. However, in war, doing what is right frequently requires a large measure of courage because death is almost always a possibility. Thus, courage in war is central to the concept of duty. Combat effectiveness is defined as the ability to win battles and campaigns. It is thus a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for victory in war. It is a component of the larger concept of military effectiveness, which also embraces military strategic and grand-strategic acumen.
The writings of Carl Von Clausewitz, Lord Moran, and Mark Wells are central to any exploration of duty characteristics. These authors, aside from offering useful insights into the psychology of war, present distinct perspectives on warfare during its pre-industrial, land-based industrial, and aerial-industrial ages. These examinations of the role of moral factors in war offer an evolving understanding of the duty concept.
Clausewitz's On War represents the truths of the moral factors in war before technology had come to exert anything approaching a dominant role in battle. 
7
8
Courage and Air Warfare provides insight into the nature of courage among Allied aircrews during World War II, when technology took war to the skies. 
9
10
7
Clausewitz,
On War,
184. 8
10
on this ability to connect insight with execution. They thus offer a construct to focus the analysis of military effectiveness. Their analysis encompasses all four levels of war, from the tactical, to the operational, to the military strategic and finally the grand-strategic. This thesis, however, examines only combat effectiveness, which is limited to the tactical and operational levels of war. However, it also examines how different approaches to the ties between duty concept and combat effectiveness resulted in either greater or reduced military effectiveness.
One must also bear in mind that good and bad strategies may have profound effects on tactics and operations. Thus, for the purposes of this study, strategy is addressed as a contextual element.
The argument then moves from concept to evidence. Two historical examples explore the interrelationships between duty concept and combat effectiveness. The Luftwaffe and the United States Army Air Forces offer a great deal of evidence to support the idea that the latter relied to some extent on the former. These air forces had distinct approaches to airpower and implemented their visions for it, with some modifications, until the end of the war. There is a great deal of information regarding the size, strength, and tactics of both air forces.
Both inculcated and drew upon their aircrews' duty concepts, and both suffered heavy casualties. The presentation of these factors also highlights how duty affects both an attacker attempting to make an enemy submit and a defender fighting for national survival. World War II provides a rich historical example of the dynamics of duty and its relation to combat effectiveness. Due to severe losses in heavy and sustained aerial battles of attrition, air forces required a strong dedication to their objectives. Those that succeeded and those that failed did so, in part, as a result of how well the airmen conducted themselves, but this quality was in turn subject to the larger constraints airmen labored under as a result of their particular country's duty concept, and the rationalities and ideologies that comprised it.
The examination of these two relatively abstract concepts of duty and combat effectiveness requires careful attention to methodology. For instance, Wells argues that morale is a phenomenon that resists quantification. 
11
Chapter 1
Encourage us in our endeavor to live above the common level of life. Make us to choose the harder right instead of the easier wrong, and never to be content with a half truth when the whole can be won. Endow us with courage that is born of loyalty to all that is noble and worthy, that scorns to compromise with vice and injustice and knows no fear when truth and right are in jeopardy.
The moral elements of war are among the most important in war. They constitute the spirit that permeates war as a whole, and at an early stage they establish a close affinity with the will that moves and leads the whole mass of force, practically merging with it, since the will is itself a moral quantity. Unfortunately they will not yield to academic wisdom. Courage and Air Warfare. 
2
Alan Millet and Williamson Murray's three-volume work, Military Effectiveness, addresses the other half of the equation by analyzing the complex phenomenon of effectiveness in war. 
3
The vertical dimension comprehends the political (or grand-strategic), strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war. The horizontal dimension involves the -numerous, simultaneous, and interdependent tasks that military organizations must execute at each hierarchical level with differing levels of intensity in order to perform with proficiency.‖
4
The horizontal dimension involves tasks such as manpower This dynamic interaction is particularly pronounced at the operational and tactical levels of war, but extends into the strategic level as well and has great importance there. Thus, for the purposes of this thesis, the operational and tactical levels of war will be the primary focus for determining the causal linkages between a concept of duty and combat effectiveness, and strategy will be treated as an important contextual issue.
Doing one's duty in combat is both personal and difficult. In fact, during both peace and war, choosing the right path in the face of possible scorn, failure, and physical harm constantly tests every human being. There is immediate duty, such as to family and church, and broader duty, such as to the Constitution or the Führer. Harnessing the duty concept is crucial to the state's ability to convince its citizenry to fight and possibly die in furtherance of grand-strategic objectives.
Military institutions around the world and through the ages have attempted to instill a sense of duty into their fighting forces. One such means of doing so has been to illustrate the linkages between the state's way of life and the individual identity this overarching security provides.
A person devoted to family and church will likely not be induced to fight unless directly threatened. If, however, a person can be brought to see that providing for the common defense of his or her state is necessary to ensuring security, the state might potentially harness that person's sense of duty to a political purpose.
This duty concept, once ignited, has often been considered a force unto itself, capable of winning wars. One of the most famous instances of this occurred when revolutionary France harnessed the power of a liberated citizenry. The official decree of 1793 by the Committee of Public Safety, known as levée en masse, stated clearly:
From this moment until that in which every enemy has been driven from the territory of the Republic, every Frenchman is permanently requisitioned for service with the armies. The young men shall fight; married men will manufacture weapons and transport stores; women shall make tents and nurse in the hospitals; children shall turn old linen to lint; the old men shall repair to the public squares to raise the courage of the warriors and preach the unity of the Republic and hatred against the kings.
5
The levée en masse had the desired effect of calling the people of France to arms. Napoleon, who became emperor of France in 1804, understood the role of this influence in maximizing the power of the forces under his command. He also understood the strategy and tactics that could, in combination with such a strong duty concept, help him to impose his will on Europe's other great powers. Napoleon's long string of victories has been recorded and analyzed in detail. One such analyst, Carl von Clausewitz, was fascinated by Napoleon's profound impact on the conduct of war. Clausewitz penned On War to understand the nature and character of war, a subject for which he had an incisive and inquiring mind. 
6
To Clausewitz, war is a contest of wills, and this contest takes place from the commander all the way down to the individual soldier. 
7
8
To understand the challenges facing a leader, it is important to understand the environment of war that Clausewitz described. First and foremost, -War is the realm of danger; therefore courage is the soldier's first requirement.‖
9
10
11
Clausewitz asserts that one develops a temperament for war through learning and understanding those factors about war that foster the commander's confidence and determination. -Determination in a single instance is an expression of courage; if it becomes characteristic, a mental habit. But here we are referring not to physical courage to accept responsibility, courage in the face of a moral danger. This has often been called courage d'esprit, because it is created by the intellect. That however, does not make it an act of the intellect: it is an act of temperament.‖
12
13
14
15
16
17
Clausewitz understood that there are two types of courage in the face of danger: permanent and temporary. The first is a factor of an individual's personal makeup. This reflects the notion that a leader is courageous because of some genetic predisposition or because he holds life cheap. The second is courage of the moment. This is fleeting but can be very powerful because it harnesses emotions such as -ambition, patriotism or enthusiasm of any kind.‖
18
Napoleon captured France's imagination and mobilized a nation to fight, not blindly as enraged men but as one, under the command of a man with vision and genius. These men were triumphant because they were bold, believed in the duty-related virtues of the revolution, and accepted advances in warfare that other nations did not. 
19
Clausewitz studied Napoleon's rise and recorded his observations as he understood them, offering an intuitive perspective of warfare at large. A century after the defeat of Napoleon and eighty years after the publication of On War, a British surgeon named Charles Wilson, who later became Lord Moran, found himself treating soldiers serving in the trenches of World War I's Western Front.
Moran wrote The Anatomy of Courage to discover -how courage is born and how it is sustained in a modern army of free people.‖
20
21
Moran understood how intangible courage is. Nevertheless, through close observation he was able to discern some useful insights into its nature. According to Moran, training, fellowship, and leadership can prop up a person's natural sense of courage, while success is its ultimate enabler. Leadership is -the quality that enables a man to think out what he wants to do and his ability to persuade others to do it.
Success is the bridge between; once men are satisfied that their leader has it in him to build for victory they no more question his will but gladly commit their lives to his keeping.‖ 
22
Like Clausewitz, Lord Moran believed sound leadership is a fundamental ingredient to the recipe that produces duty. When a leader has proven he can provide victory, the sense of duty becomes cemented among the troops under the leader's command. In Moran's construct, leadership must monitor the morale of the troops, understand what drives them, and guide the intangible force of duty towards national goals. As Moran put it, -[I]n the trenches a man's will power was his capital and he was always spending, so that wise and thrifty company officers watched the expenditure of every penny lest their men went bankrupt.‖ 
23
Airpower offers its own challenges regarding the husbanding and expenditure of courage. Lord Moran argued that pilots and associated aircrews require a particular form of courage. 
24
25
Wells, a pilot and a historian, researched both unit records and reports from survivors in England and the United States to compile Courage and Air Warfare. His book provides focused insight into -moral fibre‖ in air combat. Wells describes the high attrition rate of United States Army Air Forces personnel assigned to Eighth Air Force during World War II. Bomber crews had just over a 25% chance of surviving the 25 missions required to complete a combat tour. This slipped to just over a 21% chance when the requirement increased to 30 missions. 
28
29
30
31
Taken together, Clausewitz, Moran, and Wells offer useful insight into the nature of courage and duty in war. Clausewitz, with his intuitive understanding of war in the early industrial age, provides a foundation for understanding the nature of war along with the importance of both courage and leadership. In his view, the leader's character is central to army's morale. Lord Moran, on the other hand, explored the nature of courage and how men expended and restore it during industrialized war. 
Having examined the elements of the duty concept, we must now examine the second element of this study: the effectiveness of military institutions. All are focused on how effectively their fighting units perform against those of their enemy. Such effectiveness is the ground upon which armed forces determine war's outcomes. The nation that most effectively weds its armed forces' capabilities to its grand strategy is more likely to achieve its objectives than one that does not. Allan
Effectiveness, provides a comprehensive explanation of the components of military effectiveness. Their study examines seven nations over three periods and across four levels of war. The nations include America, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and Russia. The three periods are World War I, the interwar period, and World War II. Finally, the levels of war include the political (grand-strategic), strategic (militarystrategic), operational, and tactical. 
32
plan in keeping with his insight, which frequently has to adjust as execution progresses, is deemed to have been combat effective. 
33
The policy must be realistic and viable. The military strategy should likewise be tailored to support the grand strategy, and operational and tactical activities should be designed and executed to support the military strategy. If any of these activities is out of harmony with the other, the effectiveness of the whole will suffer.
To sum up, combat effectiveness is determined by a leader's ability
to see what has to be done and how to do it. This is linked directly to a leader's ability to accomplish what needs to be done with the resources at hand. Military effectiveness is not exclusive to the field of combat; it should be linked to all levels of war and evinced from the head of state at the top all the way down to the soldier in the field. The duty concept is integral to military effectiveness because if warriors fail to follow orders
or do what the situation demands of them, their leaders cannot execute plans, and their insight thus becomes worthless. Conversely, if leaders inculcate their troops with a flawed, inflexible, or unreachable duty concept, their effectiveness at every level of war will be in jeopardy. or failed to cope with these blows to its airmen's morale.
To understand the Luftwaffe's duty concept, it is useful to examine the air doctrine it took to war in 1939. 
3
Luftwaffe Regulation 16, -The Conduct of Air Warfare,‖ published in 1935, was the doctrinal foundation of the Luftwaffe's early victories. It emphasized that the mission of the armed forces in war was to break down the will of the enemy. The will of the nation finds its greatest embodiment in its armed forces. Thus, destruction of the enemy armed forces is therefore the primary goal in war. The mission of the Luftwaffe was to serve these goals by commanding the war in the air within the framework of combined arms. 
4
The Explanations for this [Nazi] excellence in the service and pursuit of evil have varied. The unfailing professionalism of Prusso-German forces from the Great Elector onward has long been an obvious and persuasive answer, although recent pioneering work has only partially charted the exact nature and extent of German professional military superiority in the twentieth century… [The soldiery] fought to the end because it believed in its own collective racial superiority, had faith in the Führer's word, and placed its hopes in the regime's promised new weapons of staggering power. 
5
6
As one pilot stated, -We really believed in him. Hitler did a lot for me. I had a wonderful youth. We were young, we were so much indoctrinated by propaganda, by the years of victory reports. Afterwards, people said, ‗How could you have believed in this man?' Yet we did-totally.‖
7
8
In fact, the Battle of Britain in 1940 was the Luftwaffe's first major defeat. Although it was a setback and had at least a transitory effect on aircrews' morale, their duty concept was unshaken leading up to the invasion of Russia in 1941. This huge undertaking proved to be the first major failure for the German blitzkrieg. Dogged Russian defense and numerical superiority, both on the ground and in the air, demonstrated that the blitzkrieg could be stopped. Increasinly-heavy British and American heavy-bomber attacks in 1943 further degraded the Luftwaffe's morale when the offensive machine that had swept over Poland in 1939 was suddenly forced into a defensive role over the Reich. This task was even more difficult than it might have been due to the cumulative losses of aircrew and equipment since the start of the war, along with the steadily increasing effects of Allied strategic bombing on the Third Reich's industrial complex. 
9
Adolf Hitler reignited post-World War I Germany's sense of nationalism. By blaming the Jews, politicians, and Allied nations responsible for brokering the Treaty of Versailles, Hitler stoked the fires of German resentment while at the same time restoring a deep pride in being German. 
10
From that point forward, Germany spent the next six years rebuilding its military strength so Hitler could right the wrongs of Versailles. The Luftwaffe was central to this development.
In fact, the Luftwaffe prepared for war in a manner befitting both Clausewitz's and Lord Moran's ideas about an armed force's military qualities, including the duty concept. 
11
Lord Moran stated that leadership and equipment were paramount to a 10 Geoffrey Parker, The Cambridge History of Warfare (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.), 316. 11 -An army's military qualities are based on the individual who is steeped in the spirit and essence of this activity; who trains the capacities it demands, rouses them, and makes them his own; who applies his intelligence to every detail; who gains ease and confidence through practice, and who completely immerses hi personality in the appointed task.‖ Clausewitz, On War, 187.
pilot's resolve. 
12
14
The Luftwaffe was intent on destroying planes on the ground before they could takeoff, to ensure air superiority. But their attack aircraft suffered from three distinct problems, all of which required courage to overcome. The first-weather-is common to any aircraft.
The second was distinct to the rigors of dive bombing, a preferred the Luftwaffe went against the Royal Air Force (RAF) buoyed with confidence and perhaps a touch of bravado. After all, since Germany was winning its campaigns with such ease, and National Socialist ideals comprised the duty concept underlying such magnificent victories, there was in the aircrews' and other troops' minds a clear tie between these factors.
Luftwaffe prewar training was furthered by wartime experience, thus creating a veteran cadre and unit cohesion that Moran spoke of as a key ingredient for maintaining courage. 
22
Hitler had not anticipated fighting Britain. He had expected, based on German military might and Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement, that the war in the West would be over after the capture of France. 
23
24
25
The Luftwaffe High Command knew that destruction of the RAF had to be accomplished prior to any seaborne invasion. German pilots likened flying against the enemy to hunting, and enemy kills achieved contributed to a warrior-hero ethos. 
31
32
33
30
33
34
the pilots were considering transfer to quieter duty. The British Spitfires and the channel offered a very different battle environment than the Polish campaign. The failure to achieve air superiority took a toll on the Luftwaffe, and the hunting persona of the pilots turned on itself. Ulrich Steinhilper noted, -I was thinking we were all fighting to rid the sky of the RAF; and what was really developing was that many individuals were using the battle as a stage upon which they could further their own careers and personal scores.‖ 35 Richard Muller's The Luftwaffe Over Germany also commented on the glory-hungry pilots who desired above all else to win the coveted Knights Cross, an extremely prestigious medal worn about the neck. These pilots were deemed to have -neck rash.‖ 36
The RAF proved to be more resilient than the Luftwaffe had expected; and the Luftwaffe sense of duty was too individualistic, which suggested personal kill ratios were more important than military objectives. In this sense, the Germans failed the tests of both combat and military effectiveness.
If success and respect were driven by the number of kills achieved, the Luftwaffe pilot could measure his courage by the numerical victories reaped. This offensive manifestation of duty would be germane as long as victories continued. The Luftwaffe that entered the Battle of Britain was the embodiment of this ethos. Yet the Luftwaffe that exited the battle was -worn to the point where flying suffered, so Galland demanded and got permission to give the entire Geschwader [a Luftwaffe organization intermediate in size between an American group and wing] a rest.‖ 37 The Luftwaffe leadership realized the strain on the men and equipment, and rested the wing in Austria for two months in 1941 while their equipment was overhauled. Decorations were awarded to the most deserving men to improve morale. Nevertheless, the Battle of Britain 
35
38
39
40
41
Hitler's leisure. 
42
Of course, in a case of the shoe now being on the other foot, British night bombing of Germany heralded the changing roles of the Luftwaffe as early as 1940. While the initial British bombing efforts were largely ineffectual, the Luftwaffe understood its duty to the defense of Germany  The Luftwaffe doctrinal concept was the same-to conduct combined-arms operations. It is important to note that combined-arms operations did not subjugate the Luftwaffe to the army. The Luftwaffe believed that attacking -enemy combat power and the sources of supply that sustain it‖ was a primary concern of the bomber force. 
47
48
49
Neveretheless, three factors would render the work of the Luftwaffe -first inadequate, and finally irrelevant.‖ 50 These included the inability to translate operational victory into strategic success, the failure to gain long-term air superiority, and Luftwaffe resistance to re-focusing its operations. Moreover, the German advance into Russia was so deep that army and air force units became dangerously dispersed, requiring long 
47
51
The failure to take Moscow in December 1941 and the quagmire of Stalingrad, ending with the annihilation of the 6 th Army in February 1943, represented disastrous turning points for Germany in World War II. 
52
From that point forward, the defense of the homeland would become the priority. 
53
While the German army was freezing before the gates of Moscow, Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, prompting an American declaration of war on Japan. Hitler anticipated that Roosevelt would seize the opportunity to declare war on Germany (something the President had no intention of doing) and decided to preempt the Americans instead. As the German foreign minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, stated, -A great power does not allow itself to be declared war upon; it declares war on others.‖ 
54
55
Exhaustion was a common companion to the Luftwaffe pilots stationed on Sicily. Steinhoff wrote that -the nights were short and we were overtired and wanted to sleep.‖ 60 When he requested a period of rest for his group, he was denied due to the need for maintaining the Sicilian defense. In response, Steinhoff stated that, -the group is no longer a battle-worthy unit. Its combat value is precisely nil.‖
61
62
The effects of exhaustion were clear everywhere in Sicily. Men were jumpy. Some were terrified of the bombing raids, but they never turned down a mission. This represents a clear example of Lord Moran's third type of courage: to show fear but fight through it. 
63
64
65
66
Leadership had to fill the void created by the absence of the latter three.
The dearth of training was especially debilitating. Veteran pilots were replaced by young men who lacked thorough training and were not expected to survive beyond the first few engagements. 
67
68
The officers responsible for fighter operations are fully capable to cope with their mission. The daytime fighter defense situation can be considered absolutely secure on the condition that adequately strong reinforcements are moved in.‖
69
Although some interpretation is required, Milch's call for reinforcements, which he knew would not be forthcoming, portended increasing difficulties.
Strategic bombing and the resources required to wage a multi-front war were taking their toll. What was once the best trained and equipped air force in the world struggled to stave off defeat. As Steinhoff noted, -The Luftwaffe that entered the war was an incomplete weapon and, when that war had to be conducted against great powers on several fronts, the high command and its instrument were very far from adequate for the task that confronted them.‖ 70 Flight commander Heinz Knoke was more blunt when he stated in October of 1943, -This war has become a merciless affair. Its horrors cannot be escaped.‖ 
71
74
Steinhoff realized in the summer of 1944 that the end was in sight.
Worse yet, there was nothing to be done about it. When Steinhoff had been withdrawn from Sicily to defend the mainland, he witnessed firsthand the destruction of the German cities. Because the Luftwaffe was so -wrongly equipped and wrongly engaged,‖ the German air arm was powerless to make a difference, save one option. 
75
87
During the years of defeat, the Luftwaffe continued to fight, and despite mounting attrition, the pilots did their duty at the operational and tactical levels of war. There was little choice when faced with a war On we flew through the strewn wake of a desperate air battle, where disintegrating aircraft were commonplace and 60 chutes in the air at one time were hardly worth a second look. Beirne Lay Jr.
In the years leading up to World War II, the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) viewed the application of airpower much differently than did the Luftwaffe. American airmen advocated high-altitude strategic bombing. They believed it held forth the promise of decisive results.
This factor played a large role in the USAAF duty concept and the air war over Europe. This chapter examines the USAAF's duty concept both prior to and during the war. As with the previous chapter on the Luftwaffe, it also assesses the manifestations of duty and how well the leadership maintained a sense of duty and linked it to combat effectiveness.
This assessment is divided into a prologue and three chronological periods. The prologue analyzes the USAAF's doctrine development and buildup leading into World War II. This provides insight into why the USAAF went to war the way it did. The first chronological period is titled -the months of promise‖ and covers events to the end of 1942. These months represented the boundless, but untested, promise of strategic bombing. Heralded by General Billy Mitchell, strategic bombing was the dominant airpower theory in the United States. The theory appealed to a nation that wanted to avoid a long war of attrition, such as World War I had been for the Europeans. Mitchell stated, -The influence of air power on the ability of one nation to impress its will on another in an armed contest will be decisive.‖ 1
The second section, -the years of the grind,‖ began in the spring of 1943, as the first raids into Germany encountered stiff resistance, and continued until the success of Operation Argument in the spring and summer of 1944. These years were the trial-by-fire for USAAF bomber crews. The benefits and deficiencies of strategic bombing became clear, as did the effects that sustained combat had on aircrews. The USAAF leadership had to maintain the duty concept of quintessentially American aircrew who approached the war with a workmanlike attitude of -finishing the job‖ so they could go home. This does not imply that the Americans were blind to the importance of their efforts to win what they viewed as a war against tyranny and evil, but it highlights the difference in approach between Luftwaffe and USAAF airmen. Their team focus also distinguished them from the more individualistic German airmen.
The last period is titled -the years of triumph‖ which covers the period from spring 1944 to May 1945. Here, the sustained strategic bombing campaign, coupled with long range fighter escort, prevailed over the Luftwaffe. It epitomized the kind of war Americans were wellprepared to fight, and one in which their pragmatic duty concept ultimately gave them great advantages in terms of combat effectiveness and morale.
The USAAF developed its strategic bombing doctrine from the teachings of prominent airpower theorists such as the Italian, Giulio Douhet, and the American, Billy Mitchell. Both men believed that airpower could be a decisive factor in war. To have command of the air means to be in a position to wield offensive power so great it defies human imagination... In short, it means to be in a position to win. To be defeated in the air, on the other hand, is finally to be defeated and to be at the mercy of the enemy, with no chance at all of defending oneself, compelled to accept whatever terms he sees fit to dictate. This is the meaning of the -command of the air.‖ 2
In the late 1920s, when the airplane represented a relatively new technology, Douhet believed that a country's inability to defend its vulnerable centers of government from attack from the air would lead to its capitulation. This notion found its way to the United States through General Billy Mitchell. Mitchell echoed Douhet's argument but modified it to focus on military targets, -Air forces will attack centers of production of all kinds, means of transportation, agricultural areas, ports and shipping; not so much the people themselves. They will destroy the means of making war.‖ 
3
4
In fact, the Army Air Corps (which became the USAAF in 1941) spent 1939 and 1940 organizing, training, and equipping a force to conduct strategic bombing. In Winged Shield, Winged Sword: A History of the United States Air Force, Bernard Nalty noted that, -The air arm needed equipment of every sort-bases, ranges, and men-and it needed them simultaneously.‖ 
5
Seven months before Pearl Harbor, a number of contradictions divided American popular opinion about a prospective war. Public opinion polls in May 1941 showed that -68 percent believed it more important to help Britain than stay out of the war, 79 percent wanted to stay out, and 70 percent felt that he [Roosevelt] had either gone too far or already gone far enough on Britain's behalf.‖ 
10
States was afforded a security not shared by the potential allies across the Atlantic. This was all to change. The Japanese attack at Pearl
Harbor on 7 December 1941 proved that -Americans could no longer measure their [safety] in terms of miles on a map.‖ 11 Once the blow had been delivered, American involvement in the effort was assured, but who to attack was not.
Many in the United States naturally felt that the Japanese were the real enemy, and that the weight of effort should therefore fall on this likely foe in the Pacific. The political recommendation was to the contrary, with Admiral Harold Stark asserting that -The issues in the Orient will largely be decided in Europe.‖ 
12
13
14
Through his political skill, Roosevelt ensured that the weight of American effort started with Europe and then shifted to the Pacific. But before combat operations could begin, America had to marshal its strength.
Ground forces took years to form and concentrate.
During this period, Russia and Britain bore the brunt of keeping German forces occupied. In particular, Russia's leader, Joseph Stalin, wanted assurances from Roosevelt that America was committed to the war. The bombers of the United States Army Air Forces and an autumn 1942 invasion of North Africa represented the only such assurances
Roosevelt could provide at that time. 
15
Although the Germans saw the Battle of Britain as representing a failure of strategic bombing doctrine, the British and Americans interpreted those failures as being particular to the Luftwaffe's flawed execution. Thus, they proceeded with the belief that its true capacity was yet to be reached. But in order for the United States to make strategic bombing a reality and ensure adequate strength to fight against Germany, a large crew force had to be developed to man the bombers rolling off the production lines.
The USAAF paid close attention to the selection of its aircrews.
This selection process was designed to find men who could withstand the neuropsychiatric pressures of war. Psychiatric evaluations were conducted in order to eliminate any candidate with mental disorders, and men were selected who were suitable for flight operations.
16
17
America was mobilizing its military might. Its aircraft were primarily heavy bombers such as the B-17 to carry out the strategic bombing doctrine. While crew selection was rigorous, crew training often was not, especially in the early months of America's involvement. Alan
Levine's book, The Strategic Bombing of Germany, notes that -Many units were only partly trained. The pilots were inexperienced at flying in formation at high altitudes. Many radio operators could not send or receive code. Many gunners were untrained; some had never even fired their weapons.‖
18
19
wrong -what Clausewitz called friction. 
20
The resources marshaled for the war were impressive. The USAAF went from training 300 men a year in 1939 to 50,000 a year in 1944.
The force eventually expanded to 2.4 million men and 80,000 planes. 
21
To summarize the prologue, United States involvement in World
War II gave the USAAF a means to test the theory of strategic bombing.
Before the theory could be tested, the aircraft and crews had to be marshaled quickly. This resulted in insufficient training for many of the crews. This is in contrast to Germany, which had spent the years prior to World War II training and equipping its air force, developing a professional cadre, and testing theories regarding its doctrine in battle conditions such as the Spanish Civil War, where the Condor Legion learned valuable lessons about air warfare. The USAAF went to war with men who believed in what they were fighting for. In most cases, they approached the task as a workman would. There was a job to do, and it was everyone's responsibility to go and do it. Once the job was over, the men could go home. But, like their Luftwaffe counterparts, these men had a love of flying and believed they were providing a means to win the war.
On August 17, 1942, an inadequately trained USAAF bomber force conducted its first raid against occupied France. The target was a repair facility in the Rouen-Sotteville marshalling yard. Only half the bombs fell within the target area, and neither side suffered any casualties. 
22
In her book, Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare: The Evolution of British and American Ideas About Strategic Bombing, 1914-1945, Tami   Davis Biddle states that, -A fundamental assertion that became central to the Anglo-American thinking about long-range bombing was that modern, complex, urban-based societies are fragile, interdependent, and therefore peculiarly vulnerable to disruption through aerial bombing.‖ 
23
States entered World War II, it began bombing strategic targets in Germany. The Air Corps Tactical School (ACTS) placed great confidence in the notion that -The bomber will always get through‖ And deliver its payload accurately, and the school's graduates carried this confidence with them into battle. 
24
Early predictions regarding bombing accuracy and its effects were overly optimistic and lacked validation in the field. The daylight bombing campaign against Germany proved to be a harsh test for American bombers. Chances for surviving after 25 missions were just over 25 percent early in the war. 
25
26
27
This section examines the rigors these men faced in war and how their initial expectations for strategic bombing and quick victory affected their sense of duty and combat effectiveness.
The  
29
30
The B-17 Flying Fortress was designed to act as part of a flying formation known as a combat box. Each aircraft bristled with .50 caliber machine guns on the tail, fuselage, and nose. When flown in tight formation, the B-17s' guns provided cover for the others in formation.
The Luftwaffe quickly discovered that the greatest weakness of this  Tami Davis Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality, 195.  defensive configuration was a blind spot in the nose where only handheld guns could be used. 
31
Because the B-17 was supposed to be a self-defending platform, the USAAF had not devoted a great deal of effort to developing a long-range fighter escort. Thus, the aircrews' ability to endure was partly undermined by the deficiencies of doctrine and equipment.
Despite the USAAF's deficiencies, it had survived first contact with the enemy. In the words of one bomber pilot, -We were no longer novices at this terrible game of war. We had braved the enemy in his own skies and were alive to tell about it.‖
32
33
The USAAF still held firmly to its duty of defeating Germany, but day-today morale suffered due to the low chances of survival in the skies over the Reich.
In summary, the months of promise were represented by decent duty concept but limited combat effectiveness. The promise of decisive strategic bombing was steadily undermined by the German ability to defend against the Allied bombing onslaught-an onslaught that was often inaccurate and therefore only marginally effective at this point in the war.
USAAF aircrews began showing signs of fatigue in late 1942. This fatigue was magnified by increased operational tempo and correspondingly high attrition rates. The morale among these men was directly related to their likelihood of survival. In short, the duty concept among USAAF aircrews was manifested in their ability to endure.
Bombing raids deeper into enemy airspace were beginning based on the belief that the B-17s could operate as a self-defending unit. The first half of 1943 was spent bombing targets in France and marshaling the strength of the USAAF bomber force. More crews and equipment flowed into England. When sufficient bombers and crew had rallied, the first major bombing raid against a German target deemed crucial to the war effort occurred. The 17 August raid was against Schweinfurt and Regensburg.
These raids had significant meaning for two reasons. The first was the scale of the operation: Just over 370 bombers flew. The second was the loss of life. In the Schweinfurt raid, 60 bombers were downed and 601 men were killed, captured, or interned. 
34
After we had been under constant attack for a solid hour, it appeared certain that the 100 th Group was faced with annihilation. Seven of our group had been shot down, the sky was mottled with rising fighters and it was only 1120 hours, with target-time still 35 minutes away. I doubt if a man in the group visualized the possibility of our getting much further without 100% loss. I know that I had long since mentally accepted the fact of death, and that it was simply a question of the next second or the next minute. 
35
They returned to their duties. Cleven, if he knew fear, refused to show it; this forced the rest of the crew to marshal their courage. He showed that the crew could endure, and they did. was a viable self-defending platform was thoroughly disproven. The USAAF ultimately realized that these conditions made prosecuting the war far too costly. Fighter escorts were needed in order to lower bomber attrition rates. 
40
41
The bombing results at Schweinfurt and Regensburg were impressive but transitory. Major General Curtis Lemay, who was Commander of the 4 th Bombardment Wing and had personally led 146 bombers against Schweinfurt, later wrote, -That… plant was completely out of actionbriefly,‖ this statement highlighted strategic bombing's limitations.
Without the ability to carry our persistent and heavy attacks while keeping casualties low, the Americans could not do the level of damage required to undermine entire segments of the Reich's war industry. In addition, the enemy gets a vote in deciding when he is beaten, and the Germans had cast a firm -No‖ vote with their tenacious defense of the skies over Schweinfurt and Regensburg. 
42
43
44
43
45
46
The Eighth Air Force instituted rest homes in England that facilitated aircrew relaxation. The goal was to identify operational fatigue before it became operational exhaustion. 
47
To summarize the years of the grind, the USAAF bomber force fell short of the pre-war predictions regarding training, effectiveness, and defensive superiority. The USAAF leadership entered the war with the belief that strategic bombing would likely force an early capitulation of Germany. Early bombing efforts showed that precision bombing results, even in daylight conditions, were well below pre-war expectations. While devotion to duty entering the war was high, bolstered by the belief that these men were flying in the latest and most technologically advanced aircraft and had received, in theory at least, the most advanced training, the grim realities of German fighters and flak were beyond anything training could replicate.
USAAF airmen saw strategic bombing as a duty, and this duty had an end-point -30 combat missions. Completing these was central to an airman's fulfilling his duty. The men of the USAAF were not just protecting the homeland by taking the war to the European Axis powers; they were also fighting for American interests in the world, buttressed by an ideal that originated with the President and was enforced by the leadership. The leadership in turn understood that the men's sense of duty was a resource that had to be cultivated and maintained. Rest was often used to remedy operational fatigue, but for some it was not enough.
The men who suffered from LMF were removed, at first awkwardly, and later more carefully and discreetly so as not to jeopardize the morale of those who kep flying. Lord Moran's ideas about the various manifestations of courage and the need to refill the courage are prevalent 56 Alan Levine, The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 121.
throughout the bombing campaign of the USAAF. The aircrew wrote of the exhaustion they felt after each combat sortie, but they also wrote with equal passion about their time off and times on leave, indicating that while the fighting was rough the outlets to recover from it were also relatively easy to find.
The USAAF sense of duty was predicated on the aircrews' ability to endure. Endurance became almost impossible in late 1943 due to the heavy losses. The USAAF approached aircrew endurance from both the crew perspective and the operational method of applying airpower. From the crew perspective, operational fatigue and exhaustion were treated as common medical conditions, which were curable. The Americans also modified their doctrine and operations to increase the chances of survival. Long-range escort fighters had two effects, defending the bombers and ultimately breaking the Luftwaffe's ability to resist. These two approaches gave aircrews the ability to endure and to fulfill their duty. The USAAF recognized both issues and eventually addressed them appropriately. Unescorted deep-penetration bombing also evolved to include long-range fighter escort, and crew morale was treated as a medical condition. Devotion to duty was ultimately linked to the ability to endure.
Strategic bombing was not the decisive instrument of the war, but it was significant in many important respects. One of the most important targets of the war for the USAAF was Germany's oil production. With Germany's dwindling capability to defend the skies above its homeland came greater bombing efforts by the USAAF, especially against oil plants.
Like all industrial nations of the time, the Third Reich relied heavily on oil-not just in terms of providing fuel, but also in the production of synthetic rubber, a key component in engineering aircraft and other vehicles. Unfortunately for the German war effort, oil shortages were pervasive. The USSBS stated that Production from the synthetic plants declined steadily and by July 1944 every major plant had been hit. These plants were producing an average of 316,000 tons per month when the attacks began. Their production fell to 107,000 tons in June and 17,000 tons in September. Output of aviation gasoline from synthetic plants dropped from 175,000 tons in April to 30,000 tons in July and 5,000 tons in September. Production recovered somewhat in November and December, but for the rest of the war was but a fraction of pre-attack output. 
57
As one could anticipate, the dynamics of linking devotion to duty with combat effectiveness are much different for the victor than they are for the vanquished. Both the systematic attempts to determine aptitude for flying and the pre-war American doctrine of strategic bombing represent flawed and incomplete but useful attempts to prepare men and thought processes for the rigors of war. In the early months of bombing, the practical methods of strategic bombing were found to be rather inadequate but not seriously tested; and devotion to duty held up reasonably well. The traumatic deficiencies revealed in the Schweinfurt and Regensburg attacks both degraded combat effectiveness and eroded morale. But a new operational method and enhanced techniques for dealing with the psychological stresses of combat reversed both adverse trends by mid-1944. The conclusion that emerges is, however, similar to that of the Luftwaffe experience. Although a strong duty concept can magnify combat effectiveness, combat ineffectiveness can have a seriously degrading effect on an air force's morale. If left untended, a degraded morale can also lead to a corresponding failure of a duty concept. In the German example, duty was called into question by significant erosion of morale. In the American example, duty was undermined by men who were physically incapable of fulfilling their duty due to LMF. If left unattended, LMF could become epidemic. In the American case, the problem was not strategic but operational -a flawed doctrine did not work in situations it had not fully envisioned. Thus, enlightened operational-level leaders were able to remedy combat effectiveness and restore devotion to duty by adapting the flawed doctrine to the new realities it faced. In short, combat effectiveness had a greater influence on devotion to duty than devotion to duty had on combat effectiveness.
In the end it is only people that count, all the people in the whole world. Any land is beautiful to someone. Any land is worth fighting for to someone. So it isn't the land. It is the people.
The purpose of this thesis has been to discover how well the replenishing it when able. Regardless of how strong a man's duty concept is, if he suffers from a neuropsychiatric breakdown, he will be unable to perform any duty. Thus, if a nation's duty concept is weak and there are no mechanisms in place to replenish courage, combat effectiveness may suffer. Alternatively, the properly developed duty concept is an ingredient of combat effectiveness.
Combat effectiveness derives from the ability to link one's insights into a particular situation to the execution of the task at hand. This is true at all levels of war. Of the resources available to a commander, the force's devotion to duty is one of the most perishable. A force that suffers from a weak duty concept is unlikely to be effective. Alternatively, a force that is motivated by a strong sense of duty is more likely to be effective.
In many respects, the Luftwaffe and the USAAF were similar.
Both air forces represented young services populated by young airmen.
Both services attracted men who loved flying and viewed warfare as a hunt or a game. The German political leadership viewed the Luftwaffe as the darling service critical to the success of the blitzkrieg. The American political leadership invested significantly in the hope that strategic bombing would be a war-winning strategy. Throughout the war, it became apparent to both air forces that a strong duty concept could magnify combat effectiveness. Conversely, combat ineffectiveness could have a seriously degrading effect on an air force's duty concept.
Having said this, it is useful to review how the two air forces were the necessary forces to engage on the ground. The key difference was in the ability to adapt during the course of the war. The Luftwaffe, with its failed strategic insight, was unable to upgrade its aircraft in order to effect a more balanced airpower strategy. The USAAF realized that strategic bombing was not war-winning but was beneficial in seriously weakening the enemy. Moreover, the USAAF had the resources and manpower not only to continue bombing, but to also protect those bombers with fighter escorts. Furthermore, they had both the good sense to pause when things went horribly wrong in mid-late 1943 and the good fortune and good insight to craft an effective response in early 1944. The result was the destruction of the Luftwaffe, Germany's oil and transportation infrastructures, and the Wehrmacht's near-total loss of strategic, operational, and tactical mobility.
An Airman's sense of duty is a relatively enduring motivator. The stronger the sense of duty, the more apt he is to continue performing regardless of adversity. But this study has shown it has finite limits.
Morale is a fleeting ideal that is subject to change based on prevailing conditions. USAAF aircrews fought because they believed in their country and their service. When the enemy failed to capitulate as a result of strategic bombing, the men suffered in morale but for the most part continued to do their duty.
Duty and combat effectiveness are linked. Both can exist, even succeed, in spite of the other. A weak duty concept can be compensated for with sound leadership and ample resources. Similarly, a welldeveloped duty concept, steeped in tradition and learning, is able to make up for deficiencies in leadership and resources. The nation that is capable of nurturing both is apt to have a war-winning force; this is as true now as it was in World War II. Understanding why the troops fight or why they think they fight is a crucial step in developing not only a duty concept, but also the critical foundations of a military institution.
By providing that institution with the means to build and rely on a firm sense of duty, the effects of morale -positive or negative -are easier to control. This is not to say they disappear. No war is free of declines in morale, but a strong duty concept gives airmen a belief in the justness of their cause and, ultimately, the strength to endure. For the airmen of
The JU 87 -Stuka‖ pilot usually started at 12,000 feet, put his aircraft in a 70-to-80 degree dive and released his bomb at 2,300 feet, then pulling out of the dive and experiencing a -grey out‖ due to temporary loss of blood to the brain.
The JU 87 -Stuka‖ pilot usually started at 12,000 feet, put his aircraft in a 70-to-80 degree dive and released his bomb at 2,300 feet, then pulling out of the dive and experiencing a -grey out‖ due to temporary loss of blood to the brain.
51.
48  
48  
1 William Mitchell, Winged Defense: The Development and Possibilities of Modern Airpower-Economic and Military (New York: Dover Publications, 1988; Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2009), 214. Citations are to the University of Alabama edition.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael  Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976), 184-185.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 102.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 103.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 113.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 189.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 187.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 89.   
Charles M. Wilson, [Lord Moran], The Anatomy of Courage: The Classic WWI account of the Psychological Effects of War (New York: Carrol & Graf Publishers,
2007).
Mark K. Wells, Courage and Air Warfare: The Allied Aircrew Experience in the Second WorldWar (London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd, 1995).
Allan R.Millett and Williamson Murray. Military Effectiveness: The Second World War,  Vol. I & 2 (Winchester: Allen & Unwin Inc., 1988).
Allan Millet and Williamson Murray, Military Effectiveness, Vol I,
2.
Gunther E. Rothenberg, The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon (New York: Midland Books, 1980), 100.
Peter Paret, Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), 186.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976), 75.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War,[190][191][192][193] 
Carl von Clausewitz, On War,  
10
11
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 102.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 100.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 100.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 189.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 104.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 104.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 101.   
John A. Lynn, The Cambridge History of Warfare (New York: Cambridge University Press),189.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 1.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 5.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 204.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 70.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 105.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 104.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 181.
Wesley Craven and James Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, 7 vols (Chicago: University Press, 1958), Vol. VII, 431.
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 101.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 70.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 206.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 211.   
Millett and Murray, Military Effectiveness, Vol III, 324.   
Richard Holmes, The Oxford Companion to Military History (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2001), 135.
James S. Corum, Wolfram von Richtofen (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. 2008), 156.
James S. Corum and Richard R. Muller, The Luftwaffe's Way of War (Baltimore: The Nautical and Aviation Publishing Company of America, 1998), 118
Corum and Muller, The Luftwaffe's Way of War, 120.   
MacGregor Knox, Common Destiny: Dictatorship, Foreign Policy, and War in Fascist  Italy and Nazi Germany (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 187-188.
Richard Suchenwirth, Historical Turning Points in the German Air Force War Effort  (New York: Arno Press, 1968), 14.   
Richard Muller, The Air War Over Germany, 220.   
Heinz Knoke, I Flew for the Führer (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1953),  
9 Williamson Murray, Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe 1933-1945 (Maxwell AFB, Alabama: Air University Press, 1983), 303.
Charles M. Wilson, [Lord Moran], The Anatomy of Courage: The Classic WWI account of the Psychological Effects of War (New York: Carrol & Graf Publishers, 2007), 105.
Corum & Muller, The Luftwaffe's Way of War, 120.   
Heinz Knoke, I Flew for the Führer,
12.
Cajus Bekker, The Luftwaffe War Diaries: The German Air Force in World War II(New  York: Da Capo Press, 1994), 43.   
Cajus Bekker, The Luftwaffe War Diaries, 42.
Mike Spick, Luftwaffe Bomber Aces: Men, Machines, Methods (London: Greenhill  Books, 2001), 36.   
Mike Spick, Luftwaffe Bomber Aces, 35.   
Cajus Bekker, The Luftwaffe War Diaries, 27.
Cajus Bekker, The Luftwaffe War Diaries, 58-59.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976).
Charles M. Wilson, [Lord Moran], The Anatomy of Courage: The Classic WWI Account of the Psychological Effects of War (New York: Carrol & Graf Publishers, 2007).
Stephen Bungay, Most Dangerous Enemy, 341
Wilhelm Johnen, Duel Under The Stars (London, William Kimber & Co., 1957), 16.   
Trumbull Higgins, Hitler and Russia (New York: The Macmillan Company. 1966), 11- 59, 98-151.  
46 Heinz Knoke, I Flew for the Führer, 43.
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily (Mechanicsburg: Stackpole Books,  2004), 9.
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily, 13.   
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily,
10.
Lord Moran, Anatomy of Courage, 5.
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily, 48.   
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily,
24.
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily, 17.   
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily,
24.
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily, 229.   
Richard Muller, The Luftwaffe Over Germany, 93.   
Johannes Steinhoff, Messerchmitts Over Sicily, 252.   
Donald Caldwell and Richard Muller, The Luftwaffe Over Germany: Defense of the Reich (St Paul: MBI Publishing, 2007), 189.
Heinz Knoke, I Flew for the Führer, 201.   
Caldwell and Muller, The Luftwaffe Over Germany, 285.   
Asher Lee, The German Air Force (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1946), 297.
James MacGregor Burns, Roosevelt: The Soldier of Freedom, 103.
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare,
5.
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare,
5.
Alan J.Levine, The Strategic Bombing of Germany (Westport: Praeger,  
1992), 7.19  MartinBowman, USAAF Handbook 1939
-1945
Alan J.Levine, The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 78.   
Tami Davis Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality In Air Warfare:  The Evolution of British and American Ideas about StrategicBombing, 1914
-1945
This quotation originally came from Stanley Baldwin's speech, -A Fear of the Future‖ which he gave to the British Parliament in 1932.
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 101.   
In April 1944, 371 heavy bombers were lost for the month, which represented the highest bomber losses for the war. By fall of 1944, survival rates more than doubled in Europe. Richard G. Davis, Carl A. Spaatz and the Air War in Europe (Washington DC: Center for Air Force History, 1992), Statistical Appendix 7, Heavy Bomber and Day Fighter Crew Losses, June 1943 to August 1945, 589.
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 210.   
Alan Levine, The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 81.   
Martin Bowman, Clash of Eagles, 9.   
Bert Stiles, Serenade to the Big Bird (New York: W.W.Norton & Co, Inc., 1947), 31.   
Alan Levine, The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 101.   
Headquarters, 100th Bombardment Group. Personal Report on the Regensburg Mission, 17 Aug 1943, Call # 520.056-211, IRIS # 01075610, USAF Collection,
Donald Miller, Masters of the Air, 136.
Donald Miller, Masters of the Air,[134][135][136] 
Tami Davis Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare, 224.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 101.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 79.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 79.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 80.   
Will S. Arnett, -B-17 War Diary‖ (Transcribed by Steve Green), http://www.greenshouse.com/Seaton_Diary_files/index.htm. (accessed 3 May 2010)(Chicago, 17.356)   
Bert Stiles, Serenade to the Big Bird, 20.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 197.   
Mark Wells, Courage and Air Warfare, 166.   
I would like to acknowledge several people without whose support and help, this thesis would have remained a novel thought in my subconscious. I want to thank 
Dr. Hal Winton
Col Rob Ehlers
Dr Rich Muller
The linkages between Luftwaffe combat effectiveness and morale became very clear during the course of the war. In the heady years of victory, a strong sense of duty helped bring success; and success strengthened the duty concept. Thus, the duty concept, combat effectiveness, and military effectiveness were mutually reinforcing. In the uncertain years, combat effectiveness was degraded due to strategic misjudgments; the duty concept seemed to stay strong, but there were indications that it wore down at the margins. Thus, the duty concept followed where both combat and military effectiveness led. In the years of defeat, this trend accelerated. Strategic misjudgments increasingly degraded combat effectiveness. This degradation ultimately caused the senior fighter generals to rebel openly against their service chief, but to no avail. Although there were noteworthy acts of individual bravery during this period, the revolt of the fighter generals represents both a supreme expression of duty to conscience on one hand and a deep questioning of the political object of duty on the other. The erosion of morale had finally reached the duty concept of the fighter pilots. The most Nazi inculcated leaders of the German armed services had plotted treason and opted out of the Nazi vision of duty. The major conclusion from studying the Luftwaffe in World War II is that a strong sense of duty can indeed magnify combat effectiveness; but a prolonged and severe degradation of combat effectiveness will eventually degrade or even undermine the strongest sense of duty. In short, at the tactical and operational levels, duty was well developed and maintained and effectively linked to combat effectiveness. At the grand-strategic level, National Socialist ideology produced an enthusiasm that magnified combat effectiveness in the early years of the war. But successive grandstrategic mistakes ultimately ground down the machine, just as Clausewitz would have predicted.
starting in 1939 and peaked in 1945. America invested heavily in training aircrews for the bomber force, which would comprise the dominant element within the USAAF. Unlike the German equivalent that focused almost entirely on combined arms, United States airpower theory followed a largely strategic doctrine. This notion found its way into the Air War Plans Division plan for the -overall production requirements required to defeat our potential enemies,‖ or as it is was commonly known, AWPD-1. 
6
8
The Joint Board was skeptical of the AWPD-1 assertion that victory through airpower alone was possible. It stated that -only land armies can finally win wars.‖ 9 Despite this skepticism, the USAAF went to war with the belief that strategic bombing was a war-winning strategy. While He won't last much longer. He's seen too many guys go down.‖ 49 The copilot was in need of help. Whether he received it or not was up to the leadership. Fortunately, the actions taken by commanders and doctors were generally but not completely successful.
The manner in which the USAAF dealt with the psychological casualties of the war was as important as how they dealt with those that were salvageable. Not every airman was able to weather the stresses of combat. Some men chose to claim asylum in neutral countries, while others suffered from neuropsychiatric breakdowns that were broadly categorized as LMF. The USAAF treated these cases much more leniently than the British, who insisted their aircrews maintain a -stiff upper lip.‖ Significant dereliction of duty was met with removal from flying and entry into the Army, the Royal Navy, or the coal mines. 50 Sometimes, when American airmen were not salvageable, they were removed from combat operations or sent home. This represented a loss in training and combat readiness for the bomber crews left in theater but was balanced against the negative effects these men could have on those around them.
While the relatively enlightened American treatment was generally more beneficial to the individuals involved, it also represented a mechanism for aircrews to shirk their duties. This led to some problems in morale such as airmen who were relieved of combat duties being assigned to staff duties and then, due to their proximity to the higher leadership, receiving promotion earlier than their combat brethren. This caused resentment on part of aircrews that were capable of and willing to fly combat missions. 
51
52
53
Ultimately, however, the men who returned to flying had to know that they had a way to fulfill their duty at an acceptable level of risk. The Operation Argument, which sought to destroy the Luftwaffe and gain air superiority over the Third Reich. 
54
55
52