# ID: 3cb54c221d3243da8a4798b9b96f6339
# Title: Conventional Preemption: A Needed Lens to Address War With China?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
Title: Conventional Preemption: A Needed Lens to Address War With China?
Author: Major Christopher T. Rogers, United States Marine Corps Thesis: To weigh preemption as a US counter to Chinese actions in the Pacific puts the idea of war foremost in the analysis of current US-Sino tensions. This focus on preemption can help, when addressed in a careful manner, chastise the push for war and offer a better examination of US actions in the Pacific than the too rigid belief in the historical analogy presented in Thucydides' Trap where a rising power will inevitably go to war against the established power.
The rise of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on the international stage has created tensions between China and the current world superpower, the United States of America. With tensions flaring as a result of political rhetoric, near-misses between US and Chinese vessels in the South China Sea, and US and Chinese national strategies appearing increasingly at odds, the resulting question becomes what will happen next. Many academics and pundits alike agree with Graham Allison's endorsement of the concept of Thucydides' Trap where a US-Sino war is inevitable. However, little has been written to investigate the US-Sino conflict through the lens of preemption-the concept of a country striking another first in self-defense, a logical step should Allison's fear prove correct. This study explores the US-Sino situation through the lens of conventional preemption in order to add a new perspective to this US-Sino discussion and illuminate whether or not the United States has a valid case for preemptive action towards China, what US conventional preemption might look like, the potential fallout if the United States and China enter into a war, and whether war between these two great powers is actually an inevitability or if there are alternatives to avoid a US-Sino war altogether.
A US preemptive attack on China does not appear to be appropriate. While China clearly desires a multipolar world and to compete with the United States as a great power, its current national actions, up to today, have not directly threatened an imminent and overwhelming attack on the United States. China has not endangered US national integrity nor has it put the United States in a position of fear where it felt like it had no time or other recourse to respond to Chinese actions. This view of the limited utility of conventional preemption also means one should not accept Allison's fears of the coming war. China's actions are not as threatening as imagined, nor has the United States not responded. Two great powers are certainly finding their footing in relation to one another, but there is space to defuse tensions and, certainly, that opening means a very limited need to resort to preemption. This conclusion is good news given the risks of acting preemptively. Now comes the hard work of keeping things short of the act of war to keep the need for preemption as marginal. 
With the United States' pivot to the Indo-Pacific and focus on the People's Republic of China, I became very curious about how the United States planned to address the rise of China. Mainstream news broadcasts and articles presented a picture of China's growth and capability as if it were right on the heels of the United States. This, of course, caused me great concern and surprise as a service member and an American. My almost 16 years of service has focused on the Middle East, Europe, and Africa. China was not on my radar until it became a topic of conversation in mainstream media as well as wargames and planning exercises conducted by 1st Marine Division under which my last unit served. After arriving to Command and Staff, working through the master's program guidance and perusing faculty areas of expertise, I found myself drawn to the idea of preemption. If China is threatening the country that I love and challenging US status as the single world superpower, I, like many American citizens and military professionals, gravitate to the general idea of executing a decisive military operation that could put China back in its place and preserve the American way of life. However, through my in-depth research and under the mentorship of Dr. Matthew Flynn and LtCol Joern Qviller, I have quickly realized that my pipe dream of an easy first strike option to solve the "China problem" was naive. While preemption, and the idea of striking a threat first -ostensibly in self-defense --before it strikes you, looks great in the movies and titillates the senses, the last 200 years of history proves that preemption rarely achieves positive results, often creates a much larger and unnecessary conflict, and habitually serves as an excuse for an aggressor nation to attack another country under false pretenses and often only for self-gain instead of self-defense. If war between the United States and China is imminent or even just possible, the United States must consider all of its options to address the threat. Preemption puts war at the forefront of the discussion and the United States cannot afford to ignore it as an option. My research and analysis of a possible US-Sino conflict through the lens of preemption reveals many challenges should the US choose that option. It also reveals weakness in the Thucydides' Trap claim and further highlights the imperative of defusing US-Sino tensions and finding a better alternative than war for the time being.
Throughout the course of my research and thesis development, I have truly benefitted from a wonderful support and mentorship network. I must thank my parents, Bill and Mary Rogers, and my son, Chris, for motivation and continued encouragement. I would also like to acknowledge Dr. Matthew Flynn and LtCol Jøern Qviller, for their mentorship and honest, constructive feedback throughout the process, which improved and strengthened my work.
Before the outbreak of the COVID pandemic a year ago, one of the biggest topics of discussion dominating the halls of the Pentagon, the White House, congressional committees on Capitol Hill, and major US news outlets was the rise of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on the international stage and its supposed collision course with the current world superpower, the United States of America. This confrontation has not gone away. At best, COVID has merely deferred the menacing posturing between the two states. More likely, COVID has added to the tensions-China did little to warn the world of the outbreak. As tensions flare with the exchange of political rhetoric from both sides about the origins of COVID, the possibility of more flash points coming from near-misses between Chinese and US military vessels in the South China Sea unsettle relations, as does shared boisterous rhetoric about the status of Taiwan. Curiosity abounds for what the future holds for the two biggest powers of the world. The dynamic of the rise and fall of great powers also impacts this discussion and adds to the tensions, with the United States playing the role of established power hoping to hold off a challenger. That scenario in some minds reaches to a Greek antecedent, the clash of Sparta and Athens, again pointing to the inevitability of a US-Sino conflict. The analysis that follows suggests a continued examination of US-Sino tensions with a new approach, preemption. Here, an old concept-the right of self-defense-set in more recent times given US justification of the 2003 action against Iraq, but now neglected if not forgotten, brings a needed look at US-Sino tensions today. Given how different the calculus is when considering the use of nuclear weapons as part of preemption, the scope of this study purposefully focuses solely on non-nuclear, conventional preemption. To weigh this US counter to Chinese actions in the Pacific that are resonating globally puts the idea of war foremost in the analysis. This focus on preemption can help, when addressed in a careful manner, chastise the push for war and offer a better examination of US actions in the Pacific than the too rigid belief in the historical analogy presented in Thucydides' Trap where a rising power will go to war against the established power. 
The national defense strategies (NDS) of both the United States and China show consensus that the world is changing, global disorder is increasing, and both countries blame one another for the international security situation becoming increasingly destabilized. China's 2019 NDS, entitled China's National Defense in the New Era, states that China is reacting to the destabilizing international security environment caused by US hegemonic, unilateral policies. 
1
3
The 2018 US NDS depicts a much different cause of the deteriorating situation than what the Chinese NDS conveys. The US NDS states that "China is leveraging military modernization, influence operations, and predatory economics…to reorder the Indo-Pacific region to their advantage. As China continues its economic and military ascendance, it will continue to pursue a military modernization program that seeks…regional hegemony…and displacement of the United States to achieve global preeminence in the future." 
5
8
10
12
13
14
15
16
Despite the pushback to Allison, the US military, in accordance with the NSS and NDS, continues to contemplate a clash with China. While much has been written about a US-Sino conflict through the lens of Thucydides' Trap, little has been written regarding the potential for an American or Chinese act of preemption as a means to win an inevitable war. Matthew Flynn, author of First Strike: Preemptive War in Modern History, defines preemptive warfare as "the practice of attempting to avoid an enemy's seemingly imminent attack by taking military action against them first. It is undertaken in self-defense… [and] thought to be justified and honorable." 
17
18
19
20
As with the question of legality, there is also disagreement regarding the morality of preemptive war. Flynn again weighs in when he asserts that preemptive warfare could be considered just or moral because delivering the first strike "preserves one's national integrity and can be thought of as an act of self-defense." 21 Due to the act stemming from a tremendous fear of being attacked, a preemptive attacker can start a war and still claim the moral high ground without being labeled by the international community as an aggressor. 
22
23
24
25
The possibility of preemption against China is an option that the United States must, at minimum, consider given fear of a pending war. The question that the United States must answer, and that this MMS hopes to inform, is if a US preemptive strike on a rising China today would be legal, moral, and result in a positive outcome. The United States must honestly and thoroughly discuss its options to avoid simply adding another chapter to a lengthy history of aggressive countries who ultimately failed in their attempts to further their national interests under the guise of "self-defense" from what they argue is an imminent threat.
Many Chinese activities occurring within and outside of China's borders rightfully increase US concern about China's long-term objectives and their impacts to US interests and security. One example is China's desired expansion into the western hemisphere that could enable future potential military objectives in and from the Caribbean. In December 2020, Dr.
Lawrence A. Franklin, the former Iran Desk Officer for Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, warned in his article, "Chinese Military Bases in The Caribbean?" that, "of more concern to US security interests is the ongoing seaport expansion project in the already commercially important port of Kingston, Jamaica, as well as the port at Freeport, Bahamas…China's possible new base of operations 90 miles off the US coast." 
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
In addition to China's outward expansion and its strengthening of ties with US adversaries, China's immense growth in its military capability also causes great concern for the United States. China intends to complete military modernization by 2035 and be a "world-class" fighting force by 2049 that possesses the capabilities equal to the United States and other global militaries. 
34
35
Also concerning for US interests in the Indo-Pacific region is China's continued militarization in the South China Sea. China continues to "plac[e] anti-ship cruise missiles and long-range surface-to-air missiles on outposts in the Spratly Islands, violating a 2015 pledge by Chinese President Xi Jinping that 'China does not intend to pursue militarization' of the Spratly Islands." 
36
The point is, the United States can well be regarded as a welcomed presence in the region and certainly more so than China's offers of economic assistance that clearly speak to a means of control instead of inclusion in an international system. To continue this presence is the issue.
In regard to preemption, the United States could attempt to construct a narrative to try to justify a US preemptive attack on or around China under the guise of self-protection and preservation of the rules-based international order. The narrative might focus on China partnering with dangerous, rogue states like Iran and North Korea that consistently threaten the destruction of the United States. China's own rhetoric in its NDS singles out the United States as its number one "competitor," and China's strong embrace of rogue US adversaries with "death to America" ideologies could take things one step further and strongly signal a Chinese alignment with their professed interests. China's strong partnership with Russia also signals China's active acceptance of Russia's illegal annexation of sovereign Crimean territory that goes against international law; this also alludes to China's disposition to violate or allow a partner nation to violate international law when it benefits Chinese goals. Without the financial backing of China, Russia's ability to break international law, influence US and allied interests, and annex more foreign territory would become limited. Additionally, China, Russia, and North Korea all possess nuclear weapon capabilities that can range US military bases, deployed military personnel, and US civilians living abroad. When nuclear weapons enter the picture, preemption becomes a more urgent question. Although China's more expansionist actions, military growth, partnership choices, cyber warfare, and espionage activities certainly seem to validate the Thucydides' Trap, the United States still cannot execute a preemptive strike on China without answering several questions.
The United States must answer whether these Chinese activities truly justify a US preemptive attack on China by international law. The United States must also figure out how to act preemptively without pulling itself and other countries into a larger, prolonged World War III scenario. Then the United States must decide where to strike to achieve limited objectives to mitigate further conflict with China. This willingness to go to war to limit a war is a hard ask of preemption. Lastly, the United States must ascertain when the right time is to strike given that China's capability and influence are rapidly achieving parity with the United States. Overall, the United States must ask what is gained from a preemptive strike in terms of averting a coming war, initiating a war that is coming anyway, or hoping to fight a limited war in lieu of a global conflagration. No matter the answers to these questions, Allison's fears of an inevitable war were never so clearly tied to the prospect of a preemptive strike.
In order to thoughtfully and appropriately determine an answer to these questions regarding resorting to preemption, the United States must look at the metrics proposed by some of its experts in the field of preemptive war to determine if it would be legally and morally justified. As such, it is worth restating here that for preemptive war to be legal by international standards, it has to be a "response to a threat of attack that is not only overwhelming but also so imminent as to allow no time for deliberation and no choice of means." 44 Additionally, Flynn reminds those who are considering preemptive war that it can only be considered moral when delivering the first strike "preserves one's national integrity and can be thought of as an act of self-defense." 
45
46
47
According to Doyle, "lethality identifies the likely loss of life if the threat is not eliminated… likelihood assesses the probability that the threat will occur…legitimacy covers the traditional just war criteria of proportionality, necessity, and deliberativeness of proposed responses… [and]   legality asks whether the threatening situation is itself produced by legal or illegal actions, and whether the proposed remedy is more or less legal." 
48
49
The last of Doyle's four standards, legality, asks the United States to determine if striking China first would be in compliance with international law. While one might argue that China's militarization of the South China Sea, documented cyber espionage activities towards US and other international entities, and its currency manipulation are illegal and create a threat to US interests, the threat posed to the United States does not qualify as an imminent and overwhelming threat to the survival of the United States. Therefore, after analyzing Doyle's four standards model in relation to the current situation between the United States and China, a US first strike on China does not appear justified by current standards.
Despite this black and white output, perhaps the United States could effectively use Doyle's argument that the international rules for authorizing preemption are too constraining and unrealistic given the current nature of security threats. The United States could appeal to the international community that activities traditionally believed to be below the threshold of war are currently the way that countries today wage war. In this new case, PRC cyber-attacks could be considered an act of war given that China maliciously violates the US cyber sovereignty of the United States and its citizens. After all, Chinese cyber-attacks penetrate the servers of US companies and result in the theft of US intellectual property and personal information. 
50
51
Whether the United States achieves international authorization on these grounds or not, it may still be unwise for the United States to delay its response to Chinese aggression. Harkening back to Flynn's example of the Confederate preemption of the Union during the Civil War, perhaps the United States has no reason to delay if conflict is seen as inevitable. While the vast majority of Chinese competition does fall just below the threshold of war by current standards, waiting for the PRC to achieve parity with the United States, or to surpass the United States altogether, only serves to put the United States in a worsening position to effectively address China should China decide to act later. 
52
Even if the United States chooses to delay a response to China, the United States must develop a concept for preemption in the event China's continued aggressive behavior, military positioning, and/or threatening rhetoric require the United States to take action to defend itself in the future and perhaps near future. In this vein, the United States should develop a whole of government preemptive approach. The United States must make a formal declaration that any attacks on the sovereignty of the United States or its citizens, to include cyber and information operations, are no longer considered below the threshold of war. After all, if countries like China, Russia, and Iran seek to fight the United States and gain significant advantage in this area, it is already a battleground, and China and the United States are already at war. By setting this expectation and defining a hard line publicly, China and others will be forced to rethink their current activities or accept the risk of a now-justified US response. In this way, the threat of a US preemption of China could serve as a strong deterrent.
Informationally, the United States and partner nations must put greater resources to influencing international actors to see China for the unjustified aggressor that it is. While it claims through its national security strategy not to be expansionist and only wanting fairness and peace in a new world order, the truth is quite the opposite. 
53
Chinese "One Belt One Road" (OBOR) initiative serves as a perfect starting point. The OBOR, more recently renamed the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), is China's giant infrastructure project that advertises increased Chinese investment in neighboring countries and increased revenues for all participating countries. If this were done with only honest intentions in mind, the BRI sounds like a great deal for all involved. However, the truth for China is that the BRI serves to expand the economic, political, and military power of China in all participating countries as well as those states on the Chinese periphery. 
54
55
56,
57
Economically, the United States and other world powers who do business with China must hold China accountable. China has a massive population that requires significant annual economic growth to support and achieve what President Xi Xinping has promised them: a prosperous future where China is the rich center of all trade roads. Currently, foreign companies wanting to do business in China have to transfer their proprietary technology, intellectual property, and innovative processes to China in order to gain access to Chinese markets. 
58
59
The United States and allies making smart decisions now is imperative. By enforcing fair and equitable business practices, for which the Chinese are already required to abide by through the World Trade Organization, China will be unable to sustain its current growth rate. A drop in growth rate will create instability within the country of China and put a great deal of pressure on Xi Xinping and the CCP. This instability will also exacerbate the CCP's extreme paranoia towards groups from within its own boarders. In total, this tactic, in addition to informational and diplomatic ventures, could make Xi Xinping and the CCP less confident in their desired future state and more malleable regarding the idea of cooperation and fair competition with world powers instead of Chinese bully tactics.
While military power should be the lever of US national power most cautiously pulled, the US military and other clandestine agencies must immediately work together to draw China's focus back inward through destabilization efforts within China and through the Chinese people themselves. In a February 2021 War on the Rocks article entitled "China's Post-Pandemic Future: Wuhan Wobbly?", Dr. Andrew Scobell, a RAND senior political scientist and Marine Corps University Brend Chair of Nonwestern Strategic Thought who specializes in Chinese political and military affairs, stated that "the greatest irony of the People's Republic…is that what the ruling CCP fears most are the people of China. The CCP is fearful that the people power opposition movements which shook countries and toppled regimes around the world will inspire Chinese crowds to take to the streets. The CCP is preoccupied with a plethora of different groups -disgruntled workers, irate farmers, unhappy veterans, disaffected religious groups, and restive ethnic minorities -each of which has registered dissatisfaction through physical demonstrations and online activism in recent years." 
60
61
62
63
64
As destabilization efforts attack the CCP's foundation within China, the United States and its allies must be prepared to preemptively attack China if it crosses the previously established threshold. Without following through on this threat, the United States will lose immense international credibility. US military options may seem robust, but the goal should be to further back China down without starting World War III. The United States must be the moral and just party in preemptive action. 
65
66
67
68
69
If Chinese behavior heads to war and warrants an act of US kinetic preemption, choosing an isolated target outside of the Chinese mainland appears most effective. For the past decade, China has been illegally building manmade islands off its coast and then has militarized them to push its sphere of control and influence beyond its land borders "in pursuit of its territorial and maritime claims in the South and East China Seas." 
70
As history has unfortunately shown over the last 200 years, preemption rarely remains a limited objective netting a quick conflict. If a US preemption on China follows this same historical pattern, the United States and international community must consider the consequences and risks of a possible large-scale war with China. According to the RAND study, War with China, "[w]ar between the United States and China could be so ruinous for both countries, for East Asia, and for the world that it might seem unthinkable." 
72
73
Still, military parity implies that the longer the United States waits to possibly confront China militarily, the higher the cost and harder the fight will be for the United States against the Chinese military. From an economic perspective, the cost of a larger-scale US-Sino conflict would be substantially bigger for China than the United States in both 2015 and 2025 due to China's significant reliance on bilateral trade with the United States and regional trade in the same area in which the war would most likely take place. 
74
75
76
77
78
Given this probability for significant military and economic loss for both countries if a US-Sino war occurs, the United States and its allies may be best served by using the threat of preemption as a deterrent to help keep conflict with China at a level below the threshold of war.
While the very public threat of US preemption could increase the likelihood of war with China, the public nature of the threat brings significant international attention to Chinese actions and possible US reactions. In effect, putting Chinese behavior under a much larger microscope might prove effective in pressuring China to limit controversial activities that it has been able to do in relative privacy while the world focused on conflict in Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, and Crimea over the past several decades. This additional attention might also make China feel insecure about its now very public behavior and image. With international attention on China and the insecurity this would cause, China could likely decide to retard its aggressive posturing and coercion, and might delay its activities until it believes it has regained its advantage and superior position. 
79
Although an act of preemption does not appear to be in the best interest of the United States currently, Thucydides' Trap, assuming war between the United States and China as inevitable, makes a US-Sino war likely. With tension between the nations in place and liable to escalate at any time, how best to respond to the need to keep things away from war becomes imperative. As previously mentioned in this analysis, a war is not in the interests of either country nor the international community. Therefore, the need to find a way to get clear of this logic of inevitable war and, thus, get clear of having to consider preemption is of paramount importance.
Having shown the lack of value in acting preemptively, the United States must consider how to defuse the looming clash that Thucydides' Trap predicts. There are some options. The United States must figure out how to compete or cooperate better with China below the threshold of war in the informational, diplomatic, and economic elements of national power to achieve its national objectives. As a RAND Corporation research report entitled Understanding the Emerging Era of International Competition states, "[a]n important strain of international relations theory-including classical accounts of alliances and mutual gains, game theoretic examinations of the origins of cooperation, liberal institutionalism, and defensive realismemphasizes the fact that states usually have cooperative or semicooperative routes to achieving their objectives if they choose them, and that such routes often have a better cost-benefit calculus than competitive ones." 
80
China as a responsible international power supports a balance of power in the Pacific that helps contain the negative aspects of China's rise. Such standing in Asia is more than a justification of US global hegemony. A balance of power would include China, give that state a purpose in preserving world order, and recognize it as a world power, if not a superpower. In short, balance of power could work to make China moderate, which would curb the need for war.
As a partner in the Pacific, China would have to work with the United States to "firm up trust and communication in the allied structures to ensure that no state can benefit from aggression." 
81
82
Given the preemption-focused scope of this analysis, many other fascinating aspects of US-Sino tensions still remain for future research. Whether China would respect a balance of power in the Indo-Pacific, whether the United States could more effectively deter or coerce China to cease activities counter to US interests and the international rules-based order, and exploring the implications of nuclear weapons on US-Sino tensions, aside from making preemption even less of a viable option, are all research areas that would add significantly to the discussion. Additionally, a detailed case study comparing the US-USSR Cold War in relation to the current US-Sino situation would certainly contribute to the discussion given perceived parallels and learning points. Perhaps these future research topics hold the key to identifying China's Achilles' heel, or critical vulnerability, to be targeted should China present an imminent and overwhelming threat to the United States in the future.
Until that time, however, a US preemptive attack on China does not appear to be appropriate. While China clearly desires a multipolar world and to compete with the United States as a great power, its current national actions, up to today, have not directly threatened an imminent and overwhelming attack on the United States. China has not endangered US national integrity nor has it put the United States in a position of fear where it felt like it had no time or other recourse to respond to Chinese actions. This view of the limited utility of preemption also means one should not accept Allison's fears of the coming war. China's actions are not as threatening as imagined, nor has the United States not responded. Two great powers are certainly finding their footing in relation to one another, but there is space to defuse tensions and certainly that opening means a very limited need to resort to preemption. This conclusion is good news given the risks of acting preemptively. Now comes the hard work of keeping things short of the act of war to keep the need for preemption as marginal.