# ID: 3cb54c221d3243da8a4798b9b96f6339
# Title: Conventional Preemption: A Needed Lens to Address War With China?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
In regard to preemption, the United States could attempt to construct a narrative to try to justify a US preemptive attack on or around China under the guise of self-protection and preservation of the rules-based international order.
The narrative might focus on China partnering with dangerous, rogue states like Iran and North Korea that consistently threaten the destruction of the United States.
China's own rhetoric in its NDS singles out the United States as its number one "competitor," and China's strong embrace of rogue US adversaries with "death to America" ideologies could take things one step further and strongly signal a Chinese alignment with their professed interests.
China's strong partnership with Russia also signals China's active acceptance of Russia's illegal annexation of sovereign Crimean territory that goes against international law; this also alludes to China's disposition to violate or allow a partner nation to violate international law when it benefits Chinese goals.
Without the financial backing of China, Russia's ability to break international law, influence US and allied interests, and annex more foreign territory would become limited.
Additionally, China, Russia, and North Korea all possess nuclear weapon capabilities that can range US military bases, deployed military personnel, and US civilians living abroad.
When nuclear weapons enter the picture, preemption becomes a more urgent question.
Although China's more expansionist actions, military growth, partnership choices, cyber warfare, and espionage activities certainly seem to validate the Thucydides' Trap, the United States still cannot execute a preemptive strike on China without answering several questions.