# ID: 3cc56751e8e9492497f4a3a46de88ff5
# Title: e (qJ AN ANALYSIS OF THE TACTICAL ORDERS PROCESS
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1990.0
# Fulltext:
tPJtri 0 ( t. th.% ~o. f .1 *nO ~t -d; n( d4. ei c ,e~ ho" , g -se -MIV-. f-(~n~ie t."7~ tot bea~rflO , ch-ip,( . $. j 1.t 4.1the,.n 1 ai r~l*rf he dbt& r,e,3e. A'd (: ele "q A-4 e~~~h Qt fi~ ce'tj Cr , ,Ar. ih, 8.. 3 ~ tq) r' C' Ofhe t., ofet~, QI rit~''atwei. nd , e to -" -9 'O th O de". Io. 0-;O -'e~dq..4rt,% Ser. cc OaemzOjit o( iflmaon^c ope'4tCrns j~
Command and control of combat units is achieved by issuing orders. An order, written or oral, communicates instructions from superior to subordinate. The command and control of forces on the battlefield by means of combat orders is as old as warfare itself.
Combat orders range from a simple "Follow me," shouted by the lowest fire team leader, to the sophisticated approach required to plan and execute the operations of a modern combat division.
Without orders, an army has no direction. Without direction, an army does not fight.
Throughout the history of war, the difficulty of leading large forces in battle has been solved by the Issue of orders and the use of trusted subordinate commanders to see the battlefield beyond the visual limits of the overall commander. Faced with great uncertainty and high risk, the commander's role is to orchestrate future events to his own advantage, The commander that can plan quickly and accurately, the commander that can see the essential center of the tactical problem and guide his forces in unison to achieve his objective, usually wins.
Military planning, consequently, is an attempt to arrange the future to develop advantages over th. enemy. These advantages, however, can rarely be maintained indefinitely. Their value is relative to the enemy's situation and determined by the commander's ability to benefit from them In time. Time is a common denominator of military operations. Tactics really involves the commander's ability to make decisive decisions in time. The purpose of the orders process, the commander's staff, and C 3 1 (Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence)   hardware Is to support the commander's ability to make decisions
In time for those decisions to be decisive.
War Is a race to gain a time advantage over the enemy. The commander must seize every time-saving expedient and use this "saved" time to his advantage. Time Is gained by thinking and acting faster than your opponent. Time Is gained by making clear, reasonably correct decisions quickly. Correct decisions require accurate Information concerning enemy and friendly capabilities.
Accurate Information can allow a commander to move with a higher degree of certainty and can permit him to out-maneuver his opponent in time and space.
Accurate information, however, is the product of certainty over time. Useful combat information is worthless if it is not discovered in time to act upon the information. The commander then faces a dilemma; the fight between the desire for certainty and the need to act quickly. General George Patton pointed out this dilemma when he said: *There is a right time to make every decision. Trying to select the right time is the most important factor for every decision. It is a mistake to make the decision too early, and it is a mistake to make the decision too late...w 
2
The United States Army does not employ efrective procedures for time-critical tactical planning. The specific products of operations orders have not been established, particularly in regards to available planning time. The process for planning hasty and deliberate attacks, for instance, varies only In depth, not In product. Tactical planners often attempt too much In too Ilittle time because the process does not differentiate planning products by available planning time. "The differences lie In the amount of planning, coordination, and preparation prior to execution --In other words, how thoroughly the principles can be applled, not whether they apply.* 
4
The process of preparing, Issuing and supervising combat orders forms a cycle that Is universal to all military operations. I have named this cycle the "Tactical Orders Process." The elements of the process were derived from current U.S. Military literature and represent an AirLand Battle approach to tactical decision making.
This study examines the effectiveness of the tactical orders process of the German Army, the Soviet Army and the United States Army. The research focuses on the tactical orders process at division level and below. The tactical orders process of each army Is measured against the planning tenets of the 1986 version of U.S. Army Field Manual 100-5, OQQcarQns. This study compares the orders processes of the Wehrmacht, Soviet, and American armies and highlights effective techniques and procedures for executing tactical planning to support the conduct of AirLand Battle.
The Wehrmacht, renown for its application of maneuver warfare, Is studied first, The Soviet method of "Troop Control" Is analyzed next to study the application of "a scientific approach" in the execution of the Tactical Orders Process. Finally, the orders The performance of units at the NTC, as compared to the requirements of the AirLtand Battle doctrine, will provide the means for analyzing the U.S. Army's tactical orders process effectiveness. To help the reader visualize how each orders process Is conducted, a tactical orders process example will be developed for each army. Lastly, a summary will follow at the end of each chapter.
The purpose of this study Is to analyze current U.S. tactical orders process against the processes used by the Wehrmacht and the Soviet Army. The goal of the study is to determine what changes In the U.S. Army's tactical orders process are needed for the U.S. Army to execute AirLand Battle doctrine.
The tactical level of war Is defined as the "art by which corps and smaller unit commanders translate potential combat power into victorious battles and engagements." 
5
The tactical orders process, therefore, Is defined as the process by which a tactical level commander receives or deduces the mission, develops the tactical situation, prepares courses of action, makes a decision, Issues an order, executes his plan and adjusts to new situations as rev~ured In order to accomplish the mission. It includes the techniques by which orders and instructions are organized, packaged, sequenced, and transmitted from commanders to subordinates, More than a mere decisionmaking process, the "tactical orders process" involves the method, format, and the transmission of the intent of the order. The tactical orders process is a continuing process with the defeat of the enemy force as Its main goal. The tactical orders process does not end with combat, but continues throughout and after the fight.
The tactical orders process Is an -Important element of combat power. "Whoever can make decisions faster gains a tremendous, often decisive, advantage. Decision making thus becomes a time-competitive process...." 6 The process by which orders are prepared and transmitted, therefore, can become an important combat multiplier. This study recommends that U.S. tactical planners adopt some of the techniques employed by the Wehrmacht in World War II, and some of the techniques of the Soviet Army, to optimize our ability to execute AirLand Battle doctrine and a maneuver style of warfighting. Specifically, the study recommends changes to the 5 paragraph field order to develop an AirLand Battle field order format, a simplified tactical orders process model as a procedure for decision-making, and the development of time sensitive schemes for operation orders.
The U.S. Army's orders process has evolved over the years into a laborious, paper-Intensive drill. Has the U.S. Army adopted techniques that will aid or hinder the ability to wage maneuver warfare under the doctrine of AirLand Battle? What does a maneuver-oriented, AirLand Battle approach to the tactical orders process consist of? The next chapter analyzes the differences in the two opposing styles of warfare, *Attrition" verses "Maneuver" and determines how they relate to the style of issuing orders. The style of warfare that an army adopts determines Its approach to the planning and execution of combat orders. The choice of style affects the method of command and control. The method of command Is often critical to success. "Without a striking a correct balance between centralization and decentralization, discipline and initiative, authority and individual responsibilIty, It Is Impossible for any human organization -let alone a military one, operating as it does in an environments where disorder and confusion are endemic -to function or, indeed, exist, 
2
The attrition style of warfare offers victory over time by focussing on the destruction of the enemy's forces. Attrition deals with destruction over time. Attrition warfare reduces the enemy through the application superior firepower. "Attrition warfare emphasizes the material aspects of war. It dehumanizes war to a mathematical equation. An attritlonlst sees the enemy as targets to be engaged and destroyed systematically." 3
The American Army has emphasized attrition warfare in most of its wars. Both World Wars were won by the overpowering superiority of American firepower, numbers, and technology. The stalemate in Korea was "guaranteed" by this same superiority.
During the Vietnam War, the strategy of attrition reached its nadir as the American doctrine for war. Combined with the zealous belief in the killing power of new technology, American commanders executed a military strategy of overwhelming firepower against the North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong. "It was a strategy that was based on the attrition of the enemy through a prolonged defense and made no allowance for decisive offensive action." 4 In spite of the awesome support of the latest, most devastating firepower that America could muster, the strategy failed. America became exhausted and lost the will to carry on a war of attrition for limited objectives. The enemy gained strength, and America lost the war.
To wIn by attrition one must kIll the enemy until one has more force left than his opponent. In essence, one side outlasts the other. The "addict of attrition advances cautiously and tidily on a broad front to seize another piece of ground which directly threatens some vital Interest of the erstwhile aggressor. This process Is repeated until one side has gained overwhelming strength (Second World War) or becomes exhausted (First World   War)." 5 This philosophy Is described at Its worst by the loss of over 200,000 British soldiers during the sixteen-day battle of the Somme In 1918. In Vietnam It was represented by the Indecisive commitment of an army dedicated to the pol Icy of "body-count."
The bloody elght-year war between Iran and Iraq is a frightening example of "high tech" attrition warfare In modern times.
The attrition approach to war attempts to translate war into a science and focuses on efficiency. The emphasis Is on scientific management In the form of detailed planning, management of resources and active centralized control. Only through detailed planning can the firepower of a large mass be synchronized In time, space and purpose.
The attritionist deploys a huge army in order to overpower the enemy. Overwhelming numbers require less military skill to accomplish tactical and operational objectives. Attrition oriented armies often consist of less trained but more numerous combat units. Skill Is replaced by mathematics, maneuver is replaced by firepower. This lower level of training drives the requirement for centralized control and centralized planning.
Control becomes the predominate command principle in attrition warfare. Control Is achieved by centralized planning and centralized, active control over each piece of the combat equation.
Centralized planning moves the mass In the assigned direction.
Centralized, active control Insures that massive firepower Is used efficiently. Victory will be declared when the enemy Is annlhilated. The end can be mathematically determined by an ever Increasing count of destroyed enemy personnel, vehicles and equipment.
Maneuver warfare focuses on defeating the enemy by mak Ing the enemy Incapable of fighting. Maneuver warfare Is based on a "desire to circumvent a problem and attack It from a position of advantage rather than straight on." 6 Maneuver warfare minimizes the mere counting of killing systems and emphasizes the Intangible, human factors; the Intangible factors of leadership, organization, cohesion and morale. The maneuver approach relies more on speed and surprise as multipliers of combat power. This approach is best described by Sir B. H. Liddell Hart's concept of the "Indirect approach." Using the Indirect approach the enemy Is attacked along the "line of least expectation and least resistance, resulting in the psychological dislocation of the enemy." 
7
Maneuver warfare is a thinking activity; an art, based on scientific foundations. *Maneuver theory draws its power mainly from opportunism -the calculated risk, and the exploitation both of chance circumstances and (to borrow a tennis term) of "forced and unforced errors" by the opposition; still more on winning the battle of wills by surprise or, failing this, by speed and aptness of response. " 8   In the attack, maneuver warfare bases movement on active reconnaissance. Often called "reconnaissance-pull" operations, the maneuver-oriented commander supports success by driving his forces Into areas that reconnaissance proves Is weakly defended.
In the defense, maneuver warfare bases the defense on the enemy, and seeks to defeat (rather than destroy) the enemy by active measures such as counterattack, the destruction of the enemy's command and control, or the disruption of his combat support, or combat service support. Firepower Is still vital to maneuver warfare, It Is merely applied to a different purpose. In maneuver warfare, firepower Is used to suppress the enemy with fire In order to make maneuver possible. 9
To accomplish this requires an effective, decentralized decision making process that expects subordinate commanders to act within the higher commander's intent, without slowing the decision process down by waiting for instructions. Subordinate commanders must take advantage of fleeting opportunities as they occur. Maneuver warfare, therefore, places a high priority on the leader's ability to sense the situation, appraise it correctly and act faster than his opponent. Command, rather than control, becomes the predominant command principle in maneuver warfare.
The orders process practiced by armies that attempt to employ maneuver warfare must address these needs.
Two competing control philosophies have emerged from the "Attrition" and "Maneuver" styles of war. These concepts are the "detailed orders tactics" approach (centralized control), and the system of "mission tactics" (decentralized control).
"Detailed orders tactics" is an orders-intensive approach to insure the continuous active control of subordinate units during combat. Active control requires technology and rigid organization.
The orders-intensive system constantly updates the commander on the situation in order to assist him in making battlefield decisions. These decisions are based upon a detailed plan that covers the most likely course of action and enemy reaction.
Proponents of this theory visualize a technological solution to command and control, with heavy emphasis on the ability to control elements throughout the battle. The subordinate's understanding is explicit, leaving nothing implied.
The other system, "mission tactics," involves indirect control and Implicit understanding, "Mission tactics" concedes that the tactical battlefield is now too confusing to centrally manage and that the commander must direct his operations through guidance rather than active control. He must trust his subordinates to execute their missions according to his intent.
Rather than trying to follow the letter of the tactical plan, subordinates are trained to follow the goals of the commander and make their own decisions at the point of action. The emphasis is on command. The subordinate's understanding is implicit; implied, rather than expressly stated.
Mission tactics are the preferred method of waging maneuver warfare. This is accomplished largely by verbal orders, Issued by the senior commander, overlooking the terrain where the battle will be fought. Subordinates are expected to make decisions within the guidelines established by the commander's intent. When decisions are made at the point of execution, advantage can be taken of battle opportunities as they occur, without loss of time, "Time Is always critical and mission type orders save time. The command style and staff functioning that contribute most to maneuver warfare is characterized by the application of "mission orders." 
1 0
The The CGSC Quarterly.Vol XV, 1935, had the following Information concerning mission tactics:
In the past we have often used what may be called mission tactics and mission orders. Under this system, Instructions and orders are not prescribed In minute detail; the reason being that the commander on the ground Is the only person who can correctly judge existing conditions and take the proper action when a change occurs in the situation. In addition to the tactical reason there is a strong psychological reason for such tactics and orders. The commander who Is given a mission and made responsible for results will normally accomplish more because he can act In accordance with his own Individuality. 12
The key to understanding the Tactical Orders Process is an understanding of the terms command and control. These terms are often used Interchangeably. Their meanings, with regard to the tactical orders process, are very distinct. This difference is important and cuts to the heart of the tactical orders process issue. For an army to be successful the philosophy of command must support the way that it intends to fight.
Command and control is defined by U.S. Army Field Manual I 01-5-1, October 1985, as:
"the exercise of command that is the process through which the activities of military forces are directed, coordinated, and controlled to accomplish the mission. This process encompasses the personnel, equipment, communications, facilities, and procedures necessary to The planning function of the leader Is vital. Through his plan the leader transmits his Intent to accomplish the unit's mission.
AlrLand Battle doctrine recognizes that the "most essential element of combat power is competent and confident leadership." 20 The leader establishes the dynamics of combat power through maneuver, firepower, protection and leadership. He unleashes this potential through his tactical plan.
To bring order out of chaos, maneuver warfare proposes that you try to adapt to the environment rather than to try to control it. War in the 1990's and beyond will be more intense, chaotic and destructive than ever before. AirLand Battle doctrine recognizes this lethal and confusing environment by decentralizing control and emphasizing independent action. Implicit versus explicit understanding Is expected. To accomplish this takes the kind of tactical planning that will enhance initiative, agility, depth and synchronization. The tactical orders process for AirLand Battle must, therefore, aid the leader in thinking and acting faster than the enemy.
The tactical orders process represents a dynamic pattern of  "In World War II, those who served in armored divisions -and probably in other units as well --learned that mission-type orders were a requirement if the most was to be obtained from a command....As the battle becomes more complex and unpredictable, responslblIties must be more and more decentralized. Thus mission-type orders often will be used at all echelons of command and probably will be the rule at the division and higher levels. This will require all commanders to exercise Initiative, resourcefulness, and Imagination --operating with relative freedom of action.
In our tactical forces we have built-in organizational flexibility. We must recognize this and capitalize on It in our orders. To get maximum combat power, we must have plans flexible enough to meet rapidly changing situations. But careful planning Is not enough; this must be coupled with the readiness to change and adapt to situations as they are, not as they were exoected to be, Basically a mission type order needs to cover only three Important things:
1) It should clearly state what the commander Issuing the order wants to have accomplished.
2) It should point out the limiting or control factors that must be observed for coordinating purposes.
The Need for a Standardized Tactical Orders
The command and control system must also stress standardized training In operations and staff practices to assure mutual understanding between leaders and units.  
The purpose of this process is to quickly focus the energy of the tactical planners to develop a correct tactical decision and implement that decision In the shortest possible time. The goal of the process is a synchronized operation that secures the commaniders intent. An improvement of the "decision Making Process" was published in 1989 In Student Text 100-9, TheC ommand Estimate. by the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas and is listed in Figure 
3-3
Recognize the problem, 2. Gather facts and make assumptions to determine the scope of and solution to the problem, 3. Develop possible solutions, 4. Analyze and compare possible solutions, 5.
Select the best solution available, and 6. Implement the problem solution." 
6
In a standardized, systematic process. Command, control, communications and intelligence are essential functions of the commander. Any process that assists the commander in these functions, and exploits the random nature of modern combat, can gain a time advantage over the opponent.
Such a system must also emphasize the traditional strengths of American fighting units, the American way of war, and the American character. Here, Major Orr stresses the adoption of what we now know as AirLand Battle when he says: analysis of combat in which inferior forces manage to win in spite of the odds against them suggest that ingenuity, initiative, and esprit de corps have been keys in most of these cases. These are qualities Americans like to identify as national strengths, and the military command style most appropriate for America should be designed to capitalize upon these strengths. A hierarchal control style seems to stifle all three characteristics, 12
The U. S. Army desperately needs a process to assist commanders In the procedures of issuing effective combat orders.
The contusion concerning the format and procedures of the current military decision making process drives the requirement for a simplified, standard orders process that can provide a commander and start a system to Issue quick and effective orders. This   What is more extraordinary is the fact that the German Army achieved these victories "in the teeth of considerable numerical odds, and, as often as not, inadequate logistic preparations." 4
Fighting virtually the entire world on multiple fronts, 'aided" by unreliable allies, ceaselessly hammered day and night from the air, blockaded by sea, and forced to fight under the irrational leadership of one all-knowing "Fuhrer," the German Army continued to fight right up to the final Battle of Berlin in May, 1945.   Although Germany lost the war, the Wehrmacht did not run. "it did not disintegrate. It did not frag its officers. Instead it doggedly fought on.... It fought on for years after the last hope for victory had gone....Yet for all of this, its units, even when down to 20 percent of their original size, continued to exist and to resist -an unrivaled achievement for any army." 
5
The decision arises from the mission and the situation. Should the mission no longer suffice as the fundamental of conduct or is changed by events, the decision must take these considerations into account. He who changes his mission or does not execute the one given must report his actions at once and assumes all responsibility for the consequences. He must always keep in mind the whole situation .... However, in the vicissitudes of war an inflexible maintenance of the original decision may lead to great mistakes. Timely recognition of the conditions and the time which call for a new decision is an attribute of the art of leadership.
The commander must permit freedom of action to his subordinates insofar that this does not endanger the whole scheme....
The more pressing the situation, the shorter the order. Where circumstances permit, oral orders are given In accordance with the terrain, not the map. On the front lines and with the lower commanders this is particularly so.
73. An order should contain everything a subordinate must know to carry out his assignment independently, and only that. Accordingly, an order must be brief and clear, definite and complete, tailored to the understanding of the recipient and, under certain circumstances, to his nature. The person issuing it should never neglect to put himself in the shoes of the recipient.
76. Above all, orders are to avoid going Into detail when changes In the situation cannot be excluded by 55 the time they are carried out....
In so far as the conditions permit, it is often best for the commander to clarify his Intentions to his subordinates by word of mouth and discussion. 7
Operating under a mission-oriented command system that embraced mission tactics as the guiding principle of tactical success, the Wehrmracht's tactical orders process was verbal, streamlined and flexible.
The goal was to designate the mission and leave the details in the hands of able, subordinate leaders. With this philosophy, the The speed with which the enemy exploited his penetration of the French front, his willingness to accept risks to further his aim, and his exploitation of every success to the uttermost limits emphasized, even more fully than in the campaigns of the past, the advantage which accrues to the commander who knows how best to use time and to make time his servant and not his master. 8
The Wehrmacht Operations Order A typical German Operations order, as shown in Manual For #4A to rcaftissamce, the detailed pigs mostiss the oeemq isfermatioa desired, the grow to be receassitared sod hq whem sod vhes. the time sad plate where rsltima reports are to be seat, #A-the sequosce of racesselssenactoerding to their arlosc. As to ius, vbasuc omit with IAl-eto i atteshment wr detehmats ist fulfil is csri9 v1-1mi. Insrespect to supplip sod sweesutlei*, the dmfi ite tumstiesiag of species ia relaftles to the combat slemoat spefied. A regards commusicatless. the axis of cummicallem ler the eal t publishing the order Is I Mi@l-tod. sod special lmutruetis. *nth t~o hs pertaiai al to the use of reAis or existing commertial sets are isciided. As for commeai peot, the locatis of the csmmsoders headquarters sad the ti me when it sposs or closes, et., are gives. pp.23-26.
The amount of detail of the operations order and the exact format was left to the discretion of the commander issuing the order. The difference in detail was a matter of time and confidence. Time was saved by emphasizing the intent of the orders rather than specifying how things were planned to occur.
"Orders must convince the troops even without explanations. For them to to this, prior discussions with subordinates or discussions before execution of the order are indispensable." 
12
Subordinates were expected to explain their instructions to their commanders to insure understanding. A "brief back" technique was employed to give the subordinate leader every opportunity to "...clear up any doubts he may have had and, having acquired an idea of the general situation, he will be able to act according to the intentions of the commanding officer if the situation should change." 
13
Maximum use was made of warning orders to give the troops plenty of time to prepare for combat and to Initiate movement. Parallel planning techniques, where each subordinate echelon of command began planning as soon as the warning order was received, was normal procedure. Often, a written order was only prepared after the operation was conducted in order to have a record for the units official history.
The level of detail required in the combat order was determined by the level of proficiency of the leaders and troops.
Well trained units with experienced commanders needed few instructions. They were expected to think and accomplish the mission. "The order tells its recipient to what extent he and the troops under him are to participate in the execution of the Intentions of the higher headquarters." 14 For these types of units, an identification of their mission and the higher commander's intent was all that was needed. For poorl/ trained units with mediocre leadership, more detail was required. 15
The result was an orders process that achieved a remarkably short decision cycle. In Russia, during World War I1, German division commanders were able to receive orders at 2200 and issue their own orders to the regiments by 2400. In effect, the Germans operated on a 2 hour, division-echelon, decision cycle. 'Division, corps, and army staffs were small and contained few decision-makers. The decision process was usually very fast and not characterized by exhaustive details and analyses by the staff and specialists. This was accompanied, however, by very competent and detailed ongoing staff work and superb staff planning and execution once decisions had been made." 
1 6
1311 Rnngei; General, In mobile operations in maintaining a fast tempo, how does one...welI, you talked a little bit about command and control, but more importantly, what are the coordination mechanisms that the staff and commander have to resolve to keep the Schwerpunkt going In the direction and to the objectives that you want? Can you sort of just generalize about those kinds of control mechanisms? yon Me llenthlin You know, In a tank division there are no written orders. There are only verbal orders and the commander of the division can have assistant officers with radio connection to him at the place of the various regiments which inform him about movement. This keeps him Informed, by radio.
Pierre Sprey I would like to add a question to that. What would be your Impression of the effect on operations and the effect on the speed of your divisions and the mobility of your divisions if you had to transmit all your orders by teletype ---perhaps via a computer.
yon Mellenthn Forget about it. 17 The advance guard commander, a Lieutenant Zobel, Immediately started planning for his new mission.
Zobel returned to his unit, assembled his platoon leaders, first sergeant, and maintenance support chief, and briefed them.
He Indicated the march route, which they copied on their maps, and ordered the ranking platoon leader to command the column as far as Village X while he accompanied the task force commander to the 188th Infantry Regiment. Zobel arranged for hot coffee to be served to his troops at 2130 (9:30 P.M.). !,o come to rely on some imaginary increment of time as necessary to execute a mission properly would subtly inject a degree of doubt, if that time did not materialize, into the minds of the leaders before the operation ever commenced. That could create dangerous reservations among the leaders and led before battle was joined. The men and unit must simply improvise and conduct the operation to the best of their capabilities under the prevailing conditions." 20
The Wehrmacht did not require a ten-page operations order at the task force level. In fact, the task force commander gave his 12 Ibid., p. 12.
13 Ibid., pp. 13-14.
14 Ibid., p. 26.
15 Ibid., p. 26. Page 26 of "Manual" highlights this point: "if the one who is to carry out the order is a factor In a plan strictly organized as to time, place and procedure, the order must itself be strictly organized and must contain all necessary details. This form of order Is also necessary if the subordinates are insufficiently trained. If, however, the commander believes his subordinates are capable of completing a mission themselves, because they have the necessary training, experience and fighting qualities, he will content himself with stating the purpose and objective of his order. Further details of the execution can be limited to the elements absolutely necessary for coordinating activities of adjacent, supporting or supported troops with respect to time and place. This last mentioned form of giving orders, the assignment of a mission, with latitude being given as to the execution, will Induce all commanders and combatants to think. It will Increase their self-confidence and their sense of responsibility and, In case of a sudden change In the situation, it will Insure that the spearheads act according to the intentions of the commander. On the other hand, forces accustomed to waiting for an order, or who need an order for each action, will simply freeze to the point of Inaction unless they receive such an order." p. 26.
The Soviet Approach
The most important requirement placed on the decision Is for scientific soundness, i.e., Its applicability to the existing and expected situation, the assigned mission, the senior commander's concept of the battle, and the laws and principles for conducting combat operations as established In
There is little doubt that Soviets put primary emphasis on their military. In fact, the Soviet Union has often been called a Third World nation with a First World military. The Soviet tactical orders process, likewise, has received unprecedented attention and study. The product of a rigidly structured and bureaucratic society, the tactical orders process of the Soviet 'The lower command echelons (echelons below division level) of the Russian Army, and for the most part also the Intermediate echelons (generally division level), remained for a long period Inflexible and Indecisive, avoiding all personal responsibility. The rigid pattern of training and a too strict discipline so narrowly confined the lower command within a framework of existing regulations that the result was lethargy. Spirited application to a task, born of the decision of an Individual, was a rarity. Russian elements that had broken through German lines could remain for days behind the front without recognizing their favorable position and taking advantage of it. The Russian small unit commander's fear of doing something wrong and being called to account for It was greater than the urge to take advantage of a situation.' 5
With the destruction of one field army after another, the Red Army was desperately short of trained, competent leaders.
Without trained leadership, the techniques of the tactical orders process were poorly understood and executed at the tactical level.
Blind obedience to the letter of the order was the norm. Failure at the front was followed by dismissal, execution or assignment to one of the suicidal penal battalIons.  
According to Tactics. the commander's ability to develop a battle plan with a correct solution is the critical element of Troop Control. The "correct' plan, or a variant of the plan, must be strictly adhered to. Tactics goes on to say: "The tactical art of a commander manifests Itself In his adoption of an offensive battle plan which ensures correct selection of the direction of the main strike and of the means of routing the enemy, achieving surprise In the attack, dependably suppressing the enemy's fire weapons with fire, maintaining continual superiority over the enemy in the decisive sector, maneuvering fire and resources flexibly and competently, forestalling the enemy In augmenting the effort, and dividing, surrounding and annihilating his forces In detail. An original concept or a bold maneuver unexpected by the enemy can double or triple the power of the weapons and the combat capabilities of the subunits, while mistakes and stereotypical tactics can neutralize the efforts of many people. Under all circumstances the battle plan that is adopted must be thoroughly justif ied. The I st Battalion, 18th Tank Regiment, which was executing a night march in column with the regiment's main forces, is ordered to concentrate in a forest "forming up place" (assembly area) by 0500 (5:00 AM.), 6 July. At the halt the battalion commander issues the following instructions:
1) The battalion is to move to the forest "forming up place" and camouflage, establish air and chemical/radiation observation posts and set up field defenses. Camp fires and cutting down trees are forbidden.
Each company Is to establish one platoon ready to fire antiaircraft machine guns against air targets.
2) After setting up security and camouflaging, "level one" technical maintenance is to be conducted on all vehicles.
Breakfast Is at 0730 (7:30 AM.). 
"The effect of this Military Doctrine on the Soviet Armed Forces is often misunderstood in the West. Doctrine Is widely viewed as a rigid and restricting set of regulations which destroy initiative and create a stereotyped commander totally unable to think for himself. Many Western armies, In contrast, pride themselves on the ability of their commanders to display Initiative and Inventiveness, to be versatile, and to Introduce their own Ideas Into their style of command.... The Russians do not see It this way. They deride the British and American reliance in war on what they term scathingly "native wit'. This Is valuable In its place, say the Russians, but not as a substitute for a well thought out plan. The Soviets consider their Military Doctrin, to be one of their greatest assets. It is the concentration and distillation of military wisdom and experience and Is constantly being refined, amended and Improved by experiment, exercise and reevaluation.
To battle drills --movement planning, regrouping and movement orders,: "R" (reconnaissance) groups, 0" (orders) groups, etc.
Four or five weeks ago I was studying a series of articles in Voewnyl Vestal)k (their Military Herald, a monthly professional journal aimed at junior and middle-piece officers, and perhaps senior NCOs). These articles, from the "all-arms battle" series, were mostly headed something like "the speedy attack," and most singled out a battalion or a regimental headquarters for praise. I was flabbergasted to find times form receipt of mission to H-hour of between sixteen and twenty-two hours for a straightforward battalion attack. At that speed anybody can be dead clever and get their beauty sleep Into the bargain. I have not yet unraveled this mystery, but, while I am the last person to decry the opposition, my research has led me to suspect that all the Soviet emphasis on speed and tempo Is a shade suspect by German or Israeli standards." The reputation of the American Army Is one of overwhelming firepower and mass. This philosophy can be traced to three very influential concepts; the institution of a "management philosophy," a historical belief in "attrition," and the tradition of "detailed orders tactics." For a detailed analysis of these factors see Annex C -The Development of the American Tactical Orders Process.
As explained in Chapter 2, AirLand Battle is the tactical and operational doctrine of the United States Army. "The doctrine encourages an offensive spirit In all operations, espouses no standard organ12ation for defense, stresses the use of mission orders and the importance of initiative in small units, and emphasizes the human dimensions of combat." 5
After a careful study of military history, especially the successes of the Wehrmacht and the Israeli Army, the authors of FM 100-5 were convinced that the United States must adopt maneuver warfare. *The key principles ofthe AirLand Battle doctrine are: the use of the indirect approach; maintenance of initiative through speed and violence; flexibility and reliance on the initiative of junior leaders; clear aefinition of objectives, concepts of operations, and the main effort; and attack of the enemy in depth. Wherever possible, the enemy will be defeated by destruction of critical facilities rather than through overall attrition.* 6
Two Important constraints guided the development of AirLand Battle doctrine. The first was that "war was fought by people and not by machines. Further, people would behave as people have always behaved throughout the history ot battle. This constraint resulted In the Important realization that optimizing weapons effectiveness does not always optimize the effectiveness of 
The situation paragraph describes in detail both the enemy and friendly situations. The enemy situation Is explained by the Intelligence officer as outlined In the S2/62's Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield Process (IPB). In the Friendly Forces section of Paragraph I, the mission of the units on the flanks, to the front (if any), any supporting or reinforcing units, and the mission of the next higher headquarters Is explained.
Attachments/Detachments that are new to the task organization are
Instructions can be covered In unit Standing Operating Procedures.
This paragraph contains all the Information necessary for subordinate units to coordinate their resupply, recovery of equipment and evacuation of wounded and prisoners. The service support paragraph should be supported with a matrix or overlay that specifies exact location of logistical rally points and supply routes. As with the concept of the operation, alternate plans should be prepared to support the force In case the basic plan Is changed by events.
The final paragraph of the operations order Is divided Into two parts. 
The The task force had been In the desert, fighting the OPFOR for the past ten days. They had lost some previous battles and were eager for a "win."
The task force's new mission was a movement to contact, an operation The task force had won, but it was a Pyrrhic victory. Total losses were 
The United States Army has historically conducted attrition warfare employing detailed orders tactics. The U.S. Army Tactical Orders Process has been typified by detal led orders that attempt to foresee every eventuality and plan for every contingency. This traditional process has facilitated the employment of firepower but does not support the demands of maneuver warfare.
"The conditions of combat on the next battlefield will be unforgiving of errors and will demand great skill, Imagination, and flexibility of leaders. 
"2 1
The United States Army adopted Airland Battle, however, without changing the traditional attrition-based detailed orders tactics techniques for preparing and issuing orders. The application of detailed orders tactics does not meet the requirements of AIrL.and Battle. The authors of 
The analysis of the Wehrmacht, the Soviet Army, and the United States Army clearly defines the warfIghting styles of each army. Both the Wehrmacht's and the Soviet Army's doctrinal goals were to embrace a warf ighting strategy based upon maneuver. To accomplish this these armies approached maneuver warfare from opposite sides of the Orders Continuum spectrum.
Adopting a particular war style has Important Implications.
It sets one's capabilities. The Wehrmacht adopted 'mission tactics" and earned an Impressive reputation at executing maneuver warfare at the tactical level. Their successors, the German Bundeswehr, have followed In this tradition. The Soviets, on the other hand, have adopted a 'detailed orders tactics" approach to execute maneuver warfare. The United States Army has historically embraced the attrition style of warfighting, but has recently. adopted "AirLand Battle," the maneuver oriented war fighting style proposed by Field manual 100-5, g£ion.
The relative placement of each of these armies Is shown In 
In the Wehrmacht's case, the implicit understanding that was developed through the officer education process suited the decentralized "mission tactics" approach to maneuver warfare. The implicit understanding and the requirement for decisive action was a perfect compliment to the Wehrmacht's style of warftighting. Emphasizing initiative, Independent decisions, decisive action, and the subordinate's duty to disobey orders when the situation demanded, the Wehrmacht Increased its fighting capability to a remarkable degree.
In the Soviet Army's case, the "detailed orders" approach to maneuver warfare Is the cornerstone of their system of "Troop 
The Wehrmacht gained an appreciable time advantage over their opponents In most of their tactical engagements by quick decision making and the use of oral operations orders. Decisions were usually made by the commander and his deputy or chief of staff. Committee briefings, long situation analysis and inordinate detail did not generally occur. The use of mission orders and oral operation order techniques were standard practice in the Wehrmacht and was a critical element in their tactical flexibility.
The Soviet Army, on the other hand, attempts to gain a time advantage over their opponents with scientific precision. Soviet orders minimize words and emphasize graphics, sketches, and diagrams, With the use of *order battle drills," standardized formatted orders and procedures, and a wide variety of both manual and electronic decision aids, the Soviets can plan and execute combat orders with remarkable speed. Whether all Soviet units can meet the high standards set by their training manuals remains to be seen. The fact remains that the Soviets believe that their time standards are realistic and achievable.  Execution. The specifics of these criteria are defined below:
1. Situation Development -This step involves the receipt of a mission from a higher commander or the deduction of a mission by the force commander. It includes issuing warning orders, the communication of the commander's intent and the processing of significant tactical information relevant to the accomplishment of the mission.
2. Course of Action Development -This step involves the development of several courses of action, guided by the commander's intent that can accomplish the mission.
The commander, based on the best presentation of the available information, decides on a course of action.
4 Execution Planning -This step encompasses the preparation of the order and the Issue of the order.
5. Execute -The commander, aided by his staff, supervises the execution of the mission and Issues fragmentary orders and orders the execution of branch plans as determined by his judgment of the situation.  The AirLand Battle Combat Order
Information processing changes are needed to speed up the orders process to successfully conduct AirLand Battle at the tactical level. Based upon the study of the Wehrmacht and Soviet tactical orders process, the formats for the Warning Order and Operation Order were altered. The revised Warning Order consists of two parts; a time plan, and the warning order. The format for the Warning Order is shown in   Furthermore, the commander will more than likely position himself near the main effort in order to take advantage of the opportunity for forward command at the critical moment.
"Friction' changes most plans at the sound of the first gunshot. The tactical planner must take into account the chaos that will be the Inevitable result of combat. The mission-type operation order develops alternate plans that permit the plan to be changed when more information on the enemy becomes available.
These plans are outlintd in the concept of the operation. In this manner, the plan focuses on the enemy. The commander does not attempt to force his plan to be successful, regardless of the enemy situatior Instead he keys his plan on the enemy and develops flexible contingency plans that can be executed on-order when the enemy situation becomes clearer. The tactical planner will produce two, three or four possible options for execution for each plan. 
One method that was discovered In studying the Soviet tactical orders process was their use graphic methods to transmit Ideas quickly. The Soviets employ a great amount of Information
In their tactical orders process with pictures, graphics and AirLand Battle Operations Orders For orders  Clarke, the hero of the Battle of the Bulge, employed mission orders throughout his long service In the U.S. Army:
"In World War II, those who served In armored divisions --and probably In other units as well -learned that mission-type orders were a requirement If the most was to be obtained from a command....As the battle becomes more complex and unpredictable, responsibilities must be more and more decentralized. Thus mission-type orders often will be used at all echelons of command and probably will be the rule at the division and higher levels. This will require all commanders to exercise Initiative, resourcefulness, and Imagination --operating with relative freedom of action.
In our tactical forces we have built-In organizational flexibility. We must recognize this and capitalize on It In our orders. To get maximum combat power, we must have plans flexible enough to meet rapidly changing situations. But careful planning Is not enough; this must be coupled with the readiness to change and adapt to situations as tefy. are-not as they were exected tob Basically a mission-type order needs to cover only three Important things:
1
Issuing the order wants to have accomplished.
2) It should point out the limiting or control factors that must be observed for coordinating purposes.
3) It should delineate the resources made available to the subordinate commander and the support which he can expect or count on form sources outside his command. 4
The mission-type order outlines a format that emphasizes mission tactics" and the Initiative of junior leaders to execute the commander's Intent. It can provide an important element in the search for the "superior command and control" 5 required of AirLand Battle. In most cases, the mission-type order should be Issued orally, from brigade level down, to preclude unnecessary time delays. An order issued by the commander, on the battlefield is worth ten perfect orders, mimeographed in quantity, but issued This study developed the concept of the "AIrLand Battle tactical orders process" and analyzed therequirements of this system to the tactical orders processes of the Wehrmacht, the Soviet Army, and the United States Army. It developed a conceptual way of looking at tactical orders systems, the "detailed orders tactics" approach and the "mission tactics" approach, and outl ined how each system could approach maneuver warfare.  Here the genius of the German General Staf f system was clearly demonstrated: At this level In the German service the office of chief of starf was often synonymous with that of de facto commander, the reason being that designated army commanders might be members of Germany's royal families or general officers of great seniority who were respected figureheads but who needed the guidance of a professional at the peak of his abilities. Sometimes, when presented with a difficult problem, the army commander and his chief of staff would retire to separate rooms to prepare their own solutions, which were then compared. Frequently they were Identical, but If they were not, the best features of each were chosen. In this case, even before he had joined Hindenburg for the journey to East Prussia, Ludendorf worked out a rapid redeployment of the Eighth Army's corps which made maximum use of the frontier railway network, and then telegraphed orders directly to the corps commanders on 22 August, his action being subsequently approved by Hindenburg. This action had already been predicted in detail by Lieutenant Colonel Max Hoffman, the army's Staff Officer (Operations), so that when Hindenburg and Ludendorf arrived next day the necessary movements had already been initiated, the result being that, while a covering force had been left to delay the advance of the Russian First Army, the bulk of the Eighth Army was now concentrated against the Russian Second Army.
The episode demonstrates In the most graphic manner possible the uniform thought -pattern of the General Staff when confronted with an unexpected situation; It also emphasizes the German preference for spoken as opposed to written orders In circumstances where decisions have to be made quickly. The Immediate result was that the Second Army marched Into a trap and by 31 August had been encircled and crushed at Tannenburg. Hindenburg and Ludendorf now turned their attention to the Russian First Army and a fortnight later managed to destroy part of It with another double -envelopment in the area of the Masurlan Lakes. Together, these two disasters cost Russia 250,000 of her best troops and 650 guns. 3
The Battle of Tannenburg demonstrates the German ability to operate their decision cycle faster than their opponents. In this case, a relatively junior staff officer, trained In the methods of the General Staff, gained the time advantage necessary for victory by applying a uniformly understood tactical orders process.
Lieutenant Colonel Hoffman was able to predict the correct solution to the tactical problem, and Initiate action, confident that he was acting as his future commander intended, even tho he had not received any Instructionsl As was typical of German military tradition, Hoffman took responsibility and acted decisively rather than wait for orders. This technique was repeated by German commanders and staff officers throughout the First World War and was the standard practice during the Second World War.
By 1918 It was apparent that the attrition approach would not create a decision on the Western Front. More men hadn't worked; the casualties had merely Increased. More and heavier artillery hadn't worked; no one could advance beyond the range of the artillery which couldn't move up because it had changed the landscape into a sea of shell holes and mud Not even the introduction of poison gas had worked Both sides were exhausted after four years of heavy casualties with no gains to speak of.
To break the stalemate caused by the trench and the ...It was November 1941 near Tobruk, Westphal as G3, myself as 62, we were sitting there in the headquarters. Rommel was away for five days on the front line. He had had great success at Sidi Rezegh, he had seen the thing was not completely settled, with the result he gave an order for the Afrikakorps to go over to the pursuit near the Egyptian border and only a few forces were left at Tobruk where part of the 8th Army was within the fortress. Anyhow, as we feared, the pursuit was too early. The development near Tobruk became very dangerous, nearly untenable.
Rommel was not there; we sent aircraft to look for him but we could not find him. Things became very hot, and there was no other decision but to call off the offensive from the eastern frontier, call back the Panzer divisions and give them the order to attack the enemy In the rear near Tobruk. That means G3 canceled Rommel's order and ordered all troops back from the front line. to Tobruk to relieve the situation. And when Rommel came back, first he didn't look very pleased about our decision, but after 10 or 15 minutes of explanation about the situation, he agreed with a smile. This Is what I wanted to explain to you, what we German General Staff want. If things are dangerous then even the smallest General Staff officer must have the courage to make a clear-cut decision.* 7
The German Philosophy of Forward Command An excellent example of the style of leadership expected of mission within the guidelines of the commander's intent; and the clear understanding that missions were directed two echelons down and that all units were required to think two echelons up.
The Germans did not believe In an orders Intensive, centralized approach to command and control. Their doctrine of blitzkrieg demanded a quick, flexible and decisive means of command "Forward command" called for senior commanders to Issue orders based upon personal observation and to actually assume command of a subordinate unit during a critical point in the fighting. This relied heavily on trained, thinking, Independent leaders and unflinching trust In subordinate officers to carry out the mission within the Intent of the senior commander. This understanding permeated the Wehrmacht's approach to war "The tempo of blitzkrieg calls for speedy and precise command, and Its dynamic nature calls for anticipation. To achieve these the operational and higher level commanders have to be forward not only to see for themselves what Is really happening but to get the feel of the battle.
All one can add Is that this command technique was not a gimmick of Rommel's but was laid down In "The combat value of every unit depends on the quality of its officers An average-trained unit, which has its weak points, can still give a good performance if it has a good commander. In the same manner, awell-trained and experienced unit may fail under a mediocre commander. The value of good leadership is proved by the confidence of the troops in their leaders, the improvement of their fighting qualities and finally by success in combat.... The confidence which the troops have in their commander will give them the assurance that his orders are correct, even if the reason behind them is not fully known. 9
Senior commanders planned two echelons down. A division Issued tasks to each of Its battalions. Each regiment would receive instructions for each of its battalions based on the division plan.
The regiments would then synchronize the elements of combat power as directed by the division plan. In this manner a high degree of unity of effort was achieved. Furthermore, every commander was required to understand the intent of the commander two echelons above his 1 -vel of command. This became essential in making independent decisions In the heat of battle when senior commanders could either not be reached or not be The essential core of the "forward command" approach is the subordinate commander's dedication to the senior commander's intent combined with independent action. The senior commander issues his orders. They are completely binding on his subordinate leaders. Subordinate leaders can change the plan, act independently and make their own decisions, if these decisions are guided by the commanders intent. Inactivity is considered criminal. Leaders are expected to think and make decisions Any Independent decisions must conform to the basic goal of the commander.
Allied propaganda often portrayed the Germans as unthinking automatons. The facts are that the soldiers of the Wehrmacht showed unbelievable initiative and excellent tactical leadership, Junior leaders were willing to take risks when risks were necessary. They consistently out-thought their adversaries.
History proves that the thinking, independent minded tactical leaders of the Wehrmacht consistently outfought their opponents.
That the Wehrmacht fought almost everywhere outnumbered, often in hopeless situations, and never disintegrated is proof of their tactical abilities. The forward command approach to command and control was a major reason for that success, The Germans believed that the basis for command was formed by the mission and the situation. The mission consisted of what objective was to be achieved. The order to accomplish the mission must be simple, clear and definite. The order establishes the guidelines necessary to accomplish the mission. It establishes what units are to do; not how they are to do It. *On the basis of mission and situation a decision is formed. When the mission is overtaken by events the decision must take changed circumstances Into account." I I The method of execution is deliberately not Included. Subordinate commanders are trusted to come up wIth the "how. Mission oriented discipline Is demanded. This approach substitutes control for guidance and trust. If the subordinates abilities did not meet the challenge of the situation, or If the situation required a more experienced head, the senior commander was expected to take command of the subordinate unit and achieve decisive action The bond between commander and subordinate was such that the senior commanders Intervention was not looked upon as a lack of trust but merely as his prerogative to take command at the critical place and time. The trust, therefore, needed to be two sided.
The key contribution of the Prussian General Staff to the development of the orders process was In the development efficient application of a command and staff system that operated on the basis of less Information. The Germans developed this system, called mission tactics, as the philosophy for command and control of modern armies. Mission tactics were employed by the The command style and staff functioning that contribute most to maneuver warfare and mission oriented tactics are characterized by the application of mission-oriented orders to combat. The axiom of the 11 th Panzer Division In 1943 was "night marches save lives. Orders were always Issued verbally. The division commander, General Balck, made his decision for the next day during the previous evening, and he gave the necessary orders verbal ly to his regimental commanders on the battlefield. Then he returned to his main headquarters and discussed his appraisal of the situation and his Intentions with the chief of staff of the 48th Panzer Corps. If the latter approved, the regiments were sent the radio messages "no change," and all was done according to plan. If there were any fundamental changes, the division commander visited the regimental commanders Urlng the night and gave the necessary orders personally and verbally. 19 Press, 1982), p. 37.
12 Colonel (U.S.A. Ret) T. N. Dupuy, A Genius for War. The German Army and General Staff (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall Inc.), 1977.
p. 116. 13 The success of Auftrazstaktik rests on the knowledge by the subordinate of the higher commander's concept of operations and objectives. The subordinate is expected to choose sensible courses of action which contribute to the desired outcome within the framework of the overall scheme of maneuver. There are several ways to achieve this kind of understanding. One Is to clearly explain the commander's Intent and another Is to have such a long association together that "second guessing" becomes natural. Success is largely determined by a mutually understood doctrine, education, and trust. The dependence on trust Is not a matter of faith but an Implicit understanding derived from education and trainng. (Antal)
Battelle Columbus Laboratories, Translation of Taped Conversation with Lieutenant General Heinz Gaedcke. 12 Aoril 1229, (Columbus, Ohio: Battelle Columbus Laboratories, November 1979), p. 5. "Orders were exclusively verbal within the Panzerdivision. Balck made his decision for the next day during the evening and he gave the necessary orders verbally to his regimental commanders on the battlefield; then he returned to his main headquarters and discussed his Intention with the Chief of Staff of the 48th Panzerkorps over the phone. If approval was obtained, the regiments were sent a wireless message: "No changem, and all the moves were carried out according to the plan. If there were fundamental changes, the Division Commander visited all of his regiments during the night and.gave the necessary orders, again verbally. Divisional operations were conducted from the forward position on the battlefleld. The Division Commander had his place with the group which was to make the main effort (Schwerpunkt). He visited the regiments several times a day. The divisional headquarters was somewhat further back and did not change its location during operations. There, Information was collected and collated, supplies were-handled, and reinforcements sent on their way." p. 26. military. A classic example of this difference was given by former Soviet Army Colonel Aleg Penkovsky In 1965:
One thing must be clearly understood. If someone were to hand to an American general, an English general, and a Soviet general the same set of objective facts and scientific data, with Instructions that these facts and data must be accepted as unimpeachable, and an analysis made and conclusions drawn on the basis of them, It Is possible that the American and the Englishman would reach similar conclusions -I don't know. But the Soviet general would arrive at conclusions which would be radically different from the other two. This Is because, first of all, he begins from a completely different set of basic premises and preconceived Ideas, namely, the Marxian concepts of the structure of society and the course of history. Second, the logical process In his mind Is totally unlike that of his Western counterparts, because he uses Marxist dialectics, whereas they will use some form of deductive reasoning. Third, a different set of moral laws governs and restricts the behavior of the Soviet Four, the Soviet general's alms will be radically different from those of the American and the Englishman. I
The Influence of Marxism -Leninism on the Soviet tactical orders process is pervasive. "The scientific approach of Marxism, for Instance, leads to Insistence that to every problem there Is a right answer." 2 Inundating the entire society, Marxism -Leninism attempts to establish a blueprint for every Soviet decision. Focussing on a scientific answer for every problem In life. Marxism -Leninism employs mathematics and the quantification of information to aid in the determination of the correct decision.
'Soviet life is permeated by the misapplication of mathematics. Norms, models and stereotypes crowd the corridors of power, flourish in the factory, and clutter the command vehicle of the military leadernot to mention his minl. The underlying alms of this approach are Impeccable -to save time, to keep the commander fully briefed, and to free his mind of quantifiaIle matters so that he can focus his attention on the Imponderables which call for subjective value judgments." 3
The Soviet approach to the tactical orders process is, not surprisingly, extremely scientific. The capacity for "foresight' is strenuously affirmed in Marxism-Leninism. "...the High command stresses the requirement for a 'complex approach,' a major meaning of which is 'to neglect nothing'.* 4 It is a system that is totally based on gathering and processing enough information to make a "correct," or optimal decision. It is a method driven by requirements to justify decisions. Foresight is not simply the ability to guess the course of events. It supposes an intense knowledge of the nature of contemporary battle, a comprehensive accounting of the factors that have an affect on Its development and on the basis for forecasting the enemy's assumed operations, and also the abilIty to find the proper course and take countermeasures In a timely manner." 5
The scientific approach has led to the development of laws"
and "norms" that must guide every decision. The result Is that the scientific, "Marxist -Leninist's approach" to war drIves the desire to quantify the commander's decisions. The point of the decision making process Is to arrive at "correct" decision faster than the enemy. Great effort has been expended to assist the commander with decision aids In the form of nomograms, look up charts and "correlation of forces" equations.
This desire to quantify combat leads to a need to control friendly forces precisely and to foresee every eventuality. With each eventuality foreseen, the commander can change plans quickly and execute branch plans without hesitation. In this manner, the Soviets can achieve remarkable flexibility in combat operations.
Emphasizing the control of their forces, the sclentIf Ic approach minimizes the handicaps of poorly trained and Inexperienced tactical level leadership.
To foresee every eventuality is clearly an impossible task. It  
REGIMENT co V WARNING ORDER: Informa~ an wupmnsin actio. directives on tmoW of reddmness. task orgarIrlo9n tiomes for *ecuwtofl suport orgamaatticn. an kogsta actions t@t34Jfd to be rside for the attack
Situation stimte, mvission content. pian of action, decision. argaiwtdtion for combat ACTIVITIES.
Preparation of wespons and equipment, terrain orientation. ecorwniw imO.
-re accompisllm of othe measues, to be toady foo lihe attack This view accords with their current operational and tactical concept, although as we have seen, It conflicts to some extent with their principle of centralism. Centralism subjects troop control and leadership to maximum organization and discipline, especially In a situation which calls for the more orthodox and traditional methods of leadership from the front In theory, however, ADP [Automatic Data Processing] and associated computer techniques can shorten the IDA cycle, and the Soviet Armed Forces are committed to achieve an IDA advantage by developing the use of ADP and cybernetics within the framework of Its highly centralized command system." 19
The Soviet system of Troop Control was a natural product of the bureaucratic Soviet society that emphasizes exaggerated planning and the uninterrupted control of almost every aspect of an Individual's existence. The Troop Control system is designed to maintain the direction of the drive and continue unceasing momentum of the thrust by scientifically aiding the commander to determine "optimal" solutions faster than his opponent can respond to them. It is the Soviet answer to get inside the enemy's decision cycle.
The Soviet war-fighting style Is aptly described by the German military term BefeflIstaktlk or orders-oriented tactics. Such inactivity wastes time and disrupts the time-table upon which detailed orders tactics are based "Attributing t, his subordinates -to human naturea penchant for wasting time, the commander will be imbued with the conviction that any lack of economy or accuracy with regard to time risks failure in battle."
27 Trained to maintain momentum, a Soviet commander "worries about the inclination of units, down to the smallest, and even of Individual fighters, to go 'warring by themselves'; such worries may also be due to fears that comrades and 'neighbors' may let one down by lack of skill or will." 28 Battle plans, therefore, may be pushed through in order to maintain action, the planned attack speed, and the appropriate tempo.
Stopping, and waiting for instructions in battle is viewed as a criminal loss of valuable time. The commander "...will surmise that there are always 'unutilized reserves' of time, and be intent upon procuring a 'reserve of time' for use in case things go wrong or not anticipated. Any time lost that could have been saved is a gift made to the enemy that he will use against us; any time saved Soviet theorists currently stress the importance of centralized operational level control but decentralized battle management (i.e. at divisional level and below). Their reasoning is undoubtedly sound, but the practice often seems to fall short of theory, especially with units and subunits. Tactical commanders still tend to overload themselves with unnecessary and indeed counter-productive, work and to interfere with the minutiae of their subordinates' handling of their commands. This is hardly surprising, for commanders are held personally responsible for the failure of their subordinates, and the penalties for failure are severe in the Soviet system. For their part, regimental and battalion commanders are fearful of the consequences of independent action. They therefore tend to adhere rigidly to the scheme of maneuver laid down by their superiors, even when the development of the battle has rendered it inappropriate. Alternately they will often refer their problems upwards and wait passively for fresh orders, rather than risk the consequences of exercising initiative." 31
The Soviets appear to have a natural affinity bureaucracy and centralization. Without a corresponding change in Soviet society, the switch to decentralized battle management will be difficult to accomplish within the foreseeable future. The Soviet desire for scientific certainty, their penchant for information gathering, and their emphasis on detailed planning demands tight and effective centralized control. Richard E. Simpkin, in his book Human Factors in Mechanized Warfare. believed that the switch to decentralized battlefield tactics, a move closer to the mission tactics side of the spectrum, will be Impossible for the Soviet Army. Simpkin states:
[The] "...command and control system to which the Soviets seem to be moving could prove to be a critical weakness In the capability of their mechanized maneuver force....I would describe this as "detailed-order tactics by rear command. It Is not difficult to describe or to envision. In Soviet high intensity operations the highest tactical level is probably army (formerly corps), with front (In western terms "army group) as both the operational level and the operational/strategic link. In this event there are five, maybe six, levels of command between the army commander and the vehicle or maneuver squad commander Despite this, the low staffing levels of Soviet headquarters; the enormous effort going Into the provision of a sophisticated communications and data transmission system (at least from battal Ion upwards); the doctrine that seems to be coming out on top from the present controversy; and the concern over lack of creative command talent among even hand-picked Soviet officers all add up to an Image In which the army commander uses a television monitor and a computer terminal to move individual tanks from one piece of cover to the next." 32 "The Idea that large military forces form a threat to liberty, that they endanger democracy, that they imperil economic prosperity, and that their very existence undermines peace --all these are said to have been 'fairly constantly characteristic' of the American attitudes toward the army.O I Robert Leckie, a World War II United States Marine veteran and historian called America the "fIghtingest society since the advent of modern warfare. Yet, though America can become martial, she has never been milltarist." 2 "The second World War became for American strategists an organization war, a war of corporate leadership....The committees system blossomed on the service, Inter-service and international levels and brought leaders and experts together to select courses of action." 3 This organizational feat was a remarkable accomplishment in management. The success of the management approach, so eagerly adopted by the business trained officers of a quickly mobilized army, had long term ramifications: At the close of World War l1 the United States Army was the mightiest In the world.... Mass armies could be organized, maintained, and fought effectively only by leaders possessing highly developed management skills; the United States Army cultivated an officer corps with such skills through ElIhu Root's General Staff and school systems and their extensions, nourished by more generalized management skills of a complex Industrial society. Perhaps most Important, World War II was a "gross national product war,-In which sheer quantities of weapons, supplies, and transport could decisively 198 outweigh an enemy; America's Industrial leadership fitted It preeminently to wage such a war." 4
The U.S. Army's view to warfare, therefore, was predominantly managerial "putting far heavier emphasis on doctrine, planning and control." 5 The reason for the ascendancy of these management philosophies was the relative Inexperience of the majority of troops and commanders who, civilians until yesterday, required a tremendous degree of supervision from above and the experience of an army that, traditionally assured of overwhelming material superiority, simply re) led more on organization and logistics rather than on skill and fighting power. 
6
9
The American military soon found out that It could not control the basic doctrine on how Its forces were to train, fight and win. Again, Edward Luttwak:
"We have seen how the pursuit of business-type efficiency In the placement of each soldier destroys the cohesion that makes fighting units effective;...Because tactics, the operational art of war, and strategy Itself are not reducible to precise numbers, money was allocated to forces and single weapons according to Ofirepower" scores, computer simulations, and mathematical studies --all of which maximized efficiency, but often at the expense of combat effectiveness. 
12
"Headquarters In the U.S. Army habitually expend their time and energies on routine administration, seldom pushing, training, and testing themselves as they push, train, and test their troops. Perhaps it Is natural for a hierarchy to act like a bureaucracy, comfortably keeping busy with day-to-day tasks that all large organizations create for themselves. Of course, headquarters work hard, but the result too often seems to be that the troops, even when Inadequately trained and armed, are readier for war than the men who lead them. the implied lesson Is that senior commanders and their staffs might do well to free themselves from the routine busywork of peacetime military life and to plan and carry out frequent, more realistic training exercises for themselves, Involving several command levels and arms, that will hone skills that otherwise must be bought with blood and, possibly, defeat. -14
The adoption of the science of business management over the traditional values of military responsibility as Indicated by "command" has Inhibited the U.S. Army's tactical decision making capability since the early 1960's to the present. The business approach to war has led to over large staffs and bloated bureaucracies. Instead of a few well trained 0iron majors" to turn to for decision making and advice, U.S. Army staffs have countless officers on numerous subordinate staffs who all share a piece In the decision process. The committee approach has come full circle and Is now Institutionalized "...the officers are so 'civilianized' by their entire career experience that they are III prepared for the brutal urgencies of combat. And the military Institutions run by our civillanized officers may be more responsive to the civilian priorities of efficiency, honesty, and political obedience than to the requirements of strategy..". 15
The other burden that this philosophy has laid around the neck of the U.S. Army is its ability to conduct decentralized command Hadley's book The Straw Giant. Triumph and F.i lure: America's min Vietnam, overcontrol led to disasters large and small. On the last day of the American Involvement there, the White House was requesting tatl numbers of the helicopters being used to lift the Americans off the embassy roof In Saigon. Mired In such gnat-sized details, those at the command summit had lost control over the strategic direction of American policy, while those at the bottom were robbed of Initiative and lost flexibility and confidence In themselves.. 17
The American approach to war has largely been one of The statistics soon took on the measure of tactical success.
Units were compared in effectiveness by their success at achieving a high "body count."
One should carefully note that while American field commanders openly admitted that they were waging a war of attrition, they winced at calling it a strategy of attrition. Attrition is not a strategy. It Is, in fact, irrefutable proof of the absence of any strategy. A commander who resorts to attrition admits his failure to conceive of an alternative. He rejects warfare as an art and accepts It on the most non-professional terms Imaginable. He uses blood In lieu of brains. To be sure, political considerations left military commanders no choice other than attrition warfare, but that does not alter the hard truth that the UnItPd States was strategically bankrupt In Vietnam In 1966. 23   That firepower ruled American tactics was evident by the vast amount of artillery, naval gunfIre support, fighter bombers and strategic bombers that were used in support of the ground forces. "B-52 usage, for instance leaped from sixty sorties a month in 1966 to over eight hundred monthly in 1967. When contact was made, American units, preoccupied with avoiding casualties, generally fell back into a defensive perimeter to call for air and artillery. Tactical maneuvers to roll up an open flank or strike an exposed rear were usually attempted only by the enemy. 
" 2 4
r Cg & WWF 1. UPDATED IO Ii INU Tu I 2. SITSOF RECIO STAFF OTHER COAs BECOME THE 9:=K P=LAN S, BRANCH PLANS WHICH MAY
Richard F. Timmons, "Lessons From the Past for NATO," The Parameters of War. MilItary History Journal of the U.S. Army War Colge, vol xlv no 3. (Washington: Pergamon -Brassey's International Defense Publ Ishers, 1987), p. 272.
4 Ibid., p, 11.
I give special thanks to my thesis committee, 
Dr. Philip J. Brookes
Lieutenant Colonel William Bentley
Canadian
12 Ibid., p. 89-90.
The Wehrmacht Approach   (1940), Russia (1941), and North Africa (1941 and 1942) are still regarded as masterpieces of the military art and have indeed D.A Ivanov, V.P. Savel'yev, and P.V. Shemanskiy, Fundamentals of Tactical Command and Control (Moscow: 1977), p. 184. introduced so that their command relationships are understood by all the subordinate commanders.
The mission Is a clear statement of what the unit Is to accomplish. It consists of the who, what, when where and why of the tasks to be accomplished. There are no sub paragraphs of the mission statement.
The execution paragraph contains the "how to" Information needed to conduct the operation. This paragraph consists of three or more 
A  
The French fire, the German attackers were demoralized and stunned.
Then, the division commaider, General Erwin Rommel, appeared.  Troop control Is the work of commanders, chiefs, staffs, political organs, service and other control elements In support of combat readiness and the fighting ability of troops, preparation for operations and combat operations, and their direction during the accomplishment of the assigned missions. The control process Includes:
(I) continuous receipt, collection, study, representation, and analysis of situational data;
(2) decision making;
(3) tasking subordinate troops with missions: (4) planning operations (tactical actions);
(5) organizing and maintaining coordination; (6) preparing troops and staffs for combat operations and their direct guidance;
(7) organizing and carrying out measures dealing with political work and with all types of combatoperation support;
(8) organizing the monitoring of and assistance to subordinate commanders, staffs, and troops. 12   The Soviets believe that their Troop Control system gives them a high degree of flexibility and a marked advantage over their western opponent. The basic purpose of Troop Control is to help the Soviet commander make a decision and then, using that decision, help him develop a plan that has a high probability of history, organization and technical capabilities of the Red Army.
Positive control demands continuous communications. One of the limiting factors during the Second World War was the capability of the tactical communications systems and the reluctance of Soviet officers to report bad news. This problem is still a major concern of the Soviet Army today. As Richard Simpkin states in his book Race to the Swift. Thoughts on Twenty-First Centu Warfare: Just as embryonic were the kind of communications needed to control mobile operations. The communications complexes with which the Red Army ended the war, employing up to six major nets in an army headquarters, were the outcome of lessons learnt the hard way. This lack of the physical means of troop control compounded the two-pronged psychological problem that plagued the Red Army then as it does the Soviet Army today --the run-of-the-mill Russian officer's tendency to do nothing until not just told to but actively prodded; and his understandable fear of reporting an adverse situation lest he be held to blame for it. As the wastage rate among divisional and higher formation commanders shows, the only way of achieving any flexibility at all was forward command of the most extreme kind 25
The Soviet command style, therefore, may be at a disadvantage in a fast paced, mobile war, where events do not go according to plan. The synchronization of combat power will depend on the mental agility or junior leaders to seize and retain the Initiative In an adverse command and control environment. "On this scale, 3aanced electronics evidently provide one of the three planks on which "detailed-order tactics" rest. Another is, But long theoretical training at Leavenworth will bring forth such orders at the start of any offensive, so you probably will receive Just such an order. They are very comprehensive and complete, but everything is based on "D" day and "H" hour which, you are told, will be announced later.
Simultaneous with the Issuance of the attack order will be the Issuance of the attached map. This will show sector boundaries, possibly lines to be reached by certain times (such as H+2 hours) and lines on which to halt and reform, etc. The usual allotment was four maps to a regiment. This meant four copies of the order and four maps (one for the colonel and one for each battalion). At Soissons there were but two maps per regiment, and what happened proved the fallacy of this distribution. As far as the order went, the two copies were sufficient, for the attack order became almost obsolete from the moment of the "Jump off." The enemy failed to cooperate. He did not do as he was supposed to do, and the rest of the order became useless. 27 It Is very hard to break down a highly developed technique which had indoctrinated a great many officers as a result of trench warfare procedure.
Finally In 1930 1 obtained through General von Blomberg...the data on recent German maneuvers where divisional attack orders were not only brief but at times purely oral. 30  Allen's ability to quickly issue his orders and-clearly transmit his Intent was essential to the rapid pace his division maintained in the attack. Allen's orders process gained his unit a time advantage that they were able to translate into surprise: against the French garrison of Oran, which was debating whether to fight or surrender to the Invaders. The tempo of Allen's operation was crucial to the capture of the city of Oran. gad Allen's attack slowed and had the defenders been given more time to react, French resistance could have been much stiffer and resulted in needless American casualties As it occurred, Allen took the city two days after hitting the beach and-lost only a few men to hostilefire.
Detailed orders tactics are the natural tendency of the American Army. Usually thrown together.hastily and often formed Into units that have not had-the opportunity to develop a sense ot unit cohesion and trust, the concept of detailed order tactics provides active control:
In the past...the professional response to the chronic American weakness In command-and -control was to plan more thoroughly, leaving as ilttle to chance as possible. But thorough planning, with Its natural deemphasis of unexpected situations (beyond the scope of contingency plans), led to rigidity and, often, heavy. losses. In other words, the command-and-control weakness and Its chosen professional remedy were but two aspects of a single larger problem: Inadequate preparation of commanders and staffs for the real world of combat." 31