# ID: 3ddf93d7b9ce4ed5a6a152b6b31872d8
# Title: Doctrinal origins of spetsnaz: Soviet submarine-inserted special operations in northern Scandinavia during World War Two
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
During the 1930s, the Soviet Union began developing tactical and operational instructions for naval forces, describing that the Soviet Navy should be prepared for active-offensive actions from shore to enemy shore and bases. This was a task for the Soviet Navy in both peace and war, and preparations were a continuous effort, in order to bring the war back to the enemy as soon as possible. Some of the means to achieve this are the submarines, and the operational support of reconnaissance assets. The method is to use the submarines for deep penetration, in order to deliver effect in the form of fires, raiding parties, and agents.
Before World War Two the Soviet Red Navy developed the first steps of amphibious assault, ranging from large assaults in support of ground forces operations, to insertions of agents. When the Red Navy was separated from the Red Army, this gained momentum, and soon the Naval Infantry was formed. During World War Two, the Soviet Union developed special operations forces, amongst them submarine-inserted naval scouts, later to be knows as spetsnaz. These conducted operations against German convoys supporting the German-Finnish war in northern Scandinavia and Soviet Union. The first try to insert a larger force failed and instead focus was changed to scouts for reconnaissance missions, with occasional sabotage raids, which was more successful. The operations was not war winning, but tied up German forces and resources which could have been better used somewhere else. They proved invaluable, however, for the gaining of experience for and establishment of the Soviet naval special forces.
The German Wehrmacht tried different methods to combat the reconnaissance parties. During 1942, they realized that the repeated attacks on their northern convoys must have been supported by enemy observation posts along the coast of Northern Norway. However, it was not until the capture of a Soviet soldier that they understood what to look for. A series of operations were conducted, ending with an operation to lure an enemy submarine into a trap.
Based on their experience of a sudden shift from peace to war, the Soviet doctrine writers concluded that this type of reconnaissance must be conducted in peace as well as wartime. Those doctrines goes far to explain numerous instances in which Soviet/Russian submarines and spetsnaz apparently violated Swedish sovereignty from the 1970s to present day. v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My first acknowledgment goes to James F. Gebhardt whose enthusiastic research and translations of the many sources have been essential for this essay. He has also provided me with many valuable tips and insights. Every organization needs a tireless "doer," and Gebhardt has filled that role for the benefit of not just me, but for the U.S.
I also would like to thank my committee who never lost faith in me. My chair Professor John T. Kuehn has guided me through this endeavor with good humor and encouragement. Professor Emeritus Jonathan M. House has tirelessly and patiently proofread and corrected this essay, thereby increasing my command of the English language. Retired Colonel Charles R. Webster has not only supported me with this thesis, he and his family has also been a good host for me and my family during our stay in USA, providing that all-important relaxation in-between classes, studies and writing.
Although I have been assisted with translations and proofreading it does not absolve me from any possible errors in this thesis, and I alone are to be blamed for any such occurrences. Through the greenish light of a First Generation Light Amplifier (nowadays known as night-vision goggles), I stared over an empty shore transitioning into a black sea. As a sentry, I was guarding the rear approach to my platoon's Observation Post, located on an isolated Swedish island, a part of the extensive coastal-defense. The Swedish coastline is about 2400 kilometer long, and as a protection against sea-borne invasion, the Swedish Armed Forces had since the late 19th century established fortifications along the coast, armed with fixed or mobile artillery, mines, and torpedoes. This island was normally deserted during peacetime, but now the Swedish Navy had detected an unidentified underwater activity in the area. As part of the quick-reaction force at the nearest mainland infantry regiment, my comrades and I were sent to the island, with the two-fold mission of securing it, and observing the surrounding sea.
The year was 1986, and the Cold War was still hot. Although Sweden was nominally non-aligned and neutral during the Cold War, the conceived threat was coming from the Soviet Union.0 F 1 During the 1970s it was realized that systematic violations of Swedish sea-territory was taking place, and it escalated in the 1980s, with the run-aground Soviet submarine U-137, outside the most important Swedish naval base at Karlskrona, in October 1981 as the most flagrant. A RAND report summarized:
The Soviet have conducted submarine operations in Swedish waters continuously since World War II. Although the evidence of these violations of Sweden's territorial waters is incomplete, Swedish authorities indicate that "foreign" submarine operations were carried out at irregular intervals between the 1960s and the late 1970s.1 F 2
These incidents led to a substantial, and costly, expansion of the Swedish subhunting capability. The Swedish Navy collected indicators and evidence through different sources, and used live ordnance on several occasions. It was clear that both regular as well as mini submarines were used. However, most of the violations remained inconclusive-mainly due to the oceanographic characteristics of the Bothnian and Baltic Sea-with no verified identification of the intruder. With no proof, some people argued that this was just an elaborate conspiracy by the Navy to get more funding. Due to the secret nature of under-sea warfare in general, it was difficult for the Navy to present its facts and proofs. This led of course to opposition, from some on pacifist grounds and from others on grounds of allotment of resources, for example between the sister services. The issue focused on why, and for what purpose, would the Soviet Union in peacetime risk underwater navigation in one of the world's most difficult, narrow and extensive archipelagos? The proponents stated the reason to be preparatory reconnaissance of the coastal defense, as well as mapping sea-lanes, for a possible invasion or control of the Baltic Sea. For the Swedish Armed Forces personnel responsible for planning the defense of Sweden these motives were understandable and explainable, but they were hard to prove. Sweden had a good knowledge about the capability of the Soviet Baltic Fleet, but its plans and intentions were harder to assess.
During the 1980s, more and more information became publically known about Soviet armed forces. One piece of information was the role and capabilities of their special forces, commonly known as spetsnaz.2 F
3
Subsequently, the longer the lineage that can be established, the more is it possible to argue confidently for an aggressive reconnaissance intent, executed even in peacetime.
That would be an indication of a culture likely to remain, even more so if those actions had been successful.
Consequently, for me sitting alone in the dark, one of the potential threats was Soviet spetsnaz infiltration, delivered by (mini-) submarines. Understandably, guarding against Soviet, and later Russian, threats has always been a part of my 30-year military career. In my spare time, I have read history books, especially about World War Two, both as a pastime and for professional development, but also books about Soviet and Russian armed forces. The underwater activities disappeared-or at least diminished-during the first decade of the millennia, but in October 2014 it reappeared in the Swedish archipelago. The result of that sub-hunting operation3 F
4
In the fall 2018, I read a Swedish translation of Viktor Leonov's autobiography Blood on the shores, describing his experience as a Soviet naval scout, operating along the coast of northern Norway during World War Two. Given my previous experience I found the book most interesting. Therefore, when I, during my studies at Command and General Staff College one year later, was introduced to some recently translated German and Soviet original documents from World War Two, I accepted the challenge of researching them.
The main source for this essay are documents found on microfiche in the Combined Arms Research Library, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, translated by Major (ret.) James F. Gebhardt, U.S. Army. The Russian documents include pre-war doctrines on naval special operations, and post-war reports of their experience. The German documents include orders, reports and court statements, regarding counter-sabotage and counter-intelligence operations against Norwegian resistance and Soviet Navy units. Some of the material has been researched by Gebhardt, and I have included his research in this essay. Therefore, with some expectation and excitement I set out to find the origins of Soviet Navy special operations and its evolution, showing a foundation that influenced the present Russian Armed Forces. The general intent, as described above, is to show actual willingness by the Russian armed forces to aggressively pursue information and intelligence, even in peacetime. Concurrently, I provide some additional knowledge on Nazi-German combat against the resistance movement in Northern Norway 1942-1943, but I invite further research into that topic.
To frame my research I formulated the following problem statement: "The Soviet/Russian use of submarines to support their special operations is well established. A basic approach of determining if a country poses a military (or other) threat to others involves assessing its intention and capabilities. Assessing capabilities is often quite straightforward; being just a matter of counting military units, tanks, ships et cetera, and estimating their specifications. Intention, on the other hand, is more elusive since it could be harbored only in the mind of the country's leader. Therefore, it is common practice to study speeches, interviews, publications and military doctrines and regulations to determine intention and conduct. History provides scholars and analysts a way of assessing a belligerent's intentions before a conflict, and then comparing it to their actions during the conflict, giving valuable insights into the linkage between strategic thought and the actual behavior of military organizations. This is a tri-part research. In the next chapter this essay will investigate the intent, that is, to what extent were submarine-supported special operations discussed in the doctrines before, during and after World War Two. This is done to establish how well Soviet actions during the war corresponded to their pre-war doctrines. It will then present the available submarines, the means for accomplishment. Lastly it will discuss how they were used, the chosen methods. In chapter three, the essay will look closer on how the experience was looked upon, and how it was executed of and developed.
The fourth chapter will discuss how the German Wehrmacht perceived and countered the capabilities of the Soviet Red Navy during World War Two. What indicators did the Germans notice? What proofs did they secure? What actions did they take? Is there anything that can be learnt from their experience? These sources provide an opportunity to match the activities of both belligerents and get a better after-actionreview. What one side perceived as a success can be negated by the information provided by the opponent. This is probably truer when it comes to submarine hunting, compared to any other military endeavor. Even if the hunter detects air bubbles, oil spills, debris et cetera, it does not mean that the submarine is sunk, and the final result might not reveal itself until many years later, through records like this.
The primary sources consist of two sets. These documents stems from National Finally, there is, of course, also the book that led me into this project, Blood on the Shores, written by Viktor Leonov.9 F
10
Of the authors mentioned above, it is really only James Gebhardt, Lars Gyllenhaal, and Alf Jacobsen that mention submarine insertions. Viktor Leonov was, according to his own account, mostly inserted by boat. Therefore, the ambition of this work is to contribute and expand on the knowledge about the Soviet use of submarines in support of special operations during World War Two, and how they took care of this experience and developed it. By doing so, I hope to show that their experiences were advantageous and productive that they have continued the practice them to this day. It is commonly recognized that a victorious side seldom changes it thinking and behavior after a war, at least its basic principles, and that similar thoughts can predict similar actions for the future. I am content with providing the historical foundation that could explain the reasons for activities that occurred in the territorial waters of Sweden during the 1980s and 1990s. CHAPTER 2
On Tuesday 3 February 1942 . . . the 80 meter long submarine S-101 glided slowly into Kongsfjord. To reduce the noise she steamed with her electric engines. It was pitch dark, and from the shore came an icy wind. The submarine was just a couple of hundred meters away from the snow-covered Nålnes when Captain Victor Vekke ordered the engines stop. Quietly and without rush the sailors started passing crates of provisions and equipment from the sail down onto the deck, where two rubber dinghies were prepared. The first of Vizgins radio teams was about to be landed behind German lines on the coast of Finnmark.
-Alf R. Jacobsen, Blodröd augusti -Historien om de norska partisanerna
This chapter examines the Soviet doctrines and instructions that were in effect before, during and after World War Two. First, it will examine the intent, more specific the reasoning and motives for various operations, which then became doctrine. Second, it will describe the means projected to achieve the objectives, the submarines. Finally, the methods that were employed will be presented. The main sources for this are two temporary pre/early-war instructions. parties before refining it for completion.1 5 F 16 Therefore, the instructions are indicators of a naval force in pursuit of professionalism, striving to find its form and building on best practice. Their version of readiness is found in the following sentence: "The Military-Naval Fleet, still before the eruption of military actions, should be prepared…to conduct decisive offensive operations."1 6F 17
The Soviet Intent Basically, intent can be divided into "When?" and "Why?" In the following discussion this essay will show that the difference between war and peace was very vague in the Soviet Union. Secondly, it will point to some of the reasons why certain actions had to be carried out. In an order on 14 May 1939 Admiral of the Fleet 2d Rank Nikolay Kuznetzov replaced chapter 1, named General Conditions. That chapter describes some general settings for the Workers'-Peasants Naval Forces.1 7 F 
18
18 DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, 6-7. 
19
their offensive all the way to Berlin, for the final victory in 1945. It also provides an explanation of why Russia to this day is focused on generating offensive weapons and tactics, even when Russian leaders are talking publicly about defense. The history of wars in Russia, including their Civil War 1917-1921, when several foreign powers sent troops to participate, is often a story of ravaged land and brutal actions, which makes for an appealing idea of making defense of the home country to an affair of bringing the war to the enemy territory. This is important to remember. This thinking also brings some clarity to modern Russia's talk about spheres of interests and buffers. The conquering of other territories is not necessarily a goal in itself, but it could imply that in preparing for defense of their motherland, they assess the geopolitical and military geography of neighboring countries. Assessment of terrain is a vital step in most military decision processes, and if you plan to wage war on enemy territory, you need to gather information about that territory somehow. Thus, a bottom line up front is found in their intent of bringing the war back to the aggressor's territory as quickly as possible. That is a reason for clandestine intelligence gathering-even in peacetime.
A good explanation for this reason can be found here:
A good knowledge of the theater and all its peculiarities provides great superiority over an enemy . . . The study of the theater and its peculiarities is a constant mission of the higher level commanders, flag-rank officers, their staffs, and vessel commanders. This study should be conducted from the perspective of the missions confronting the fleet, possible enemy operations, and the relationship of forces and conditions of employment of various forms of naval forces.1 9F 
20
However, the Russian way of war is more aggressive than that. To achieve victory, it must be decisive and the enemy fully destroyed, and the only means to do this is through conducting battle, with the intent of destroying the enemy forces and material, and suppressing his morale and capability of resistance.2 2F 23 This is not a tactic of halting the enemy, produce a cease-fire, and then engage in diplomatic-political solutions-this is a tactic of decisive victory and punishing the aggressor.
On several occasions BUMS-37 mentions how important it is that the naval forces be active, persistent and engaging the enemy from friendly coast all the way to the enemy's coast.2 3F 24 This aggressiveness is intentional and expected: "A constant urge to engage in combat with the enemy, with the purpose of his destruction, should lay at the basis of military training and actions."2 4 F 25 By creating and maintaining this urge, the Soviet 21 DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, 7. 
22
23
24
Navy will always maintain a preparedness to meet and retaliate any aggression, to include "even in peacetime."2 5 F 26 In a discussion on operational stress2 6F 27 of the naval forces, BN-40 explains that norms enable judgment of different courses of actions. To accurately calculate these factors BN-40 stresses that no opportunity to collect material shall not be neglected, in peacetime or wartime.2 7 F 28 Therefore, to claim that Russia does not see a real distinction between war and peace when it comes to military operations, should not be seen as overly alarmist.
At the time of the publication of BN-40, the Soviet Union had successfully occupied half of Poland and all the Baltic States, but also fought a desultory and nearly unsuccessful winter war with Finland. The publication is described as have being created considering experiences from the recent wars, but that future events may provide more experience of this "continuing imperialistic war."2 8 F
29
27
9F 30
32
31 Ibid.,
24. 32 Ibid.,
26. 33 Ibid.,
[26]
[27]
35
Placement of mines and obstacles includes the enemy's bases as well, and is intended for the destruction of enemy vessels and obstruct his lines of communications.
The calculations for types, number, locality is to be based on a careful study of the terrain, to include depths, current, incoming and outgoing tides, lucidity of water and 35 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 9.
36 Ibid., 37. more.3 6F 37 This is information that may be collected from open sources, but in many countries this is restricted, and was even more so in the time up to and including World War Two.
Another reason for collecting information is to find out more about the enemy.
Previously mentioned norms are one. The calculations of norms is based on analysis of five factors, for example general war experience, the Soviet Navy's own war-experience, and the experience of combat preparation and combat activity of foreign navy's. The Soviet Northern Fleet Submarine Brigade consisted of three divisions at the outbreak of The Great Patriotic War. The 1st Division were equipped with three K class 42 Jan Breemer, Soviet Submarines-Design, Development and Tactics (Surrey, UK: Jane's Information Group Limited, 1989), 7. 
43
(1500 tons) submarines, which was the largest Soviet-built submarine of the war.4 3F
44
For a detailed description of the Soviet submarines, see Table 
,
page 93.
Their opinion could be viewed as that of a "fortress fleet," but it was probably more because of the distinct Russian notion of the navy as a supporting arm to army operations.4 5 F 
46
This meant for the Soviet Northern Fleet that the small Malyutkas operated no further than Tanafjord. The medium-sized Shchukas were assigned the area from Tanafjord to North Cape, while the large Ks were deployed beyond North Cape.4 8F 
49
Submarines share a capability with aircraft and that is to provide deep scale of operations, and support penetration in depth of limited theaters, according to BN-40. The 46 Jacob W. Kipp, "Undersea Warfare in Russian and Soviet Naval Art, 1853-1941" (Conference Paper, Soviet Army Studies Office, Fort Leavenworth, KS, June 1989), 1-2. 
47
48
No mention of special forces or spetsnaz is found in neither BUMS-37 or BN-40, but in BN-40, Section 8 Organization of Operations, Chapter 2 Organization of Forces it states that certain operations might require temporary formations of special detachments to execute special tasks. Furthermore, it states that all necessary means, surface vessels, submarines, air forces, and shore defense, are represented in the large maneuver formations or Fleets.5 1F 52 It is obvious that the concept of Combined Arms was well understood in the Soviet Armed Forces, how different means reinforce and complement each other. Of interest, is that "organization of the fleet in peacetime should to the maximum degree approach the organization for wartime."5 2 F 53 Although not uncommon in 50 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 11. 51 Ibid., 22. 
52
53
most armed forces, it is nevertheless again an indication of the Soviet blurred line between war and peace.
Even if spetsnaz is not mentioned, Section 9 Typical Operations of BN-40, in   Chapter 9 about Operational Reconnaissance and Reconnaissance Operations, mentions that "continual" reconnaissance is organized using for example submarines and "secret agents in the form of special service."5 3 F 54 They are also mentioned as examples of "episodic" reconnaissance, although with a tiny difference: "[a]secret agent network in the form of special service."5 4 F 55 One of the tenets stated about reconnaissance is that it should be reliable, and one means for accomplishment of that is agent reconnaissance, mentioned in the same paragraph.5 5F 56 Together this shows the symbiosis foreseen between men and machines to achieve what this essay has set out to reveal, and what was later executed in Northern Scandinavia during World War Two.
There are several methods described in both BUMS-37 and BN-40, as it should be in any instruction. The base line for actions are set in the introduction of BN-40, where   the Soviet Fleet should be prepared to conduct decisive offensive operations "still before the eruption of military actions."5 6F 57 That implies preparations for operations targeting a possible enemy still at base. In order not to arouse the enemy or unnecessarily heighten 54 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 34. 
55 Ibid.,
35. 56
57
However, they are restricted by slowness to deploy, limited observation (periscope), and impossibility of submitting reports.5 7 F 58 Nevertheless, the preferred method is to strike as deep and as early as possible.
The need for advantage is thusly stated as: "The most important and principal fundamental of operations is the creation at the crucial moment of decisive superiority over the enemy on the main axis."5 8F 
59
As seen earlier, the Soviet Fleet put a lot of effort in developing plans that could be put into effect almost immediately, and this should be done "without a declaration of war or general mobilization,"6 0F 61 so as not to alert the enemy which provides an enormous advantage. This would start with what in modern terms is called shaping operations. The Soviet intent was to sequentially broaden the operational zone until it included the 58 DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, 19.
59 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 6. 
60
61
Another possible task for any agent landed on enemy shore could be to establish the cargo content on ships leaving the enemy's port.6 2F 63 This is described as one of the elements when planning operations against enemy sea lines of communication. However, there are no specific methods prescribed. Given the means of the period, this limits them to surveillance from air by air reconnaissance, or from sea by surface or underwater vessel, or from the ground. The two former are likely limited by the distance by which they have to position them in relation to the ship observed. The latter, if adequately trained, can come as close as to actually touching the ship, providing excellent data on what is being loaded.
A submarine may not strike one as being the first choice when engaging shorebased targets, but is mentioned as a method. Operations against shore-based targets are described as having two elements: Firstly, the target is immobile, facilitating specific calculations and actions. Secondly, it is associated with penetration in depth of the enemy's operational zone.6 3F 64 Due to the fact that the torpedoes of the time were quite unreliable, most submarines had, and used as a primary weapon the deck-mounted 62 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 21. 
63
64
Yet, the paragraph in BN-40 sees this more in a combined arms view, with a mix of aviation, surface vessels, torpedo cutters, amphibious landing craft, and submarines complementing one another, according to their special capabilities. But: If a raid is the selected method of action, then the forces used for the raid should be selected such that they have the capability of penetrating secretly or by surprise into the depth of the enemy's operational zone . . . In a local case, if a powerful artillery strike is not required, submarines can be employed.6 5 F 
66
The next example of method relates to the previous one. In the section about Typical Operations, Chapter 8 is about Amphibious Assault Operations. It begins with a definition of amphibious assault, as a maneuver of ground forces across the sea for the purpose of flank attack, deep attack, or carrying the war to the enemy's territory. It differentiates between strategic and operational assaults. The latter can be a local assault directed against a hostile fleet base or seizure of hostile coastal territory for organization of a base for subsequent operations. In contemporary U.S. doctrinal terms, it is the equivalent of a joint forcible entry operation.6 6F 67 As a support operation, BN-40 foresaw 65 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 45. 
66
67
The doctrines tells a story of a "new" fleet trying to establish a best practice. Their intent is to prepare in peacetime, so that they can conduct active-offensive defense and bring the war back to the enemy as soon as possible. The boundary between peace and war is not solid, and active preparations vis-à-vis possible enemies is a continuous work. Some of the means to achieve this are the submarines, and the operational support of reconnaissance assets. The method is to use the submarines for deep penetration, in order to deliver effect in the form of fires, raiding parties, and agents. In the next chapter, the Soviet World War Two experience of using these combined arms will be presented.
Yes, we know how to operate in the enemy's rear area; we had mastered the enemy's strong and weak points; we were proficient with our own and the Germans' weapons; and we fearlessly met the jaegers in close combat. But every scout of polar infantry who fought beyond the sixty-eight parallel knew and could do these things. We were naval scouts! Naval horizons attracted us, deep fjords and enemy bases in those fjords, coastal lines of communications.
-Viktor Leonov, Blood on the Shores-Soviet Naval Commandos in World War II, This chapter will present the Soviet Naval Fleet's experience with submarineinserted reconnaissance groups. The sources are Gebhardt's study mentioned in chapter 1, a couple of autobiographies from Leonov, Makar Babikov (which was another member of the same unit as Leonov), and Vinogradov, who was the commander of the Northern Fleet submarine brigade. As part of the group involved in the decision to execute submarine-insertions, he can be considered a primary source. Also included are a Soviet Naval academic report from 1950 and the Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the Military Naval Fleet of the Union of the SSR (BU-45), which superseded BUMS-37. This chapter will begin with a presentation of the evolution of amphibious warfare, followed by a presentation of operational experiences, and finally a discussion about lessons learned and their formalization.
The continental nature of Russia's October Revolution, and subsequent Civil War, combined with a strained national economy led to a downgrade of importance for the Soviet Fleet.7 4 F 75 However, once the Soviet Union was consolidated in the middle of 1920s, the construction of submarines got high priority. Influenced by the so-called Young School, the focus for the Soviet Fleet was on coastal defense and submarines, with the Fleet acting as more or less as a flank protection of the Red Army's ground maneuver.7 5F 76
This focus on coastal warfare supporting the ground forces led to an evolution of amphibious warfare. By the end of the 1930s, Soviet Union had a well-developed doctrine for amphibious warfare, but lacked the means necessary, like amphibious landing craft or naval infantry.7 6F 
77
78
The added type was tactical, which was described as a limited assault on the flank or rear of an enemy hindering the advance of their own ground forces. The diversionary attack was similar to that of landing parties, but the added purposes now included being a 
75
Russian and
Soviet Naval Art, 1853-1941, 27. 76
77
78
81
The Northern Fleet Commander, Admiral A. G. Golovko, turned to the commander of the Submarine Brigade, Captain N. I. Vinogradov, and asked: "Speak to me as an experienced malyutochnik8 1 F 82 . . . Is it possible to place 13 scouts on board an Mtype submarine?" [Vinogradov replied] "We have never had to attempt such a tasking . . . 
79
80
81
82
The German-Finnish forces were within reach of the Soviet submarine-base in Polyarnyy, and therefore the Soviet Fleet and the Red Army shared a common intelligence need on the enemy's positions and actions. What routes did convoys travel? How did they sail? Where did they stop? Where were their anti-submarine assets located?
Where were their minefields? The first infiltrations were done by small torpedo patrol boats or slow-moving guard cutters, but that became increasingly difficult.8 4F 
85
Therefore, his priority request for information was if the Germans had any amphibiouslanding-capable assets in northern Norway. He tasked Captain 3rd Rank Pavel Vizgin, chief of the intelligence staff section, to develop an intelligence collection plan.8 5F 86 83 Nikolay I. Vinogradov, Podvodnyy Front [Underwater front], trans. James Gebhardt (Moscow: Voyennoye izdatelstvo, 1989), 1. 
84
85
86 Makar Babikov, Letom Sorok Pervogo [Summer of '41], trans. James Gebhardt (Moscow: Sovetskaya Rossiya, 1980), 1.
Vizgin assigned named areas of interest amongst his subordinates: The immediate combat zone, including the coast; German second-echelon forces; Finnish and Norwegian ports. Realizing that this included a large portion of Norwegian territory, Vizgin's deputy, Major Dobrotin, came up with the idea of recruiting some of the Norwegian nationals that had fled from Norway to the Soviet Union, after the German attack on Norway the previous year. This was approved, and the task of recruiting them fell upon Senior Lieutenant Kudryavtsev, one of the intelligence staff. Many of the Norwegians who fled were communists, and thought they would be received as comrades when they arrived. Awkwardly, the first refugee, Alf Mikkelsen, was arrested and sentenced for espionage and unlawful border crossing to labor camp, where he perished within a year and a half. That was a fate he would share with many of those following him.8 6F 
87
Because it was already a secretive and isolated base, the submarine-base in Polyarnyy was chosen as the scouts' base. The submarine brigade was also responsible for equipping and logistically supporting them.8 7 F 88 Once selected, the unit started its combat training. Being fleet officers, few had experience or training in ground combat, so the deputy of the intelligence-staff section, Dobrotin, and another staff officer became responsible for the combat training, as being the only individuals with some experience.8 8 F 89 Thus, on 5 July 1941 the Northern Fleet Reconnaissance Detachment was officially activated. One of the first selectees was Viktor Leonov, a submariner wanting to do more, and he describes the training:
After breakfast, Motovilin led us into the hills and showed us how to move and stay hidden in the rocks, how to throw a grenade, and how to thrust with a bayonet. We made a good effort, and after just two days Motovilin, satisfied with our initial success, said, 'Men, you're good, but don't tell anyone! Of course, you'll have to learn a lot more, but there is no time. We'll assemble tonight for more training.'8 9 F 
90
88
89 Ibid. 
90
91
The Norwegian debut took place on the fourth operation, in the beginning of August 1941. It was to involve the entire reconnaissance detachment, and the mission was to execute a full raid on the northernmost flank of the German line. It turned out to be costly one. The unit suffered eight killed in action and thirty wounded, mainly through German fighters strafing their boats on their way back to base.9 2F 93 All attacks so far had been on objectives on the Soviet side of the border. Possibly realizing the value of the Norwegians, and not wanting to waste them on combat missions in the close battle-area, Golovko now wanted to shift focus to the enemy's deep area, Norway and Finland.9 3 F 94 Golokov wanted to insert groups, arranged around a core of Norwegians, but with Soviet radio operators, to observe the bringing up of reserves, munition storages, arriving ship and aircraft. For this, Vizgin was authorized to start recruiting radio operators from the commercial and fishing fleets. Another other issue concerned their means of insertion.
So far, the operations had been within hours away of boat travel, but their next objectives laid at least a day's travel away. The existing surface vessels used were both too slow and too small to cope with the Arctic Sea, especially as harsh autumn and winter weather approached. To this end, the detachment were issued with sea-going cutters. The other option was to use aviation. This had dual purpose, both as means of insertion, using 
92
97
95
96
97
98
Forty-eight hours later, it arrived to its destination on the eastern coast of Varanger Peninsula, at Langbunes. Spending the day grounded on the bottom, they used the periscope to determine the most suitable landing site. After dark M-173 made its way closer to the shoreline, to a distance of one hundred and eighty meters from the shore.9 9 F 100
The strong tide made it difficult to maintain position, so the anchor had to be dropped, however, only so much as just touching the bottom. This was done to facilitate escape, in case the submarine was detected from the air, sea or ground. For that same reason, the submarines were under strict order to not surface with the bow towards the shore. As soon as the submarine was secured, the crew and scouts passed equipment from the sail1 01 F 102 down on to the deck, while at the same time inflating two rubber boats, using a low air pressure hose from the bridge. Three scouts, together with some equipment, set off in the dark with the first rubber boat toward the shore. The second boat with equipment, rowed by one of the submarine's crew, followed some minutes later.
Those on the submarine waited with tension. In case the landing party was confronted, they were supposed to detonate a grenade, but the silence remained. Suddenly, the crewmember returned with the two boats. The rest of the landing took 90 minutes, and Kudryavtsev was the last one to leave the submarine, likely to make sure every last piece of equipment was brought ashore.1 02 F 
103
Of the thirteen scouts, six were Norwegians, and of the remaining seven Russian, two were Norwegian-Russians from the Kola Peninsula. Their mission was to set up a base for partisan warfare, gather intelligence, and to establish contact with the Norwegian resistance. Once on the ground they soon realized that the harsh climate, the barren terrain, and the general lack of a population to muster for a partisan force would make it hard to achieve the objectives. Within a few days, they would be reported by a 102 Sail is a naval term for the tower, conning tower or bridge of a submarine. 
103
104
Norwegian they had met, leading to engagements with the Wehrmacht, killing in total four scouts, while the rest had to withdraw before finally being extracted.1 04 F 105 That raises the question whether the Norwegians, of which five out of six were from the east coast of Varanger Peninsula,1 05 F 106 were consulted about the mission before landing? Given their local knowledge, they should have discouraged such a futile task.
However, the task did align with the description of a diversionary task in BN-40.
Vizgin's plan for the operation was that after the first landing, there would be subsequent landings every two weeks to reinforce this projected partisan force. The aim was to make the Germans feel unsecure, forcing them to task more forces for rear and coastal guard duties instead of reinforcing the frontline troops. Modern doctrine calls this "economy of force."1 06 F 107 As an advance force, the units' principal task was to reconnoiter suitable locales, and the locations and supply routes used by the Germans, and not let themselves get involved in any engagements. Thereby, they would literally adhere to BN-40, which stated that the purpose of a diversionary assault landings is "by means of concealed and surprise landing on enemy territory, to develop diversionary (demolition, partisan) actions."1 07 F 108 The key word in this case would be "develop," meaning to create the conditions for further operations. 
105
106
107
108 MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 69.
Returning to the operation, revealed to the Wehrmacht, the patrol fled out into the wilderness, from where the leader Kudryavtsev then radioed back to Northern Fleet command post and informed them about their current situation. They also recommended the ensuing landings to be canceled. This was agreed by the command post, who not just canceled the planned landing of the main body, but also ordered the group to cancel their mission and make their way back to Langbunes for extraction. Three weeks after their landing they were back at the same shore they had been inserted at. The promised submarine, M-176, did not appear. According to one source, the submarine failed to detect any signal from the shore on the first night. On the second night, again no signal was detected. Then the submarine commander decided to send two rubber boats with armed sailors to search for the scouts on shore, but without finding anyone. M-176 was then informed that the scouts had moved on to Persfjord on the northern coast of Varanger Peninsula, and was redirected there. After several unsuccessful attempts, due to the weather and enemy actions, it finally returned empty-handed to base on 25 October.1 0 8F 
109
Unfortunately, during the sprint, he and another Norwegian were hit by German fire, killing both men.1 11F 112 The rest of the group made a fighting withdrawal, breaking contact and were able to make it to a new hiding place. Finally, on the evening of 14 November, they could be extracted by the submarine M-172.1 12 F 113
The first submarine-insertion of a Northern Fleet Reconnaissance Detachment had lasted fifty-five days, in fall and winter weather, and cost the lives of four scouts, including the scout leader Kudryavtsev. On a negative note, they had failed to establish a partisan movement or sabotage anything, but as a positive they had gathered some intelligence, made contacts with local resistance, and shown that submarine-insertions 
111
112
113
The insertions would continue, and the experience would continue to grow. One problem that soon revealed itself was the choosing of observation posts. The problem facing Northern Fleet command was that the selection of suitable sites was made difficult in that enemy observation posts were already located in such places.1 1 5F 116 BN-40 made only one mention about the location of an observation post, and that says that it should be in a place where reconnaissance data may genuinely be obtained.1 16 F 
117
114
115
Operations 1940
Operations -1945, 154-155. 116 , 154-155. 116
Probably an aspect of economy of force, but also likely due to the limited size of their submarines, normally a submarine conducted a single mission in a sortie. This meant that either it picked up or landed a reconnaissance group, before it went and took up station at sea or returned to base. Very seldom was the insertion or extraction the single mission of a submarine, and equally seldom did a boat exchange one patrol for another. Possibly, this was done to preserve the secrecy of the patrol and its mission, but also a way of mitigating detection by antisubmarine units. The less time spent surfaced for loading or off-loading, the better.1 17 F 
118
20 F 121
If possible, it would ground and then the commander would determine his location and chose the most appropriate landing site on the shore. It is not mentioned, but it is highly probable that the choosing of the site was done in cooperation with the scout patrol leader. During the wait, the submarine would keep a constant hydro acoustic watch, surveilling for enemy antisubmarine boats. When it was time to surface, the periscope was raised and the horizon scanned, before the submarine moved into position for surfacing.1 2 1F 122 Nevertheless, finding the right landing spot was still difficult. On 1 April 1942, submarine K-1 had arrived during the day, ascertained its position, determined the landing site, and then waited until dark. Once the landing operation started and the rubber-boats approached the shore it was discovered that they were unable to land due to the steepness of the terrain. The landing was aborted, and the submarine spent another nine days reconnoitering the coastline, before it finally found a suitable location where it could land the reconnaissance party.1 22 F 123 Kovalenko was wounded, washed overboard and drowned.1 
25 F 126
Once the surrounding area was considered safe the crew immediately started to prepare the rubber-boats, while the scouts and the rest of the crew started to pass the equipment to the deck. Personnel with only handguns and a limited quantity of supplies were first brought to the shore. If everything was calm, they signaled back to the submarine, and the rest of the personnel and equipment could be ferried in. If there was a large amount of cargo, the submarine could sometimes bring a larger boat, capable of bringing all equipment in one trip. To have a rapid and precise landing, everything should 
126 Morozov, Podvodnyye Lodki VMF SSSR v Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyne 1941
-1945 gg. Chast 3. Severny Flot;
letopis boevykh pokhodov, 71. 127
131
Training of the landing party and the small boat handlers, going to and from the submarine was one. The second was the importance of secrecy in preparation and execution. Third was precise identification of the reconnaissance patrol before extraction.
A preliminary reconnaissance of the area to establish enemy patrol pattern was the fourth.
Finally, a rapid and concealed execution of the landing was essential.1 34 F 
135
134
135
USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great Patriotic War (1941
-1945), 3. 136
137 Morozov, Podvodnyye Lodki VMF SSSR v Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyne 1941
-1945 gg. Chast 3. Severny Flot;
letopis boevykh pokhodov.
138
de norska partisanerna: 3 February 1942, 81;
28 October 1942, 273;
20 February 1943, 274;
1 April 1943, 274;
6 April 1943, 274;
7 October 1943, 275;
5 April 1944, 275;
Sunde, I partisanenes fotspor: 1 April 1942, 162-163;
4 April 1942, 110-111;
23 September 1943, 22-23;
19-20 October 1943, 103. 139
distinguishes between offensive actions and raiding actions, with the difference being in duration.
Section 5 in Chapter 2 B is entitled Amphibious Landing of Reconnaissance-Diversionary Force. Examples of missions are reconnaissance, diversionary actions, capture of prisoners, and reception from shore of own scouts and parties. These tasks are executed by reconnaissance units of naval infantry, and special teams like sapperdemolition, or engineer assault. The mentioning of naval infantry is interesting, and shows that such infantry was now an independent branch of the Soviet Fleet. BUMS-37 suggested the use Red Army units for similar tasks. Depending on the mission and target, the force might range from battalion down to small groups of two-three men. The delivery options include parachute insertion, surface vessel insertion, and insertion by submarine.1 40 F
141
In the early days of the Soviet Union there was an emphasis on submarine warfare as a cost-effective way of defending the motherland. At the same time thoughts of offensive defense were being discussed, and there was a will to bring the war to the enemy's territory as quickly as possible. That developed into the first steps of amphibious assault, ranging from large assaults in support of ground forces operations, to insertions of agents to reconnoitering or executing diversionary actions. When the Soviet Fleet was regarding Soviet intelligence services. The two main structures were the intelligence services in the armed forces, the Red Army and the Red Navy, and the intelligence services in the Soviet secret police.1 43 F 144 As a subordinate service to the Red Army, there was also the Soviet-Russian Partisan forces that was controlled by the Central Committee of the Communist Party regarding intelligence activities, but supported by the Red Army in other functions.1 44 F 145
The statement in the summary that the boundaries between the different services are not distinct is not because of German intelligence failure, but rather Soviet inability or unwillingness to coordinate them. This is exemplified by the fact that, in the beginning of April 1942, both the Northern Fleet and the Soviet secret police had established three different observation posts within fifty kilometers, observing the same stretch of water.1 4 5F 
146
The last term refer to the units of interest for this essay, the submarine-inserted reconnaissance units. This is interesting considering that the original intent for these units was to establish partisan groups, but as the first attempt failed they were assigned 
144
145
146
147
The first organized attempt to stop such insertions was initiated by an order issued on 23 June 1943. The code name for the operation was 'Midnight Sun', and the plan was for units belonging to 210th Infantry Division to establish road checkpoints and conduct foot patrols as well as motorized patrols. This first operation had as its overall purpose to gain situational awareness. Para I. and II. of the order explained that there existed evidence that the enemy was inserting agent teams along the coast. The enemy was described as being composed of those Norwegians who fled to the Soviet Union after the German occupation of Norway. As such, they were likely to be accommodated with elements of the regular population in remote homesteads, fishing houses, and so on. The intent was to conduct "a large-scale reconnaissance operation in conjunction with a defensive check of the civilian population."1 50F 
151
156
56 F 157
It described that two radio stations or observation posts had been found, together with two supply depots as well. At one radio station they were able to capture one member of the reconnaissance group red-handed, and in total they captured fifteen suspected Norwegians, of whom five were identified as agents.1 57F 158 The findings were concrete evidence that what Vertyanskiy had told the Germans was true, and the report provided instructions on tactical-technical procedures to implement in further searches, as well as indicators of presence of an observation post.
The German forces were instructed to consider which terrain features overlooked the ocean. These observation posts could be in elevated terrain, among rocky cliffs, and under overhangs. They also realized that the inaccessibility by land did not exclude the presence of an observation post, since they would be inserted, supported and extracted from the sea. One important conclusion that would come of this was that subsequent search operations should be done jointly, involving both the Wehrmacht and the Kriegsmarine. The observations posts faced the ocean and could therefore, hopefully, be detected from that direction, while the ground forces were necessary for stopping evasive 
157
The searches were focused on rocks and hollows that could hide supply dumps, and to look for stone cairns marking them.1 60F 161 Further, it was by then known that narrow plywood boxes indicated that goods had been transported by submarines. Several of these crates were found at multiple locations.1 61F 162 They were likely tailor-made to fit in different compartments of the submarines, and was probably useful for an easy and quick offloading of equipment, since the time surfaced for insertion had to be kept minimal. Having a Russian national as a radio operator makes sense, as regards to both the language skills and familiarity with the equipment. However, in this case the messages were coded and only the Norwegian agents could cipher and decipher them. This could indicate that the Russians were taking the security and secrecy of their Norwegian agents seriously. On the other hand, it could also be as is stated in the conclusion of the minutes that, given Jessipov's criminal past, he was not to be trusted. Therefore, he had no knowledge about the content of the messages, but suspected they pertained to convoys, fortifications, troop unit relocations and troop unit shifts. Most importantly in the outcome of the interrogation was that Jessipov agreed to participate in a radio deception against the Soviets.1 63F 164 This was to be facilitated by two cipher codes, found at one of the sites.1 64F 165
In an acknowledgement dated 19 August 1943 the Commander of XIX Mountain Army Corps, Lieutenant General Ferdinand Schörner, summarized the outcome of these places for submarines along the coast.1 67 F 168 It was by now clear to the Germans that Soviet submarines did not just approach the shores to insert reconnaissance teams, they could also use the rugged coastline for concealment, striking at convoys from the landward side.1 68F 169
In a division order at the beginning of September regulating a coastal-overwatch operation the lessons learned had been implemented. The most suitable locations for submarine insertions and landings were designated in an annex, and were to be monitored or patrolled on a regular basis. Apparently, the Germans had realized that if agents could be inserted or landed, so could larger raiding parties. As presented in chapter 2 this was not an ungrounded suspicion. In order to prevent this the German units were instructed to be vigilant, especially during dark or foggy nights, and conduct combat patrols at nearby landing sites.1 69 F 
170
The successful operation at the beginning of August had been a hasty arrangement between two like-minded officers from the Wehrmacht and Kriegsmarine respectively. In mid-September it was time for a more deliberate action, using the acquired experience.
The area of interest was the coastline from Jakobselv-on the current border between Russia and Norway-westward to Bøkfjord, a distance of twenty-five kilometers as the crow flies. Considering all the fjords and islands, this was an impressive undertaking. The order was to search the coastal area as well as the coastline for agent observation posts.1 70F 171 In the annex to the order, the now well-known characteristics of an observation post-a rocky slope facing the sea-were outlined, and also the indicators: Russian clothing, food containers and especially the narrow plywood submarine supply containers mentioned earlier. It was emphasized that supplies could be either submarine delivered or airdropped, implying that ground-access was not a prerequisite for a suitable observation post.1 71F 
172
First, ground forces would move in on the coastline and establish a defensive line facing the sea, with a second screening line behind in surveillance posts. These positions should be occupied as covertly as possible, and in synchronization with the sea-borne elements.1 
72 F 173
The operation, named Sea Eagle, did not achieve anything other than finding some Soviet made equipment and arresting six suspicious civilians.1 74F 
175
176
The execution was to be in three phases. On arrival, the Germans assumed the submarine and shore would exchange the agreed-upon signals. When the rubber-boat arrived at shore, the occupant would be arrested noiselessly. Secondly, on the first shot all weapons would engage the submarine. Lastly, when the submarine submerged the assault boat would engage it with its depth charges.1 80F 181 Most submarines had a hatch 178 260/43 1943, 1-2. between the pressure hull and the sail, so therefore the gunners were instructed to aim at the base of the sail in order to compromise the hull. The machine-gunners were to engage the visible personnel.1 81 F 182 Once the assault boat had released its depth charges, the remaining hunt would be left to the Kriegsmarine.1 
82 F 183
184
The following night the Wehrmacht had deployed their guns at the agreed location, and the Kriegsmarine had stationed its boats around the coastline. At 2000 hours, the submarine M-105 surfaced and launched the rubber-boat. The moment it beached, the German guns opened fire. Twenty artillery rounds were fired and five was recorded as hits, together with multiple machine-gun bullets, from a distance of threehundred-and-fifty meters. The submarine made a crash dive, cueing the engagement of the naval elements. The nearest boat was the assault landing craft, but the heavy surf swamped it, rendering it powerless.1 85 F 186 Therefore, the outpost boat 6113 became the first boat to engage. Approximately one hour before midnight 6113 detected underwater movement and released its first depth charges. After its third attack run large oil quantities became visible on the surface. On its thirteenth run it released the last of its ninety-five depth charges, which resulted in a large air bubble emerging and additional oil spills. Another four attack runs were executed, until it was determined around noon the following day that M-105 had been destroyed. As a result, the battle report assessed that the engagement had led to the destruction of the M-105, referring to the hits in the sail by the land-forces that would make a dive precarious, and also because a dull bang had been heard from the submarine when it dived. After the fourteenth depth charge attack, no in-motion operation of the submarine could be detected. Therefore, it concluded, the damage had been devastating.1 87 F 188 However, 210th Infantry Division's report on Operation Tundra to the commander of XIX Mountain Army stated "an absolutely safe statement of the destruction of the submarine on the basis of the previous documents will not necessarily be met."1 88 F 189 This caution later proved to be correct.
A Soviet account of the incident stated that M-105 had been at the extraction point the previous night, but was unable to establish contact with the "scouts" ashore. It therefore submerged and settled on the bottom of the fjord. In the evening it surfaced and deployed the rubber-boat, with-coherent with the German report-the firing starting when it landed. After that, the accounts differ. The Soviet writing claims that only machinegun and submachine gun fire was received, but that none of it struck the submarine since the tide had carried it out of range. This seems unlikely, given what has been discussed previously, that the submarine commanders made great efforts to maintain their vessels in place during insertion or extraction. Nonetheless, after crash-diving the Folder 45787/3, First Frame 000592, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC. then tried to get the Soviets to agree on a new extraction point, claiming that the "scouts" were running seriously short of supplies.1 
91F 192
From then on, the submarine-insertions almost ceased, but not the activities they had been supporting. According to Morozov, on 9 March 1944 there was a failed 
192 239/43 1943
192 239/43 , 4-5. 193 Ibid., 6-7 194 260/43 1943, 4, 4
The first operation to counter the Soviet observation posts was a failure. Yet, by a stroke of luck and the determination of a Wehrmacht intelligence officer and a coastal commander from the Kriegsmarine they were able to conduct a truly joint operation, which led to the capture of enemy men and equipment. With the help of that and with the cooperation by a traitor they were able to lure a Soviet submarine into a trap, almost leading to its destruction. Even if the outcome was not according to what had been planned, it did achieve the effect of drastically reducing the use of submarines as a mean of insertion or extraction.
Hence, if there is no difference between peace and war, then there cannot be any difference between military exercises, preparations for war, or acts of war.
The first factor and most telling reason for why the Soviet Union would see the need for clandestine intelligence gathering was found in BU-40: "Reconnaissance should be uninterrupted. This is achieved by organizing and conducting reconnaissance both in peacetime and in wartime."1 97 F 198 In order to evaluate possible and planned operations it was necessary to be aware of the time and place of forces and means of the enemy. Only by being aware of changes is it possible to make adjustments, and therefore not one opportunity-in peace or war-should be neglected to collect information.1 98 F
199
99 F 200
Conclusion 1: In accordance with the prevailing doctrine and the thoughts of military thinkers during the 1930s-40s, the units of the Soviet Naval Fleet were striving to achieve operational readiness to be able to conduct operations throughout the strategic and operational depth at any given time.
Submarines were seen as a cheap substitute for bigger surface vessels, which fitted into the initially defensive and close coastal doctrine. The first five-year plans saw a steady increase of submarines until at the time for World War Two the Soviet Union had one of the world's largest submarine forces. Although primarily intended for naval warfare against the enemy's battle fleets, the submarine was quickly recognized as having the capability to deliver fires as well as reconnaissance deep into the enemy's territory, as discussed above. The submarine itself has both acoustic and visual sensors, but experience from World War Two showed that it was difficult for Soviet submarine captains to take useful photos through the periscope, even though some good pictures of ships or coastlines were taken.2 03 F 204 However, even if intelligence collection was a 'constant mission', the submarine technology of the day usually forced the submarine to abandon its station during night, sail out to sea and surface in order to charge the batteries. On the other hand, an observation post on land could provide reconnaissance twenty-four hours a day for several months. That is probably why operational reconnaissance by troops or agents was foreseen as early as 1937. As the wartime experience showed, the submarines also had the capability to clandestinely insert the scouts at locations only accessible from the sea.
In December 1937, the Red Navy was separated from the Red Army. That meant that, in order to independently conduct ground operations, the Soviet Naval fleet had to be augmented with a ground component. This was to be in accordance with the theories of amphibious warfare that had been developed during the 1930s.2 04F
205
Consequently, five years after it had been presented as an option in BUMS-37 the Soviet Naval Fleet had an amphibious warfare unit with reconnaissance scouts ready for use. Its leaders knew very well what it wanted to use this capability for, but it would take some time and effort before they had figured out the method for its application. The submarines with their crews were neither equipped nor trained for this type of task, especially not the Malyutka-class, but with a mix of courage and adaptability they made it work. Therefore, in 1946 the Soviet Naval Fleet could issue a new regulation building on newly acquired war experience describing how spetsnaz-units could be used for various tasks, such as reconnaissance, diversionary actions, capture of prisoners, and insertion and extraction of scouts and agents.2 
05 F 206
Although one of the intents for the submarine-inserted reconnaissance teams was to collect intelligence about the German convoys trafficking the Barents Sea, in order to guide the Northern Fleet submarine warfare against it, it is questionable if the Soviets achieved that. The submarines accounted only for a limited and disappointing number of sinking. Instead, it was the Soviet Air Force and Naval Air Arm that attributed most to these.2 06 F 207 According to Jacobsen, the German Admiral Polarküste claimed that 0.6% in 1942, and 0.8% in 1943 (measured in tonnage) of German shipping were sunk. For example, of 2 238 German ships convoyed in 1942 thirty-six ships were sunk, out of which twenty-four were merchant ships. Of those merchant ships, only twelve were sunk by direct fires, and the remainder lost to mines or otherwise shipwrecked.2 07F 208 This poor outcome is probably indicative of the cumbersome communication setup that required the scout teams to radio their observations to the Northern Fleet Headquarters in Murmansk, which in turn then assessed, decided and directed the submarines. The communications with the submarines were of course decided by the predetermined timings for signaling, furthering delaying the actions against the convoys. In this case, it was the technology, not ambition, that produced the biggest friction.
However, the method of inserting scout teams to their operations area were in the majority of cases successful. In some cases weather prohibited insertion, but usually the submarine would just return the next night and execute it. On only two occasions did the insertions fail, when equipment were lost in the high surf, leaving the scouts without supplies or radio-sets. When extractions failed, it was usually due to inability to establish contact between the team on shore and the submarine, forcing the scout team to find another way back. For anyone who has not experienced the terrain and climate of the northern coast of Norway, it is probably difficult to really appreciate the feats of those submarine crews and scout teams.
In addition, for the purpose of this study, it is noticeable that the perception of the Soviet Navy after the war is that the submarine insertions and extractions "on the whole …were carried out successfully."2 0 8F
209
The success of the method can also be measured by how difficult it was for the Germans to detect and apply countermeasures. They suspected the presence of scout teams along the coast, but initially they thought either they were local Norwegian agents or that they had been inserted by boats or parachutes. It was not until the capture of a Soviet scout team that they became aware of the submarine insertions. Furthermore, the Germans could not effectively counter those activities until they had captured a Soviet radio operator and radio codes. As a result, they were able to lure a submarine to a known location and engage it. This trap made the Soviet Northern Fleet more careful and it abandoned the submarine method for the remainder of the war.
As a side note, it is noticeable that these remaining insertions were done using parachute, thereby proving that Soviet naval spetsnaz units-like their American counterpart SEALs-can use infiltration tactics and means on sea, air and land.
Conclusion 3: The method of submarine insertions was seen as successful and
(almost) undetectable. The overall failure can be attributed to immature technology rather than inappropriate methods.
On 5 October 2000 the Swedish Government appointed a special investigator to look into the Swedish political and military conduct of the so called 'submarine question', and the report Perspektiv på ubåtsfrågan (SOU) (Perspective on the submarine question) was released on 15 November 2001.2 0 9F 210 The report was expected to be a summary of all political and military investigations that had been done so far.
were that Swedish territorial waters had been violated, and that neither the Soviet Union nor any Western state could be excluded as perpetrators.2 
13 F 214
1. Mapping and surveillance to facilitate hostile actions against shipping.
2. Preparations in order to contain Swedish naval bases.
3. Sabotage against the coastal defense and the chain of surveillance and detection installations along the coastline.
Interestingly enough, SOU did not see the use of spetsnaz-type units as likely because, according to the investigator, such use is only done in preparations for an amphibious landing, which were deemed as excluded in the Swedish case.
214 SOU, Perspektiv på ubåtsfrågan, 368-369. 
215
On an anecdotal, but still interesting, level are the numerous sightings and even close encounters with unidentified frogmen. One of the more well known in Sweden happened in the end of February and beginning of March 1984 in the vicinity of the Swedish naval base in Karlskrona. Swedish Army units on two occasions observed frogmen along the shoreline. On the first occasion, a Swedish police K-9 unit engaged in a pursuit but it ended at the waterline. A few days later, an Army unit opened fire on a frogman who disappeared into the water.2 16 F
217
The Nazi-German experience from Northern Norway shows how difficult it is to conduct sub-hunting, especially in littoral waters, something that is shared with the experience of the Swedish Armed Forces during the 1980s-90s. Even when the Germans managed to lure a Soviet submarine to a specified place at a specified time, they failed to sink it or force it to strike flag, although it was subjected to direct gunfire and more than a hundred depth charges.
Finally, this research also found the Soviet and German actions and observations that can serve as indicators of submarine activity even to this day. First, there is the described practice of lying in wait during daytime, only to surface and insert teams during the night, which should leave markings in the seabed, as well as indicating when an effort should be concentrated. Second, is the maneuvering just before surfacing to ensure the bow are facing open water, which can help explain movement patterns. Lastly, the deliberate search by the Wehrmacht for plywood boxes as indicators of submarine insertions. Any identified telltale sign like that can be used as indication of a presence. Conclusion 4: What was described in BUMS-37 through BU-45 can be observed as modern day practice.
Committed to avoid fighting a war on its own territory the Soviet Union from the outset was determined to maintain a readiness, in order to be able to deliver a pre-emptive strike or at least bring the war back to an aggressor's territory as quickly as possible. At the same time they were developing the deep-battle theory, engaging the enemy throughout the whole depth, and striking at the rear echelons. The Soviet Naval Forces contribution to this was an intent to engage the enemy even at their bases. To achieve this there had to be ready plans, which during their production had to be fed by an intelligence-preparation of the battlefield. This preparation had to be carried out in peacetime in order to be ready when the war came.
These ideas were tested in practice during World War Two and within a couple of weeks after the Soviet Union had been attacked by Nazi-Germany, the Soviets were preparing to conduct deep strikes behind enemy lines. With the use of submarines they successfully inserted scout teams along the coast of Northern Norway to monitor the German convoys. The scout teams did not achieve the expected effect, but that was more due to a cumbersome command and control arrangement than anything else. Nonetheless, the experience gained was encouraging enough to promote a continued practice after the war.
an additional leap was taken when the experiences of World War Two was incorporated into BU-45.
Although not technically research, English speakers would benefit from a translation of the books by Jacobsen and Sunde. The story of the Norwegian nationals working for the Soviet Union in an effort to liberate their country is awe-inspiring. The author has had a hard time to stay on track, and not let himself divert into the enticement of their stories. Nevertheless, with an angle in line with the first research suggestion there might be room for them to be heard. 
The Doctrine One of the governing documents for Soviet tactics during World War Two-what they call the Great Patriotic War-on operations in Northern Scandinavia was the Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA1 0 F 11 1937 (BUMS-37).1 1 F 12
68 MNS,
68 MNS,
This essay will use the name Soviet Union , unless the sources cited specifically refer to the name Russia, or the language or culture of Russia.
Gordon McCormick, Stranger than Fiction-Soviet Submarine Operations in Swedish Waters, A Project AIR FORCE report prepared for the United States Air Force (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, January1990), v.
It is a collective term for many different special operations forces that existed or exist in Russia, but this essay focuses on those forces belonging to the Russian Navy. The word spetsnaz is a Russian abbreviation of the term (vojska) spetsialnogo naznatjenija, which translates to (troops with) special task. In this essay, the terms spetsnaz, scouts or agents will be used intermittently, but all referring to the same type of special operations forces. The word spetsnaz is referring to a type of unit and not to a unit, and is therefore written with lower-case letters.
In Swedish official terminology the operation is referred to as being an intelligence operation, since many of the sub-hunting capabilities have been stood-down during the last two decades. Therefore, what was hoped to be achieved was to gather as much information as possible.
James F. Gebhardt, "The Evolution of Soviet Concepts of Amphibious Warfare in the 1930s" (Essay, Soviet Army Studies Office, Fort Leavenworth, KS, undated).
Earl F.Ziemke, The German Northern Theater of Operations 1940-1945  (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1980).
Alf R. Jacobsen, Blodröd augusti-Historien om de norska partisanerna, trans. Emeli André(Stockholm, Bokförlaget Natur och Kultur, 2008).
Lars Gyllenhaal and James F. Gebhardt, Slaget om Nordkalotten (Lund:  Historiska Media, 1999).
Harald G. Sunde, I partisanenes fotspor (Kirkenes: Beallječohkka Innovation. 2019).
Viktor Leonov, Blood on the Shores-Soviet Naval Commandos in World War II, trans. James F.Gebhardt (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1993).
RKKA is an abbreviation for Rabochye-Krestyanstkaya Voyenno-Morskiy Flot(Workers' and Peasants Military Naval Fleet).
Directorate of Naval Forces (DNF), Workers'-Peasants Red Army, BU MS 37, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, trans. James F.
MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 9.
DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, 8.
MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 11
Ibid., 3.   
DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, 11.
This was also the only Soviet submarine that experimented with submarinebased aircraft, but the, understandably, small size of the aircraft (OSGA-101) was no match for the elements of the oceans, and the trials were eventually cancelled. This submarine was about the same size as the U.S. Navy Gato class.
  45  Breemer, Soviet Submarines-Design,Development and Tactics,[48][49][50][51][52][53][54][55] 
Breemer, Development and Tactics,[72][73] 
MNS, Temporary Instructions for theConduct of Naval Operations, 35.   
Jacobsen,[32][33][34][35][36] 
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 19-20.   ), 19-20.    
Babikov, Otryad Osobogo Naznacheniya, 17.   
MNS, Temporary Instructions for theConduct of Naval Operations, 38.   
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 3.   ), 3.    
Ibid., 5.    
Ibid., 3.   
Jacobsen, 89, 107, 117.    
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 3-4.   ), 3-4.    
Ibid.,[5][6] 
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 4.   ), 4.    
Jacobsen, Blodröd augusti-Historien om de norska partisanerna, 116.
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 4.  ), 4.   
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 7-8.   ), 7-8.    
Sunde, I partisanenes fotspor,[162][163] 
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 18.  ), 18.   
MNF-MNH, Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the Military NavalFleet of the Union of the SSR, 6.
210 Infantry Division, Section Ia 401/43, Ic (401/43), Order, 23 June 1943, trans. James Gebhardt, Series T-315, Reel 1620, 210 Infantry Division, Folder 37889/4, Annex 1b to KTB, First frame 000041, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC, 1.
401/43 1943, 1-2.   
Jacobsen,[158][159][160] 
The statement that the convicted had been shot turned out to be false. When the convicted were brought to the place of execution, they were first ordered to dig a mass-grave. During the digging (probably not carried out in a haste) they were taunted and abused by the soldiers of the German execution squad. Finally, the officer in charge spat one of the Norwegians in the face, which made him kill the officer with a blow to the head from his shovel. This enraged the German soldiers and instead of shooting the prisoners they started clubbing them to death one by one, using firewood and shovels. After the war, no one was tried for this war crime.Sunde, I partisanenes fotspor,[16][17] 
Headquarters, XIX (Mtn.) Army Corps, Acknowledgement, 19 August 1942, trans. James Gebhardt, Series T-315, Reel 1621, Annex 1b, KTB No. 3, 210 Infantry Division, Folder 45787/2, First Frame 000165, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC.
625/43:1 1943, 2-3.   
Jacobsen, Blodröd augusti-Historien om de norska partisanerna, 292.
210 Infantry Division, Abt. Ic 260/43 (260/43), Report, 17 November 1943, trans. James Gebhardt, Series T-315, Reel 1621, 210 Inf. Div. Ic, Annex 2, KTB 3 Folder 45787/3, First Frame 000565, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC, 1.
210 Infantry Division, Abt. Ic 239/43 (239/43), Transcript, 6 November 1943, trans. James Gebhardt, Series T-315 Reel 1621, 210 Inf. Div., Folder 45787/3, First Frame 000573, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC, 1.
210 Infantry Division, Abt. 1a 203/43 (203/43:2), Order, 7 October 1943, trans. James Gebhardt, Series T-315, Reel 1621, 210 Inf. Div., Folder 45787/2, First Frame 000283, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC.
Ibid., 1.
Zunker, Battle Report of Outpost Boat 6113 in regard to the destruction of an enemy submarine on 21 October 1943 in front of Piersfjord, 3.
260/43 1943, 3.   
MNS, Temporary Instructions for the Conduct of Naval Operations, 37.
Ibid., 11.    
DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the RKKA, 8.
Ibid.,[358][359] 
DNF, Temporary Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of theRKKA, 7;  MNS 1940, 10.   
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 24-25.  ), 24-25.   
Gebhardt, The Evolution of Soviet Concepts of Amphibious Warfare in the 1930s, 1.
MNF-MNH, Combat Regulations for the Naval Forces of the Military NavalFleet of the Union of the SSR, 6.
Breemer, Development and Tactics, 75.    
Jacobsen, Blodröd augusti-Historien om de norska partisanerna, 281.
NGS-NAD, Collection of Materials on the Experience of Combat Activities of the Naval Forces of the USSR, No. 38, Intelligence Support to the Northern Fleet during the Great PatrioticWar (1941War ( -1945), 3.  ), 3.   
Statens offentliga utredningar (SOU), Perspektiv på ubåtsfrågan, SOU 2001:85 (Stockholm, Sweden: Regeringskansliet, 15 November 2001), last updated 2 April 2015, accessed 17 April 2020, https://www.regeringen.se/rattsligadokument/statens-offentliga-utredningar/2001/11/sou-200185.
See Norman Friedman, The US Maritime Strategy (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1988), for a complete discussion of the change in US operations and strategy.
SOU, Perspektiv på ubåtsfrågan,[353][354] 
Ibid., 357.   
Patrik Micu, Mikael berättar: "Fienden är här, tänkte jag," Kvällsposten, 10 January 2016, accessed 26 April 2020, https://www.expressen.se/kvallsposten/31-arsenare-fienden-ar-har-tankte-jag/.
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Once surfaced the submarine commander dispatched observers topside to keep watch on the air, ground and surface of the sea. How important this was is exemplified by an insertion by the Shchuka submarine Shch-403, that began on 14 February 1942 at the deserted fisherman's village Opnan, some ten kilometers east of North Cape. Two rubber-boats set off, with three scouts and two sailors as oarsmen, in the heavy sea. When they did not return in time, the rubber-boats was retracted via the attached safety lines, and found to be empty of both personnel and equipment. A search party was dispatched but returned without any news. The submarine commander, Lieutenant Semyon Kovalenko, was forced by the deteriorating weather to abandon further search attempts.1 23F 
124
124
125
Apart for those sections specifically talking about support of ground forces, it is implied in many other places as well, as presented earlier in chapter 2. BU-45 contains one chapter on how to defeat an enemy amphibious assault landing and another chapter about naval gunfire in support of ground forces operating on a coastline. The rest of the chapters are about how to maneuver a fleet with its vessels, and how to fight with them.
While BUMS-37 talked about reconnaissance in general terms, and gave examples how it could be conducted, BU-45 had a section about reconnaissance's role in combat support, as well as how it is supposed to be executed. It also makes a distinction between reconnaissance and patrolling. Another distinction is made between combat in enemy coastal regions, and amphibious assault. Both are given a chapter each. The former also 
140
CHAPTER 4 GERMAN COUNTERMEASURES 'The cool-blooded ramming hit the submarine's weakest point with full force. At straight angle and with a speed of 13 knots the double reinforced icebow cut through the pressure hull and capsized the submarine, confirmed by the escaping air. The force is illustrated by the submarine-hunter's anchor snapped in two when it cut through the sail', wrote the flotilla commander, Lieutenant Commander Erich Köplin in the report. The Soviet submarine M-106 Leninsky Komsomolets was built by money collected through the Young Communists in Leningrad. It never returned to Polarnoje after the collision. Submarine and crew disappeared.
-Alf R. Jacobsen, Blodröd augusti -Historien om de norska partisanerna
This chapter examines the documents of the German forces operating in northern Norway during World War Two. These documents have been the base for much of the research about this theater, but the focus here will be on the counter-infiltration of reconnaissance teams. The chapter will follow a chronological order, from the first suspicions about insertions until the last entries on it.
On Preparation of the Battlefield, IPB.1 52 F 153 They wanted to find out where insertions could possibly take place and which human and physical terrain could harbor this.
At the beginning of July 1943, the 210th Division disseminated an intelligence summary for the period 1 January to 30 June regarding the Finno-Scandinavian theater.
Three things are noteworthy. First, it stated that Soviet military and civilian intelligence had been rendered ineffective. That was a premature statement, considering what was presented in the previous chapter, and their big break-through was yet to come.1 53F 154
Secondly, the credit for revealing the enemy's intelligence activities was given to the German intelligence officers working in corps and division level. Through their interrogation of prisoners of war and agents, they were able to present a workable intelligence picture. This would guide the Germans what to look for in the coming operation.1 54 F 155 Lastly, it does not mention Vertyanskiy's name. This is odd, because he was the one who revealed the organization and modus operandi of the reconnaissance teams operating from submarines. The only plausible reason for this could be that he was still being interrogated, and considered as being used as a cross-reference for additional information. two last operations. Fourteen Norwegian nationals had been tried and found guilty of agent activities, or support thereof. Eleven were sentenced to the death penalty by shooting and the remaining three to prison.1 65F 166 He also acknowledged that these had been Wehrmacht-led activities, with the support of the German Security Service. This is remarkable since it would usually be the other way round. His concluding remark was the most important. A successful counter-intelligence operation had degraded the enemy's capabilities, but he cautioned that this was only temporary and that it would occur again.
There would be no time to relax.1 66F 167 210th Infantry Division issued a final report on 21 August with a summary of recent events and recommendations for further actions. Syltefjord, on the northern coast of Varanger Peninsula, was identified as the most likely fjord for further insertions. It was therefore recommended that an observation post should be established at one of the high points overlooking the fjord, in order to detect submarine insertions. The Luftwaffe was, in addition to its regular sea surveillance, also instructed to look for possible hiding approaching submarine-hunters were soon heard followed shortly by the depth charge attacks. A total of fifty-three explosions were reported, including those heard after M-105 reached the open sea.1 8 9F 190
Considering the fact that 6113 reportedly dropped its allocation of ninety-five depth charges, this could be an indication that the better part of the German submarinehunt was a wild goose chase. The Germans fifteenth run, which was executed sometime between 0820 and 1118 hours in the morning, claims to have been done against a particularly good and clear echo of a submarine.1 90 F 191 This shows exactly how difficult a submarine-hunt is in littoral waters, as was later experienced by the Swedish Navy in the 1970-80s.
Subsequently, the Soviet report claimed that M-105 returned to base with only some damage. The report ends the story of this mission with the statement that the reconnaissance group had probably been captured, and then used to lure a submarine into a trap. It is difficult in retrospect to determine if this conclusion was evident for the Northern Fleet Command 1943, or if it is a later statement based on captured German documents after the war. Nonetheless, the radio game continued for almost a month. The German "scouts" transmitted a deceptive accusation that they had been betrayed, and Apart from one violation, the infamous U-137 that ran aground outside Karlskrona in 1981, it was never possible to establish the identity of the violators.
Therefore, a number of rumors and speculations rose: "that some or all the intrusions were made by NATO submarines with the tacit consent of the Swedish Navy, that the chiefs of staff deliberately allowed submarines to violate Swedish territory, that submarines were released with the tacit consent of the Government, etc."2 12F 213 This contributed to a growing credibility gap between the politicians, the Armed Forces, and the public, which continues to this day. Nonetheless, the overall conclusions by SOU Comparing the World War Two and the Swedish Experience Chapter 2 described the supposed tasks for reconnaissance and diversionary units in the Soviet naval doctrines during the time for World War Two. The foundations of these tasks were to maintain an updated knowledge about the possible theaters, in order to facilitate war planning and ensure a rapid execution of 'active-offensive' strikes even in peacetime. Therefore, military geography had to be reconnoitered, for example depths, currents, and tides. That also included knowledge about mines and other obstacles. In conjunction with intelligence on the enemy's composition of forces, and their equipment, it also included information about the bases, coastal batteries, communication equipment, and navigational aids. Finally, submarines were also expected to insert raiding parties or agents as necessary.
All of these tasks fall well within the three categories described by SOU. Keeping with the confidentiality that still applies to much of the information around the Swedish underwater violations, only two open-source examples will be provided as indicators of activities listed above:
1. In the mid-1980s, it was discovered that a mine-line belonging to the Swedish coastal defense had been sabotaged.
2. An anti-submarine net protecting a Swedish naval base was found to have been cut through in 1986.2 15F 216
Both of these examples can be directly linked back to what was described as tasks for diversionary-reconnaissance units, or spetsnaz, in BUMS-37.
216 SOU, Perspektiv på ubåtsfrågan, 378.
The principal lesson learned was how difficult it was for an enemy to detect the insertions and extractions, and in case they did, how difficult it was (and still is) to conduct sub-hunting in littoral waters. It is possible that the Germans would never have been able to counter the submarine insertions, had it not been for a lucky capture of a prisoner willing to cooperate. Although the operation to sink a Soviet submarine failed, it did manage to severely limit further Soviet submarine insertions into Northern Norway for the remainder of the war.
Experience from modern day Swedish anti-submarine warfare shows several similarities with the writings in Soviet naval instructions from the 1930s, as well as the practical experience by the Wehrmacht and Kriegsmarine during World War Two.
Modern Swedish assessment of the motives replicates early Soviet writing on the matter, and a current Swedish Navy captain would likely nod his head in an acknowledging manner could he speak with a Kriegsmarine captain, on how to sink a Soviet submarine.
As stated in the beginning of the essay, there is more to be learnt from the northern Scandinavian theater of World War Two. The sources are abundant with information, and although the German documents have been used by several researchers previously there are still more to be found. This author's humble suggestions are: firstly, more can be learned from the German experience of counter-insurgency or anti-guerilla 