# ID: 3fb03043b4414d3db9ba871ad0f3e980
# Title: Air Force's Combat Aircraft: A Future Holding into the Past
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
America's AF has adopted a strategy that reduces and then modernizes its remaining legacy fleet of combat aircraft. The strategy attempts to free up the necessary funding required to procure a modernized AF with all stealth bombers and fighters. It has been plagued with setbacks because of production delays and cost overruns. The newly attained stealth aircraft have also fallen short of their projected and required mission capable rates and drastically exceeded their estimated cost per flying hour. While the AF attempts to explain away the costs as temporary or as costs that will dissolve when maintenance practices are developed and matured, the history of stealth aircraft reveals differently. It reveals instead that stealth aircraft cost drastically more per flying hour than do their predecessors. Given the history of how America's combat AF has fought to gain air superiority and provide support to the forces on the ground, it needs to procure a mixed stealth and legacy combat force capable of gaining air superiority at an acceptable cost. This total stealth and legacy force make-up should be sized to gain air superiority over the future battlefield, thus enabling a modernized legacy fleet to sustain air dominance over its enemies while achieving its nation's objectives. This solution will prove itself affordable while allowing the AF to continue its investments toward a stronger future.
15.
Since the great losses of fighter and bomber aircraft in WWII, America's Air Force (AF) has made great strides in increasing the survivability of its aircraft over the contested airspace of the nation's enemies. America's adversaries, however, have not remained idle. They, too, have advanced their technology and increased their ability to track and target aircraft in the skies over their territory. It was the adversarial increases in capability during the Cold War years that led America's AF to invest heavily in stealth technology to counter this threat. As a result, early stealth aircraft played a major role in the opening hours of OPERATION DESERT STORM and paved the way for less survivable aircraft to endure against the Soviet-designed Iraqi integrated air defenses. 
1
Starfighter. Third generation aircraft are marked by technological refinements with a push toward improved maneuverability and multi-role capabilities such as carrying out both air-to-air and ground attack missions. Their developmental time span was from 1960 to 1970 and included aircraft such as the F-4 Phantom that became popular during the Vietnam War. The fourth generation (4 th Gen) includes more sophisticated avionics and weaponry brought on by advances in computers and systems integration, which spanned from 1970 to 1990. Increased agility and flexibility in mission roles are also typical attributes of 4 th Gen and include aircraft such as the F-15 Eagle and F-16 Falcon. These same aircraft have also been recently modified with fifth generation (5 th Gen) technology because of their extended procurement period combined with service life extensions to the older F-15s and F-16s. 
4
Most of these later changes came as a result of the lessons learned during the Vietnam War and were emplaced so America's aircraft could survive in the ongoing Cold War. 
5
7
8
Stratofortress but never realized its original force size as a result of the Cold War ending in December, 1991.   In response, engineers developed electronic counter measures against the SAM's radar detection and tracking ability but learned that the most effective means of surviving is to remain undetected. Since that would not always be plausible, the next best option was to prevent detection from directing effective anti-access measures against an aircraft. 9 7 Federation of American Scientists, "Anti-Aircraft Artillery," fas.org, 1994, The country's long range bombers were no longer required to penetrate deep into the SAM defended Soviet Union, and President George H.W. Bush announced in January, 1992 the reduction of B-2 stealth bombers from the original plan of 132 to only 20 as part of the http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/row/aaa.htm (accessed March 9, 2010). 
8
9 David Halberstam, War in a Time of Peace: Bush, Clinton and the Generals (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001), 12-13. 'peace dividend.' 
10
The requirement for stealth never went away, however, as evidenced by the AF's procurement strategy over the 18 years that followed. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
11 Global Security, "F-22 Raptor History," Globalsecurity.org, http://www.globalsecurity.org /military/systems/aircraft/f-22-history.htm (accessed March 9, 2010).
12 Ibid.  (Washington, DC, 2009), 4.
14 Ibid., 5.
(FYDP). This strategy is based on procuring aircraft that possess the ability to access areas defended by advanced surface-to-air missile systems. Another portion of the savings goes toward enhancements and service life extension programs (SLEPs) to maintain and modernize the current 4 th Gen aircraft until their eventual replacement.
17
Since this strategy does not procure legacy aircraft, it will result in a short term mix of both 4 th and 5 th Gen aircraft until the 4 th Gen reach their new extended end-of-service life. It also makes the assumption the AF will not be receiving an increase to its Total Obligation Authority (TOA) to procure 5 th Gen aircraft while maintaining its current force structure of 4 th Gen aircraft.
Anyone who has to fight, even with the most modern weapons, against an enemy in complete command of the air, fights like a savage against modern European troops, under the same handicaps and with the same chances of success.
Since the end of WWII, America's AF has increased its ability to survive and operate over the skies of its enemies, but retaining this advantage requires an ever vigilant process of modernizing its legacy fleet and procuring a future generation of combat aircraft. This monograph examines three areas that support this type of modernization approach and procurement strategy. These areas include a historical perspective on how combat aircraft have been used in conflicts dating back to WWII, the advancement of technology towards thwarting air power and its freedom to maneuver, and the current reduction and procurement strategy in the USAF's fighter and bomber fleet size.
The first of these three areas will examine historical references from WWII to presentday conflicts. While there were no stealth aircraft in these earlier conflicts, the data provides the cost of gaining air superiority and reveals the survivability rate once that price was paid. In later wars, historical data reveals where stealth aircraft were used to gain access into high threat environments and then allowed for continued operations of less survivable aircraft to operate and sustain air superiority. Historical accounts also confirm that the majority of follow-on air strikes are accomplished by the less survivable aircraft in America's recent conflicts.
The second area of evidence reviews the increasing counter-air threat through modernization programs to legacy systems, the introduction of advanced technology towards thwarting air power and its freedom to maneuver, and the proliferation of these systems. It will also assess the current USAF ability to survive and operate against these threats without stealth capability. For the purposes of keeping this monograph unclassified, only unclassified sources such as Jane's Defense Weekly, Gulflink, and Sinodefense are referenced. These sources will also be referenced when discussing and evaluating the survivability of America's newly acquired stealth fighter aircraft to include the proposed next generation bomber.
The final area reviewed is the USAF's reduction of 4 th Gen aircraft and its procurement of 5 th Gen aircraft. Information is taken from historical budgets that have been presented to the Department of Defense (DoD) along with published articles from senior Air Force leaders.
Budget material related to reductions is obtained from the Air Force Financial Management and Also examined are the costs and mission capable (MC) rates of stealth aircraft because they provide relevancy toward maintaining an all stealth fleet as opposed to one mixed with a larger and less expensive legacy fleet.
Using these three areas, this monograph addresses what the future makeup of the USAF's combat fleet should be in order to gain air superiority and allow for continued operations of its less survivable but equally-capable aircraft. Gaining insight into the historical use of combat aircraft along with projected threats to the survivability of future, more advanced aircraft will help better determine an AF procurement strategy.
20
This insight begins with a review of past military history to present day execution of air operations.
The future battle on the ground will be preceded by battle in the air. This will determine which of the contestants has to suffer operational and tactical disadvantages and be forced throughout the battle into adoption compromise solutions.
Erwin Rommel
Many historians refer to WWII as the war when air power first came of age. General Eisenhower, and he was also the air commander. He stated in one of his lectures after the war the following:
There was an element of the unknown prior to the landings in Normandy, in spite of the fact that since 1940 Allied superiority had gradually extended from British coast, over the coastal sea routes, across to the shores of Europe and finally to some extent over parts of Europe itself. How unknown was the degree of air superiority we had attained is shown by the fact that prior to Dday it was estimated Luftwaffe would carry out 600 and 700 sorties per day over the area of the landings; whereas in fact they were unable to maintain a daily average of more than 200. 
27
The systematic destruction of the ground organization of the Luftwaffe, especially of the fighter airfields, was very effective just before and during the start of the invasion. Hardly a single airfield, of those intended for fighter operations, is still serviceable. The outstanding factor both before and during the invasion was the overwhelming air superiority of the enemy. 
28
29
30
31
28 Wynn, and Susan Young, Prelude to Overlord (California: Presidio Press, 1984)
The Korean War was no different than the one previously fought with regard for the need to gain air superiority. It did, however, see the transition in America's AF from piston driven aircraft into the jet age. At the onset of the war, the majority of America's aircraft in the inventory were still piston-driven. 
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
Air superiority, combined with the ability to deliver munitions without flying into the threat radius of AAA, would have significantly reduced the number of overall losses. As America's AF closed out the air war over Korea, it applied lessons learned and invested in further transformation of its fighter and bomber forces. This continued transformation came about as it entered into the Cold War with Russia and faced its next challenge over the skies of Vietnam. 
37
38
39
40
It also revealed the capabilities that America would face in an all out war against its Cold War adversary, Soviet Russia. Against this rival, the engagement zone was more complex and provided a larger array of weapons that could effectively engage aircraft at all altitudes. In order to survive in this environment, an aircraft had to apply multiple defensive characteristics. Some of these characteristics relied on providing electronic countermeasures that thwarted the enemy's ability to track and engage the aircraft it detected or deceptively lead radar-guided missiles and AAA astray. 41 40 James F. Dunnigan and Albert A. Nofi, Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War (New York: St. Martin's  Press, 2000), 108-109.
One of these defensive characteristics is to remain unseen by radar. It was during the mid-1970's, with the bitter experiences of the Vietnam War very much in the minds of senior U.S. military officers and politicians alike, that thoughts turned to ways of designing an aircraft whose surface could absorb probing radar beams or deflect them in such a way that there would 41 Jacob Van Staaveren, Gradual Failure: The Air War Over North Vietnam 1955-1966 (Washington D.C.:  Air Force History and Museum Program, 2002), 116.  be little or no radar reflectivity. 
42
In 1991, the USAF employed a squadron of aircraft that had the ability to engage targets with precision from medium to high altitudes and remain unseen by enemy sensors. This capability would expose the most heavily defended targets to air attacks, especially at night. Thus the concept of stealth technology was born, and the end results were to be dramatic when applied in the skies over Iraq. 
43
44
45
46
47
48
The tide had turned for America's AF in this war. All previous wars discussed resulted in AAA having the most kills against USAF aircraft, but the radar-guided and heat-seeking SAMs now replaced AAA as the new number one threat to aircraft.  that flew slow and low during daylight hours, flares and armor provided some protection against heat-seekers and AAA. 
50
51
52
In all, the USAF conducted modern operations born out of the lessons learned from the past and did so very successfully. These more recent lessons learned over Iraq combined with lessons reaffirmed from previous air wars were what the USAF planners and executors brought with them into the skies over Kosovo.
The military operation, named ALLIED FORCE, was planned to be prosecuted in five phases where the first of these, Phase 0, was the deployment of air assets into the European theater and the second, Phase 1, was to establish air superiority over Kosovo. NATO's strategy was based on the gradual application of military force, which received considerable criticism from military strategists and others despite the fact that it ultimately did compel Yugoslavia's withdrawal at zero cost in NATO lives. Phase 2 allowed for air strikes against military targets in Kosovo and against Yugoslav forces south of 44 degrees north latitude, to include Yugoslavian territory south of Belgrade. Phase 3 expanded the air 
51
operations against a wider range of high-value military and security force targets throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and Phase 4 redeployed forces as required. Within a few days of the start of the campaign, alliance aircraft were striking both strategic and tactical targets throughout Serbia, as well as working to suppress and disrupt its integrated air defense system. 
55
The F-117 was used against highly defended Belgrade along with the B-2 stealth bomber in its combat debut. 
56
57
58
Both missile types that shot down USAF airplanes over the former Yugoslavia had also destroyed USAF airplanes over Iraq.
Although the hardware was basically the same, the Serbs, however, used different methods than 
56
57 Richard Hallion, Storm Over Iraq: Air Power and the Gulf War (Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997), 64, 163.
58 Ibid. 
59
Iraq. The Iraqis used the systems as they were originally designed, sending radar signals constantly to the aircraft they intended to shoot down. This made successful targeting more likely but also rendered the systems more vulnerable to HARMs. The Serbs used the radar considerably less in the early part of an engagement, thus scoring fewer hits but preserving their air defense capability until the end of the hostilities. 
60
61
62
Although the Yugoslav air defense systems were some of the most capable the U.S. has faced in combat so far, they do not represent the most advanced state-of-the-art SAM capabilities for sale on the international market. In future engagements against advanced SAMs, USAF aircraft will need the ability to have continuous, real-time, precision location of passive and active enemy systems to better achieve effective suppression and destruction of these systems. In order to gain air superiority, they will also need the ability to do this without getting shot down first by the very system they are targeting. While these lessons were still being applied, and research was being conducted on technology to bring about these futuristic advancements, America's AF entered into operations over Afghanistan and Iraq. 64 U.S. military intervention in Afghanistan (ENDURING FREEDOM) began on October 7, 2001 and consisted of airstrikes on Taliban and Al Qaeda forces, coupled with targeting by U.S. special operations forces working with the Northern Alliance and other anti-Taliban forces. 
65
66
67 64
As a result of the combined tactics from 2001 to 2002, there were no USAF aircraft combat losses to enemy SAMs, AAA, or fighters. Air superiority was quickly gained using advanced cruise missiles and stealth and then maintained through continued operations of 4 th Gen fighters and bombers. The ease with which air superiority was gained in Afghanistan would not be the case for Iraq in 2003.
IRAQI FREEDOM opened up slightly different than DESERT STORM. While remaining air threats were still planned for early destruction, leadership proved to be higher on the priority list. The plan called for beginning with a short, air-only campaign followed by the ground invasion. Late-breaking evidence, however, gave rise to stronger concerns that the Iraqi regime would deliberately destroy its southern oil wells. As a result, the timing of the ground forces launch was moved ahead of the scheduled air campaign launch to prevent such an action.
Once again, another late breaking intelligence update provided compelling information on Saddam Hussein's whereabouts at Dora Farms near Baghdad. 
68
70
71
73
74
Upgrades to 4 th Gen aircraft have included internal (on-board) enhancements enabling them to defeat threats electronically or external capabilities in the form of strap-on pods.
Expendables, such as chaff, flares, and towed decoys, have been modified or added to increase 4 th Gen aircraft chances of survival while inside the WEZ of enemy missiles and AAA. Modernized avionics and munitions, such as advanced airborne radars and precision weapons, have also been 
73
74
fitted. These modifications have allowed USAF 4 th Gen aircraft a greater ability to survive against anti-access threats and, on occasion, effectively strike targets using advanced munitions without having to enter into the enemy's range of fire.
Newer aircraft, such as the F-22 and F-35, have been transformed in their design and capability specifications to make them less vulnerable to advanced technology and futuristic capabilities that seek to deny them access. The AF is also reviewing options for fielding survivable long-range surveillance and strike aircraft as part of a comprehensive, phased plan to modernize the bomber force.
75
These capabilities, combined with tactics that use land and sealaunched cruise missiles, will continue to allow air superiority to be gained and maintained with limited loss to USAF assets. Once air superiority is tentatively gained, the AF can introduce its legacy aircraft to finish the endeavor and pave the way for all follow-on air missions. This is a strategy that relies on the continued advancement and procurement of aircraft that are capable of surviving future threats, and history has revealed that the enemy will continue to develop those future threats.
To conquer the command of the air means victory; to be beaten in the air means defeat and acceptance of whatever terms the enemy may be pleased to impose.
History has shown that the advancement in technology towards thwarting air power and its freedom of movement will continue to pose a credible threat to the future of America's combat aircraft. Surface and ground-based systems such as SAMs and AAA are two capabilities that are evolving to establish themselves as a formidable menace to current and future combat aircraft.
U.S. air forces in future conflicts will encounter integrated air defenses of far greater sophistication and lethality than those fielded by adversaries of the 1990s. Department of Defense (DoD) forecasts that proliferation of modern SAMs by countries such as Russia, China, and others will pose growing challenges for U.S. military operations worldwide. A third area of improvement comes in the form of an aircraft itself. 
76
Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) envisaged such threats from "robust regional adversaries" early in the 21st Century and from "heavily-armed theater-level 'peer' competitors or major powers" by about 2014. 
78
These forecasted threats are beginning to materialize across the globe as America's near-peers produce these capabilities for sale in the open market. These capabilities exist in the form of advanced SAMs, AAA, and aircraft.
79 This is slightly larger than a bird that has an average radar cross section of 0.01 square meters. It can also engage targets flying at speeds up to 2,800 meters per second in massive enemy air raids with heavy clutter and severe Electronic Counter Measure (ECM) environments. 
80
76
(Washington, DC, 2010), 31-32. 77 Ibid., 31. 78
79
80
Gargoyle. Key improvements included the missile's range from 81 miles out to 108 miles, a new variant of the transport erector launcher (TEL) giving the ability to "shoot and scoot," and a radar that can be ready to move in only five minutes from full operation. 
81
82
Changes include increased missile range out to 120 miles, additional lighter weight missiles to counter low flying targets, and improved radar and trans-loader vehicles. 
83
84
81
87
86
87 "Igla-S, Igla-1," Defense Update: International, Online Defense Magazine, http://defenseupdate.com/products/s/sa-18.htm (accessed March 13, 2010). requirements met predetermined special instructions (SPINS). 
88
To gain a better understanding of why AAA still poses a threat even to stealth aircraft, this monograph will review some of the more recent improvements being made. 89 88 SPINS are provided through the Air Tasking order and provide operational and tactical direction at appropriate levels of detail. They can be very explicit when forces operate from different bases and multi-component or composite missions are tasked. By contrast, less detail is required when missions are tasked to a single component or base. U.S. Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Document 2-1, 2000 (United States Air Force, January, 2000), 49-50, 54.
It has the capability to acquire and track low-flying aircraft targets with an effective range of 2,500 meters. It is also capable of firing on the move because of its integrated radar/gun stabilization system. The high frequency operation of the Gun Dish radar emits a very narrow beam that provides for excellent aircraft tracking while being difficult to detect or evade.
However, such a frequency also dictates a limited range, which can be compensated for by linking the system to other long-range acquisition radar in the area. On newer variants, the radar is capable of being used independently in the search mode, whereas on previous versions it had been slaved to the gun tubes. In 1985, a modified ZSU 23-4M was seen with protrusions on the right and left sides of the Gun Dish radar dome and vanes down its center. The vanes are sidelobe clutter-reducing devices, and the protrusions are Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) receivers.
Electronic target acquisition, tracking, and ranging are automated, and an onboard computer determines super-elevation and azimuth lead. The most significant changes in late production versions of the ZSU 23-4 have included a major change to the air cooling supply system as well 
89
as the radio and electronic systems of the vehicle. These changes have improved the overall reliability of a dated piece of AAA but it remains limited to its effective range. 
90
91
The China Northern Industries Group Corporation revealed a seven-barreled 30 millimeter close-in weapon system during the 2005 Intentional Defense Exhibition in Abu Dhabi. This new weapon system, debuting as the LuDun-2000 (LD-2000), was specifically aimed for the export market. The LD-2000 features a seven-barreled remotely controlled 30mm cannon turret mounted on the rear of an 8X8 heavy-duty wheeled chassis truck. It has two ammunition boxes each holding 500 rounds of ammunition of which one magazine typically holds armor piercing rounds and the other high explosives. The seven-barreled 30mm cannon has a maximum cyclic rate of fire of 4,600~5,800 rounds/min and a maximum range of 3,000 meters. The tracking radar is mounted on the roof of the cannon turret, along with a day/thermal sighting system, which also incorporates a laser rangefinder. The weapon system is designed to use as stand-alone or to provide point air defense for high-value strategic targets against aircraft and cruise missiles. It can also be deployed as a part of a multi-layer air defense system comprising surface-to-air missiles and anti-aircraft artillery weapons. 
94
95
http://www.sinodefence.com/army/ antiaircraft/ld2000.asp (accessed March 13, 2010). 
95
96 "LD-2000 Close-In Weapons System," Sinodefence.com, http://www.sinodefence.com/army/ antiaircraft/ld2000.asp (accessed March 13, 2010).
The third area that poses a threat to America's gaining of air superiority is the opposing force's fighter aircraft. USAF doctrine calls for a Counterair mission, which consists of operations to attain and maintain a desired degree of air superiority by the destruction or neutralization of enemy air forces. Both offensive and defensive actions are involved. Offensive Counterair (OCA) deals with aggressively neutralizing enemy forces in-flight or the supporting infrastructure on the ground, while the latter describes reactively engaging enemy aerospace forces which have already launched on an offensive mission. 
97
To project an OCA front, a country's Air Force must survive the air-to-air engagement with opposing fighters. America's adversaries have not remained latent in their fighter advancements and many of these improvements have taken place over the past 20 years. Similar to the discussion on SAMs and AAA, this monograph will limit its review to the more recent developments regarding fighter aircraft. Then in 1996, the Sukhoi Company and Shenyang Aircraft Corporation (SAC) entered into a contract for the co-production of 200 Su-27SK fighters renamed the Jian-11 (J-11). This partnership did not go well, and China stopped the production of aircraft at around 100 total. In mid-2002, SAC unveiled its intention to build an upgraded multirole version of the J-11 by revealing a mock-up aircraft carrying various types of air-to-air and air-to-surface missiles. Russian sources also confirmed that SAC was pursuing a multirole variant of the J-11, designated J-11B, with much greater Chinese-made content. There has also been speculation that Shenyang is currently developing a two-seater version of the J-11B, possibly designated J-11BS. The aircraft was to be similar to the Su-27UBK fighter-trainer but fitted with Chinese-made power-plant, avionics, and weapon suite.
The Su-27 was already a formidable air-to-air fighter, and with upgrades helping it achieve parity with America's F-15 Eagle, it will remain a threat to air superiority unless confronted with 5 th Gen capabilities. 
99
100
One of the most advanced non-stealth fighters made in Russia is the latest version of the Su-35. The Su-35BM is an advanced capability multi-role air superiority fighter that was also developed from the Su-27. The aircraft has a maximum speed of Mach 2.25, is capable of pulling in excess of nine times the force of gravity (+9g), and is equipped with a high-capability weapon systems that contributes to the aircraft's exceptional dog-fighting capability. The aircraft will enter service with the Russian Air Force in 2010, and Sukhoi has announced that it will be available for export deliveries that same year. The aircraft has 12 hard-points for carrying external weapons and stores and carries a mix of air-to-air and air-to ground medium and longrange missiles. The Su-35 can be armed with a range of guided bombs, including TV-guided, satellite-guided and laser-guided bombs. 
102
The DoD estimation of future threats has proven an accurate forecast upon review of advances in counter-air technology and the proliferation of that technology. In response, America's AF has been attempting to stay out front with the procurement of 5 th Gen stealth aircraft capable of surviving in this forecasted environment. The brief history of air power since WWII has revealed three outcomes. The first was that heavy losses to aircraft and aircrew resulted when trying to achieve military objectives without air superiority and without superior aircraft capable of surviving enemy counter-air. This was most prevalent during WWII. Second, as witnessed in the skies over Korea, was that air superiority could be lost when an enemy introduced a more capable counter-air threat. It took the introduction of an equally-capable American fighter to provide only windows of air superiority for the remainder of that war.
Finally, an outcome that has been noticeable in America's more recent conflicts, is where its AF faced credible counter-air threats and applied superior technology to survive. It was the technological advancements that neutralized the counter-air capability and allowed for less superior aircraft to fly continued operations in support of Combatant Commander's objectives while preventing its enemy from reemerging as a credible threat. Air superiority gained early provides America's leadership the ability to use air power as an effective tool to aid in achieving the overall campaign objectives. Superior air power allows those leaders to achieve this without great loss to its combat airframes and crew.
If the Su-35 is truly capable of detecting stealth aircraft, then it does pose a threat to America's ability to dominate in the air-to-air role. Detection is not enough by itself though; it will also need the ability to maintain a track for an effective missile launch. It will, in addition, be required to out maneuver 5 th Gen aircraft in an air-to-air engagement if it is to survive the close in fight. 
103
Joseph Stalin
Because of the advancements made in counter-air technology and its application to AAA, SAMs, and fighter aircraft, America's AF has been attempting to modernize and replace its aging fleet of combat aircraft. 
104
105
This higher purchasing price, combined with the increasing cost of maintaining a legacy 4 th Gen fleet, has led the AF to adopt a new budgeting strategy.
with available procurement dollars toward the purchase of the 5 th Gen replacement fleet.
109
110
111
America's Air Force has been working towards replacing its superior fighter, the F-15
Eagle, with the world's most advanced fighter, the F-22 Raptor. The AF has also argued that it needs 381 F-22s to be able to dominate the skies at the start of any major war and clear the way for other U.S. and allied warplanes. America's Air Force is headed in a direction that will combine its 4 th Gen fighter and bomber fleets with limited procurements of 5 th Gen stealth aircraft for at least the next fifteen to twenty years. The legacy 4 th Gen fleet will need SLEPs and technology upgrades to increase their service life and keep them relevant in the future fight while maintaining a fleet size that is commensurate with OSD and current QDR guidance. As the legacy aircraft age out beyond their extensions, the Air Force will again be faced with the dilemma of sizing the force. It will need to choose between a total combat force with superior stealth technology on all its aircraft or a mix of less survivable, less costly aircraft with the superior generation of their day.
The form of control most often practiced by aerospace forces today is air superiority, which enables friendly forces to use the air medium for military purposes while denying the enemy effective use of the same. 
128
Today, and in the future, the proper employment of America's aerospace power will remain essential for its success within this air medium. To conduct that employment successfully, America will need aircraft capable of surviving and destroying the modern threats that seek to deny them access over its enemy's sovereign airspace. Planners in WWII were some of the first to apply relevant advances in aircraft against asserted air power theories. Two negative aspects stood out early: the bombers did not always get through, and when they did, the results were not always the destruction of their intended target. If Allied planners were going to prove or disprove their strategic theories on airpower, they would have to apply it in a fashion where air superiority was gained first. America also learned that if air power theory was going to survive at all, it could not be gained at such great losses in the future. 
129
Later wars bore out these lessons learned as America and Russia pitted their aircraft against each other, competing for dominance of the skies in wars conducted over proxy states' airspace. America continued to make advances in both aircraft designs and the ability to deliver accurate weapons while Russia introduced its own new aircraft, antiaircraft AAA and SAMs. It was not until DESERT STORM, though, that America's air power achieved superior results executing tactics aimed at gaining air superiority. Once it was gained through the aid of advanced stealth technology, the air assets were then able to focus the bulk of their efforts towards achieving the Combatant Commander's objectives. This similar strategy also played out in ALLIED FORCE, ENDURING FREEDOM, and IRAQI FREEDOM and continues to be maintained in the latter two operations today. The USAF has learned that when using technology that is superior to its enemy's ability to deny them access, that air superiority can be quickly gained and at a limited cost to its own aircraft. America's enemies have learned that their anti-access capabilities need to keep up with the advances in stealth technology to prevent similar courses of action occurring against them.
As a result, Russia has developed multiple advances towards its older anti-access equipment and then made these capabilities available on the open market. As discussed earlier, countries such as Iran, China and India have taken steps towards procuring Russia's most advanced fighters and SAMs, with other countries projected to do the same. China has also re-engineered some of this technology and gone into production for itself. As DoD's projected proliferation of these modern threats begin to materialize, America's AF has become focused on procuring an all stealth fighter and bomber force. America's AF needs to remain focused on its past successes and how it has obtained air superiority. It started off WWII with lesser-capable aircraft which resulted in high loss rates against enemy counter-air. As advances were made in design, capability and sheer production, America was able to gain air superiority. In Korea, America entered aircraft that were one generation shy of the jet age and achieved early success but then quickly paid a heavy cost in losses when Russian jet technology entered the war. Not until America countered with its own jet technology did it achieve limited air superiority again. In Vietnam, AF aircraft faced SAMs and somewhat equally advanced fighters but most often lost aircraft flying inside AAA trying to achieve effective target destruction. The answer to this threat came in the form of precision weapons that could be delivered from altitudes above most AAA's effective range. This accuracy was first achieved during DESERT STORM when precision weapons were delivered by equally impressive stealth F-117s. Totally counter to WWII, this war was fought with advanced aircraft being used first and then followed by earlier generation aircraft with less survivability and less accurate weapons capability. This tactic was used across the next three operations with advances in both stealth and accuracy of weapons. In all, the legacy aircraft continued to carry out the preponderance of weapons delivered after air superiority was gained.
It is clear from the history of America's success at gaining air superiority that technologically advanced aircraft will be needed to gain the early advantage in future wars. It is also clear that America's enemies will endeavor to advance their ability to produce anti-access threats capable of reaching parity with them. As seen with the high procurement and operating cost of 5 th Gen aircraft, owning an entire combat force made up of these aircraft can become prohibitive when trying to maintain a force size capable of two simultaneous MCOs. An alternative approach that procures not only 5 th Gen, but also modernized versions of 4 th Gen and modification upgrades to it legacy 4 th Gen aircraft, is a more feasible approach. It is an approach that allows for air superiority to be gained with 5 th Gen aircraft, continued operations to be flown with modernized 4 th Gen aircraft, and a total combat force that is sustainable within the confines of the AF's TOA. The USAF needs to procure 5 th Gen combat aircraft only in numbers that will allow air superiority to be attained and enable flight operations of modernized 4 th Gen combat aircraft to sustain air superiority.
52 United States Air Force Document, AFD-070912-043: Executive Summary: USAF Manned Aircraft Combat Losses 1990-2002 (Washington D.C.: Department of the Air Force, 2002), 1-2. 53 Benjamin S. Lambeth, NATO's Air War for Kosovo: A strategic and Operational Assessment (California: Rand, 2001), 1. 54 Department of Defense, Report to Congress: Kosovo/Operation Allied Force After-Action Report
72  
72  
Warren Thompson,   
2007), 23-24.2  Combat Aircraft are defined in this monograph as manned/unmanned fighters and bombers. 3 Air Superiority -That degree of dominance in the air battle of one force over another which permits the conduct of operations by the former and its related land, sea and air forces at a given time and place without prohibitive interference by the opposing force. U.S. Department of the Air Force, "Air Force Doctrine Document 2-1, 2000," (United States Air Force, January, 2000), 105.
Boeing Company. "F-15E Radar Modernization Program Receives New Designation," Defensetalk.com,  2009,    This development or discovery drove a change in American tactics to fly above 15,000 feet whenever possible to stay above the maximum range of most AAA
Global Security, "Top Air Force Generals Address Airman's Concerns," Globalsecurity.org, http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2007/09/mil-070926-afpn06.htm (accessed March 9, 2010).
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report: February, 2006(Washington,  DC, 2006), 38.   
Department of the Air Force. Fiscal Year 2010 Air Force Posture Statement, May 2009. Statement of: Secretary of the Air Force, Michael B. Donley and Chief of Staff of the Air Force, Gen. Norton A Schwartz, (Washington, DC, 2009), 4-5.
Department of the Air Force, Advance Questions for General Norton A. Schwartz: USAF Nominee for the Position of Chief of Staff of the USAF (Washington, DC,
2008), 18.
This insight will not advocate a total force size and makeup of 5 th Gen vs. 4 th Gen aircraft but instead provide support for a mix of the two.
Henry H. Arnold and John W. Huston, American Airpower Comes of Age (Alabama: Air University Press, 2002), 218.
Giulio Douhet and Dino Farrari, The Command of the Air (Washington D.C.: Air Force History and Museums Program, 1998), 3.
Warren Thompson, F-117 Stealth Fighter Units of Operation Desert Storm (New York: Osprey Publishing,  2007), 6.  
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report: February 2010(Washington,  DC, 2010), 33.   
"Su-27SK/UBK Air Superiority Fighter Aircraft," Sinodefence.com, http://www.sinodefence.com /airforce/fighter/su27.asp (accessed March 13, 2010).
This strategy has three steps and is based on taking a defined acceptable risk in the near term by retiring legacy aircraft before their replacements, 5 th Gen aircraft, are procured. The first step in this process calls for a substantial reduction of 4 th Gen fighter aircraft in the near years of the FYDP to generate savings.
The second step uses a portion of the savings from the aircraft reductions to modernize the remaining smaller fleet with advanced capabilities in weapons, communication technology and SLEPs. The premise is based on a smaller, more capable 4 th Gen fleet being able to manage multiple MCOs in the same fashion as the larger, less capable 4 th Gen fleet. In theory, the increase comes as a result of better MC rates and increased lethality and survivability.
104 "F-22A Raptor Advanced Tactical Fighter Aircraft, USA," Airforce-technology.com,
SSgt Todd C. Lopez, "Air Force Focused on Three Priorities." The Official Web Site of the U.S. Air Force,
OMB No. 
0704-0188 (S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The F-22 was declared fully operation by ACC in 2005 and, despite all the early setbacks, has been improving in each of the troubled areas previously mentioned and is expected to meet the original design specifications the AF required. 
120
121
122
120
121