# ID: 3fb03043b4414d3db9ba871ad0f3e980
# Title: Air Force's Combat Aircraft: A Future Holding into the Past
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
As a result, Russia has developed multiple advances towards its older anti-access equipment and then made these capabilities available on the open market.
As discussed earlier, countries such as Iran, China and India have taken steps towards procuring Russia's most advanced fighters and SAMs, with other countries projected to do the same.
China has also re-engineered some of this technology and gone into production for itself.
As DoD's projected proliferation of these modern threats begin to materialize, America's AF has become focused on procuring an all stealth fighter and bomber force.
America's AF needs to remain focused on its past successes and how it has obtained air superiority.
It started off WWII with lesser-capable aircraft which resulted in high loss rates against enemy counter-air.
As advances were made in design, capability and sheer production, America was able to gain air superiority.
In Korea, America entered aircraft that were one generation shy of the jet age and achieved early success but then quickly paid a heavy cost in losses when Russian jet technology entered the war.
Not until America countered with its own jet technology did it achieve limited air superiority again.
In Vietnam, AF aircraft faced SAMs and somewhat equally advanced fighters but most often lost aircraft flying inside AAA trying to achieve effective target destruction.
The answer to this threat came in the form of precision weapons that could be delivered from altitudes above most AAA's effective range.
This accuracy was first achieved during DESERT STORM when precision weapons were delivered by equally impressive stealth F-117s.
Totally counter to WWII, this war was fought with advanced aircraft being used first and then followed by earlier generation aircraft with less survivability and less accurate weapons capability.
This tactic was used across the next three operations with advances in both stealth and accuracy of weapons.
In all, the legacy aircraft continued to carry out the preponderance of weapons delivered after air superiority was gained.