# ID: 3fdf0e1167c249679e40a19079cc9c24
# Title: The continued evolution of US law of armed conflict implementation: implications for the US military
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC) is a source of significant legal authority for and restriction on a wide range of U.S. military activities. It is not a single law but rather a collection of international treaties and customary international law, and it has had a profound influence on the conduct of warfare. The LOAC is not, of course, the only factor that has influenced whether and how states, including the United States, decide to adopt policies governing their military activities. U.S. forces are required to operate in accordance with U.S. legal interpretations of the LOAC; failure to do so is punishable by law.
However, decisionmakers often adopt policies that restrict military activities beyond what is legally required. Even when the LOAC permits a given practice, U.S. policymakers may alter policies to reflect political or operational concerns. The resulting implementations, reflecting both legal and nonlegal factors, shape decisions on such matters as rules of engagement, targeting procedures, and the development of weapon systems.
Such U.S. implementations of the LOAC have increasingly restricted military activities over the past two decades. In particular, greater concern for civilian casualties-for both political and operational reasons-has motivated the U.S. military to take increasing precautions in its planning and has deterred it from undertaking military actions anticipated to place civilians at risk. Despite the clear impact of such implementations on military operations in recent years, relatively little attention has been paid to assessing their potential future direction. This report aims to fill this gap by surveying potential strategic, iv The Continued Evolution of U.S. Law of Armed Conflict Implementation technological, and normative trends that may affect the future evolution of U.S. LOAC implementation and by assessing the resulting implications for the U.S. military.
As this report was in the final stages of publication, the U.S. Department of Defense released an updated Law of War Manual. 1  The more than 1,200-page manual collects and summarizes the department's view of a comprehensive set of LOAC topics, including the principles that undergird the LOAC, rules governing the conduct of hostilities, the use of various types of weapons, and emerging issues, such as the application of the LOAC to cyber operations. 2 Rather than announcing a major shift in U.S. policy, the manual primarily represents the codification of existing Department of Defense interpretations and implementations of the LOAC. Initial commentaries have emphasized the manual's relative continuity with previously stated U.S. positions. 3   While the manual is not a forward-looking document, it is likely to be a tremendously helpful reference for both commanders and scholars seeking to become familiar with current Department of Defense interpretations and implementations of the LOAC. The present report, by contrast, focuses on trends that may affect the future evolution of U.S. implementations of the LOAC, a largely separate task.
sored by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Staff, the Unified Combatant Commands, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the defense agencies, and the defense Intelligence Community.
For more information on the RAND International Security and Defense Policy Center, see www.rand.org/nsrd/ndri/centers/isdp or contact the director (contact information is provided on the web page). 
The Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC) is a source of significant legal authority for and restriction on a wide range of U.S. military activities.
It is not a single law but rather a collection of international treaties and customary international law, and it has had a profound influence on the conduct of warfare. The LOAC is not, of course, the only factor that has influenced whether and how states, including the United States, decide to adopt policies governing their military activities. U.S. forces are required to operate in accordance with U.S. legal interpretations of the LOAC; failure to do so is punishable by law. However, decisionmakers often adopt policies that restrict military activities beyond what is legally required. Even when the LOAC permits a given practice, U.S. policymakers may alter policies to reflect political or operational concerns. The resulting implementations, reflecting both legal and nonlegal factors, shape decisions on such matters as rules of engagement (ROE), targeting procedures, and the development of weapon systems.
Such U.S. implementations of the LOAC have evolved considerably in recent decades to increasingly restrict military activities. In particular, greater concern for civilian casualties has motivated the U.S. military to take increasing precautions in its planning and has deterred it from undertaking military actions anticipated to place civilians at risk. A review of the historical evolution of U.S. LOAC implementation suggests that the factors that have most affected that implementation can be summarized into the following three categories:
• strategic, including the types of conflicts in which the United States has been involved and the methods it has employed to win those conflicts • technological, including changes in available weapon technologies and the increasing gap in capabilities between highly technological states and others • normative, including increasing public concern for civilian casualties and the changing views and influence of international actors.
This report assesses each of these categories for their potential to alter future U.S. LOAC implementation. In these assessments, we identify the ongoing or anticipated trends in each category that have the potential to shift U.S. LOAC implementation, how these trends might change battlefield and legal or normative dynamics, and the implications for the U.S. military that might result from these possible changes.
The types of conflicts in which the United States is likely to become involved and the weapons it may employ in these conflicts may both influence the manner in which U.S. implementations of the LOAC develop. Two potential trends in particular are important to highlight.
• Urban warfare: Anticipated trends in population growth and urbanization mean that the United States is increasingly likely to face urban operational environments in the future. It is extremely difficult to conduct urban warfare while retaining the highly restrictive implementations of the LOAC that have become most common in U.S. military operations in recent years. As the United States' two major recent experiences with urban combat-Fallujah in 2004 and Sadr City in 2008-demonstrate, the United States may choose to adopt less restrictive ROE for such engagements, which may result in higher levels of collateral damage.
If urban combat becomes increasingly common in U.S. military operations, maintaining low levels of collateral damage-widely seen as essential for maintaining political support-is likely to become more difficult. • Hybrid adversaries: Hybrid adversaries-nonstate groups with state sponsorship or state-like capabilities-may represent an increasingly difficult challenge for the United States if the diffusion of precision-guided munitions (PGMs) and other standoff fire capabilities to such groups continues. The potential for these actors to acquire and learn to effectively employ standoff fire capabilities may limit the United States' ability to conduct precision strikes that minimize civilian casualties. Furthermore, unlike many state actors with similar capabilities, hybrid opponents may be less likely to take precautions not to place civilians at risk from their operations. Indeed, their operations may depend on using civilians as human shields. Given the greater firepower that may be needed to defeat these more capable adversaries, limiting collateral damage to levels similar to what has become expected of the United States in recent conflicts may be difficult.
In aggregate, strategic considerations are likely to pressure the United States to adopt less-restrictive implementations of the LOAC in the future than it has in the standoff bombing or counterinsurgency campaigns of recent decades.
Advances in new technologies may also affect the evolution of U.S. LOAC implementation, as the development of PGMs did in the past. This report considered the following four main categories of technological advances:
• autonomous weapon systems, including the potential development of fully autonomous systems capable of making independent decisions to fire on a target • nonlethal weapons, including directed energy weapons, acoustic weapons, and electrical weapons
• cyber warfare, including the diffusion of offensive cyber capabilities and the increasing military and civilian reliance on the cyber domain • space warfare, including the declining cost of satellite launches and the diffusion of directed energy antisatellite weapons.
These technological advances have the potential to give the U.S. military significant new capabilities in the years to come, but the extent to which some of these advances can be used in a manner consistent with the United States' implementation of the LOAC remains in question. In many cases, the use or development of such new technologies may be restricted, limiting but not eliminating their operational value.
A number of normative or social trends may influence U.S. LOAC implementation by affecting domestic public or foreign partner support of or adverse reaction to U.S. military activities. Our analysis focused on the following categories:
• domestic response to civilian casualties, including the potential for changing social norms and declining direct military experience to alter the U.S. public's attitude toward civilian casualties • diffusion of recording technology, including the likelihood that the proliferation of recording devices, such as smart phones, may significantly increase the number of recorded images and videos of U.S. military engagements • differing partner attitudes, including the possibility that attitudes toward the LOAC, and judgments regarding feasible policies to limit civilian casualties in particular, may diverge in partner countries, creating difficulties for interoperability • exploitation of the LOAC, including the deliberate misuse of asymmetric concern for the LOAC by unscrupulous adversaries.
Our analysis suggests that normative factors are likely to give the U.S. greater incentives to adopt increasingly restrictive implementations of the LOAC in the future.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the U.S. military is likely to find it increasingly difficult to reconcile its operational responsibilities with political pressures to adopt increasingly restrictive implementations of the LOAC in the years to come, highlighting the need for policy options to mitigate both operational and political risks. The types of adversaries and operational environments that the United States is likely to face will likely increase the difficulty of distinguishing between combatants and civilians and limiting collateral damage. At the same time, normative trends are likely to further increase pressure to adopt restrictive ROE and other implementations of the LOAC that emphasize the importance of avoiding civilian casualties for fear of placing public and international support for military operations at risk.
The report briefly explores the following potential policy responses that may help to mitigate these operational and political risks:
• Precision micromunitions. The destructive power of current PGMs limits their ability to reduce civilian casualties when employed in urban areas. Developing and deploying lower-yield PGMs that are designed to target individuals or small groups could help to greatly reduce collateral damage from such strikes. These loweryield PGMs could potentially be fired from drones or other closeproximity platforms that may also gather targeting intelligence. • Usable nonlethal weapons. Certain categories of nonlethal weapons currently under development may themselves run afoul of future political or legal restrictions. Greater attention to the likelihood that emerging nonlethal weapon technologies could be banned or otherwise restricted under future interpretations of the LOAC could help to prioritize research and development efforts. If successful, such efforts could yield weapons that preserve greater operational flexibility for U.S. forces while lowering the risk of civilian casualties. • Greater diplomatic engagement. Prioritizing greater diplomatic engagement, including the ratification of LOAC treaties to which the United States now expresses only modest objections, may give the United States more opportunity and leverage to shape future international LOAC treaty regimes and other countries' LOAC interpretations to better reflect U.S. perspectives and interests. • Wearable cameras for U.S. forces. The U.S. military may want to explore developing the capability to have service members wear cameras during certain types of combat operations; doing so would provide a record that can be used to deter misconduct and dispute adversary accusations of LOAC violations. • Enhanced political and legal focus on adversary LOAC violations. A broader diplomatic and legal focus on adversary LOAC violations, potentially including prosecutions, may be helpful in strengthening respect for the LOAC, limiting sources of adversary support, and reducing the asymmetry of U.S. political risks.
To limit the circumstances in which it faces unacceptable choices in the future, the United States should begin to develop these or other policy options to mitigate operational and political risks. This report highlights the need for further research on how the United States can most effectively combine the pursuit of its strategic interests with evolving political pressures and its enduring commitment to the LOAC. that may affect the future evolution of U.S. implementations of the LOAC, and assess the resulting implications for the U.S. military. 
1
Before proceeding to our analysis of the recent evolution of the United States' implementation of the LOAC, a brief discussion of the principles of the LOAC and the treaties upon which it is based will be helpful. 
2
5
For text of the four 1949 Geneva Conventions and the additional protocols, see International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), "1949 Conventions and Additional Protocols,  and Their Commentaries," 1949a.  Additional relevant international treaties have also been widely adopted, though not all by the United States. The treaties that the United States has adopted include conventions prohibiting the use of chemical weapons, biological weapons, and indiscriminate conventional weapons, as well as conventions governing the protection of cultural property. Treaties that have not been adopted by the United States because it objects to certain aspects of them include the Ottawa Treaty banning land mines and the Convention on Cluster Munitions, which are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. For a list of most relevant LOAC treaties and the status of the United States' adoption of them, see International and Operational Law Department, Operational Law Handbook, Charlottesville, Va.: Army Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School, U.S. Army, 2014, pp. 9-10.  law. Nonetheless, there may be considerable variation in how different parties interpret and treat their obligations under the law.
The LOAC has implications for virtually every aspect of military activity, such as targeting procedures in aerial bombardment, the rules governing naval interdictions, and the requirement to protect cultural antiquities during military operations. Numerous volumes have been written exploring the law's implications for each of these disparate activities. 
6
The foundational documents of the LOAC contain important principles that can be used to understand and apply the requirements of these documents to the military activities of states. While there is no single way to summarize these principles, a useful taxonomy would include five that are clearly essential: distinction, military necessity, unnecessary suffering, precautionary measures, and proportionality. 7
Perhaps the most fundamental requirement of the LOAC is the need for military operations to distinguish between participants in the conflict and civilians. While participants in a conflict can lawfully be targeted with appropriate military force-"appropriate" being the subject 6 See, for example, Geoffrey S.  2004. The principle of precautionary measures is not listed separately in Solis's framework, because it is closely related to the principles of proportionality and distinction. However, it is listed separately elsewhere, such as in the ICRC's study on customary international humanitarian law (see, for example, ICRC, "Rule 22: Principle of Precautions Against the Effects of Attacks," Customary IHL database, undated b), and given the clear operational implications of adhering to this principle, we felt it was appropriate to list it separately in this document. of significant discussion below-civilians may never be deliberately targeted. A similar, though less clear-cut, rule applies to targeting objects or property. Military facilities may be targeted, for example, while purely civilian buildings generally may not.
The application of these rules in practice leads to many difficulties. Individuals and property may be presumed to be civilian at one point and then later become lawful targets; for example, individuals can become targets if they take a direct part in hostilities, and property can become a target when it is employed by conflict participants for military ends or otherwise becomes a valid military objective. Parties to the conflict are expected to distinguish themselves from civilians using uniforms or other means, but this requirement is often not met, particularly in civil wars, and the breach of it by one party does not absolve the other party of the requirement to adhere to the principle of distinction. For instance, even when rebels pose as civilians or use human shields, all reasonable measures must still be taken by government forces to avoid attacking civilians. Similar difficulties apply when deciding whether civilian facilities or objects may be attacked. In the 1999 Kosovo air campaign, for example, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) forces bombed a Serbian radio and television station that they argued was an important part of the Serbian military's command and control apparatus, killing civilians. The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia assessed the justification for the attack against the principle of distinction, and ultimately found insufficient rationale to pursue a more in-depth investigation of a potential violation of the LOAC.
8
The principle of military necessity allows parties to the conflict to undertake all actions-not otherwise prohibited by international law-against legal targets that are necessary "to compel the complete submission of the enemy with the least possible expenditure of time, life, and money." 
9
10
11
12
13
Attacks against military personnel are lawful unless and until the enemy is no longer participating in combat due to death, injury, or surrender. However, the LOAC prohibits attacks that are calculated to cause unnecessary suffering. Accordingly, the LOAC permits the use of force sufficient to kill, but it does not permit force that is intended to inflict gratuitous or superfluous suffering. To clarify, this requirement is intended to apply to attacks targeting military personnel. Civilians cannot be targeted by any attack according to the principle of distinction.
The application of this principle can most clearly be seen in the prohibition of various types of armaments, such as exploding bullets, biological toxins, blinding lasers, and chemical weapons. Such armaments may provide military advantages to the user, but the suffering they inflict has been judged to be beyond that needed to cause prompt incapacitation. Several international agreements have been adopted to address these restrictions of armaments, perhaps most prominently the 1980 Convention Prohibiting Certain Conventional Weapons and its associated protocols. 14
Beyond requiring states to distinguish between military and civilian targets, the LOAC also mandates that states take feasible precautionary measures to mitigate anticipated risks to civilians. 
15
16
14
15
Cross, Vol. 88, No. 864, 2006. 16
While the principle of distinction mandates that only lawful military targets may be deliberately attacked, it does not prohibit all attacks that incidentally inflict damage on civilians or civilian objects. Instead, according to the principle of proportionality, such attacks may proceed if the anticipated harm inflicted on civilians is not excessive in comparison with the concrete and direct military advantage that is anticipated to be gained by the attack. Civilian casualties may even be anticipated to be quite high, but as long as they meet this standard, the attack may remain legal under the LOAC.
In practice, how the principle of proportionality has been applied has varied. There is no single agreed-upon standard by which to weigh the anticipated harm to civilians against the anticipated military value of the attack, and nonlegal factors such as public opinion often play a role in how ROE and targeting decisions are made. Further, it can be extremely difficult for outside actors to assess the military value that the commander placed on the target when making the decision to attack it, although after-the-fact reviews can be and are conducted when these judgments seem questionable. In practice, however, the application of this principle relies on the reasonable efforts of military personnel to adhere to it.
The translation of these legal principles into specific U.S. policies guiding the behavior of its armed forces is influenced by numerous factors, and the LOAC treaties that the United States has signed are only one element. Customary international law, derived from consistent state practice or widely adopted agreements, also shapes U.S. LOAC obligations, although the precise content of customary international law and the extent to which consistent objections to it may shield the objector from its obligations remain contested. 
18
This report focuses on the evolution of U.S. policies that implement the LOAC. These policies are bounded by U.S. legal interpretations of the LOAC, but they are also shaped by nonlegal concerns, such as political and strategic factors. This document does not primarily focus on whether specific U.S. policies adhere to, exceed, or fall short of U.S. legal obligations, although there are issues for which such concerns are salient (for example, regarding the decision to develop or use potential military technological advances). In the main, however, the LOAC authorizes a broader set of potential military actions than is typically permitted during U.S. operations. This document therefore focuses on providing a policy analysis and assessing how U.S. implementations have evolved over time and how they are likely to evolve in the future based on both legal and nonlegal considerations. 
U.S. implementations of the LOAC have exhibited significant variation since the middle of the 20th century. These changes have generally resulted in more-restrictive ROE and targeting standards that often place increasing burdens on U.S. military personnel to avoid inflicting harm on civilian populations. 
19
20
21
19
20
21
During the Cold War, the great power competition between the United States and its allies on one side and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other was often fought through a series of "limited wars" that had to take place beneath the nuclear threshold. 
22
The United States and the Soviet Union used conventional weapons in asymmetric conflicts against "lesser" adversaries throughout the Cold War (e.g., in Vietnam and Afghanistan), albeit with modifications in tactics and operations. They both also supplied client states with weapons. In several cases, these weapons were first-tier systems. 
24
25
22
Strategy and Policy, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1977, p. 445. 23
24
25
• "The ultimate objective of all military operations is the destruction of the enemy's armed forces by battle. Decisive defeat in battle breaks the enemy's will to war and forces him to sue for peace." 26 • "Superior fire constitutes the best protection against loss as well as the most effective means of destruction." 
27
If the American record is not one of gross illegality, neither has it been a model of observance of the law of war. Impeccable ROE, based on applicable legal provisions, were issued, but their observance was often inadequate and the American command failed to take reasonable steps that they would be properly enforced. 
28
30
31
In the early years following the Cold War, the U.S. military demonstrated its overwhelming capabilities against state adversaries in Panama, during Operation Just Cause, and in the Middle East, during Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. These conventional military operations were rapid and their outcomes seemingly decisive, proving the utility of U.S. conventional forces against state actors.
The prowess demonstrated by the U.S. military during Operation Desert Storm raised issues with U.S. implementations of the LOAC. Two cases are particularly relevant: the bombing of the Al Firdos bunker in Baghdad and the decision to end the ground war after 100 hours.
On February 13, 1991, the Al Firdos bunker, also known as the Amiriyah shelter, was destroyed by two 2,000-lb laser-guided bombs, dropped by two F-117 stealth fighters/bombers. 
32
33
34
35
36
39
40
41
42
40
Cohen, Gulf War Air Power Survey, Vol. 2, Operations and Effects and Effectiveness, Washington, D.C., 1993, p. 206. 41
42
43
44
45
46
(1) the safety of friendly forces, (2) the risk that UNPROFOR [United Nations Protection Force] troops would be taken hostage, (3) attacks on troop concentrations that would result in high casualties, and (4) the delegation of authority for Option 3 targets. 
47
[M]ost importantly, Deliberate Force resulted in few casualties on either side. Only two allied aviators were shot down and captured, the crew of a French Mirage. None were killed. Casualties among the Serb military and non-combatant civilians are not precisely known, but the latter were less than thirty, or about one for every thirty to forty heavy weapons dropped. This is a notably low ratio given that many of the targets were joint use, such as bridges, or located in or very near civilian dwellings, such as radio (microwave) relay towers (RADRELs) and barracks. 
48
49
In many ways, Operation Allied Force was a replay of Operation Deliberate Force, but with more difficult relationships among NATO members and more-restrictive ROE. General Wesley Clark, the Supreme Allied Commander of Europe, "fought two wars: an offensive one against Milosevic and a defensive war against NATO critics." 
50
51
President Clinton and other Alliance leaders indirectly told Milosevic that his way out was to endure aerial bombardment; because of this, Milosevic hoped NATO would make enough mistakes to undermine diplomatic support for the air campaign. Clark's task was to ensure no mistakes were made. . . . Faced with the diplomatic prerequisite of risk-free warfare, General Clark prevented alliance decay by reducing the possibility of collateral damage and civilian casualties. According to Clark, given the memories of World War II bombings, "We had to convince them [Europeans] of the validity of the targets, the accuracy of the delivery systems, the skill and courage of the airmen, and their ability to deliver weapons with pinpoint accuracy." Targets were studied to determine the effects on nearby civilian facilities. If the risk was too great for collateral damage, the target was avoided or was attacked with a very precise weapon. Lord George Robertson stated, "A balance had to be struck between the risks taken, and the likely results." Acting according to this principle, attacks were explicitly timed to avoid the risk of casualties. The result, in some critics' eyes, was the destruction of empty buildings. 
53
Congress left General Clark musing that the only arena in which he could lose the war in a single day was on the television screen." 
56
58
59
56 Wrage, 2003, p. 91. 57
58
In one instance, the 23 April 1999 attack on the headquarters of Serbian state Television and Radio (RTS), NATO launched a direct attack on a civilian object, killing 16 civilians. In other attacks, including the 12 April bombing of Grdelica railroad bridge, which killed 12 civilians, and the missile attack on Varvarin bridge on 30 May, which killed 11 civilians, NATO forces failed to suspend their attack after it was evident that they had struck civilians. In other attacks, including those which resulted in the highest number of civilian casualties (the attacks on displaced ethnic Albanians near Djakovica on 14 April, and in Koriša on 13 May, whose combined death toll exceeded 120) NATO failed to take necessary precautions to minimize civilian casualties.
June 7, 2000, article in The Guardian reported on NATO chief spokesman Jamie Shea's response to the charge: "Each target that Nato struck was approved by a team of government lawyers and we attacked in such a way as to minimise the prospects of civilian casualties," he said.
"We never said we would avoid casualties. It would be foolhardy to say that, as no military operation in history has been perfect."
He argued that the costs of the conflict had to be weighed against the thousands of Kosovan Albanians who would be dead without Nato intervention. 60
The two major campaigns following Operation Allied Force were Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) in Afghanistan, which began on October 7, 2001, after the al Qaeda attacks on the United States on September 11, and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), which commenced on March 19, 2003. Initially, operations in both campaigns were extraordinarily successful. Despite the rapid success of combat operations, both OEF and OIF morphed into protracted insurgencies. Between 2003 and 2006, the U.S. military struggled to adapt its concepts and doctrine to accommodate the reality of the conditions on the ground in the two wars after its "decisive" operations. Iraq was the crucible for these changes, as the situation became ever more chaotic and visible to the international public. What eventually replaced the post-Vietnam paradigm of closing with and destroying the enemy through offensive operations was a counterinsurgency concept focused on protecting the population. 61 60 "Amnesty Accuses Nato of War Crimes," The Guardian, June 7, 2000. 
61
Any use of force produces many effects, not all of which can be foreseen. The more force applied, the greater the chance of collateral damage and mistakes. Using substantial force also increases the opportunity for insurgent propaganda to portray lethal military activities as brutal. In contrast, using force precisely and discriminately strengthens the rule of law that needs to be established. As noted above, the key for counterinsurgents is knowing when more force is needed-and when it might be counterproductive. This judgment involves constant assessment of the security situation and a sense of timing regarding insurgents' actions. 
62
The cadre at the COIN Academy duly impressed incoming unit commanders with the importance of acting within FM 3-24's emphasis on limiting violence. Those limitations are best expressed in one of FM 3-24's "paradoxes": "Sometimes doing nothing is the best reaction." Instructors showed image after image of bomb, missile, and indirect-fire strikes that had gone off target and caused collateral damage. They stressed that collateral damage had serious consequences for U.S. objectives in Iraqand the careers of the commanders who authorized them. 
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
71
72
73
74
Both the Fallujah and Sadr City battles were prosecuted with attention to the requirements of the LOAC. However, these operations suggest that the trend in U.S. implementations of the LOAC toward increasing restrictions in order to lower civilian casualties is likely conditional and based on the operational and political requirements of the mission. In situations in which the military advantage to be gained appears to be sufficiently high, the United States remains willing to accept substantial collateral damage, as well as substantial political costs.
The foregoing chronology, together with a broader survey of the literature, suggests that shifts in U.S. policies implementing the LOAC have been influenced by at least four important developments. 
75
76
77
78
From a purely political perspective, such tragedies, isolated though they may be, instantly dominate the narrative of a conflict because they speak to the heart of observers-whereas government speeches, Twitter feeds, and press releases seem too coldly rational and calculated, too soulless and self-interested. There are no arguments a political leader or a press officer can make that trump horror or anguish. There is no moral equation that offers a satisfactory calculus to enable us to accept the death of innocents as warranted. 
79
80
79
83
We must avoid the trap of winning tactical victories-but suffering strategic defeats-by causing civilian casualties or excessive damage and thus alienating the people. While this is also a legal and moral issue, it is an overarching operational issueclear-eyed recognition that loss of popular support will be decisive to either side in this struggle. 
84
Larson and Savych, 2006;
Kahl, 2007. 84
85
Kahl, 2007. 86
Whether civilian casualties result from aerial bombing in Afghanistan seems to depend more than anything else on whether the airstrike was planned or was an unplanned strike in rapid response to an evolving military situation on the ground. When aerial bombing is planned, mostly against suspected Taliban targets, US and NATO forces in Afghanistan have had a very good record of minimizing harm to civilians. In 2008, no planned airstrikes appear to have resulted in civilian casualties. . . . US and NATO forces have been far more likely to cause civilian casualties in unplanned situations, normally when ground troops call in airstrikes as tactical support when under attack from insurgent forces, or to target insurgent forces on the move. The vast majority of known civilian deaths and injuries from airstrikes in Afghanistan come in these situations.
87
In this chapter, we have identified the factors that have influenced the evolution of U.S. LOAC implementation over the past several decades, which can be summarized into the following three categories:
• strategic, including the types of conflicts in which the United States has been involved and the methods it has employed to win those conflicts • technological, including changes in available weapon technologies and the increasing gap in capabilities between highly technological states and others • normative, including increasing public concern for civilian casualties and the changing views and influence of international actors.
In the chapters that follow, we assess each of these categories for their potential to alter LOAC implementation going forward. In these assessments, we identify the ongoing or anticipated trends in each category that have the potential to shift U.S. implementations of the LOAC; how these trends might change operational, political, legal, or normative dynamics; and the implications for the U.S. military that might result from these possible changes.
This chapter assesses the manner in which strategic considerations may affect the future evolution of U.S. LOAC implementation. To do so, it focuses on two main issues: the types of conflicts in which the United States is likely to become involved and the weapons it may employ in these conflicts. 
1
War has an enduring nature that demonstrates four continuities: a political dimension, a human dimension, the existence of uncertainty, and a contest of wills. Clausewitz, author of the most comprehensive theory of war, provided a description of war's enduring nature in the opening chapter of On War. He observed that all wars involve passion, often lying with the hostile feelings of the people, otherwise states would avoid war altogether by simply comparing their relative strengths in "a kind of war by algebra." He emphasized wars' uncertainty, stating that war often resembles "a game of cards." Finally, war is always a matter of policy, as "The political object . . . will thus determine both the military objective . . . and the amount of effort it requires," which is a rational process of directing hostile intent normally left to government. While these continuities are present in all wars, every war exists within social, political, and historical contexts, giving each war much of its unique character (e.g., levels of intensity, objectives, interactions with the enemy).
Conversely, warfare has a constantly changing character. Technology has a significant influence on warfare, but other influences, such as doctrine and military organization, are also important. Changes in the character of warfare may occur slowly over generations or quite rapidly. Additionally, these changes clearly affect the tactical art of employing units and weapons and, to a lesser extent, the operational art of linking military objectives to achieve strategic ones. Both continuities in the nature of war and the changes in the character of warfare influence strategy. The greater influence on strategy, as Clausewitz observes, ations may encourage the United States to adopt less restrictive operational implementations of the LOAC, such as in ROE, than those that were typically employed in the standoff bombing or counterinsurgency campaigns of the past. Military actions in urban areas and against hybrid adversaries-which are likely to become more frequent in the years to come-may increasingly force policymakers to choose between loosening these implementations and sacrificing operational goals.
Chapter One's review of the historical evolution of U.S. policies implementing the LOAC highlights the growing concern for collateral damage. High levels of public concern for civilian casualties are a reality that U.S. policymakers and military operators will need to account for in future operations. Additionally, as in Afghanistan, the U.S. military may work together in coalitions with militaries that operate under even greater legal or political restraints. However, the types of conflicts in which the United States is likely to become involved in the future may make it increasingly difficult to balance these operational and political objectives.
Numerous publications have attempted to assess how the operational environment may change in the years to come. The doctrinal publication Joint Operations: Insights and Best Practices describes the world within which the U.S. military expects to operate in the future:
Complex and Changing Environment: Globalization, the interconnected information environment, non-traditional adversaries, and our changing military capabilities have significantly changed today's security environment and the way we operate. We recognize that many of today's conflicts are rooted in the human comes from the nature and character of war because the "most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish . . . the kind of war on which they are embarking; neither mistaking it for, nor trying to turn it into, something that is alien to its nature." dimension, and defy full understanding and scientifically derived solution sets. 
2
Regular vs. Irregular Forms of Combat. The competition between regular, organized state-based military operations and decentralized, irregular warfighting exhibited recently in Afghanistan and Iraq almost certainly will continue. This competition is not new, but the evolution of "hybrid adversaries," who combine irregular tactics with advanced standoff weaponry, add new dimensions to it. There are three broad categories of potential adversaries-nonstate irregular, state-supported hybrid, and state-that are largely defined by their capabilities in the areas of organization, weapons, and command and control. 
4
5
The term hybrid threat has evolved to capture the seemingly increased complexity of operations, the multiplicity of actors involved, and the blurring between traditional elements of conflict. A hybrid threat is the diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorist forces, and/or criminal elements unified to achieve mutually benefitting effects. Hybrid threats combine regular forces governed by international law, military tradition, and custom with unregulated forces that act with no restrictions on violence or their targets. These may involve nation-state actors that employ protracted forms of warfare, possibly using proxy forces to coerce and intimidate, or nonstate actors using operational concepts and high-end capabilities traditionally associated with states. Such varied forces and capabilities enable hybrid threats to capitalize on perceived vulnerabilities, making them particularly effective. (pp. 1-3)
The Challenge of Adapting to State-Sponsored Hybrid Adversaries Johnson (2011) characterizes state-sponsored hybrid adversaries, with whom the United States may increasingly come into conflict in the years to come, as follows:
In the middle of the spectrum of operations are state-sponsored hybrid opponents. This is the type of adversary Israel faced in Hezbollah during the Second Lebanon War, that the Soviet Union eventually encountered in the later years of its war in Afghanistan, and that Russia faced in Chechnya in the early 1990s. These adversaries pose a qualitatively different challenge than irregular opponents-a challenge that is similar to that posed by opponents in major combat operations, although it occurs on a smaller scale. The similarities between state-sponsored hybrid adversaries and opponents in major combat operations are due to the former's training, discipline, cohesion, organization, [command and control] capabilities, and weapons (e.g., ATGMs, MANPADS, intermediate-or long-range surface-to-surface rockets), which give them standoff fire capabilities. Irregular Palestinian forces operating during the Second al-Aqsa Intifada were generally engaged immediately in close combat at ranges of 500 meters or less. However, standoff weapons gave Hezbollah the capability to engage the IDF [Israeli Defense Forces] with mortars and ATGMs at extended ranges (as much as 5 km, in the case of AT-14 Kornet-E ATGMs). To successfully counter the Hezbollah threat, the IDF would have had to have used combined-arms fires to suppress the opponent's standoff weapons and thereby enable IDF infantry to maneuver into close combat ranges. 
6
The proliferation of precision-guided weapons would allow critical infrastructures to be put at risk by many more potential adversaries. This could create a fundamentally new security dynamic in regions like the Middle East with multiple contending forces. The proliferation of long-range precision weapons and antiship missile systems would pose significant challenges to US or NATO to forward deploy forces, limiting in-theater options for military action. It could discourage third parties from cooperating because of fears of becoming a victim of more precision targets with greater lethal consequences. More accurate weapons could lead attackers to become overconfident in their military capabilities and therefore more apt to employ such systems. Precision also may give attackers a false sense of their abilities to tailor attacks to create specific, narrow effects. 
8
9
10
11
[T]he current generation of RPVs [remote piloted vehicles] generally requires a very permissive air environment to survive. To use the systems in contested airspace presents a variety of daunting technical challenges that must be overcome, not the least of which is the maintenance of continuous contact between the vehicle and its distant operator. Many experts believe that in the future, the vehicle would have to operate autonomously, at least part of the time. 
12
Hybrid adversaries will likely understand U.S. strengths and attempt to confound them with asymmetric challenges, particularly by using complex terrain, including urban areas, and shielding by noncombatants to their advantage to avoid U.S. intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and precision strike capabilities. They will likely understand and leverage U.S. and other states' concern for civilian casualties to create dilemmas that deter those states from taking military action.
Beyond the type of adversaries involved, the location of future conflicts has the potential to complicate U.S. implementations of the LOAC as well. As the world becomes more populous and increasingly urbanized, military actions are increasingly likely to take place in urban areas in close proximity to civilians. Conducting urban warfare while maintaining traditionally restrictive implementations of the LOAC represents a significant challenge. 
13
Precision weapons are not pinpoint weapons that have an effect only on the target, as will be discussed in greater detail in the next section. To be effective against dug-in or large targets, these weapons must create effects that can destroy or neutralize these targets. Their effects radius will also result in damage or injury beyond the target. One should expect future adversaries to continue to create dilemmas of this nature, positioning their capabilities among the population in urban areas.
Furthermore, the ability of the United States to limit collateral damage in order to maintain public perception that it is adhering to the principle of distinction in close complex terrain-jungle, moun-tainous, or some combination thereof, but particularly urban environments-is extremely difficult for current ISR and air strike systems. 
14
15
Good ISR was in high demand because allies were determined to ensure that their air strikes caused the absolute minimum possible collateral damage and civilian casualties. This was essential for humanitarian reasons (a principle rationale for the war), but good optics were also critical to holding the coalition together. . . . A number of unusually strict requirements for situational awareness and precision bombing were therefore written into the rules of engagement for the strikes. For every strike on a fixed target, for example, a minimum of thirty minutes of observation was required to ensure the site was free of civilians. Smaller precision munitions were often used in the place of larger bombs to minimize collateral damage, and the importance of having sufficient stocks of these smaller precision weapons-Hellfire and Brimstone missiles, for example-would become one of the main military lessons of the operation. 
16
17
While the character of future conflicts may affect how the United States implements the LOAC in operational terms, so too may the weapons it employs. The widespread use of effective aerial bombardment, for example, created fundamental challenges for the application and public perception of LOAC obligations to which the United States had to adapt, as discussed in the previous chapter. Weapons may chal-17 Magdy Samaan and Richard Spencer, "ISIS Fighters Disperse Within Syrian and Iraqi Cities to Evade US Air Attacks," The Telegraph, September 9, 2014. 
18
Improvements in most conventional weapon systems, from tanks to planes to missiles, are unlikely to pose novel concerns for LOAC implementation. Such weapons can be used in accordance with or in violation of the LOAC, but potential future improvements in their functionality are unlikely to challenge understandings of how to do so. It is possible for implementations of the LOAC to evolve to restrict the use of existing conventional weapons, as has occurred recently with cluster munitions and land mines, discussed in greater detail below. 
19
Since the 1990s, the widespread use of PGMs by the United States, driven in large measure by their significant operational value, has increased expectations about the potential to conduct warfare while avoiding collateral damage. Such expectations, however, have sometimes become unrealistic, and they may become increasingly so in the future if PGMs are to be employed in urban combat against hybrid adversaries. The gap between the expectations of how PGMs may help to avoid collateral damage and the reality may be based in part on a failure to fully appreciate the nature of the weapons involved.
The use of PGMs during Operation Desert Storm, together with improvements in ISR and stealth technology, seemed to portend a revolution in military affairs. Targets could be identified with great precision and discrimination, friendly strike platforms could penetrate enemy airspace with near impunity, and weapons could be precisely delivered against targets.
Precision, or greater accuracy, has direct implications for implementations of the LOAC, as explained by Stephen D. Wrage:
Accuracy matters in moral terms primarily because it allows one to aim narrowly at legitimate targets and carefully away from innocents and noncombatants. In this respect, the characteristics of precision weapons enable their users to conform to the standards of discrimination established in the just war tradition.
Greater accuracy also means that in addition to greater discrimination, greater effectiveness can be achieved. Moderate increases in accuracy yield large increases in effectiveness, and if (as has lately become possible) one can place the charge next to or on top of the target, one can employ a much smaller charge. This means that highly accurate weapons permit one to practice an economy in the use of force, using smaller warheads, carrying out fewer strikes, putting fewer people at risk, and cutting back the number of occasions for errors and so the likelihood of unintended damage or killing. This economy of force allows users of precision weapons to conform to the standards for proportionality established in the just war tradition. In short, greater accuracy means greater care can be taken and both of the in bello tests that are part of the just war tradition, that of discrimination and that of proportionality, can be more fully satisfied. 
20
21
22
The JDAM tail-kit "utilizes an inertial reference unit aided by precise location and time signals from at least four of the satellites in the GPS [Global Positioning System] constellation. These GPS signals enable the munition to calculate its position in three dimensions within a few meters and home on the aim-point" GPS coordinates. The aim-point for reach JDAM is supplied by the aircrew on the delivery platform through an electronic interface prior to release. 
23
32
While the increasing use of PGMs has arguably been the most salient trend in conventional weaponry in recent years, the development and deployment of "remote" UASs is also important to note. Beginning in OEF, the United States began relying on UASs for surveillance and killing. 
33
33
for longer durations than manned aircraft. This capability provides considerable advantages in identifying targets accurately and timing strikes to minimize the potential for civilian casualties. Second, they do not have pilots who could be shot down and killed or captured over enemy-held areas. Third, they are capable of delivering precision munitions, such as Hellfire missiles, which are very effective against point targets. Fourth, there is a "person in the loop" at a ground control station who can ensure target identification and "pull the trigger." The United States has used UASs, both armed and unarmed, in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as in Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen.
Using UASs themselves does not raise novel LOAC concerns beyond those posed by using PGMs fired from other delivery systems. Indeed, to the extent that UASs increase ISR capabilities and substitute for other, less precise means of attack, they may actually enhance the United States' ability to limit civilian casualties and increase perceptions of adherence to the LOAC. Whether the current use of UASs by the United States in countries such as Pakistan and Yemen does so in practice is the subject of significant debate. The greater precision that UASs afford may, for example, be outweighed by less restrictive rules for their use. 
34
Just as U.S. LOAC implementation has previously adapted to the development of PGMs and the requirements of waging a counterinsurgency campaign, so too is it likely to adjust if the United States becomes increasingly involved in conflicts with highly capable hybrid actors in urban environments. However, while the previous generation of changes both allowed and encouraged the United States to implement more-restrictive ROE and targeting standards, future changes may work in the opposite direction.
Urban warfare is extremely difficult to conduct while retaining the highly restrictive implementations of the LOAC that have become most common in U.S. military operations in recent years. In the United States' two major recent experiences with urban combat-in Fallujah in 2004 and in Sadr City in 2008-less restrictive ROE were employed and higher levels of collateral damage resulted. 
35
Operations against state-sponsored hybrid opponents may pose similar challenges. The potential for these actors to effectively employ standoff fire capabilities, including PGMs, may limit the United States' ability to conduct precision strikes that minimize civilian casualties. Furthermore, many hybrid actors have shown little respect for the principle of distinction that requires that they take precautions not to place civilians at risk from their operations. 
36
This chapter provides an overview of medium-term-by 2030-anticipated changes in the technology of warfare, and how those changes may affect and be affected by U.S. LOAC implementation. This topic is potentially vast, and the focus of this chapter will therefore be on those changes in military technology that are likely to be most conceptually challenging and most likely to come into use over the medium term. Further improvements in well-understood categories of weapons and support technologies ranging from aircraft to communications may well occur and have important operational implications, but they are less likely to raise novel LOAC concerns. Conversely, advances in areas such as nanoweapons may have challenging implications for LOAC implementation, but they are less likely to come into use over the time period considered in this study. 
1
Before discussing these issues, it is important to note that before they are fielded, all new technologies whose use is anticipated by the U.S. military undergo a detailed review to determine their legality. 2 These reviews take into account not only the nature of prospective technologies but also the circumstances in which their use is anticipated. Determining the legality of new weapon technologies in this manner can be challenging, because previous treaties, decisions, and commentaries may not have anticipated novel issues raised by these technologies. 
3
2 This requirement is codified in Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, to which the United States is not a party. Nonetheless, the requirement is considered to be part of customary international law, and the U.S. policy to conduct such reviews in any case predates the 1977 signing of the Additional Protocol. The current U.S. legal requirement to conduct these reviews is found in U.S. Department of Defense, The Defense Acquisition System, Directive 5000.01, Washington, D.C., May 12, 2003. For a discussion, see Duncan Blake and Joseph S. Imburgia, "'Bloodless Weapons'? The Need to Conduct Legal Reviews of Certain Capabilities and the Implications of Defining Them as 'Weapons,'" Air Force Law Review, Vol. 66, 2010.
Autonomous weapon systems, particularly those capable of making independent decisions to take lethal action, have the potential to reshape the battle space with their greatly increased operational tempo and scalability. However, developing such systems that allow their operators to continue to adhere to the principles of the LOAC, and be perceived as adhering to these principles, remains a difficult challenge. Over the medium term, fully autonomous systems may therefore be significantly restricted in their development and use, reducing their value to military planners.
The most salient change anticipated to occur in autonomous weapon systems over the medium term is the ability of such systems to take lethal action without the direct involvement of human operators. 
4
5
6
Creating a weapon system that is capable of independent lethal action raises serious questions for the LOAC, perhaps the foremost of which is whether such systems would be capable of properly applying the principle of distinction. 
7
8
9
10
Adherence to the principles of proportionality and unnecessary suffering would pose additional challenges to such weapon systems. 
11
7
Schmitt and Thurnher, 2013, pp. 277-278. 8
12
Even assuming that all of these substantial programming challenges can be overcome, there is also a significant debate in the literature on the overall effect that having lethal action decisions made by automated systems would have on adherence to U.S. LOAC obligations. Proponents argue that because autonomous systems do not become fatigued or angry, they have the potential to more consistently and rigorously adhere to agreed-upon interpretations of the LOAC in the heat of battle. 
13
14
Current and future implementations of the LOAC are likely to affect the U.S. military's development and deployment of fully autonomous weapon systems in several ways. First, there is a significant ongoing debate regarding whether such autonomous systems should be banned outright before they can be deployed. 
15
16
Such restrictions would likely be felt by limiting the environments or circumstances in which such systems could be deployed. 17 Battle spaces containing low or zero civilian actors or targets could be acceptable places to deploy fully autonomous systems, provided they were programmed not to leave such defined areas, while use might be restricted or prohibited in more-complex environments, such as urban areas. Using these systems could also come to be seen as acceptable only against adversaries of similar technological sophistication that have themselves deployed fully autonomous systems. Under the principle of proportionality, the degree of collateral damage that is acceptable is proportional to the military advantage that is gained by the military action. Adversaries that unilaterally deploy sophisticated fully autonomous weapon systems could gain a significant military advantage over U.S. forces. U.S. use of such weapon systems to counteract this advantage could therefore be of significant military value. Even if using fully autonomous weapon systems were judged to more likely result in collateral damage compared with using human-operated systems, their use could still be justified, both legally and politically, if the military advantage to be gained (or negated) in such circumstances were sufficiently high.
Concerns over the ability of fully autonomous systems to adhere to U.S. implementations of the LOAC could also continue to require constant human monitoring capable of countermanding their lethal action decisions, as is reflected in current U.S. policy. 
18
19
Concern for civilian casualties and the increasing use of human shields and similar tactics by adversaries unconcerned with violating the LOAC has frequently deterred the United States from taking certain military actions. The United States therefore has a strong incentive to develop weapons that can be used more readily with lower levels of risk of collateral damage, of which nonlethal weapons (NLWs)-also frequently called less-lethal weapons due to their potential to still cause death under certain circumstances-may be an important part. 
20
21
22
20
21
NLWs as a category include a tremendous diversity of devices and agents, including those incorporating kinetic, chemical, biological, acoustic, and directed energy technologies. 
23
24
25
26
27
Technologies where medium-term advancements appear plausible and where such advancements could have significant implications for U.S. implementations of the LOAC if employed can be divided into the following three main categories: 
The future development and use of NLWs are likely to affect and be affected by U.S. interpretations of the LOAC in at least three main ways. First, the increasing availability of operationally useful NLWs has the potential to reduce civilian casualties while simultaneously placing significant stress on applying the principle of distinction. By lowering the expected level of collateral damage, using NLWs may enable states to undertake military operations that they currently avoid out of concern for civilian casualties that are disproportionate or perceived to be disproportionate by the public. This has the potential to be operationally valuable. However, it is important to reiterate that civilian populations cannot be targeted for attack using any weapons, including NLWs, without violating the principle of distinction. 
31
33
31
Ethics, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2010. 32
33
34
35
36
37
34
35 Koplow, 2010. 36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
Third, if NLWs are developed that satisfy the concerns raised above, they may present an additional challenge: the possibility that their use comes to be viewed as a requirement, effectively replacing many traditional, lethal weapons. If NLWs are developed that are equally as effective or more effective than lethal weapons in incapacitating adversaries on the battlefield, U.S. policy could evolve to require their use. This would parallel the rise in expectations surrounding the use of PGMs (discussed in the previous two chapters). 
44
45
43
44
46
Second, newly deployed NLWs that operate in novel ways may require significant investments in both training and public outreach to allow them to be used effectively and safely. NLWs can frequently become lethal if used at levels above their recommended settings, although proper training can in many cases minimize this concern. Public outreach would need to extend both to the populations that live in areas where such systems are likely to be deployed, as well as to the U.S. public that may harbor its own reservations about the weapon systems being used in its name.
Third, NLWs that operate in a similar manner to weapons already in wide use are likely to face a lower risk of significant opposition and calls for blanket bans than those that operate in an entirely novel manner. For example, improved electrical weapons that represent innovations on widely used Taser technology may be less likely to produce a public backlash and possible ban than truly novel systems, such as the Active Denial System. Such considerations should be taken into account when allocating research funds for NLW systems.
How to apply the LOAC-which evolved historically to govern violent, kinetic attacks-to the cyber domain has been the subject of significant debate. 47 Some parties-including, notably, China-contest the very idea that the existing LOAC can be applied to the cyber domain, and they argue that a new treaty should be negotiated. 
48
49
Review, Vol. 38, 2013, p. 103. 48
49
Advances in cyber technologies are expected to continue to alter military and civilian systems in the years to come. While their precise evolution is uncertain, likely salient trends can be noted, including the following:
• Increasing reliance on the cyber domain. The economic importance of the Internet has become readily apparent over the past two decades, and further increases in its importance are still expected.
Less-developed countries are still in the process of coming online, and even in developed countries, tremendous further increases are forecasted in the prevalence of Internet-connected devices that would amplify the effects of any large-scale disruptions. 
50
The cost and difficulty of conducting offensive cyber operations are likely to fall in the years to come, as the education and technologies necessary to do so continue to diffuse. This may in turn make offensive cyber operations a more attractive option to nonstate and proxy groups, particularly given the difficulties of properly attributing cyber attacks. 
U.S. implementation of general international law and the LOAC as they relate to the cyber domain has significant potential to evolve over the medium term due to the trends noted above. First, the definition of when cyber operations are sufficient to constitute an armed conflict under international law may change over time. Up to this point, cyber operations on their own have not been viewed as an act of war in the traditional sense, but this could change as the centrality of cyber assets to economic and military activities increases. Second, the question of when cyber operations conducted in the context of an armed conflict are sufficient to constitute an "attack," and thus be governed by the LOAC, remains unsettled. Current interpretations generally argue that only cyber operations that result in injury or damage to people or objects qualify as attacks, and therefore become subject to the restrictions of the LOAC. 
52
53
54
53
54
55
Second, the increasing potential for even loosely organized groups to cause significant damage or disruption may shift notions regarding state responsibility for their proxies. Under current interpretations of the LOAC, states may provide limited support or even just inspiration for individuals or nonstate groups that undertake cyber operations, and the state will typically not be considered as having taken part. 
56
57
56
57
58
59
60
61
Notwithstanding these difficulties in applying the principles of distinction and proportionality, inherent uncertainty and lack of transparency related to operations in this emerging domain may limit U.S. offensive cyber operations as well. As civilian economies become increasingly reliant on the cyber domain, it may become increasingly 
58
Libicki, Cyberdeterrence and Cyberwar, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, Congressional Briefing Series, 2009. 59
60
The potential changes that may occur in the implementations of the LOAC noted above would generally respond to U.S. concerns about how the LOAC is applied to the cyber domain, and are thus likely to be beneficial to the United States. An implementation of the LOAC that placed greater responsibility on states to police nonstate actors operating within their borders and that had a more expansive definition of the types of cyber operations that constitute "attacks" subject to the LOAC targeting regime could help to safeguard the United States' own reliance on the cyber domain. Given its level of technological development, the United States would likely be more affected economically by widespread cyber disruptions of civilian systems than most of its potential adversaries, so it is in its interest to promote an interpretation of the LOAC that restricts operations against such targets. 62 Therefore, the United States should encourage the development of interpretations of the LOAC in this manner.
In order to gain support for these more-favorable interpretations of the LOAC, it may be helpful for the United States to demonstrate flexibility on other issues. For example, it might be in the U.S. interest to sacrifice some of the apparent ambiguity between what it argues it can permissibly do in the name of "active cyber defense" and what types of cyber operations against U.S. networks would constitute a 62 A counter-argument can be made that because the United States' technological sophistication also means that its offensive cyber capabilities are likely to be more advanced than most potential adversaries, limiting the scope of potential cyber operations could be strategically unwise. While the United States is indeed likely to possess superior offensive cyber capabilities against most adversaries, the relative advantage that it would enjoy in such a cyber conflict, given its potential vulnerabilities, should be assessed in comparison with the clear relative advantage that it enjoys in conventional military means against most adversaries. "hostile act" if undertaken by others. 
63
Space has not yet been the site of armed conflict between states, but concern about the potential for such conflict has led to numerous legal attempts to restrict the militarization of space, most notably the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. 
65
67
63
64
65
January 27, 1967. 66
Review, Vol. 48, 2000. 67
Research into military space technology remains secretive, in both the United States and other states, making an informed assessment of likely future developments in such technology difficult. However, accounts in open publications do suggest several noteworthy trends, including the following:
68
• Declining costs of satellite launches. The development of smaller, cheaper satellites and the increasing number of actors capable of launching them, including private companies, are likely to significantly reduce the costs to states of deploying military or dualuse satellites. 
69
70
• Increasing concentrations of space debris. Space debris-stray pieces of discarded, damaged, or unused rockets or satellites-is highly likely to become more prevalent in the years to come. 
71
72
The lack of known offensive operations against space-based assets has limited the development of the LOAC in this domain. However, as space becomes increasingly exploited and crowded, armed conflict cannot be assumed to be absent indefinitely, and implementations of the LOAC-particularly how the principles of distinction and proportionality are applied-are increasingly likely to be tested. The anticipated developments noted above suggest at least three ways in which implementations of the LOAC as it pertains to space may evolve over the medium term. First, the use of kinetic ASATs, such as missiles, may become increasingly difficult to reconcile with interpretations of the principle of proportionality. 
73
71
72
Astronautical Sciences, Vol. 137, No. 8, 2010. 73
74
Second, given the increasing economic importance of satellite technology in many countries, the practice of relying on dual-use military and civilian satellites is likely to deter states from using ASATs that would permanently disable or destroy these satellites. 
75
76
74 Maogoto and Freeland, 2007
75 Maogoto and Freeland, 2007;
Koplow, 2009. 76
The first lesson for the U.S. military from the above analysis seems to be one that it has already absorbed. Both operational requirements and existing implementations of the LOAC strongly suggest that the United States should not pursue the development and potential use of kinetic ASATs and should instead move toward directed-energy ASATs that can temporarily disrupt satellite functionality. This appears, at least from publicly available sources, that the United States is already moving in this direction, motivated largely by the need to avoid worsening the space debris problem in keeping with its own self-interest. 
78
79
80
81
This chapter assesses how normative developments may alter future U.S. LOAC implementation. As discussed in Chapter One, while implementations of the LOAC are guided by the United States' legal commitments, they are also affected by operational, normative, and political factors. For example, in the past the United States has curtailed specific military activities out of concern over public or partner reaction, as it did after the international campaign to ban land mines in the late 1990s. While the United States did not accept that any new restrictions were legally required, it still restricted such activities in the face of public pressure. Over time, if such restrictions remain in place, they may even come to be considered part of customary international law in their own right, and binding on all states. 
1
"Immaculate warfare," as discussed in the introductory chapter, is a near impossibility. Conflicts can be significantly more or less damaging, but they are inherently destructive. However, recent technological developments, such as PGMs, may give the impression that wars can be waged without tragic consequences, in turn reducing the political and public tolerance for such consequences when they do occur. While such an impression may be less likely to affect those who have experienced combat themselves, it may be more likely to affect those without any exposure to combat or military affairs, particularly when the public is often poorly informed or misinformed about the United States' obligations under the LOAC or the steps that commanders take to ensure U.S. compliance with the law.
The separation between the U.S. military and broader American society has increased dramatically in recent decades, and is poised to increase further. Since the institution of the all-volunteer force in 1973, the percentage of Americans who have served in the military has fallen by roughly two-thirds. 2 Moreover, while more than 75 percent of those over age 50 have an immediate family member who has served in the military, that number falls to one-third among those ages 18-29. 3 Americans are increasingly becoming a society without any close experience with armed conflict-not to mention any direct exposure to the LOAC or U.S. efforts to comply with it-despite the massive burden imposed on the professional military through the past 13 years of war. Several observers have noted that this trend may pose a long-term challenge for civil-military relations, and this has led some analysts to suggest reinstituting some form of a draft as a means of ensuring broader civilian understanding of and engagement with the process of warfare. 
4
5
6
Public sensitivity toward foreign civilian casualties may itself be a relatively recent development. Historically, war was often portrayed as glorious. Even when mass conscription policies meant that people faced a much higher risk of being sent into combat, publics may have soured on war in its immediate aftermath, but within a matter of years, they frequently returned to speaking of war as presenting an opportunity to demonstrate martial virtues and clear out the decadence that can develop in societies in peacetime. 
7
Recent research suggests that concern in the United States for foreign civilian casualties is increasing. 
9
10 Pinker (2011)
Reading is a technology for perspective-taking. When someone else's thoughts are in your head, you are observing the world from that person's vantage point. Not only are you taking in sights and sounds that you could not experience firsthand, but you have stepped inside that person's mind and are temporarily sharing his or her attitudes and reactions. . . . " [E]mpathy" in the sense of adopting someone's viewpoint is not the same as "empathy" in 
7
War, New York: Basic Books, 1989, pp. 37-51. 8
9
10 Pinker, 2011.
11
In twenty-first century wars, the media is of greater strategic importance to the outcome of war than ever before. New forms of electronic communication and imaging technologies have made it possible for any individual with a cell phone, whether civilian, soldier, or marine, to capture a moment and transmit it at the speed of light. With access to the Internet and e-mail, anyone can send and distribute information, documents, maps, graphics, photographs, and other materials. . . . The strategic importance of the media was demonstrated by the Abu Ghraib prison scandal during which American soldiers were captured on camera torturing and abusing Iraqi prisoners. Thousands of images were digitized and flashed around the world, showing up on the Internet and on the pages of Arab newspapers. The images, admittedly reprehensible, angered Arabs, reinforcing their views of the Bush Administration, the Armed Forces of the United States, and Americans. These images damaged the prestige and credibility of the United States and supported the claims of terrorists and insurgents. 
12
13
11 Pinker, 2011, p. 175. 12
13
4
A future environment in which adversaries and civilian bystanders are generally assumed to be capable of recording U.S. military operations as they take place, particularly in densely populated urban areas where bystanders are most likely to be present, poses greater risks for U.S. forces. Beyond the tactical risks that the communication of such imagery may pose to the operation itself, adversaries or aggrieved civilians may also selectively edit video of U.S. operations that resulted in civilian casualties to suggest that U.S. troops committed violations of the LOAC. Such videos, even if unfair and misleading, have the potential to undermine support for U.S. operations both from the U.S. public and from partners and allies. 14 sion News Depictions of the Images of War on Viewers," Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, Vol. 52, No. 2, 2008; Michael Pfau, Michel Haigh, Andeelynn   
Research, Vol. 58, No. 2, 1974. 14
This analysis has largely focused on the evolution of LOAC implementation in the United States. However, it is important to note that different actors, including both partners and allies and potential adversaries, may also differ in their implementation or interpretation of the LOAC, and that these differences could have important operational or political implications. Many close NATO allies, for example, have adopted a number of treaties not ratified by the United States. The United States is not a party to the International Criminal Court (ICC), two of the five additional protocols to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, or Additional Protocols I and II.
However, the implications of the United States' nonparty status to these agreements are complex, because the United States often considers provisions of these treaties binding as customary international law, or complies with other provisions as a matter of policy. For exam- ple, while not a party to the ICC, the United States has supported the referral of certain cases to the ICC by the United Nations Security Council. Furthermore, while the United States is not a party to the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions, three U.S. presidents have requested that the Senate ratify Additional Protocol II, indicating that the United States intends to adhere to the obligations established by this treaty. 
15
Important differences do nonetheless remain, and the United States has persisted in its objections to several important provisions of treaties it has refused to consider for ratification. Notably, the United States does not consider itself bound to certain provisions of Additional Protocol I, including those affecting the distinction requirement for irregular forces, those expanding the meaning of international armed conflict, those related to protection of the natural environment from certain combat operations, and those related to protection of works containing dangerous forces, such as dams and nuclear power facilities. While some coalition partners that have ratified Additional Protocol I noted reservations to some of these provisions upon ratification, other partners did not, and they are therefore bound to comply with these provisions. 
16
15
16
Studies, Vol. 82, 2006. 17
18
Notwithstanding these differences in the interpretation and implementation of the LOAC among U.S. partners and allies, the behavior of potential adversaries is likely to have the greater effect on U.S. operations in the future. The nature of this effect is likely to depend on which types of adversaries the United States faces. Potential state adversaries, for example, are in general more likely to be committed to the LOAC due to their greater need to maintain domestic and international support for their actions, although there may be important differences in their implementations. 
19
However, nonstate adversaries that may rely on much narrower and more-committed bases of support than state actors are more likely to display lower levels of concern for the LOAC. For example, many nonstate adversaries attempt to become indistinguishable from civilian populations, hoping to leverage state concern for the principle of dis-18 However, these difficulties should not be overstated. The United States and its European, Pacific, and Canadian partners share similar or compatible interpretations of much of the LOAC. Sharp differences that have clear operational implications, such as regarding land mines, have tended to be the exception rather than the rule. In general, the United States has proven willing to adopt a consensus position in relevant ROE and other policies in the name of coalition cohesion that may be more restrictive than its own interpretations would require. Alternatively, coalition commanders may tailor missions to national requirements. See 
Stephens, 2006, pp. 248-251. 19
tinction to deter strikes against them. An analysis of Hamas actions in the 2014 Gaza conflict notes:
A Hamas manual on "Urban Warfare" . . . explained how the civilian population can be used against IDF forces, because "the soldiers and commanders (of the IDF) must limit their use of weapons and tactics that lead to the harm and unnecessary loss of people and [destruction of] civilian facilities. It is difficult for them to get the most use out of their firearms, especially of supporting fire [e.g., artillery]." Demonstrating how this advice was implemented, Israeli engineers discovered civilian homes with claymores, [rocket-propelled grenades], ready bags and explosive labs, as well as Hamas-placed military manufacturing equipment in the basements of multi-story apartments with civilians residing above them. 
20
The captured manual also discusses the benefits to Hamas when Palestinian civilian homes are destroyed: "This increases the hatred of the citizens towards the attackers and increases their gathering around the city defenders." Additionally, we saw evidence that Hamas at least directed, if not forced, innocent civilians to areas that they knew were to be attacked by the IDF. Hamas provided leaflets telling people to stay in place and paid "helpers" to remain in battle areas until fighting began and block the evacuation of neighborhoods in Gaza. . . . These statements suggest a concerted strategy on the part of Hamas to exploit misunderstandings of LOAC to gain international condemnation of Israel. Such attempts to move the conflict from the battlefield, where Israel enjoyed military and technological superiority, to the court of international opinion appears to have been part of Hamas's concept of operations in the 2014 Gaza War. 
21
22
This conflict is asymmetric because the nonstate actor is, in general, not similarly vulnerable to public backlash for violating the LOAC. 
23
An important question going forward is how effective such tactics will be in the hands of hybrid adversaries. While state support for such groups provides them with valuable resources and capabilities, it may also provide them with greater political vulnerabilities if their supporting states come to be seen as aiding and abetting war crimes. If public opinions both in these supporting states and internationally view LOAC violations by the hybrid actor as the ultimate responsibility of the supporting state, then significant pressure may be brought to bear to curtail such activities. 
24
The foregoing discussion of normative trends that influence U.S. implementations of the LOAC has several important implications for the U.S. military, many of them highlighting the potential for greater risks. While the U.S. military has limited capabilities to shape broad international and social normative trends, it does have some influence and may be able to adapt to such trends as well. The section below highlights several of these potential implications and adaptations.
• Greater incentives to adopt increasingly restrictive implementations of the LOAC. Public support for military operations is likely to be increasingly contingent on the appearance of taking all reasonable precautions to avoid collateral damage, a trend that has been in evidence for some time. If this trend does continue, the United States will have an incentive to adopt an increasingly restrictive implementation of the principle of proportionality in particular, and increase the care and judiciousness-already at high levelswith which it undertakes military operations. The extent to which this greater incentive may be reflected in actual policies such as ROE, given anticipated strategic and technological developments, will be assessed in Chapter Five. • Recording the battlespace. As discussed, the prospect of a battlespace that is increasingly recorded by those hostile to U.S. interests poses significant political risks for the United States. One way to mitigate these risks would be to ensure that the United States has its own recordings of any military engagement that occurs. The selective editing of footage by adversaries could then be counteracted by more-complete, accurate versions that could, at least in some circumstances, mitigate the risks to public support. Facing similar issues, law enforcement officials have recently begun experimenting with wearable cameras as a means of deterring misconduct and defending the reputation of officers wrongly accused of misconduct. 
25
26
27
The United States could produce a systematic record documenting observed LOAC violations by an adversary, to the extent permitted by the need to protect classified sources and operational security, for public dissemination and use by journalists. Such a record could then be used publicly and diplomatically to further isolate the adversary. Even relatively autonomous nonstate Arise," National Public Radio, November 7, 2011; and American Civil Liberties Union, "Strengthening CBP with the Use of Body-Worn Cameras?" Washington, D.C., April 15,  2014. On the Israeli police experience with wearable cameras, see Jessica Saunders, Steven W. Popper, Andrew R. Morral, Robert C. Davis, Claude Berrebi, Kristin J. Leuschner, Shira Efron, Boaz Segalovitz, and K. Jack Riley, "Effective Policing for 21st-Century Israel," Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-287/1-MPS, 2013. actors may still rely on tacit support from states or groups that can be pressured by strong international condemnation of unambiguous, documented LOAC violations. This evidence could also be used in legal proceedings against those that commit LOAC violations, with charges brought by either the United States or other states, depending on where the violations took place and applicable criminal jurisdiction.
The U.S. military is likely to find it increasingly difficult to reconcile its operational responsibilities with political pressures to adopt increasingly restrictive implementations of the LOAC in the years to come, highlighting the need for policy options to mitigate both operational and political risks. The types of adversaries and operational environments that the United States is likely to face will tend to increase the difficulty of distinguishing between combatants and noncombatants and avoiding collateral damage. At the same time, normative trends are likely to further increase the pressure on the United States to adopt restrictive ROE and other implementations of the LOAC that emphasize the importance of avoiding civilian casualties, or place public and international support for military operations at risk. 
1
expense of allowing such adversaries to operate there with relative freedom. Second, the United States could accept greater levels of risk to U.S. forces. Military operations in complex environments could still take place, but with highly restrictive ROE and limited fire support, increasing the danger to U.S. forces operating against adversaries that are not likely to be similarly constrained. Third, the United States could accept greater levels of political risk. Engagements in complex environments could continue to take place with existing ROE and levels of fire support, but with the understanding that if significant civilian casualties occur, that may end the operation.
Presented with these undesirable choices, any of which could constitute operational failure, policymakers are likely to seek additional options. While "silver bullet" solutions are unlikely, there are several technological, communications, and diplomatic options that the United Statesincluding the military and other actors throughout the U.S. government, such as the State Department-could pursue to mitigate the risks it may face. The list of suggested concepts below is provisional, and additional research into the viability and advisability of each could be valuable.
• Precision micromunitions. Currently, the ability of PGMs to reduce civilian casualties when employed in urban areas is limited due to their destructive power. Even if precisely and accurately targeted, current PGMs may still have relatively wide area effects, and targeted combatants may be in close proximity to civilians. 
2
6
8
• Wearable cameras for U.S. forces. As the battlespace becomes increasingly likely to be recorded by those hostile to U.S. inter-Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II)," June 8, 1977b. Note also that multiple U.S. presidents have requested that the Senate ratify Additional Protocol II (Meier,  2007). For a current list of states that have ratified the Ottawa ests, the U.S. military may want to explore having service members wear cameras during certain types of combat operations to deter misconduct and provide a record that can be used to dispute adversary accusations of LOAC violations. The deployment of such recording systems, however, would raise a number of technological, security, and legal issues and pose potentially significant risks that would need to be carefully assessed. • Enhanced political and legal focus on adversary LOAC violations.
The United States has typically adopted a defensive approach when accused of violating the LOAC. 
9
This report's assessment of strategic and normative trends suggests that the United States is likely to face greater operational and political risks in its implementation of the LOAC in the years to come. To limit the circumstances in which it faces unacceptable choices in the future, the United States should begin to develop policy options to mitigate these risks. This report suggests several potential technological, communica-tions, legal, and diplomatic options that could be pursued, and highlights the need for further research on how the United States can most effectively combine the pursuit of its strategic interests with evolving political pressures and its enduring commitment to the LOAC. $20.00 U.S. policies implementing the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC) have increasingly restricted military activities over the past two decades. Greater concern for civilian casualties in particular has motivated the U.S. military to take increasing precautions in its planning and deterred it from undertaking military actions anticipated to place civilians at risk. Despite the clear impact of such implementations on military operations in recent years, however, relatively little attention has been paid to assessing their potential future direction. This report aims to fill this gap by surveying potential strategic, technological, and normative trends that may affect the future evolution of U.S. LOAC implementation, and assessing the resulting implications for the U.S. military.
The report's assessment of these trends suggests that the U.S. military is likely to find it increasingly difficult to reconcile its operational responsibilities with political pressures to adopt highly restrictive implementations of the LOAC in the years to come, highlighting the need for policy options to mitigate both operational and political risks. The types of adversaries and operational environments that the United States is likely to face will tend to increase the difficulty of distinguishing between combatants and civilians and limiting collateral damage. At the same time, normative trends are likely to further increase the pressure on the United States to adopt restrictive rules of engagement and other implementations of the LOAC that emphasize the importance of avoiding civilian casualties, or place domestic public and foreign partner support for military operations at risk.
7 Gary D. Solis,
4 5
6  
6  
See, for example, Charles J. Dunlap, Jr., "Cyber Operations and the New Defense Department Law of War Manual: Initial Impressions," Lawfare, June 15, 2015.
For a similar approach to this topic, see Michael N. Schmitt, "Bellum Americanum: The US View of Twenty-First Century War and Its Possible Implications for the Law of Armed Conflict," Michigan Journal of InternationalLaw, Vol. 19, 1998.    
As a point of clarification, this report is concerned with interpretations of the law governing the conduct of warfare, jus in bello. It does not address debates related to the law governing whether the decision to go to war is lawful, jus ad bellum. Such debates have received significant attention in recent years, but they fall outside the scope of the present effort
.3  The four Geneva Conventions of 1949, ratified by the United States in 1954, form the basis for much of the contemporary LOAC, although they were preceded by several influential treaties, such as the 1907 Hague Convention. (See Convention[IV]  Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land and Its Annex: Regulations Concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land, The Hague, October 18, 1907.) The first three conventions-related to the treatment of wounded soldiers on land, wounded soldiers at sea, and prisoners of warrepresent evolutions of earlier international treaties on the same subjects. The fourth, however, regarding the protection of civilians during wartime, represented a significant expansion of the LOAC, and it has become arguably the most important, and controversial, of the Geneva Conventions for modern warfare.
The United States has produced several documents to clarify the implications of these treaties for its soldiers and citizens. These include the Department of the Army, The Law of Land Warfare, FieldManual 27-10, Washington, D.C.: Headquarters, July 1956; and Department of the Navy, Commander's Handbook on the Law of Naval Operations, NWP 1-14M, July 2007. As this report was in the final stages of publication, the U.S. Department of Defense released an updated Law of War Manual (General Counsel of the Department of Defense, Department of Defense Law of War Manual, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Defense, June 2015). The manual collects and summarizes the department's view of a comprehensive set of LOAC topics, including the principles that undergird the LOAC, rules governing the conduct of hostilities, the use of various types of weapons, and emerging issues, such as the application of the LOAC to cyber operations. Rather than announcing a major shift in U.S. policy, the manual primarily represents the codification of existing Department of Defense interpretations and implementations of the LOAC. Initial commentaries have emphasized the manual's relative continuity with previously stated U.S. positions. However, it should be noted that the manual was released as this report was nearing publication, and it is therefore not reflected in the analysis herein
.5  ICRC maintains an updated list of states that have acceded to the main LOAC treaties. See, for example, ICRC, "Convention (IV) Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time ofWar," Geneva, August 12, 1949b.   
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Final Report to the Prosecutor by the Committee Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign Against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
June 13, 2000.
Lewy, 1980, pp. 223-224.    
Stephen Watts, "Air War and Restraint: The Role of Public Opinion and Democracy," in  Matthew Evangelista, Harald Müller, and Niklas Schörnig, eds., Democracy and Security,  London: Routledge, 2008.   
Scott Peterson, "'Smarter' Bombs Still Hit Civilians," Christian Science Monitor, October 22, 2002.   
In July 1995, the situation in Bosnia became an international scandal when Serbian soldiers captured the Bosnian town of Srebrenica-a United Nations safe haven supposedly
David L. Dittmer and Stephen P. Dawkins, Deliberate Force: NATO's First Extended Air Operation; The View from AFSOUTH, Alexandria, Va.: Center for Naval Analyses, 1998, p. 12. See also Robert C. Owen, Operation Deliberate Force: A Case Study on Humanitarian Constraints in Aerospace Warfare, 2001. Owen describes the target types:
Robert C. Owen, 2001, p. 64.   
Sheehan, 2008, p. 208.    
Derek S. Reveron, "Coalition Warfare: The Commander's Role," in Stephen D. Wrage, ed., Immaculate Warfare: Participants Reflect on the Air Campaigns overKosovo and Afghanistan, Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2003, p
. 51. 51 David E. Johnson, Learning Large Lessons: The Evolving Roles of Ground Power and Air Power in the Post-Cold War Era, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-405-1-AF, 2007, p. 65. 52 William M. Arkin, "Operation Allied Force: The Most Precise Application of Air Power in History," in Andrew J. Bacevich and Eliot A. Cohen, eds., War over Kosovo: Politics and Strategy in a Global Age, New York: Columbia University Press, 2001, pp. 9-10.
Amnesty International, 2000, p. 2.  It is important to note that, as discussed, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia did investigate some of the most notable cases and declined to pursue any charges. See International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 2000.
Department of the Army, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Department of the Navy, and U.S. Marine Corps, 2006, p. 1-27.
David E. Johnson, M. Wade Markel, and Brian Shannon, The 2008 Battle of Sadr City: Reimagining Urban Combat, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-160-A, 2013, p. 35.
Department of the Army, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Department of the Navy, and U.S. Marine Corps, 2006, section 1-14.
Johnson, Markel, and Shannon, 2013, p. 36;  and Robert H. Scales, "The Only Way to Defeat the Islamic State," Washington Post, September 5, 2014.
David E. Johnson, Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-1085-A/AF, 2011a, p. 37.
This also resembled the Russian approach during the prelude to the battle in the Chechen city of Grozny (December 1999 through February 2000). See, for example, Timothy L.Thomas, "Grozny 2000: Urban Combat Lessons Learned," Military Review, Vol. 80, No. 4,  2000.    
Johnson, Markel, and Shannon, 2013, pp. xx-xxi.   
In relation to the negotiations that led to drafting the Additional Protocols,
Parks (1990)
  78  Richard MacKay Price, "Reversing the Gun Sights: Transnational Civil Society Targets Land Mines," International Organization,Vol. 52, No. 3, 1998.   
Human Rights Watch, "'Troops in Contact': Airstrikes and Civilian Deaths inAfghanistan," New York, 2008.   
Deployable Training Division of the Joint Staff J7, Joint Operations: Insights and Best Practices, 4th ed., March 2013.
3 National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, December 2012, p. 69
.4  To be clear, the LOAC does not make any similar distinction in types of adversaries, only between combatants and civilians. This typology of adversaries is noted here because conflicts between the United States and different types of adversaries are likely to occur in different operational and political contexts, which in turn may raise different issues under the LOAC.
Johnson, 2011a, p. 154.    
National Intelligence Council, 2012, p. 69.   
National Intelligence Council, 2012, p. 64. See alsoJohnson, 2011a, p. 66: During the  2006  Second Lebanon War, "Hezbollah hit the Hanit, an Israeli Sa'ar 5-class corvetteone of Israel's most advanced ships-with an Iranian-made C-802 Noor missile. The Israeli chief of naval operations said that the Israelis 'were not aware that Hezbollah possessed this kind of missile.' The ship's crew, not expecting to be attacked, had turned off its Barak antimissile system.
"
9
ISIS.
10
David de Bruijn, "Israel's Iron Dome, Tank Edition: The 'Trophy' System," The National Interest,July 30, 2014.   
See, for example, David Shunk, "Mega Cities, Ungoverned Areas, and the Challenge of Army Urban Combat Operations in
2030
See Johnson, Grissom, and Oliker (2008)  for a discussion of military operations in complex terrain. The significance of complex terrain is that it makes target identification and attack with overhead systems difficult because the adversary can hide. Additionally, the ability to engage at long ranges with ground systems is lessened; engagements are generally at shorter ranges
.15  Libyan forces did adapt later in the campaign to mix with civilians where possible precisely in order to deter airstrikes. See Christopher S. Chivvis, Toppling Qaddafi: Libya and the Limits of Liberal Intervention, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014, p. 110.
Wrage (2003).
See Bradley Jay Strawser, "Coming to Terms with How Drones Are Used," New York Times, September 25, 2012.
It should be noted, however, that the battle of Sadr City in 2008 resulted in notably lower levels of collateral damage than Fallujah in 2004(Johnson, Markel, and Shannon, 2013,  p. 111).
Hybrid actors generally rely on much narrower and more-committed bases of support than state actors, which often rely more heavily on broadly based domestic and international support that may be more sensitive to apparent LOAC violations.
Eric Talbot Jensen, "The Future of the Law of Armed Conflict: Ostriches, Butterflies, and Nanobots," Michigan Journal of InternationalLaw, Vol. 35, No. 2, 2014.   
Jeffrey S. Thurnher, "Examining Autonomous Weapons Systems from a Law of Armed Conflict Perspective," in HitoshiNasu and Robert McLaughlin, eds., New Technologies and the Law of Armed Conflict, TMC Asser Press, 2014. It should be noted that systems capable of fully autonomous movement and navigation, but with firing decisions requiring a human decision, may also be developed. Such systems would not be significantly different from current human-operated systems from an LOAC perspective, although they may offer important operational advantages over current technology
.5  Michael N. Schmitt and Jeffrey S. Thurnher, "'Out of the Loop': Autonomous Weapon Systems and the Law of Armed Conflict," Harvard National Security Journal, Vol. 4,
2013.6 Benjamin Kastan, "Autonomous Weapons Systems: A Coming Legal 'Singularity?'" University of Illinois Journal ofLaw, Technology, and Policy, Vol. 45, 2013.   
While active engagement in hostilities can of course identify an adversary as a target, it may be difficult even moments later when the shooting has stopped to distinguish the adversary from civilian bystanders, because the use of uniforms or other identifying markers is uncommon.
10
Such an obligation is generally not applicable to human soldiers. See Geoffrey S. Corn, Laurie R. Blank, Chris Jenks, and Eric Talbot Jensen, "Belligerent Targeting and the Invalidity of a Least Harmful Means Rule," International Law Studies, Vol.89, 2013.  
13
2011.14 Human Rights Watch, Losing Humanity: The Case Against Killer Robots, New York: International Human Rights Clinic, November 2012.
See, for example,
Schmitt and Thurnher, 2013;
.16  
Rappert and Moyes, 2009;
Kastan, 2013
Alternately, machine decisionmaking could evolve to the point where it is clearly superior, perhaps mandating that human judgment no longer be relied upon, although such a development is not anticipated in the time frame considered for this study. For a discussion of the possibility of needing to choose between relying on human versus machine judgment in making such difficult decisions, see Corn
, 2014a, pp. 5-8.   
Helpful overviews of relevant technologies are provided byKoplow, 2010; and Nick  Lewer and Neil Davison, "Non-Lethal Technologies-An Overview," Disarmament Forum,  Vol. 1, 2005.    
United States Code, Title 18, Section 229, Prohibited Activities, February 1, 2010.
Executive Order 11850, Renunciation of Certain Uses in War of ChemicalHerbicides  and Riot Control Agents, 40 F.R. 16187, April 8, 1975.    
The term method of warfare is not defined in the Chemical Weapons Convention. The United States interprets the phrase to permit the use of riot control agents even by armed forces personnel during armed conflict in certain circumstances-such as the dispersal of civilians being used as human shields-as detailed in Executive Order 11850. Riot control agents such as tear gas are also widely used for domestic law enforcement purposes. Further research into such agents could therefore continue for domestic or limited military uses, but the impetus for significant additional research in this area is likely to be limited(Koplow,  2010). For a summary of U.S. interpretations of legal restrictions on the use of riot control agents, see ICRC, "Practice Relating to Rule 75: Riot Control Agents," Customary International Humanitarian Law database, undated a.
  27  For the text of the treaty, as well as details on U.S. ratification, see U.S. Department of State, "Text of the Biological Weapons Convention," Washington, D.C.,
April 10, 1972.
ICRC, "Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV to the 1980 Convention)," International Humanitarian Law database,
October 13, 1995.
Coleman suggests that the U.S. preference for disability over possible death may reflect the relatively humane treatment of disabled persons in the United States, a situation that is not common in many other areas of the world
(Coleman, 2014)
Even based on the limited medical knowledge available, some NLWs can still be quite dangerous. While less lethal than traditional weapons, many still have the capacity to seriously injure or even kill if applied at higher levels of intensity or if those affected are elderly, infants, or others in poor health. Designing a weapon system that is properly calibrated to disable a healthy, possibly highly determined adult while simultaneously not posing a serious health risk to the sick or infirm is a difficulty that has plagued and will continue to plague the development and prospects for operationally useful NLWs. (See David C. Gompert, Stuart E. Johnson, Martin C. Libicki, David R. Frelinger, John Gordon IV, Raymond Smith, and Camille A. Sawak, Underkill: Scalable Capabilities for Military Operations Amid Populations, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-848-OSD, 2009.) Some have argued on these grounds that the term nonlethal is misleading, with less lethal being more accurate, as used, for example, in a 2009 U.S. Department of Justice report (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Inspector General, Review of the Department of Justice's Use ofLess-Lethal Weapons, Report No. I-2009-003, May 2009.   
Michigan Journal of International Law, Vol. 21, Fall 1999, pp. 52-100.   
The potential for NLWs to come to be viewed as required has many parallels to the ongoing debate over whether the LOAC imposes an obligation to capture rather than kill an adversary where doing so is feasible. For a discussion of this debate, including the difficult position in which such an obligation would place soldiers, see
Corn et al., 2013.
The 2011 National Security Space Strategy provides a useful overview of the perceived strategic environment from a U.S. government perspective. For an unclassified summary of the document, see U.S. Department of Defense and Office of the Director of National Intelligence, National Security Space Strategy: Unclassified Summary, Washington, D.C., January 2011.
See, for example, Gaurav Raghuvanshi, "Arianespace Cuts Launch Prices as Upstart Gains," Wall Street Journal, July 2, 2014.
See, for example, Forrest E. Morgan, Deterrence and First-Strike Stability in Space: A Preliminary Assessment, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-916-AF, 2010.
For example, rather than offering GPS and imaging capabilities to civilian and commercial actors from dual-use satellites, the United States and its commercial partners could over time move to separate civilian and military systems, each with appropriately tailored capabilities.
  80  For a broader discussion of the strategic context for these issues, see Jeff Kueter and John B. Sheldon, "An Investment Strategy for National Security Space," The Heritage Foundation, Special Report #129 on Space Policy, February 20,
2013.81  The 2011 National Security Space Strategy does not appear to take LOAC issues into account. Discussing the strategic imperative to maintain resilient space capabilities in the event of an attack, the summary document states, "Resilience can be achieved in a variety of ways, to include cost-effective space system protection, cross-domain solutions, hosting payloads on a mix of platforms in various orbits, drawing on distributed international and commercial partner capabilities, and developing and maturing responsive space capabilities. We will develop the most feasible, mission-effective, and fiscally sound mix of these alternatives" (U.S. Department of Defense and Office of the Director of NationalIntelligence,  2011, p. 11). Drawing on international and commercial partner capabilities in the event of an armed conflict could have operational benefits, and would likely be cost-effective. However, it would also make those assets potentially legal targets for an adversary to strike. Indeed, planning in advance to take advantage of commercial satellite capabilities could make those satellites potential targets from the outset of a conflict, by effectively blurring the distinction between civilian and military space-based assets.
Of note in this regard, the United States recently announced that it would eliminate all land mines from its stockpile and restrict their use to the Korean peninsula. This follows a previously announced ban on U.S. production or purchase of new land mines. Outside of Korea, this would constitute a de facto acceptance by the United States of the 1997 Ottawa Treaty banning antipersonnel mines. See Brian Murphy, "'Unique' Conflict with North Korea Keeps U.S. Land Mines Along Border," The Washington Post, September
23, 2014; ICRC, "Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction," September 18, 1997.
Pew Research Center, "War and Sacrifice in the Post 9/11 Era," October 5, 2011a.
Pew Research Center, "The Military-Civilian Gap: Fewer Family Connections," November 23, 2011b.
See, for example, Karl W. Eikenberry and David M. Kennedy, "Americans and Their Military, Drifting Apart," New York Times,
May 26, 2013
John E. Mueller, War, Presidents, and Public Opinion, New York: Wiley, 1973; Scott  Sigmund Gartner, and Gary M. Segura, "War, Casualties, and Public Opinion," Journal of  Conflict Resolution, Vol. 42, No. 3, 1998.    
Larson and Savych, 2007.   
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2020
Gaza Conflict Task Force, 2014 Gaza War Assessment: The New Face of Conflict, Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs, March 2015, p. 40.
Charles J. Dunlap, Jr., "Will 'Lawfare' Define Palestinian-Israeli Conflict,"
July 30, 2014b.
For an example of this asymmetry in Afghanistan, see Jason Lyall, Graeme Blair, and Kosuke Imai, "Explaining Support for Combatants During Wartime: A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan," American Political ScienceReview, Vol. 107, No. 4, 2013.    
The degree of such vulnerability may of course vary greatly depending on the state sponsor's willingness to bear such political costs.
See, for example, Kirk Johnson, "Today's Police Put On a Gun and a Camera," New York Times, September 27, 2014; Martin Kaste, "As More Police Wear Cameras, Policy Questions
Not the least of these is the concern that footage of engagements not previously publicly available is leaked. For a discussion of the potential implications, see Kari Andén-Papadopoulos, "Body Horror on the Internet: US Soldiers Recording the War inIraq and  Afghanistan," Media, Culture, and Society, Vol. 31, No. 6, 2009.
   27  The experience of Israel in this regard may be one place to start. The IDF have begun a program to record selected military operations, specifically to counter accusations of LOAC violations. See Joshua Levitt, "IDF 'Combat Cameramen' Deployed to Counter Propaganda," The Algemeiner,
April 9, 2014.
For a discussion of U.S. attempts to counter Taliban claims of U.S. LOAC violations both in Afghanistan and internationally, see Arturo Munoz, U.S. Military Information Operations in Afghanistan: Effectiveness of Psychological Operations 2001-2010, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-1060-MCIA, 2012.
The authors wish to thank the 
International Security and Defense Policy Center at RAND
Olga Oliker
We are also indebted to numerous individuals for their assistance with our research. 
Geoffrey Corn
Karl Mueller
Allison Kerns
This research was conducted within the 
International Security and Defense Policy Center of the RAND National Defense Research Institute
Department of Defense, Department of Defense Law of War Manual, Washington
U.S. Department of Defense
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or