# ID: 401e0739ba31449db3ef6def5342a7f1
# Title: Effects-Based Operations: Success Across the Spectrum of Conflict
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2005.0
# Fulltext:
Although effects-based operations (EBO) is not a new concept for waging war, it is rarely thought of as a methodology that can be applied across the spectrum of conflict to achieve national security objectives. This paper argues that the EBO methodology should be used as the joint standard to ensure success for America in symmetric and asymmetric conflicts. By first analyzing trends in the world's political environment, this paper will show the necessity of harnessing all instruments of national power in an integrated effort to defeat our adversaries. Second, this paper will highlight how EBO has taken hold as the joint standard, although doctrine and training has been slow in documenting progress across the services. Third, this paper will look at the steady development of EBO since Gulf War I while focusing on the lessons learned from that conflict, OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM and OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM. Last, this paper will discuss the future of American combat and the prospect for winning America's wars with EBO.
16.
iii
The United States currently faces the challenge of having to prepare for operations that range from humanitarian relief in the Tsunami-destroyed regions of the South Pacific; asymmetric conflict in the Global War on Terror currently undertaken to stabilize Iraq; and maintaining stability on the Korean Peninsula using a more conventional force.
Although effects-based operations (EBO) is not a new concept for waging war, it is rarely thought of as a methodology that can be applied across the spectrum of conflict to achieve national security objectives. This paper argues that EBO methodology should be used as the joint standard to ensure success for America in both symmetric and asymmetric conflicts. By first analyzing trends in the world's political environment, this paper will show the necessity of focusing all instruments of national power in an integrated effort to defeat our adversaries. Second, this paper will highlight how EBO has taken hold as the joint standard, although doctrine and training have been slow in documenting progress across all military services. Third, this paper will look at the steady development of EBO since Gulf War I while focusing on the lessons learned from that conflict, OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM and OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM. Last, this paper will discuss the future of American combat and the prospect for winning America's wars with EBO.
Trend Analysis: Insight into Today's Political Environment What is Effects-based Operations?
The EBO Cycle
War: To Fight Symmetric and Asymmetric Enemies MOOTW: Investing in the Future
Changing the American Way of War : EBO Since Gulf War 1
Lessons from OEF and OIF
The United States currently faces the challenge of having to prepare for operations that range from humanitarian relief in the Tsunami-destroyed regions of the Pacific;
unconventional warfare in the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) to stabilize the Middle East; and maintaining peace on the Korean Peninsula with a conventional force. Combine these operations with the nearly insurmountable expectation that the United States military act quickly and decisively, with near-zero casualties or collateral damage, and the prospect for American success seems impossible. Still today, America is the only country that can respond across the globe to do the right thing at the right time to secure its national interests, while meeting many of the world's humanitarian needs. Effects-based Operations (EBO) is the method for ensuring the appropriate use of our national assets to accomplish the mission under insurmountable pressure, in a changing world environment.
This paper will describe the effective use of EBO to plan, execute and assess missions at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels. By first analyzing trends in the world's political environment, this paper will show the necessity of focusing all instruments of national power in an integrated effort to defeat our adversaries. Second, this paper will define EBO for the joint warfighter and apply its tenants to war and Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW). Last, I will illustrate how the Air Force's emphasis on EBO since the first Gulf War has propelled the joint community to make EBO the joint standard, as seen in OPERATIONS ENDURING FREEDOM and IRAQI FREEDOM. Much can be learned from the conflicts we have fought and those currently undertaken, to provide insight into the types of enemies we will encounter in the future. The enemies that threatened to defeat American world dominance in 2001 continue to seek that objective. It is imperative that the US know its enemy, and train well to defeat him.
As highlighted in the US Quadrennial Review (QDR) in September, 2001, the United
States must maintain a military force that can "ensure our allies, dissuade our adversaries, deter our aggressors, and defeat any adversary, if deterrence were to fail." 
1
2
3
4
Although America can no longer rely on overwhelming force, maneuver, speed, and technology to bring its enemies to their knees, the US can synchronize and integrate all of its instruments of national power to effectively attain its national security objectives. To paraphrase former President George H. W. Bush, jointness is the "use of the right force, at the right place, at the right time," and for the right purpose!
5
The Air Force and EBO advocates like Major General David Deptula have been the
preaching EBO for over a decade. Finally in November of 2004, Joint Forces Command produced Joint Warfighting Doctrine Pamphlet 7, which provided a common language for EBO. It is still too early to tell whether the services will train to this standard, but at least there is a joint vision being used in the field today. Joint Forces Command (JFCOM) defines effects-based operations for the joint warfighter as:
"Operations that are planned, executed, assessed, and adapted based on a holistic understanding of the operational environment in order to influence or change system behavior or capabilities using the integrated application of selected instruments of power to achieve directed policy aims."
6
Typical of joint doctrine, this definition isn't inherently clear. What is truly important is that EBO focuses at all levels of war; not on the specific weapons used, or even the targets attacked; but rather on the desired effects. 
7
There are literally dozens of definitions and interpretations of EBO. However, the common thread is a need for assessment, planning, and execution with an effects-focused approach. For this reason, one of the primary principles of EBO is regressive planning: the use of the commander's objective as the starting point for planning and assessment. Through the use of regressive planning, operations can be conducted with the highest certainty that a successful mission will result in the achievement of the commander's objectives. JFCOM advocates a four phased approach for translating national security objectives to the lowest levels (see Figure 
1
11
Last, effects-based assessment is critical to identifying and measuring progress and Together, these two pieces of information answer the question: did the mission have the desired effect, and if not, what actions must be taken to re-accomplish the task?
In applying doctrine to operations, the goal is often lost in the translation. So, how are we supposed to use EBO to conduct more effective operations? Proponents of EBO suggest there are three ways EBO can be used to secure our national security objectives.
First, by harnessing technology and integrating all instruments of national power, EBO can be used to defeat the enemy's will to fight and cohesion of his military forces. 12 Second, EBO can be used to attack the enemy's strategy. Last, by conducting effects-based operations, we hope to convince the enemy leadership to make decisions favorable to our goals. Destruction is not the key to success. Rather, shaping the decisions, behavior, and actions of the enemy are the critical factors in defeating the enemy; and we have demonstrated its effectiveness in every conflict since 1991.
The United States' ability to conduct effects-based operations has evolved significantly over the past 12 years, where EBO made its biggest impact as a warfighting method during Gulf War I. That evolution is marked by technological advances such as precision-guided munitions, information operations, and network-centric warfare that have enhanced our ability to plan, execute and assess each mission to ensure it achieves the desired effect. Lt Col Joshua Ho describes the six ways that EBO has been used in the past;
each lending credence to its applicability in real world operations. 
13
During OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM (OIF), national strategy was integrated with operational objectives. The strength of the planning process was in the fact that each mission was tracked back to the operational and strategic objectives outlined by General Tommy
Franks and his staff.
Second, EBO has been described as an effective way to conduct targeting. 
12
13
By analyzing enemy capabilities as a system, we can identifying and exploit key weaknesses in the system. During OIF, the coalition attacked multiple target sets simultaneously, rather than in sequence, which allowed for desired effects to be achieved quickly and decisively.
For example, in attacking the Iraqi Integrated Air Defense System (IADS), the US attacked two major sector operation centers simultaneously to cut command and control of Iraqi air defenses.
Third, EBO has been described in terms of applying all sources of national power to accomplish the objective. By synchronizing the political, military, economic and diplomatic arms of the US government, they intend to overmatch their adversaries and prevent them from accomplishing their goals. During OPERATION ALLIED FORCE, operations to oust Slobodan Milosevic from Serbia were a combined international effort that included sanctions, diplomacy, and NATO military action that ultimately forced the leader to acquiesce.
Next, EBO has often been described as a method to gain "rapid dominance", a buzz word in a world of military transformation. Rapid dominance is characterized by quick, decisive action to include unrelenting waves of powerful strikes against the enemy. Used in an effects-based methodology, rapid dominance can be achieved by attacking hundreds of targets at the same time to achieve a desired effect. In Gulf War I, a synchronized effort that included TLAMs, maneuver forces, and a myriad of strike aircraft hit targets nearsimultaneously, having devastating effects on multiple Iraqi systems.
Fifth, effective communication between the operational commander his subordinates to minimize uncertainty in a complex operational environment can be seen as an effectsbased operation. This is certainly an attribute that every commander seeks to accomplish during mission planning and execution.
Finally, EBO is a critical element of Network-Centric Warfare (NCW). Viewing the enemy as a complex, adaptive system, NCW is characterized by the ability of geographically dispersed forces to attain a high level of shared battlespace awareness that can be exploited to achieve strategic, operational, and tactical objectives in accordance with the commander's intent. The linking of people, platforms, weapons, and sensors into a single network creates a whole that is clearly greater than the sum of its parts. 
14
seen at the Air Ops Center (AOC) exemplifies network-centric warfare, as it shows war planners near-real time information on friendly and enemy disposition, to include shooters, sensors, and support aircraft.
There are many more examples of how EBO has been applied in conflict, but the process is more important than the execution. The fact is that any operation planned, executed, and assessed to achieve the desired effects meet the commander's objectives is an effects-based operation. In looking at Joint Vision 2020, American war planners realize the scope of their responsibility is very broad. From conventional combat to Military Operations Other That War (MOOTW), Americans will plan and execute missions across the spectrum of peace and war. Moreover, all these operations have the best chance of success if an effects-based methodology is applied to planning, execution, and assessment of the mission.
The "American Way of War" has been described as warfare based on either a strategy of annihilation or of attrition and focused on engaging the enemy in close combat to achieve Zarqawi and others, will do everything possible to exploit America's vulnerabilities and avoid meeting them in a conventional, force-on-force battle. The world knows it is foolish to try to match the US conventionally. Instead, they are seeking ways to turn our strengths against us. 16 America must organize, train and plan to fight the unconventional threat.
However, will that transformation come at the expense of the country's ability to fight the peer competitor? It must not! The US must always maintain a force capable of fighting our peer competitors such as China, Russia, and to a lesser extent North Korea, where a conventional force and nuclear deterrent are essential. So the question remains: what enemy should the US prepare to fight in the near future, and how should the government prepare to meet their challenges? The answer is: all of the above. By looking at the range of military operations, the enormous task for the US military, diplomatic, economic, and informational instruments of power is obvious: from strategic nuclear war to presence operations, the US must be ready to secure America's interests across the globe. (Figure 
3
15 Air Force Doctrine Center. Air Force Doctrine Document 1, Air Force Basic Doctrine. Pg 20. 
16
defeating that enemy, regardless of its nature, is to defeat his will to fight. In war, the US military must be organized, trained, and equipped as an adaptable force; ready to fight any war, from global conflict to regional war, against a symmetric enemy or asymmetric enemy. In symmetric warfare, nation-states fight other nation-states or coalitions of nationsates. Combat is characterized by force-on-force, close combat, and the objective has historically been to physically destroy the enemy's capability to fight. These are the wars that America's military was designed to win: quickly, decisively, and with speed, precision, and massive firepower. But it is the asymmetric threat that seems to give America trouble; and the country's enemies realize it.
In national security, asymmetry is acting, organizing, and thinking differently than opponents in order to maximize one's own advantages, exploit an opponent's weaknesses, attain the initiative, or gain greater freedom of action. 17 In asymmetric warfare, America's enemies look to exploit its weaknesses and attack its strategy. If "the American Way of War" is conventional force-on-force battle aimed to achieve a quick-decisive victory, America's enemies know the only way to defeat them is by forcing the opposite. Through protracted, unconventional, bloody battle that attacks at the heartstrings of society as much as it does the military, today's enemy has learned from past successes. Not only was asymmetric warfare effective in Afghanistan against the Russians, in Ireland and Kosovo, but it is also the only form of warfare the US has ever lost: in Vietnam, 
Lebanon and Somalia. 18
In understanding the changing nature of war, we must not attempt to shape it into something it is not. 
19
The Global War on Terrorism has proven that the US can no longer sit idly by and wait to 
17
18
19
Joint Pub 3-07, Joint Doctrine for Military Operations Other Than War, identifies 16 types of "other than war" operations (Figure 
4
21
"If you infuse the people that work for you with the right mentality and the right vision, they can make things happen. There's no greater example of that than the fact that you had the kid on the horse talking to the B-52 in the air…" -General John Jumper
On the first day of Desert Storm, we struck more targets than were struck in all of 1942 and 1943 by 8 th Air Force during the Combined Bomber Offensive. 
22
23
5
First, during World War II, forces had to be massed to compensate for the lack of precise weapons. During Desert Storm, a single F-117 carrying two precision-guided munitions effectively accomplished the same task it took 1500 B-17 sorties in World War II. 
24
25
After September 11 th , 2001, when the decision was made to strike Afghanistan, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld outlined his goals
26
In Afghanistan today, CJTF-18 is executing effects-based operations to achieve the commander's intent and integrate lethal and non-lethal fires to achieve desired effects. 
27
28
General Tommy Franks described the kind of war he US would fight in Iraq by saying, "this war will be characterized by shock, surprise, flexibility, and the employment of precise munitions on a scale never seen before and by the application of overwhelming 
If learning lessons from the past can give insight into the future, we should realize that our enemy will adapt as we do; and our technological advantage, military superiority, and political strength will not secure our interests on their own. It is in our nature to promote democracy and secure our borders by taking the fight to the enemy. Therefore, we must plan for, fight against, and adapt to the enemy using an effects-based approach. EBO will ensure we achieving the primary principle of war: the objective.
To conduct EBO effectively for the long-run, there are three things the US must do more effectively. First, the US must more effectively integrate all instruments of power.
Stabilizing the Middle East is a perfect example of how difficult the integration of military, diplomatic, economic, and information arms of the government can be. We must plan, train, and exercise for the joint and interagency war. Second, we must maintain the technological edge. Advances such as precision-guided weapons, satellites, and stealth carried us into the EBO environment. We must maintain the technological lead to ensure our peers and enemies don't level the playing field. Last, the US must do a better job of training, educating, and exercising our soldiers to fight in an effects based manner. Secretary of State Rumsfeld said after successfully defeating the Taliban in Afghanistan, "This is not the end; it is not even the beginning of the end, but perhaps the end of the beginning." Joint Forces Command has given us joint doctrine on EBO, and our future depends on its implementation as the joint standard.
14 Department of Defense. Elements of Defense Transformation. October 2004. Pg 8. a
Batschelet, Allen W. Effects-based Operations : A New Operational Model? Pg. 101.
Batschelet, Allen W. Effects-based Operations : A New Operational Model? Pp. 101-103. Trends described in general.
Smith, Edward R. Effects Based Operations. pg 111   
Batschelet, Allen W. Effects-based Operations : A New Operational Model? Pg 101-102. Trends described in general.
Deptula, David A. Effects-Based Operations: Change in the Nature of Warfare. Pg 23
Joint Warfighting Center, United States Joint Forces Command. Pamphlet
7, Operational Implications of Effects-based Operations (EBO). 17 November 2004. Pg 2. 7 Air Force Doctrine Center. Air Force Doctrine Document 2, Organization and Employment of Aerospace Power. 17 November 2000.
Joint Warfighting Center, United States Joint Forces Command. Pamphlet 7, Operational Implications of Effects-based Operations (EBO). 17 November 2004. Pg 8.
Joint Warfighting Center, United States Joint Forces Command. Pamphlet 7, Operational Implications of Effects-based Operations (EBO). 17 November 2004. Pg 8
Batschelet, Allen W. Effects-based Operations : A New Operational Model? Pg 104.
Joint Warfighting Center, United States Joint Forces Command. Pamphlet 7, Operational Implications of Effects-based Operations (EBO). 17 November 2004. Pg 16
Smith, Edward R. Effects Based Operations. Pg. 409   
Effects-Based Operations Briefing, presented  by Col Gary L. Crowder, plans director for Strategy Concepts and Doctrine at Air Combat Command March 19 2003
Effects-Based Operations Briefing, presented by Col Gary L. Crowder.   
Effects-Based Operations Briefing, presented by Col Gary L. Crowder.   
Deptula, David A. Effects-Based Operations: Change in the Nature of Warfare. Pp. 23-26 in general.
Grant, Rebecca.  The First 600 Days of Combat: The US Air Force in the Global War on Terrorism.
Herndon, 
Herndon, 
Ho, 
AGENCY 
NAME(S)
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
NWC
Department of the Navy
Faculty of the Naval War College
Department of Joint Military Operations
Naval War College
Department of the Navy