# ID: 40d9a1138bd74683a4755956c916aaba
# Title: The Wicked Game: Planning for Nonlinear Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
As the United States realigns its military ways and means to deter and defeat the nation's nearpeer adversaries in large-scale combat operations, the United States must not overlook its adversary's capability to employ nonlinear warfare to achieve political objectives. Both China and Russia are attempting to expand their regional and global influence while countering US global influence. This occurs primarily through the information and cyber domains. The employment of cyber and information technologies provides Russia and China with an asymmetric advantage over the West. Both nations acknowledge the value of the cyber and information domains, which is reflected in emerging Chinese and Russian nonlinear warfare doctrine. The Russian incursion into Ukraine and Chinese activities within the South China Sea provide recent examples of their nonlinear doctrine in action. To assist in meeting these challenges, the US military should consider adapting its operational art framework to assist planners in developing campaign plans that are distinctively suited for defeating nonlinear threats. A planning framework for countering nonlinear threats requires an operational art framework for comprehending these ill-structured problems. Designing campaigns to counter nonlinear warfare -specifically within the cyber and information domains -requires planners to use a "grammar" unique to this type of conflict.
As the United States realigns its military ways and means to deter and defeat the nation's near-peer adversaries in large-scale combat operations, the United States must not overlook its adversary's capability to employ nonlinear warfare to achieve political objectives. Both China and Russia are attempting to expand their regional and global influence while countering US global influence. This occurs primarily through the information and cyber domains. The employment of cyber and information technologies provides Russia and China with an asymmetric advantage over the West. Both nations acknowledge the value of the cyber and information domains, which is reflected in emerging Chinese and Russian nonlinear warfare doctrine. The Russian incursion into Ukraine and Chinese activities within the South China Sea provide recent examples of their nonlinear doctrine in action. To assist in meeting these challenges, the US military should consider adapting its operational art framework to assist planners in developing campaign plans that are distinctively suited for defeating nonlinear threats. A planning framework for countering nonlinear threats requires an operational art framework for comprehending these ill-structured problems. Designing campaigns to counter nonlinear warfare -specifically within the cyber and information domainsrequires planners to use a "grammar" unique to this type of conflict.    
Even as the US military shifts emphasis and resources from seventeen years of counterinsurgency operations to large-scale combat operations (LSCO), the nonlinear or unconventional threat confronted by the United States remains. US adversaries will continue to exploit perceived fissures and weaknesses within US capabilities through the use of nonlinear and asymmetric techniques. Furthermore, nonlinear warfare provides an assortment of challenges to military planners that reflect a complex problem-set that demands adaptive and innovative solutions.
As the United States realigns its military ways and means to deter and defeat the nation's near-peer adversaries in LSCO, the U.S. must not overlook its adversary's capability to employ nonlinear warfare to achieve political objectives. The 2017 US National Security Strategy asserts that China and Russia "challenge American power, influence, and interests" while attempting to "make economies less free and less fair, to grow their militaries, and to control information and data to repress their societies and expand their influence."
1
Russia's 2014 incursion into Ukraine demonstrated its unique ability to combine conventional and unconventional warfare to achieve political objectives. The swift seizure of Crimea and portions of eastern Ukraine shocked the West as Russia applied mostly unconventional means to overwhelm Ukrainian resistance. Russia's use of hybrid warfare in Ukraine reflects an evolution and growth of Russian nonlinear warfare since the beginning of the twenty-first century. 
2
Russia and China employ nonlinear techniques to counter the traditional military strength of the United States. For example, China's use of nonlinear warfare is guided by its unconventional doctrine of "Three Warfares." First introduced in 2003, China's nonlinear approach utilizes psychological, media, and legal warfare to gain both strategic and operational advantages over the West. As China's economic and geopolitical influence grows, China analysts look closely at both China's conventional and unconventional methods of influence within the Indo-Pacific region and beyond. The overarching objective of China's "Three Warfares" is the employment of information and cyber warfare to gain a strategic, operational, or tactical advantage over its adversaries. Some experts compare the concepts and structures associated with China's "Three Warfares" to Russia's use of nonlinear warfare as it also incorporates cyber and information operations within gray zone conflict. As China and Russia continue to exert their regional power and place increasing pressure on neighboring countries within their respective spheres of influence, much can be gleaned from how both countries exert influence through the information and cyber domains.
Scholars continue to debate the significance of Russian and Chinese nonlinear warfare.
However, most pundits agree, the use of nonlinear warfare remains a factor within the international arena. From gray zone conflict to unconventional warfare, variations of nonlinear warfare remain a fundamental characteristic of modern conflict. Many scholars warn the increased use of nonlinear warfare within the current operational environment provides important security challenges to the United States and its allies.
To assist in meeting these challenges, the US military should consider adapting its operational art framework to assist planners in developing campaign plans that are distinctively suited for defeating nonlinear threats. The framework associated with traditional operational art is best suited for conventional operations and lacks the appropriate grammar for countering these threats. The research and findings from this paper will assist in providing military planners with the framework required to design operational approaches to counter the threats associated with nonlinear warfare.
The monograph is organized into six sections: introduction, literature review, methodology, case study, conclusion, and recommendations. The literature review defines the threats within the current operational environment associated with nonlinear warfare, examines Joint and Army operational art and planning doctrine, and considers the current doctrine applied by planners to solve complex problems. Next, the methodology section provides a systems theory framework for examining Chinese and Russian nonlinear operations within the information and cyber domains. The conclusion will focus on the similarities and difference between Russian and Chinese nonlinear warfare. The recommendations section will identify certain facets of operational art that should be amended to assist the military practitioner operating within the ambiguous and complex environment linked to nonlinear warfare.
Today, military planners must navigate within complex operational environments that includes both conventional and unconventional threats. As planners endeavor to connect strategic goals with tactical actions on the ground, they are sometimes challenged by the lack of tools available to decipher the complex problems often associated with nonlinear and hybrid warfare.
Hybrid warfare -the combination of conventional and unconventional warfare -has existed since man's early history and continues to influence conflict today. 
3
An evaluation of the trends within global conflict reveal a significant decrease in interstate conflict over the last several decades with armed conflict between states considered a "rare event."
4
5
6
Recent bellicose actions by Russia and China within their respective spheres of influence has reinvigorated the terms nonlinear and hybrid warfare within the warfighting lexicon. Frank Hoffman describes the spectrum of today's nonlinear conflict as consisting of gray zone, irregular, hybrid, and limited conventional conflicts. 
7
1
8
While some scholars are confident in defining Russia's behavior in Ukraine as hybrid or nonlinear warfare, others are hesitant to offer a distinctive label for Russia's actions. Michael Kofman and Matthew Rojansky find Russia lacks a specific hybrid warfare doctrine, but instead employs all instruments of national power to attain a strategic advantage. 10 As the U.S. employs diplomacy, information, economics for global influence and to sustain its standing throughout the world, Russia uses the same tools within its own spheres of influence. Kofman and Rojansky caution policymakers against using the concept of hybrid warfare to describe an evolution of twenty-first century Russian doctrine. Instead, the authors warn that policymakers should focus on "how to deal with a major power such as Russia when it chooses to employ its full range of national power." 
11
12
The cornerstone of Russian nonlinear warfare is the incorporation of information and cyber operations into its military doctrine to gain a strategic advantage over its adversaries. James Sherr finds "today's Russian state has inherited a culture of influence deriving from the Soviet and Tsarist past . . . it bears the imprint of doctrines, disciplines and habits acquired over a considerable period of time in relations with subjects, clients and independent states." 13 Russia displayed its culture of influence through the use of information and cyber operations during the Russo-Georgian War in 2008 and the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014. In addition, Russia demonstrated its proclivity for influence operations, applied through the information and cyber domains, during the 2016 US presidential elections.
Through his analysis of General Gerasimov's writings, Charles Bartles finds the "Russian military is seeing war as being something much more than military conflict." 14 There is a growing appreciation within the Russian defense establishment for nonmilitary means to counter the West's strengths. In fact, through his analysis of the current operational environment, Gerasimov acknowledges a four to one ratio of nonmilitary and military means. Bartles examination of 
12
13
14 Charles Bartles, "Getting Gerasimov Right," Military Review 96, no. 1 (2016): 34.
Russian and Western views on nonmilitary measures within contemporary conflict concludes that the "West considers these nonmilitary measures as ways of avoiding war, Russia considers these measures as war." 15 Furthermore, Russia's influence within the cyber and information domains are connected to Gerasimov's view on the utility of the information domain. Figure 
2
Gerasimov finds that "the information space opens wide asymmetrical possibilities for reducing the fighting potential of the enemy." 
16
2
Similar to Russia's application of nonlinear warfare, China's "Three Warfares"psychological, media, and legal warfare -seek to exploit flaws within the traditional view of conflict held by the United States. Stephan Halper finds that China's use of "Three Warfares" is 
15
16
"a new way of thinking about conflict that has the advantage of both obtaining the sought-after objective and engaging the United States in an asymmetrical manner." 17 Through the application of nonmilitary ways and means to achieve its political and economic objectives, China is able to side-step traditional sources of US power, both globally and within the Pacific region. Visible through the construction of artificial islands in the South China Sea and theft of US intellectual property (IP), China seeks to bypass US instruments of national power through the employment of its own variant of asymmetric doctrine.
The principal theme flowing throughout each component of the "Three Warfares" is China's manipulation of the information environment to influence both domestic and international audiences. For example, Elsa Kania finds "in peacetime and wartime alike, the application of the "Three Warfares" is intended to control the prevailing discourse and influence perceptions in a way that advances China's interests, while compromising the capability of opponents to respond." 18 China's unique combination of media warfare, psychological warfare, and legal warfare provides the Middle Kingdom with an asymmetric platform to challenge the United States for regional influence without resorting to a strategy of direct confrontation.
Although there is a substantial body of research examining China's "Three Warfares" and Russia's nonlinear warfare, scholarly research that solely compares Chinese and Russian information and cyber operations is limited. Peter Mattis finds the difference between Chinese and Russian approaches to information operations "is that the Chinese are human or relationshipcentric while the Russians are operation or effects-centric." 
19
17
18 Elsa Kania, "The PLA'a Latest Strategic Thinking on the Three Warfares," Jamestown Foundation: China Brief 16, no.12 (August 2016): 15. acknowledge the "Three Warfares" and role that it plays in China's approach to information operations. However, Mattis does believe China's information operations are evolving to incorporate Russian techniques of influence.
Most comparisons of Chinese and Russian nonlinear warfare examine their gray zone strategies, which encompass the information and cyber domains. Michael Mazarr finds "both China and Russia have explicitly chosen gray zone-style strategies to peruse their measured revisionist goals."
20
Even with the challenge of precisely labeling Russian and Chinese actions in Ukraine and the South China Sea, national security experts do seem to agree that their methods are unconventional. Frank Hoffman contends, regardless of the label assigned to recent Russian and Chinese actions, the US national security establishment remains primarily focused on traditional military threats. 
21
22
Military Planning for Nonlinear Warfare Military planners use the conceptual framework associated with operational art and design to plan campaigns and operations. Joint Publication 3-0 defines operational art as a cognitive approach used by commanders and their staffs "to develop strategies, campaigns, and operations to organize and employ military forces by integrating ends, ways, and means." 
23
The majority of the problems that military planners attempt to solve through the planning process are complex problems, often requiring creative or nonlinear thinking to generate an effective solution. To assist planners in developing solutions to complex problems, Joint Doctrine provides planners with an operational design framework. Joint Publication 5-0 defines operational 
22
23
24
25
By recognizing most operational problems as complex and difficult to solve, the US Army developed supplementary planning doctrine to assist commanders and their operational planners. The Commander's Appreciation and Campaign Design (CACD) seeks to "create a systemic and shared understanding of a complex operational problem and to design a broad approach for its resolution." 
26
In fact, the CACD finds that contemporary operational problems offered to military planners are mostly "structurally and interactively complex." 27 These ill-structured problems require planners to spend more time in the design phase of the planning process as they attempt to provide structure to complex problems. John Schmitt supports the need for planners to spend more time in design prior to engaging in detailed planning. Schmitt finds "planning addresses a problem within the boundaries of an existing paradigm, while design is about questioning assumptions and creating new a paradigm for addressing a problem on its own terms." 28 This is especially true for operational problems that are associated with nonlinear warfare. The existing planning construct for conventional warfare is inadequate in dealing with the ill-structured problems that accompany nonlinear warfare. In dealing with complex problems, Schmitt recommends that planners use systems thinking to adequately construct the problem or system that is attempting to be deciphered. The incorporation of systems thinking into design will "establish the terminology, symbology, and constructs that will constitute the language and grammar of all planning and execution." 29 Antulio Echevarria makes the claim that warfare has having "two grammars." Borrowing the concept "grammar of war" from Carl von Clausewitz, Echevarria defines grammar as "its unique ability to capture the collective concepts, principles, and procedures germane to the conduct of war." 30 According to Echevarria, conventional and nonlinear warfare each possess its own distinctive characteristics and methods for attaining strategic or political objectives.
Echevarria argues American operational artists are proficient in defeating its adversaries within conventional conflict using war's "first grammar." However, the application of traditional operational art to defeat US adversaries engaging in nonlinear or irregular warfare -war's "second grammar" -is lacking. Military planners are hindered when applying concepts and processes intended for conventional warfare to nonlinear or complex problems. Lessons from the last seventeen years in Iraq and Afghanistan have demonstrated the challenges faced by military planners in applying conventional thought to unconventional problems.
Acknowledging the array of complex problems that nonlinear warfare presents to military planners is an important first step toward developing an appropriate solution. In dealing with these threats, Frank Hoffman calls on the military to modify its operational art and adapt its 
29
30
31
32
Operational Art and Design for Complex Problems T.C. Greenwood finds that modern conflict is best defined as "interactively complex" with the Department of Defense (DoD) struggling to adapt its Joint Operation Planning Process (JOPP) to defeat "wicked" or ill-structured problems. 
33
34
31
(Fall 2009): 38. 32
34
Brigadier General (Ret.) Huba Wass de Czege acknowledges the complexity of twentyfirst century conflict and advocates for the adoption of an operational design to assist commanders and military planners in meeting difficult challenges. Wass de Czege finds "because today's missions present novelty and complexity combined, designing components of operational art requires systematizing collective critical and creative thinking within a headquarters." 
35
36
This monograph will examine nonlinear threats within the information and cyber domains that offer challenges to military planners when applying only linear planning tools.
Through the examination of Chinese and Russian nonlinear warfare, the monograph will first establish evidence of the persistent nonlinear threat presented to the United States and the West by both actors. Next, a comparative analysis of Russian and Chinese nonlinear warfare will utilize a systems theory framework to identify the structural similarities and differences between Russian and Chinese operational approaches to nonlinear warfare.
John Schmitt defines systems thinking as "a mental process that seeks to understand and represent subjects as interactively complex wholes functioning within a broader environment." 37 35 Huba Wass de Czege, "Systemic Operational Design: Learning and Adapting in Complex Missions," Military Review, no.1 (January-February 2009): 7. 
36
37
According to systems theory, systems are composed of structures and processes functioning together for a particular purpose. In addition, complex systems interact with its environment, which also contain other systems; figure 
3
Consequently, this comparison and analysis will assist in identifying the shortfalls linked to the current operational art framework which is challenged to provide military practitioners with the necessary tools for countering nonlinear threats. describes Russia and China as revisionist powers that compete with the United States for power and influence across multiple domains. 
38
39
40
43
44
45
As Chinese economic power and influence expand within the region, it endeavors to establish geopolitical conditions favorable for realizing its goal of becoming the regional hegemon. The growing friction between China and the United States over China's belligerent activities within the South and East China Seas reveal China's increasingly brazen challenges to US regional authority. Andrew Krepinevich finds China is a "revisionist power seeking to dominate the western Pacific" as it lays claim to the "1.7 million square miles that make up the East China and South China Seas where six other countries maintain various territorial and maritime claims." 46 As China's economic and military power increase, it is emboldened to contest the traditional Indo-Pacific balance of power. Moreover, China seeks to weaken US regional alliances. China's militarization of numerous islands within the South China Sea provides it with man-made platforms to project power into an economic zone that sees nearly $5.3 trillion in trade pass through each year. 
47
While there is no definitive nonlinear warfare doctrine available to decrypt Russian actions in Ukraine, recent Russian military writings and speeches by prominent Russian military leaders provide clues into their view on the use of nonlinear methods in modern conflict. To understand Russian military thought and bearing in the twenty-first century, Russian analysts often turn to the writings of Russian General Chief Valery Gerasimov. Gerasimov's reflections on twenty-first century warfare provide the West with valuable insight into how the Russian military views modern conflict. In The Value of Science is in the Foresight: New Challenges Demand 46 Andrew Krepinevich, "How to Deter China: The Case for the Archipelagic Defense," Foreign Affairs, March/April 2015, 79. 
47
Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations, Gerasimov writes the "very rules of war have changed" as "the role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, in many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness." 
48
In addition, his declaration about modern conflict is linked to Russian observations of the multiple color revolutions that have occurred in certain former Soviet republics over the last two decades such as the Rose Revolution in Georgia and the Orange Revolution in Ukraine.
As Russia pursues an asymmetric advantage over the West, lessons learned from the Arab Spring and the Color Revolutions provide Russia with a potential template for nonlinear warfare. Timothy Thomas highlights Gerasimov's findings that "a combination of nonmilitary methods, including the protest potential of the population, covert military measures, information operations, and special forces activities, are being implemented by some nations to control conflict." 
49
53
The Chinese and Russian people share common histories of existing under authoritarian regimes where the central government monopolizes the dissemination of information, both domestically and internationally. This is important to note as China and Russia leverage information and cyber operations as an asymmetric instrument to counter the strength of the U.S.
Senior Russian military leaders acknowledge the potential of the information space to provide Russia with an asymmetric advantage over the West and NATO. 
54
55
Russian activity within the information and cyber domains is advanced and wellpracticed. Dating back to its Bolshevik roots, Russian manipulation of the information domain to 
53
54 Charles Bartles, "Getting Gerasimov Right," Military Review 96, no. 1 (2016): 36.
55 Timothy Thomas, "The Evolving Nature of Russia's Way of War," Military Review 97, no. 4 (July-August 2017): 40.
influence both domestic and international populations is timeless. Using active measures and reflexive control to advance its interests and curb the expansion of Western influence during the Cold War, Russia gained valuable experience in the art of strategic and operational influence operations. For example, since the rise of the communist party during the 1920s, Russia has used active measures "to influence political attitudes and public opinion in non-communist countries through deceptive and covert means." 
56
57
During the initial days and weeks of unrest, Russian manipulation of the information domain generated a cloud of propaganda and disinformation that fueled Ukrainian social and ethnic tensions while impeding a diplomatic or military response by the West. Russian influence operations themes and messages "proactively targeted pro-Russian rebels, the domestic population, and the international community to alienate Ukraine from its allies and sympathizers."
59
The ethnic Russian population residing within eastern Ukraine and Crimea provided Russian information operations with its target audience. As Russia's "little green men" infiltrated government buildings on the Crimean Peninsula, Russia's disinformation campaign stoked historical and ethnic tensions within Ukraine. For example, Russian political leaders and state media labeled the Euromaidan Revolution as a fascist movement in an attempt to "awaken memories of the Soviet fight against Nazi Germany." 
60
Russia's use of social media to manipulate eastern Ukraine's social and political fabric. Since the onset of the conflict and the subsequent 2016 US presidential elections, investigative journalists and academic literature has extensively documented the existence of Russian social media "troll" factories. 
61
62
Since the Ukrainian conflict, the target of Russian information operations has expanded to include strategic objectives. Julian Lindley-French finds that "Moscow has established a new level of ambition -strategic Maskirovka -by which disinformation is applied against all levels of NATO's command chain and wider public opinion to keep the West politically and militarily offbalance." 64 This is mainly achieved through Russia's use of state media outlets to promote a pro-Russian narrative and sow disharmony within socially and politically delicate environments. 
61
62 David Patrikarakos, War in a 140 Characters: How Social Media is Reshaping Conflict in the Twenty-First Century (New York: Basic Books, 2017), 141.
63 Roger Ames, ed., Sun Tzu: The Art of War (New York: Ballantine Books, 1993), 76.
64 Julian Lindley-French, "NATO: Countering Strategic Maskirova" (Calgary: Canadian Defense and Foreign Affairs Institute, 2015), accessed December 12, 2018, https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net /cdfai/pages /543/ attachments /original/ 1432247421/NATO_Countering_Strategic_ Maskirovka.pdf.
Russian state sponsored news organizations such as Russia Today (RT) and Sputnik provide Russian domestic and international media markets an alternative voice that promotes pro-Russian news stories while attacking democratic ideologies and institutions. Some estimate the Russian government spends around $1 billion dollars per year on international media broadcasting targeting foreign audiences. 
65
Russia has revealed a prowess for manipulating the cyber domain to support its geopolitical objectives. During the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, the Russian military, supported by the Ossetian militia, engaged the Georgian military over political and economic disputes. David Hollis claims that Russia's 2008 invasion of Georgia "appears to be the first case in history of a coordinated cyberspace domain attack synchronized with major combat actions with the other 65 Jill Dougherty, "How the Media Become one of Putin's Most Powerful Weapons," The Atlantic, April 2015, accessed January 13, 2019, https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/04/howthe-media-became-putins-most-powerful-weapon/391062/.
66 Andreas Rink and Paul Carrel, "German-Russian Ties Feel Cold War Style Chill Over Rape Case," Reuters, February 1, 2016, accessed January 3, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-germanyrussia/german-russian-ties-feel-cold-war-style-chill-over-rape-case-idUSKCN0VA31O. warfighting domains."
67
During the Russo-Ukrainian conflict, cyberattacks against Ukrainian governmental targets reveal Russia's polished skills to employ non-lethal effects through the cyber domain.
Following the exodus of President Yanukovych to Russia, Ukrainian officials quickly moved to provide the populace with a legitimate democratic government by holding a nationwide presidential election. As conflict spread between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian forces in eastern Ukraine, the acting government in Kiev moved to steady Ukrainian society. Just days before the scheduled election, officials from the Ukrainian Central Election Commission discovered that a cyberattack on its computer networks disabled their ability to display real-time voting results. 
68
Ukraine computer and cyber experts struggled to maintain the integrity of their networks as perverse actors attempted to derail the election. These cyberattacks were later linked to a Russian hacking group named CyberBerkut after the group publicly claimed responsibility for the attacks. 
69
Russian cyberattacks against Ukraine were not limited to the Central Election Commission, but instead targeted multiple government institutions and their networks. For example, Russian cyberattacks also targeted the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ukrainian military units engaged in eastern Ukraine. Figure 
4
70
74
China's maritime militia is composed of thousands of civilian vessels that fall under the informal control of the Chinese government. When deployed in service of the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN), experts posit these vessels have the potential to disrupt economic shipping lanes, attack offshore oil rigs, and interrupt US Naval operations in the region. 
75
76
China's use of media warfare is intended to influence both domestic and international audiences as a means to legitimize the CCP's policies and actions within China and throughout the region. Media warfare, sometimes referred to as public opinion warfare, "is aimed at influencing domestic and international public opinion to build public and international support for China's military actions and to dissuade an adversary from pursuing policies perceived to be averse to China's interests." 
77
In 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) ruled in favor of the Philippines in its dispute with China over its "nine-dash line" claims within the South China Sea. Shortly after the PCA ruling, Chinese celebrities such as Zhang Jinlai, Zhao Wei and Fan Bingbing launched a social media barrage to denounce the PCA's findings and the Philippines actions while asserting China's rightful claims to the South China Sea. 
78
China's determination to achieve information dominance within cyberspace is reflected through its use of the cyber domain to counter its geopolitical rivals. As a means to counter US dominance within the region, China engages in cyber operations "in an effort to extract information from diplomatic, economic, and defense industrial base sectors that support US national defense programs." 80 Furthermore, China's activities within cyberspace provide another example of its employment of the psychological component of "Three Warfares" to achieve its national security objectives. As previously discussed, a chief target of China's information dominance is the adversary's physical information infrastructure and the data that is transmitted within cyber nodes. For example, in 2010 Pentagon analysts discovered that China cyberattacks 79 Elsa Kania, "The PLA'a Latest Strategic Thinking on the Three Warfares," Jamestown Foundation: China Brief 16, no.12 (August 2016), accessed December 14, 2018, https://jamestown.org/program/the-plas-latest-strategic-thinking-on-the-three-warfares/. 
80
were responsible for "numerous computer systems around the globe, including US government systems, have been the target of Chinese offensive cyber operations" with the "exfiltration of massive amounts of data of strategic or military utility." 
81
82
In addition to pursuing US intellectual property associated with domestic corporations and technology, Chinese hackers target the US military industrial base and defense contractors.
For example, in 2018 Chinese hackers breached the secure computer systems of US Navy contractors, stealing a treasure trove of classified data related to an ongoing undersea warfare project. 
83
84
Within an open system framework, the environment is composed of a multiplicity of actors vulnerable to influence. When discussing systems theory, Jamshid Gharajedaghi describes the concept of transactional environment where little is actually controlled, but influence can be exerted over the actors in an open system. 
85
A clear distinction between Russia and China in their employment of information operations is Russia's more aggressive employment of information warfare. First, Russia has proven highly adept at combining unconventional and conventional warfare to achieve its political goals. Russian military operations in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrate an evolution of nonlinear warfare that culminated with Russia's successful annexation of Crimea in 2014. Next, it is evident that Russia is more aggressive than China in information warfare, especially when considering Russia's practice of using active measures to target its adversaries through propaganda and disinformation. Russian active measures influence the populations of sovereign nations on its periphery functions to propagate a Russian narrative while sowing discord as Russia seeks to promote its geopolitical interests. Russia's interference in the 2016 US presidential elections, characterized by Russia's support of social media trolls and other methods 85 Jamshid Gharajedaghi, Systems Thinking: Managing Chaos and Complexity: A Platform for Designing Business Architecture, 3rd ed. (Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2011), 32. of disinformation to aggravate fissures within the US electorate, provides an example of Russia's aggressive use of information operations.
China has yet to demonstrate such brashness of technique in the South China Sea or elsewhere, choosing instead to rely mainly on nonmilitary methods to promote its interests as outlined in the "Three Warfares." Chinese information operations as described within the components of the "Three Warfares" remain indirect when compared to Russian information operations. When describing Chinese information operations, Marzarr finds that "China tends to favor patient, indirect approaches if at all possible, a preference grounded in classic Chinese strategic thought."
86
The recent technological evolution of the cyber domain provides China and Russia with tools to wield their influence within their respective regional systems. Chinese and Russian hackers have proven proficient in their ability to challenge Western influence through cyberattacks and cyberespionage. More importantly, both Russia and China are using cyberspace as a medium to distribute a narrative -through government sponsored news sites and social media -that promote their interests to regional and international audiences. While China and Russia share some similarities within cyberspace in how each employ information operations, there are also clear distinctions between each modus operandi.
Russia's preference for cyberattacks versus the use of cyberespionage reflects its principal goal of spreading chaos within targeted systems. As previously mentioned, Russia's distributed denial-of-service-attacks against Georgia and Estonia contributed to degraded and interrupted public services. These disruptions aimed to influence the local populace and government. By targeting these actors, Russia intended to cultivate fissures between the local populace and their government. It is within these molested political and societal fractures that Russia excels at increasing chaos and discord within targeted systems. The same methods were employed against Ukraine in 2014 as Russia sought to drive a wedge between the government and its people. Janis Berzinis claims, "the Russian view of modern warfare is based on the idea that the main battlespace is the mind, and as a result, new-generation warfare wars are to be dominated by information and psychological warfare." 
87
88
88
China's desire to be more globally competitive in biopharmaceuticals and robotics. 89 China's desire to dominate certain economic markets drives its activities within the cyber domain to steal US intellectual property from within these economic sectors.
The case studies within this monograph demonstrate that Russian and Chinese nonlinear warfare is persistent. Both states exploit evolving technological advances within the cyber and information domains to their advantage. Conducting cyber and information operations against the West allows both Russia and China to distort the space between war and peace, which generates many dilemmas for military planners. Countering Russian and Chinese nonlinear warfare is a vast challenge for the United States, which requires a concerted effort among the national security establishment to counter. A recent publication from the US Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) finds that China and Russia "have blurred the distinctions between actions "below armed conflict" and "conflict," enabling the achievement of strategic objectives short of what the US traditionally considers war." 
90
A planning framework for countering nonlinear threats requires an adapted operational art framework for comprehending these ill-structured problems. Military commanders and their planners must understand that twenty-first century competition and conflict between the United States and its near-peer adversaries is continuous. Cold War history offers a useful example. At the onset of the Cold War, George Kennan identified the Soviet Union's use of political warfare against the West as a serious challenge to US national security and its global interests. In his 1948 Policy Planning Staff Memorandum, Kennan defines political warfare as the "employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives." 
91
Designing campaigns to counter nonlinear warfare -specifically within the cyber and information domains -requires planners to use a "grammar" unique to this type of conflict. The elements of operational art provide planners with conceptual tools that assist with understanding the operational environment associated with LSCO. 
93
91
92
93
11 Ibid.
The White House, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington DC,
2018), accessed October 12, 2018, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
Timothy Thomas, "The Evolving Nature of Russia's Way of War," Military Review 97, no. 4 (July-August 2017):
Williamson Murray and Peter R. Mansoor, eds., Hybrid Warfare: Fighting Complex Opponents from the Ancient World to the Present (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 2.
Thomas Szayna, What Are the Trends in Armed Conflicts, and What Do They Mean for U.S. Defense Policy? (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Arroyo Center, 2017), accessed October 16, 2018, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1904.html.
Ibid.    
Ibid.   
Frank Hoffman, The Contemporary Spectrum of Conflict: Protracted, Gray Zone, Ambiguous, and Hybrid Modes of War (Washington, DC: The Heritage Foundation, 2016), accessed October 3, 2018, https://s3.amazonaws.com/ims-2016/PDF/2016_Index_of_US_Military_Strength_ ESSAYS _HOFFMAN.pdf.
Ibid.   
Peter Mattis, "Contrasting China's and Russia's Influence Operations," War on the Rocks, January 16,
2018, accessed October 3, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/01/contrasting-chinasrussias-influence-operations.
Michael J. Mazarr, "Mastering the Gray Zone: Understanding a Campaign Era of Conflict," Strategic Studies Institute (December 2015): 96.
Frank Hoffman, "On the Not-So-New Warfare: Political Warfare VS Hybrid Threats," War on the Rocks, July 28, 2014, assessed October 16, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2014/07/on-not-so-newwarfare-political-warfare-vs-hybrid-threats.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 5-0, Joint Planning (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), IV-6.
US Department of the Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5-500, Commander's Appreciation and Campaign Design (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2008), 4.
US Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5-500 (2008), 7.    
John F. Schmitt, "A Systemic Concept for Operational Design," accessed October 21, 2018, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/usmc/mcwl_schmitt_op_design.pdf.
The White House, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC, December 2017), 25.
In 2016, NATO SACEUR General Curtis Sacporotti stated "a resurgent Russia is striving to project itself as a world power and to address these challenges, we must continue to maintain and enhance our levels of readiness and our agility in the spirit of being able to fight tonight if deterrence fails." Bettina Renz, "Why Russia is Reviving its Conventional Military Power," Parameters 46, no. 2 (2016):1.
Malcolm Scott, "Here's How Fast China's  Economy is Catching Up to the U.S.," Bloomberg, May 24, 2018, accessed November 22, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2016-us-vs-chinaeconomy.
44 Graham Allison, Destined for War: Can America and China Escape Thucydides' Trap? (New York: Harcourt Press, 2017),
21.45  Mark Beeson, "China Rises, America Falters, and Geoeconomics Rears its Head," War on the Rocks,
August 23, 2018
Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science in Foresight: New Challenges Demands Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations," trans. Robert Coalson, Military Review 96, no. 1(January-February 2016): 46.
Timothy Thomas, "The Evolving Nature of Russia's Way of War," Military Review 97, no. 4 (July-August 2017): 40.
Emilio Iasiello, "Russia's Improved Information Operations: From Georgia to Crimea," Parameters 47, no. 2 (2017): 57.
Heidi Reisinger and Alexzander Golts, Russia's Hybrid Warfare: Waging War Below the Radar of Traditional Collective Defense (Rome: NATO Defense College, 2014), accessed January 19, 2019, http://www.ndc.nato.int/news/news.php?icode=732.
David Hollis, "Cyberwar Case Study: Georgia 2008," Small War Journal, January 2011,  accessed December 16, 2018, http://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/cyberwar-case-study-georgia-2008.    
Margaret Coker and Paul Sonne, "Ukraine: Cyberwar's Hottest Front," The Wall Street Journal, November 9, 2015, accessed December 2, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/ukraine-cyberwars-hottestfront-1447121671.
Office of the Secretary of Defense. Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2010, accessed January 6, 2019, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2010_CMPR_Final.pdf.
Tong, Linh. "The Social Media War Over the South China Sea." The Diplomat, July 16, 2016, accessed January 4, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2016/07/the-social-media-war-over-the-south-chinasea/.
Michael Mazarr, "Mastering the Gray Zone: Understanding a Campaign Era of Conflict, Strategic Studies Institute (December 2015): 82.
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
A component to China's three-pronged information warfare strategy is psychological warfare. China's psychological warfare, or information warfare (xinxi zhanzheng), has its origins in classical Chinese strategy. The fundamental objective of Chinese psychological operations is to attack the adversary's morale, or shiqi. 
71
72
73
China's recent actions regarding the ongoing dispute over the South China Sea provides an opportunity to analyze its use of the "Three Warfares" to shape both domestic and international perceptions. In order to avoid a conventional conflict over its territorial claims, China is employing its nonlinear doctrine to keep regional challengers at a distance. China is