# ID: 4162ed9b4cdd4bf59d59d1233d80d168
# Title: 14o 14% o
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1993.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this study was to review the history of the U.S.
Security Assistance Program to determine factors that shape the program.
This research question was answered by accomplishing a literature review of the major legislative acts related
The purpose of this study was to review the history of the U.S.
Security Assistance Program to determine factors that shape the program.
We accomplished this by performing a literature review and comparative analysis of the major legislative acts related to U.S. security assistance.
In preparing this study and writing this thesis, we have had a tremendous deal of help. We are deeply indebted to our thesis advisors, Dr.
Craig Brandt and Dr. Larry Mortsolt for their guidance and technical assistance. We are forever indebted to our loving wives, Genene and Cathy, for their patience and faithful support. Their constant devotion and unremitting reassurance made it all possible. David B. Edwards Terry L. Meneley
The decline of Communism, the reorganization of the Soviet Union, and the reuniting of Germany are changing the way the countries of the world operate. All areas, economic, political, and social, are affected. In addition to these world changes, the United States is significantly changing.
The first Democratic president in years has been elected, bringing a sweeping "new covenant" to our system. He is committed to curtailing U.S. deficit spending and intends to do it by making deep, across-the-board spending cuts. The U.S. is also shifting from a foreign policy of containing Communism to more of an international peace-keeper role. Large military forces once used to deter the spread of Communism are no longer necessary, and President Clinton is committed to downsizing the military to save money. Because of these significant changes, the U.S. defense budget is shrinking and federal programs are being cut. In addition, the new administration has promised to improve domestic stability; therefore, programs dealing with foreign policy matters are especially vulnerable to change. A federal operation sure to be affected is the U.S. Security Assistance Program, which is one of the government's major foreign policy programs.
This thesis will answer the question, What factors shape the direction of  FMF is a grant and low interest loan program designed to enable selected friends and allies of the U.S. to acquire U.S. defense articles and services 
(4: 3)
(25: 267-290)
PKO provides funding to friendly countries and international organizations which are pursuing U.S. national security interests. The Nonproliferation Specifically, this thesis will investigate the events surrounding the following key events in the development of security assistance:
(1) Greek-Turkish Aid Bill of 1947 These sources were chosen because they contained detailed information on world events, specific budget figures, viewpoints of the current administration, and pertinent background material.
After collecting the data from the sources, the researchers examined the findings, found the factors common to each act, and compared the factors to answer the research question. Toward the end of 1946, the U.S. ambassador in Turkey wrote, "Turkey will not be able to maintain indefinitely a defensive posture against the Soviet Union. The burden is too great for the nation's economy to carry much longer" 
(28: 98)
believed Russia would continue to pressure Turkey and seek concessions unless some type of long-term assistance were made available from the United States and England (28: 98).
While Turkey's problems were a result of Russia's post-war efforts to expand, the situation in Greece dated back to the occupation during WWII.
Greece and its people suffered severely during the war and resistance to the occupation had polarized the country into two main groups. One of these groups was still loyal to the exiled Greek king and the other controlled by Communists. In 1944, the last of the occupying forces withdrew and the British government sent in 40,000 troops to help in the restoration effort 
(28: 98)
In addition, the Ukrainian S. S. R. also filed complaints citing incidenls along the Greek-Albanian frontier that they felt were provoked by the Greek armed forces (7: 753). The bill provided an initial appropriation of $400 million in 1947 and an additional appropriation of $225 million 
(19: 5)
(19: 5)
The Truman Doctrine and its provisions for aid to Greece and Turkey marked a significant change in the foreign policy practices of the United States. By 1949, the U.S. had increased the size of its military mission in Greece to 527 personnel and, in Turkey, the figure had risen to 410 
(19: 6)
This was a radical change from the policies of isolationism that followed the first World War. This doctrine marked the beginning of the United States' policy of Soviet containment.
In his speech to Congress, President Truman said, "The free peoples of the world look to us for support in maintaining their fredoms. If we falter in our leadership, we may endanger the peace of the world and we shall surely endanger the welfare of our own nation" (28: 106). The U.S. followed this lead by developing its own initial assistance legislation policy. President Truman strongly addressed Congress, stating, "I am sure that the determination of the free countries of Europe to protect themselves will be matched by an equal determination on our part to help them do so" 
(18: 43)
(18: 44)
This initial move plus many additional meetings and conferences in In Korea, the Communists had been pushed back to their original positions in the north. In other parts of the world, especially Europe, the free nations had been strengthened and had drawn closer together in their efforts to fight Communism (15: 526). While the Soviet influence was declining, The problem facing America concerning the war in Indochina was how to keep France in the war and the U.S. out of it. The U.S. wanted to enthusiastically encourage France to battle the spread of Communism, but not appear too enthusiastic so as to demand the U.S. to commit ground forces to the cause. In the backwash of the Korean war, opposition on the home-front to any commitment of U.S. troops was too strong (15: iii).
EDC, the second problem facing the U.S. in 1954, was an ambitious, forward-looking program of military and political integration in Western
Europe that was supposed to resolve the problem of how to get a German contribution to Western security without reviving the danger of an independent German militar, force and general staff.
Under EDC, German military contingents and those of other membernations were to be welded together into a single "European" army, which would be subordinated to the political authority of the community as a This switch to emphasizing long-term stemmed from the Committee on Foreign Relations' belief that foreign aid programs must be clearly related to the long-range goals of a recipient country. Many members of the Committee on Foreign Relations had experience with these foreign aid programs from the beginning of the security assistance. They had studied aid programs all over the world, issued reports of their findings, and authorized comprehensive studies of the problems of development. These experienced members pointed out that short-range cash grants rarely help a needy country. Instead of throwing foreign aid money at a country's problem under a "program", the committee perceived no amount of aid could materially improve a society whose leadership was not strongly committed to economic and social development. The committee believed previous U.S.
programs were too heavily influenced by military considerations -direct "impact" programs, that often were short sighted (27: 7).
Departing from this short-range perspective, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 stressed the underlying principle of continuity. Aid programs were supposed to respond to the efforts of the foreign peoples to help themselves and future assistance would follow this principle.
All loans extended under the new authority permitted up to 50 years to repay, with interest rates as low as I percent and in some cases with no repayment of principal for initial periods up to 10 years. still considered an important part of American foreign policy.
The Foreign Military Sales Act of 1968, was designed to revise and consolidate all of the foreign assistance legislation related to military exports (29:1320). The Act authorized sales by the United States to friendly foreign countries that had enough resources and wealth to maintain their own military forces or at least assume the majority of this responsibility without placing an unreasonable strain on the economy of the nation as a whole (29: 1321). It was further stated that sales would be approved only if they were consistent with existing American foreign policy practices and interests. The Act also set down the following additional guidelines for eligibility and the purposes for which sales would be authorized.
In regard to eligibility, the sale of defense articles or services to a country had to contribute to the security of the United States and promote world peace for the sale to be approved. The receiving organization or country was required to agree not to transfer the articles to any other person(s) or nation without the prior approval of the United States. And finally, the Act stipulated that services/articles would not be sold to any country which seized or imposed fines on an American fishing vessel while it was fishing in international waters or twelve miles from the coast of that country (29: 1322).
The purposes for which sales could be authorized were also clearly The Act also provided au:.:oiization for the President to enter into contracts to procure items for sale to other countries provided the receiving country or organization illustrated a commitment to make payment in full or set aside funds to make the required payments within 120 days of the deliverv of the items or services. The President could enter into contracts with fixed prices for the articles or services when he determined such contracts to be in the best interest of the United States (29: 1323).
For credit sales, the President could authorize the finance of the purchase of defense articles and services by friendly countries or organizations in terms of repayment that were to be made to the United States within a period not to exceed ten years after the delivery of the articles or services provided (29:1324). The President could use his power to guarantee any individual or private business against the possible credit risks of a failure to pay by any of these countries. This protected these individuals and private businesses against any financial losses they might incur as a result of their financing sales to foreign countries 
(29: 1324)
The Act also outlined the amounts to be authorized and the limits or ceilings on those authorizations for some regional areas. In the area of export controls, for the year 1969, the President was authorized a total of $269,000,000 for the purpose of foreign military sales credits. The Act contained a number of changes which are designed to limit the power of the president and give Congress more influence in shaping foreign policy decisions. In the area of defense stockpiling, the Act stipulates that no defense article that has been set aside for a foreign government may be released to that government without authorization from Congress. It also states that after September of 1977, Congress must approve all military assistance advisory groups, missions, or any other organization of U.S. armed forces personnel deployed to carry out advisory duties. The number of these advisory groups was also limited to 34 (30: 730-731 ). Under the area of arms exports, the Act points out that the President should initiate multilateral discussions with all principal arms suppliers in order to limit the number of arms transfers in the interest of world peace. It requires the President to conduct a thorough study of the United States' arms sales policies to examine the benefits and rationale behind our programs and submit a report of the findings to Congress. The President is restricted from approving the transfer of defense articles unless he has submitted a written proposal to the House Speaker and the Committee on Foreign Relations requesting such a transfer thirty days prior (30: 734-735).
The Act included an amendment to the Foreign Military Sales Act which gives the President the power to control the import and export of all defense articles. The President was authorized to designate exactly what is and is not considered to be a defense article. This control over the licensing of importers and exporters was done in the interest of promoting world peace and to further the security and foreign policies of the United States.
This amendment also repealed sections of the Mutual Security Act of 1954 that referenced or pertained to arms export and control (30: 744). We have strongly made known our views to the Korean government and there should be no doubt about the concern of the U.S. on the human rights issue. At the same time we cannot lose sight of our basic concerns over the security situation on the Korean peninsula and its importance to the peace and security of the area. Our request is based on our own assessment of the need to maintain the military balance in Korea and is in support of our security objectives in Korea, Japan, and East Asia generally (17: 71).
Another amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 prohibited the United States from rendering assistance to any countries that provided refuge or sanctuary to international terrorists. This could be waived by the President if it was believed to be in the best interest of the national security of the United States (30: 753).
Finally, the Act specifies economic assistance by country or region.
The Middle East policy was determined by the circumstances and events of the time. Congress saw the civil unrest in Lebanon as a threat to the security and peace in that region of the world. An additional $20,000,000 was set aside to help in the relief effort there. The refugees of Cyprus were given S 10,000,000 more than they received under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, for a total of $40,000,000. Assistance to Turkey, totaling no more than $125,000,000 for fiscal year 1977, was contingent upon Turkey's continued adherence to the cease-fire and an end to the Turkish build-up of forces on Cyprus. The Act stated that no assistance would be granted to any nation, organization, or individual for the purpose of conducting or promoting, either directly or indirectly, any type of military or paramilitary operations in the country of Angola. Congress used this section of the Act and the following one to express their disapproval of the Soviet Union's involvement in Angola during this time. The South American country of Chile was also affected by this new legislation. Chile was guilty of violations of internationally recognized human rights and as a result there would be no security assistance, military training or education granted to them as of the date of this enactment. They would be allowed a total of $27,500,000 for economic assistance with a provision for an additional $27,500,000 if the government of Chile did not engage in a consistent pattern of human rights violations. In the economic support fund, the Act amended the previous year's limit of $1,902,000,000 by increasing the amount available for fiscal year 1980 to $1,935,000,000. The peace efforts in the Middle East were supported by authorizations of $785,000,000 and $750,000,000 for Israel and Egypt, respectively. Not less than two-thirds of these amounts were to be provided on a grant basis. The fund also made available $68,000,000 for the countries of southern Africa to assist in refugee support and economic assistance. The Act prohibited any assistance to those countries seen as instigators in the conflicts of that region. These included, Angola, Zambia,    
In 1968, President Johnson maintained the present the level of security assistance even though Congress urged a reduction in overseas spending. America's costly involvement in the Vietnam War and the growing opposition to additional spending were critical in shaping the policies of this time period. As a result of these influences, exports in foreign military sales were limited to $269,000,000.
This legislation continued a tight control on security assistance spending. Congress was deeply concerned over the amount of arms being exported and began limiting the President's authority to sell arms.
Authorizations continued to decline with only $196,700,000 for military assistance. The United States was involved in no major conflicts at this time and, with the war in Southeast Asia over, conditions were conducive to decreased spending. In conclusion, this thesis determined that the threat of Communism, the attitudes and policies of the current leadership, and the impact of global events were the main factors that shape the direction of the Security Assistance Program.
The United States representative to the Security Council proposed that a commission be established to investigate the problems. This proposal was unanimously favored with the exception of a negative vote from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The Communist faction thrived on the post-war chaos, and Russia was now openly supporting the Communist guerrillas. Intelligence reports received during this time confirmed the United States' suspicions regarding the Soviets' interest in Greece. The reports indicated that, under Soviet direction, Yugoslavia. Bulgaria, and Albania were attempting to establish a Communist Greece (28: 98). If the Soviets came to power in Greece and persuaded would be highly unsafe (8: 28-29). The subsequent top secret memo from the Under Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, to the Secretary of State reflected the mood of the time and the main reasoning behind the push for U.S. involvement:
The United States representative to the Security Council proposed that a commission be established to investigate the problems. This proposal was unanimously favored with the exception of a negative vote from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The Communist faction thrived on the post-war chaos, and Russia was now openly supporting the Communist guerrillas. Intelligence reports received during this time confirmed the United States' suspicions regarding the Soviets' interest in Greece. The reports indicated that, under Soviet direction, Yugoslavia. Bulgaria, and Albania were attempting to establish a Communist Greece (28: 98). If the Soviets came to power in Greece and persuaded would be highly unsafe (8: 28-29). The subsequent top secret memo from the Under Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, to the Secretary of State reflected the mood of the time and the main reasoning behind the push for U.S. involvement:
U.S.
U.S.
borrowing authority to be the most important part of the act (27: 10). Since most poor countries did not need and could not absorb large amounts of aid President and to any country. Assistance could be provided through defense articles or services acquired from any source by loan, lease, sale, exchange, grant. or any other means (27:24). Therefore, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 encouraged long-term assistance through standard means. 89). In a May 18, 1966 press conference, then Treasury Secretary, Henry Fowler remarked, "Department of Defense appropriation. This funding was called military assistance service funded or MASF. The money was used to provide military equipment, services, and training to countries that were involved in the conflict in Southeast Asia (14: 106). In 1965, President Johnson had no problem getting Congressional approval for $3.25 billion in foreign aid (12: 84). The President had purposely scaled down his request from $3.6 billion to avoid any opposition from Congress and the tactic worked. Plus, the threat of Communism remained and the need to ensure both national and international security was
out of the Military Assistance Program (MAP) and included provisions for the International Military and Education program, thus separating it from MAP. At the time, congressional leaders were concerned over the large amount of weapons being exported by the U.S. and used this legislation as a means of checking the President's ability to sell arms at will (20: 244-245).
S. defense. In his State of the Union address on February 18, President Reagan told the American people "since 1970, the Soviet Union has invested $300 billion more in its military forces than the U.S. As a result of this massive build-up, the Soviets have made a significant numerical advantage" (23: i). He continued his point in a speech at West Point in May when he said "treaties are no substitute for arms buildup" (13: 720).
(27:4).
Pres'cr"od tb ANSI "td Z39-'B 298-102
to U.S. security assistance.
This thesis consists of four chapters. Chapter one is the introduction. Chapter two will describe the methodology used to perform the research.
Chapter three is a literature review. Chapter four will contain an analysis of the research.  
PuOct( •e0or? -: ot'.'a" -Of th CC1O4niOn of ot fo( atiOn s$ etimated tO&.@rage in, ,•r per ewr'se 'nciaing the time for rer e-,ng instructiOns. wear-, nge est'.g cat: 1o07" gathefr." 412 " ,jta, g the costa needed, and completing and leve.Ing the :oIemton ot information Send comments rega-an; tmth 0 rden estlnte 0' anV other aMXCM Of t h colet,-' -'"aCcn ncMOU4ng suggesttons for feowcinq thstir.~o.,en tc vashn';ton rfoead arersSe'-.icf. D~reCtOrate for nfofrn'alios Ooe'at~oni and kepcrts, i2is etlersoh Oa.• ,;r.a,. $te 12C4. Arinm .on. vA 22202-4302 and toG the O0l.e Of Management and BS get, PaperrO,. RedctO Poject (0704.-088). •a The purpose of this study was to review the history of the U.S. Security Assistance Program to determine factors that shape the program.
This research question was answered by accomplishing a literature review of the major legislative acts related to U.S. security assistance. After completing the review, the researchers determined that each of the acts contained four camIon factors: 1) the threat of Soviet expansion, 2) significant global events, 3) monetary authorizations, and 4) the attitudes and policies of the current leadership. After analyzing these four factors, the researchers concluded that only three could be determined to shape the U.S. Security Assistance Program: the threat of the Soviet expansion, significant global events, and the attitudes and policies of the current leadership. 