# ID: 422152dde6a144aabae9ce8f7e9a3624
# Title: Airpower and Gradual Escalation: Reconsidering the Conventional Wisdom
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2000.0
# Fulltext:
This study reexamines the concept of gradualism. Written off as an unworkable concept after the Vietnam War, gradualism worked in NATO's recently completed Operation Allied Force. Since it is reasonable to believe that national decision makers and military commanders may have to conduct another graduated air operation in the future, this study examines what conditions must be fulfilled or avoided to maximize the chances for a successful graduated air campaign. Since most contemporary strategists do not fully understand the components of gradualism, the study begins by deriving from the writings of Thomas C. Schelling, perhaps the best-known theorist of gradualism, a definition and theoretical propositions for gradualism. The conclusion from this is that bargaining and communication between the two adversaries, a well-coordinated effort between the military and diplomatic instruments of power, and an intensive and extensive understanding of one's adversary are all key facets of gradualism. Following the theory is a theoretical critique of gradualism, comparing it to the principles of Clausewitz, to the ideas of several airpower theorists, including John Boyd and John Warden's theories of strategic paralysis, and to the theoretical and empirical lessons of the psychological impact of air attack. This suggests that the key tenets of gradualism are explicitly contrary to the theoretical underpinnings of the way western nations conduct warfare.
The second part of the critique analyzes the application of graduated airpower during Operation Rolling Thunder, 1965-68, as well as exploring two other graduated campaigns: the Egyptian-Israeli War of Attrition, 1969-70 and NATO's Operation Deny Flight/Deliberate Force, 1992-95. The conclusion is that the contextual variables of the Cold War as well as American and Israelis mistakes doomed the graduated use of airpower in Vietnam and the War of Attrition. Conversely, NATO's graduated use of airpower in Deny Flight, culminating with Deliberate Force, demonstrated that the military can execute a politically risky operation within broad political constraints, that NATO's operational execution of the Deliberate Force should be viewed as an archetype for how a graduated airpower campaign could be planned and executed in the future, and that airpower is now a sufficiently precise instrument and can be wielded with sufficient dexterity that it can, under the right circumstances, be used to send subtle messages to an adversary.
When the political and tactical constraints imposed on air leaders are extensive and pervasive-and that trend seems more likely than less likely-then gradualism may be perceived as the only option. Whether or not we like it, a measured and steadily increasing use of airpower against an opponent may be one of the options for future war. If this is an option, then it is our obligation to optimize the tools we use to achieve success. General Joseph W. Ralston, 14 September 1999   There is no point, really, for air power exponents grumbling about escalation or gradualism. If we are going to maximize air power responsiveness, we will have to turn it on and turn it off. The important thing is to make sure we reach the necessary impact before we turn it off and establish hard-nosed rules for gaps.
Air Vice Marshal Tony Mason, 16 August 1999   Gradualism is a concept so distasteful to military officers in general, and to veterans of Operation Rolling Thunder in particular, that most will not even entertain the idea that it might be a viable strategic option for the use of airpower. One of the many lessons that the U.S. military took away from Vietnam was the importance of not gradually escalating the combat power that is applied against an adversary. U.S.
Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger later codified this idea in 1984 as one of the tenets of the Weinberger Doctrine. The U.S. Air Force learned this lesson, too. The leaders of the air campaign in Operation Desert Storm, mostly veterans of Rolling Thunder, exorcised the demons of gradualism with the massive and sustained use of airpower against Iraq in January and February 1991-with the now well-known spectacular results.
Yet Operation Allied Force, the NATO bombing campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, seems to contradict the lessons learned from Vietnam and validated in Desert Storm. NATO employed airpower in a graduated manner in Allied Force, yet was still able to coerce Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to accede to the terms of the Rambouillet Accords. The contradiction between the lesson derived from Vietnam about the graduated use of airpower and the success of airpower over Kosovo is perplexing.
As a number of well-regarded airmen have recently suggested, a reconsideration of the concept of gradualism is overdue. 
2
The first is that applying airpower in a graduated manner is not an aberration that only appeared as NATO planned to coerce Milosevic. A variety of circumstances may require airmen to plan and execute graduated campaigns in the future. One circumstance is alliance politics if the United States intervenes in conjunction with other states. If the alliance makes decisions by consensus, then it is likely that any decision to use military force will be difficult to attain, and even when military action is authorized, the alliance may only allow what it perceives to be the minimal amount of military force needed to conduct the operation. It may also be difficult to get approval for rapid escalation in the conflict. Furthermore, if the alliance is trying to gain and maintain the moral high ground with the world community, then preserving political cohesion within the alliance becomes a major concern at the political level. This may be to the detriment of the military effort. 
3
1
2
3
anywhere in a short period of time, this does not happen overnight. If the U.S. must deploy its forces to a conflict, it will take some time to accumulate combat power in a region, potentially forcing the air campaign to take on a graduated nature, at least in the beginning.
Finally, U.S. national politics may drive the requirement for a campaign to be graduated. This may take the form of a desire to minimize the damage to a local population's infrastructure with an eye towards post-conflict relations. Or national decision-makers may wish to use minimal force to ensure that domestic opinion remains in favor of the war. While national decision-makers may find these reasons to be politically expedient, it makes it difficult for the military to plan and execute the campaign in the most militarily effective manner.
The future may bring other reasons why national decision-makers may decide that a graduated campaign is necessary. The point to take away from this is that the military will always be constrained by political restrictions, and that these may increasingly dictate that the military conduct its part of the coercive campaign in a graduated manner.
The second, and perhaps most important, reason for reexamining gradualism is that the apparent success of Operation Allied Force suggests that the failure of gradualism in Rolling Thunder may have been an aberration in the graduated use of military force. What if other factors unrelated to gradualism doomed Rolling Thunder to failure, and the concept is in fact likely to succeed in future conflicts? This question, coupled with the assertion that the strategic context may force the military to conduct graduated campaigns in the future, whether they like it or not, makes it important to study the theory of gradualism, as well as the lessons from its execution in the past, to learn what went wrong and how the theory and application of gradualism can be improved.
Moreover, since coercion is a strategy where the military instrument is only one of many levers that national decision-makers can use to persuade an adversary, and the coordination of these levers is often critical, then the national decision-makers also have a role in establishing the necessary conditions for airpower to be used successfully in a graduated manner. The main research question, then, is what conditions must national decision-makers and airpower leadership establish or avoid in order to maximize the chances of success of a graduated air campaign?
This thesis will answer the research question by following a methodology for critical analysis advocated by Dr. Harold R. Winton, a professor at the Air Force's School of Advanced Airpower Studies, called the "Updated Synthesis of Clausewitz on Theory." 
4
5
Rolling Thunder provides only a limited evidentiary basis for assessing the efficacy of gradualism. Because of this, another major task is finding further evidence with which to compare these claims. Finally, after analyzing all of the evidence, it should be possible to modify the theory of gradualism, and in the process, derive conditions that national decision makers and military commanders must establish or avoid to maximize the probability of success for the graduated use of airpower.
Chapter Two begins, then, with an examination of the theory of gradualism. This examination is based on the ideas of perhaps the best-known theorist on the concept of gradualism, Thomas Schelling. As one of the defense intellectuals who rose to prominence in the 1950s, Schelling encapsulated his ideas on compellence and gradualism in Arms and Influence. These ideas emerged in the Johnson administration's policy planning cells for Rolling Thunder. This chapter examines Schelling's ideas about gradualism and deductively derives propositions for the theory. The next step is to examine Rolling Thunder. But before one can competently examine the operation, one must understand the circumstances that Presidents Kennedy and Johnson faced as they tried to find a solution to the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam. Chapter Three examines the contextual elements that helped shape the decision to implement a graduated campaign, as well as the influence these elements exerted on the execution of this operation. After examining the reasons why gradualism resonated with senior members of the Johnson administration, the chapter concludes with a primer on Operation Rolling Thunder and the circumstances that led up to its implementation.
With this background, it is now possible to critique the theory objectively.
Chapter Four critiques gradualism from the theoretical perspective, first by comparing the theory of gradualism to the military theory of Carl von Clausewitz. It will be readily apparent that while Clausewitz and Schelling both believe in the primacy of politics over war, they have radically different, and contradictory, views about the least expensive way to achieve the political objective. Following this, gradualism will be measured against airpower theories, the first being the "classical" airpower theories of Giulio Douhet, William Mitchell, and the U.S. Army Air Corps Tactical School. This examination will show that the early airpower theorists believed that airpower was particularly well suited to apply Clausewitz's principles of concentration, economy of force, and surprise. The chapter continues by examining the modern airpower theory of strategic paralysis, proposed by the late John Boyd and by John Warden, and will show that strategic paralysis and gradualism are almost theoretically contradictory with respect to the mechanisms through which their theorists expect to achieve the objective. The examination of prominent military and airpower theories will demonstrate why most military practitioners are so averse to gradualism. The chapter concludes by comparing gradualism to the psychology of decision making and the psychological impact of an air attack. This analysis demonstrates that airpower's inherent coercive effects can be misapplied if airpower is used in a graduated manner. Following this will be the critique of gradualism based on history. Chapter Five begins with a derivation of three analytical criteria, based on the propositions of gradualism from Chapter Two, to examine the evidence of Rolling Thunder. Then, to broaden the evidence base, Chapter Six examines, within the same analytical construct, two other air campaigns that were also graduated in nature. These are the Arab-Israeli War of Attrition, 1969-70, and NATO's Operation Deny Flight and Deliberate Force,  1992-95. While military commanders did not intend it, circumstances drove these air operations to be graduated in nature. Chapter Seven analyzes the lessons about gradualism that emerge from these three campaigns, and proposes modifications to gradualism's theoretical propositions. Finally, Chapter Eight recommends a number of conditions to national decision-makers and air commanders to establish or avoid to maximize the chances for a successful graduated air campaign.
[Theory] is meant to educate the mind of the future commander, or, more accurately, to guide him in his self-education, not to accompany him to the battlefield; just as a wise teacher guides and stimulates a young man's intellectual development, but is careful not to lead him by the hand for the rest of his life.
Gradualism became notorious after its implementation as a strategic concept in the Vietnam War, and in Operation Rolling Thunder in particular. 
6
The dawn of the nuclear age, which came with the dropping of the atomic bombs on Japan in August 1945, began a dramatic change in thinking about defense strategy, 
6
7
And related to this was their belief that unrestricted federal spending could hurt the United States' greatest strength in its confrontation with communism: the American economy. 
8
Having decided to rely on the United States' superiority in nuclear weapons, the Eisenhower administration promulgated a new strategic doctrine, the idea of "massive retaliation." In a speech before the Council on Foreign Relations, on January 12, 1954, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles announced the United States' new defense policy.
Recognizing the United States' nuclear superiority, Dulles declared that "the way to deter aggression is for the free community to be willing and able to respond vigorously at places and with means of its own choosing." Dulles concluded by stating that the United 7 For a description of the Air Force's focus on becoming the sole nuclear arm in the national security strategy of the time, see Walton S. Moody, Building the Strategic Air Force (Washington, D.C.: Brookings  Institution, 1978). 
8
9
Strategic thought in the 1950s evolved in response to the policy of massive retaliation. During these years, a number of civilian theorists, either academics or members of defense think tanks such as the RAND Corporation, built theories that still figure prominently in strategic thought today. These ideas include the interrelated concepts of deterrence, limited war, flexible response, nation building and counter insurgency, crisis management, and controlled escalation. While these are separate concepts, two themes tie them together. The first is that foreign policy challenges could be tamed by analyzing them through a rational process; the second is the idea that "the exercise and threat of the exercise of force be subject to close political control." What these theorists envisioned is that politicians could fine-tune both the threat and the use of military force. 
10
9
10
11
12
13
14
Staff in 1962. 11
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983), 185-200. 12
13
15
"The management of a foreign-policy crisis, then, is an exciting, demanding form of organized thinking, in which the maximum degree of complexity must be sifted through the minds of those few men in position to take the ultimate responsibility for action." 
16
17
18
20
21
22
23
24
The best known theorist of gradualism is Harvard-trained economist Thomas Schelling. His ideas about gradualism are not explicit: in fact, he never defined the term in any of his writings. 
25
Schelling defines compellence as "inducing [an adversary's] withdrawal, or his acquiescence, or his collaboration by an action that threatens to hurt, often one that could not forcibly accomplish its aim but that, nevertheless, can hurt enough to induce compliance."
26
27
1. The two sides must have some mutual interests from which a bargain can be struck, i.e. it cannot be a zero-sum game. 2. The coercive threat must be sufficiently potent to convince the adversary of the costs of non-compliance. 3. The adversary must perceive the coercer's intent as credible. 4. The coercer must somehow assure the coercee that compliance will not result in further demands being placed on him. 5. The adversary must be given time to comply with the demands. 
28
29
30
Schelling's second and third conditions deal with perceptions. If the adversary does not perceive a coercer's threat to be powerful enough, then the coercive threat will not work. This implies that a weak country may be able to coerce a stronger adversary if it can pose a sufficiently powerful threat. The adversary's perception of the coercer's intent is equally important. If an adversary does not believe a coercer's intent to use force is credible, then the threat will be for naught. Countries that have a reputation for not following through on commitments, countries that do not have a history of using force offensively, or coalitions that are politically fractious may have difficulties persuading an adversary of the credibility of their intent.
Furthermore, an adversary has little incentive to comply with coercive demands if it believes that the coercer will only make new demands after the first conditions have been fulfilled. A coercing government may find it difficult to prove to an adversary in advance that it will not impose further conditions unless the coercer has a reputation for following through on commitments or a third party that can enforce an agreement is brokering the deal. 
31
After examining the conditions necessary for successful coercion, Schelling describes the ideal compellent action as one that, once initiated, causes minimal harm if compliance is forthcoming and great harm if compliance is not forthcoming, is consistent with the time schedule of feasible compliance, is beyond recall once initiated, and cannot be stopped by the party that started it but automatically stops upon compliance, with all this fully understood by the adversary. 
33
Schelling's ideas about gradualism are embedded in his ideas about compellence and bargaining. 
34
30
31 Schelling,
Arms and Influence,
172. 33
34
Influence is sometimes inexplicit and that he never explicitly mentions gradualism in any of his works, it is possible to distill a definition of gradualism and derive four propositions for a theory of gradualism. Gradualism, in the military context, is the incremental increase of the application of military force, coupled with a threat to use this force against targets an adversary values, with the goal of compelling an adversary to accede to the coercer's demands. The central proposition for gradualism is: "The power to hurt is bargaining power. To exploit it is diplomacy-vicious diplomacy, but diplomacy." 
35
There are three other propositions to the theory of gradualism:
1. Since bargaining is a key aspect of compellence and gradualism, a graduated campaign must necessarily be controlled at the highest level 2. If threatening harm to what an adversary values is a key tenet, then the coercer must have appropriately intensive and extensive knowledge of the adversary 3. If bargaining is a key facet of gradualism, clear, if tacit, communication between the adversaries is a critical component of gradualism Let's examine these closely. In a graduated campaign, the goal is not to destroy the adversary, but to bend him to your will. Since gradualism can minimize the amount of destruction necessary to compel the adversary, and since destruction is not the goal, gradualism can be an efficient way to coerce. Moreover, since part of the graduated campaign involves bargaining with the adversary through diplomacy, centralized control of both diplomatic and military efforts at the highest level is necessary to ensure this efficiency.
Furthermore, Schelling notes that if a coercing government intends to threaten to punish an adversary through the use of force not able to determine what the adversary treasures, it will be difficult to hold it hostage, thus making it difficult to effectively threaten to inflict pain.
Finally, as can be seen from the first four conditions that are necessary for coercion to succeed, as elaborated in the previous section, clear communication between the two sides is critical. But the importance that Schelling attaches to interadversary communication is even greater than what can be inferred from Arms and Influence.
Schelling began his professional life as a trade negotiator and he learned a great deal about the art of bargaining from these experiences. 
37
38
Gradualism presents an attractive and rational theory to a national policymaker.
By threatening to strike what an adversary holds dear, it should be a simple, if not necessarily easy, matter to compel him to comply with one's wishes. And equally as important, gradualism implies that a compellent action using the military instrument can be relatively inexpensive, both politically and financially.
As with most theories, however, there is a large gulf between what makes sense on paper and what actually occurs in reality. To comprehend the reality in which this theory was originally applied, the historical context of gradualism's application in Vietnam must be understood. President Johnson's advisors, steeped in the rational theories of limited war and flushed with success from the management of the Cuban 37 Kaplan, 330. 
38
Missile Crisis, believed that rational men could solve all international problems. The next chapter will examine this historical context.
When examining a complex historical matter, it is critical to have a firm appreciation of the contextual elements present at the time. By placing oneself in the same situation that the original decision-makers were in, to the greatest extent possible, the analyst will be able to understand many of the factors influencing an event. But, as Clausewitz admonishes, it is possible to reconstruct the decision-making environment only to a certain level of fidelity. To understand the complexities of the decision-making involved with Rolling Thunder and how gradualism was applied in this case, it is important to appreciate the context of the operation, not only within the events of the Vietnam War, but also within the context of the international and domestic situation that President Johnson and his advisors faced as they made these decisions.
To provide this context, this chapter will first briefly outline the international and domestic situation facing President Johnson by analyzing some of the key contextual elements. After that, it will briefly consider the characters and personalities of President
Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara's and assess why they found gradualism so appealing. Finally, the chapter will conclude with a brief overview of Operation Rolling Thunder itself.
It is impossible to understand the decision to initiate sustained bombing of North Vietnam without appreciating the context in which President Johnson and his advisors made the decision. This section will examine the contextual elements that influenced President Johnson and his advisors as they made their fateful decisions leading to military intervention in Vietnam. Johnson could have done anything different, short of not getting involved at all, given the concern about avoiding nuclear war, the precedent of Chinese actions in the Korean War, and the lack of clarity regarding Beijing's intentions about intervening in Vietnam. 
47
The United States' grand strategy in the early 1960s centered on containment.
First articulated by George Kennan in his famous "Mr. X" article in Foreign Affairs in July 1947, containment was the idea that the West, led by the United States, must act to prevent the expansion of communism by meeting it at every point where it tried to spread. Under President Truman, containment manifested itself in economic and military terms as the Marshall Plan, the Truman Doctrine, and the U.S. intervention in the Korean War. For President Eisenhower and his New Look policy, containment embodied the concept of an asymmetrical response: the U.S. would respond to aggression, but with the means and at the intensity of its choosing. 
48
Soviet leadership, however, quickly realized that massive retaliation was not credible. This was due to the increases in their own nuclear arsenal, along with their perception that if It is impossible to precisely assess the influence that these five contextual elements had on the decision-making of the time. Even with the benefit of memoirs from some of the principals, the influence can only be cautiously surmised since memoirs, influenced by ego and based on hindsight and imperfect memory, are not always reliable. Still, it is safe to conclude that all these forces drove the Johnson administration toward their decision to intervene and, more importantly, influenced their choice of means to do it.
An examination of how President Johnson and his Administration viewed the concept of gradualism is best conducted in three parts. The first part looks at how the idea came to influence members of the Administration. The second and third parts look at how Johnson and McNamara came to embrace the concept and why they found it so appealing.
As Chapter Two illustrated, members of the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations were influenced by the defense intellectuals who worked in academia and at RAND in the 1950s, some of whom assumed positions within the Administration.
Thomas Schelling, the best known theorist of gradualism, was one of these. When 56 At the time, Schelling was better known for his work on nuclear arms control. Fred Kaplan, Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983), 331. 
57
58
59
Schelling's ideas of gradualism did have a direct influence on the Johnson Administration's approach to dealing with the North Vietnamese. While the principals would have been open to such a rational way of conducting diplomacy through the use of the military instrument, the fact that John McNaughton, versed in Schelling's theoretical ideas, was in such an influential position within the government certainly helped bring these concepts to the forefront of decision-makers' minds.
Still, President Johnson had the final say on all policy matters. As such, he must also have been convinced of the efficacy of using such a strategy. The next section will examine how gradualism resonated with Johnson's psyche.
President Lyndon Baines Johnson assumed the Presidency after John F. Kennedy's assassination in November 1963; the American people elected him in his own right a year later. Before becoming Vice President, Johnson had a very successful career in Congress, first as a representative from Texas, then as a Senator, finally becoming Senate Majority Leader in 1955. During his time in the Senate, Johnson was renowned for his ability to single-handedly control the body and to move legislation through it. A Johnson biographer declares:
59 "Draft Position Paper on Southeast Asia," November 29, 1964, in The Pentagon Papers, 374-5.  There can be no doubt that Lyndon Johnson was among the most effective and powerful leaders in the history of the United States Senate. He had his critics, but at any time during his leadership he would have received, had he asked for it, an overwhelming vote of confidence and approval from his colleagues, the press and the public…Lyndon Johnson was an impressive leader responsible for some of the most significant achievements of his time. 
60
Johnson liked to do this through either the use of carrots to entice a reluctant colleague to vote his way or through the use of a stick to threaten to punish a member who did not appear willing to go along with what had been decided.
Johnson's inclination for bargaining stayed with him once he became President.
When confronted with the complex situation that the United States faced in Vietnam, he naturally gravitated to the option that struck a chord in his psyche-the bargaining option. At the center of Schelling's concept of compellence is the idea of two sides bargaining to come to a mutually agreed upon position. This fit very well with Johnson and the way he liked to do business: I saw our bombs as my political resources for negotiating a peace. On the one hand, our planes and our bombs could be used as carrots for the South, strengthening the morale of the South Vietnamese and pushing them to clean up their corrupt house, by demonstrating the depth of our commitment to the war. On the other hand, our bombs could be used as sticks against the North, pressuring North Vietnam to stop its aggression against the South. By keeping a lid on all the designated targets, I knew I could keep the control of the war in my own hands. If China reacted to our slow escalation by threatening to retaliate, we'd have plenty of time to ease off the bombing. 
61
60 Kearns,
Before he became President Kennedy's Secretary of Defense in 1961, Robert S.
McNamara experienced a meteoric rise to the top of the business world. After graduating from the University of California at Berkeley and Harvard Business School, McNamara served in the Army Air Force during the Second World War. He rose to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and made a name for himself by using a new field of mathematics called systems analysis to rationalize how the Army fought its air war. After the war, McNamara helped turn around management practices at Ford, allowing the company to become profitable again. Recognizing his talent with numbers and his business sense, Henry Ford named McNamara President of the corporation in 1960, the first non-family member to be so chosen. 
62
63
One can safely conclude that McNamara, based on his personality, his propensity for numbers and the quantifiable, and his experience as a businessman, would have found gradualism enticing for two reasons. He would have liked the close control over the application of military force that gradualism required. McNamara would see this control, analogous to turning the volume on a radio up and down, as a way to rationally control violence in incremental steps. The second reason that McNamara may have found gradualism so appealing is the prospect that it offered for efficient warfare. If one could bend an adversary to your will with a minimal use of force, as gradualism seemed to promise, then this would be an efficient use of the military instrument. This expectation for efficiency would have fascinated the businessman in McNamara, who made his reputation as a manager who could cut costs and rationalize a system of production.
The entry of gradualism into the repertoire of the Johnson administration was shaped by two factors. Not only did an administration that was intellectually sympathetic to the ideas of limited war and gradualism enter office immediately prior to the beginning of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, but gradualism's underlying concepts resonated with the two officials who had the most influence on how military operations were planned.
With an understanding of the contextual elements facing Washington decisionmakers and an explanation about how gradualism became a part of U.S. policy, the final part of the chapter will examine Operation Rolling Thunder in order to provide a point of departure for the discussion of gradualism's critiques in the next two chapters. However, it was these covert actions that in all likelihood provoked the North to attack two U.S. destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin on 2 August 1964, probably in retaliation for the covert maritime operations. It was this attack, along with a possible 
63 Shapley,
37. 64 McMaster,
As 1964 came to a close and 1965 began, the Viet Cong began a series of attacks against U.S. interests in South Vietnam. The straw that "broke the camels back" was a Viet Cong mortar attack against the U.S. airbase at Pleiku in the Central Highlands on 7 February 1965 that killed eight American servicemen and damaged twenty aircraft. Two things differentiated this attack from previous ones. First, Soviet Premier Kosygin was in Hanoi at the time. Because of this, Washington viewed the attack as a provocation. The second factor was that President Johnson's National Security Advisor, McGeorge Bundy, happened to be in the country at the time on a fact-finding mission. While Washington reacted as if this were just a small event, Bundy's visit to the airbase "brought home the reality of war. Thrust suddenly into a chaotic environment that contrasted sharply with the relatively orderly, controlled surroundings of the White House, he began to mutter, 'We cannot stand by…just can't do this to our country. 
'" 65
65 Ibid.,
215. General William Westmoreland,
Interestingly, it is difficult to find a source that lists Operation Rolling Thunder's objectives prior to the operation. 
68
1. To reduce DRV/VC [Democratic Republic of Vietnam/Viet Cong] activities by affecting DRV will. 2. To improve the GVN [Government of Vietnam-South Vietnam]/VC relative "balance of morale." 3. To provide the U.S./GVN with a bargaining counter. 4. To reduce DRV infiltration of men and materiel. 5. To show the world the lengths to which U.S. will go for a friend. 
69
70
Gradualism entered the Johnson administration's bag of tricks at an opportune time. President Johnson and his advisors faced the difficult task of balancing the needs of seemingly disparate demands: using enough national power to contain the perceived spread of communism and to support an American ally on the one hand, while ensuring that too much force was not used, which might have caused a Chinese or Soviet intervention or threatened the passage of Johnson's Great Society agenda on the other.
Gradualism gave Johnson and McNamara a means of regulating the military effort so that they could satisfy all of the demands that faced them at the time. Moreover, both men would have found gradualism attractive because the theory's core tenets would have resonated with them. Johnson bought into the idea of bargaining with an adversary: it was the way he had made his reputation in the Congress. Gradualism's need for close control of the military instrument, along with its apparent efficiency, would have 
71
Armed now with an understanding of the theory of gradualism as well as the context for how and why it was applied in Vietnam, the next chapter will examine the theoretical critiques of gradualism.
Gradualism is anathema to most military officers. The idea of not attacking an adversary with all of your combat power at the beginning of the fight, and of ignoring the long-held principles of war, is counterintuitive to the traditional way western nations like to fight. This chapter will examine some of the theoretical underpinnings of why gradualism is so contrary to the western way of war. It will look at Clausewitz's thoughts on how to conduct war, specifically his concepts of concentration, economy of force, and surprise and compare these ideas to gradualism. The chapter will also examine Clausewitz's opinions about theories of war that attempt to impose order on this inherently disorderly phenomenon. After Clausewitz, the theoretical critique will compare gradualism to airpower theories. The first theorists examined will be the "classical" airpower theorists, Giulio Douhet, William Mitchell, and the United States' Army Air Corps Tactical School. This examination will demonstrate that the early airpower theorists incorporated Clausewitz's ideas of concentration, economy of force, and surprise into airpower theory from the beginning and, as a result, share a similar contrary view about gradualism. An examination of the modern airpower theory of strategic paralysis, as espoused by its two proponents John Boyd and John Warden, follows. The theoretical section concludes by comparing gradualism to psychology as it has been applied to decision making as well as the psychological impact of air attack.
An eminent scholar has noted that gradualism, "by employing violence as a tool for reasoning violates every dictum declared by Clausewitz." 72 Carl von Clausewitz served as a staff officer in the Prussian and Russian armies during the Napoleonic Wars.
From this vantagepoint, he observed first-hand the changes in the nature of war that Napoleon's genius was able to harness using the passions of the people unleashed by the French Revolution, as well as more incremental changes in technology and tactics. 
73
75
77
78
73
74
75
76
78
Clausewitz views economy of force as a corollary to concentration. In Clausewitz's mind, the key to this principle is "to ensure that no part of the whole force is idle." 79 He continues by noting that forces that are managed uneconomically are wasted, something that is "even worse than using them inappropriately." 80 Returning to the metaphor of the physical world, economy of force is the equivalent of ensuring that all force is applied against the adversary's center of gravity, for any force not so applied will produce an effect counter to what is desired. On the battlefield, this means using forces in a manner that is not somehow contributing to the fight. While some forces may not have a specific active mission at all times, like the reserve, a good commander will ensure that he has a plan for the gainful employment of all of his forces.
Clausewitz's final principle is surprise. While he asserts that the defense is stronger than the attack, he concedes that the attack does have one advantage over the defense: since the attacker chooses the timing of the attack, he can take advantage of the element of surprise. The way one gains surprise is through the "rapid use of our forces," the quick movement of one's forces to the attack. 
81
Integral to surprise is the concept of speed of one's forces; Clausewitz offers further guidance to the commander regarding it. He admonishes the general that victory cannot occur fast enough because "to spread it over a longer period than the minimum needed to complete it makes it not less difficult, but more." 
82
79 Ibid.,
213. 80 Ibid.,
213. 81 Ibid.,
624. 82 Ibid.,
598. Emphasis in original.
83
84
According to Schelling, since compellence threatens to harm what the enemy holds dear, it is not necessary to concentrate your military power against it, but only to threaten its use and to communicate this threat to the adversary. Moreover, since the cornerstone of compellence is bargaining and the military is but a tool for communication, the pace of diplomacy must dictate the pace of the fight. 
85
In addition to critiquing gradualism at the level of the conduct of war, Clausewitz has strong opinions about imposing rationality, like gradualism, on war. He considered ridiculous those who only examined the material side of war, to the exclusion of war's moral side. He continues by stating that rational war theorists "reduce everything to mathematical formulas of equilibrium and superiority, of time and space, limited by a few angles and lines. If that were really all, it would hardly provide a scientific problem for a schoolboy." 86 Rational war theories, generally based on a cost-benefit analysis view of decision-making, are all rational and quite passionless. These "cold-blooded" 87 theories, while adequate for examining war on paper or in the classroom, do not translate well to the realities of war on the battlefield where war's physical and moral domains had to contend with rational war theorists in his day. The most famous is Antoine Henri Jomini, a Swiss-born expatriate who rose to be a general officer and chief-of-staff to one 
83
84
85
Jomini was a product of Enlightenment thought. As such, he believed that it was possible to describe all natural phenomena in scientific terms, as Newton did with the universe. Because of this influence, Jomini believed he could describe war in "scientific terms." His most important work, The Art of War, reflects these ideals. Its central proposition is that military science rests upon principles that can never be safely violated in the presence of a skillful enemy. These four principles are:
1. Mass the army via strategic movements upon the decisive points of the theater of war and the enemy's communications without compromising your own. 2. Maneuver to engage fractions of the hostile army with the bulk of your forces 3. On the battlefield, mass forces on the decisive point, or upon that portion of the hostile line, which is most important to overthrow. 4. It is important not only to mass on the decisive point, but also to do it at the proper times and with energy. 
88
But Jomini acknowledged war's moral side too. In the preface to the 1854 edition of The Art of War, Jomini acknowledges, in a polemic with Clausewitz's ghost, that as "a general officer, after having assisted in a dozen campaigns, ought to know that war is a great drama, in which a thousand physical or moral causes operate more or less powerfully, and which cannot be reduced to mathematical equations." 89 While Jomini recognized the existence of the moral domain of war, it seems that since he could not reduce it to a mathematical equation, he could not encapsulate its significance.
While Clausewitz viewed with disdain the rational war theorists of his day, he did recognize a use for such theories. Clausewitz divides the activities related to war into two categories: "those that are merely preparations for war, and war proper." 
90
91
92
The parallels between Clausewitz's differences with Jomini and the arguments that senior military officers made concerning the rational way of conducting the war in Vietnam are striking. In both cases, the rationalists brushed aside the importance of war's moral domain in the rush to quantify a phenomenon that does not completely lend itself to quantification. If the decision maker decides policy without due consideration for war's moral nature, then any military operation undertaken under such circumstances is a risky venture indeed.
Clausewitz and Schelling present a fascinating contrast in ideas. Both theorists explicitly state that war is a continuation of politics and that the use of the military instrument must serve political ends. It is the manner in which the policy makers employ that military instrument that sparks the contradiction. In Clausewitz's day, the 
90
91
92
This has two implications. The destruction of the adversary's fielded forces is still viewed by many as the key to victory in a war. The quicker and more effectively one can do this, the less costly the effort will be. The second implication is that the adversary has to accede to one's demands because he has no other choice. This is similar to Schelling's idea of forcible offense, "taking something, occupying a place, or disarming an enemy or a territory by some action that an enemy is unable to block." 
93
It is this difference of opinion over the use of the military instrument and their widely contrasting views on its most efficient use that is at the heart of the contradiction between Clausewitz and Schelling.
Having examined how Clausewitz's theory of war can be used to critique rational war theories in general, and gradualism in particular, let us now examine how gradualism stands up to airpower theory. This section will do this in three parts. The first will examine the changes in the nature of warfare from the time of Napoleon to the beginnings of the twentieth century and the first use of airpower. Having provided the context, the next section will then examine the "classical" airpower theorists. This examination will reveal that the early airpower theorists embraced the same principles that Clausewitz espoused, concentration, economy of force, and surprise. Finally, the section will conclude by examining the modern airpower theory of strategic paralysis. 
93
From the time of Napoleon to the beginning of the First World War, the theme that encapsulates the changes in the nature of war is that war became increasingly total in nature. This is particularly evident in the economic and social aspects of the phenomenon. The rest of the nineteenth century after Napoleon saw the maturation of the Industrial Revolution. This allowed nations to produce, for the first time, the means of warfare both in large quantities and relatively inexpensively. Tied to industrialization was the need for larger numbers of workers to work in the factories to produce the means of war. By the beginning of the First World War, all of the principal nations involved in the conflict were industrialized to a greater or lesser extent; during the war, all the principal nations mobilized their respective economies to maximize the production of war materiel.
The social aspect of the change in warfare is related to this full mobilization of the economy. One of the most important changes that Napoleon harnessed to his advantage was the sense of nation that the French people felt after the Revolution. This was the idea that all people in the country were citizens and bore responsibility for their nation's defense and welfare. As war approached totality, the idea of mobilizing not only the economy for war, but the entire society, began to take hold. 94
While airpower made its debut during the First World War, its effect on the outcome of the conflict was far from decisive. However, the effect of the First World War on the rise of airpower "was anything but modest." 
95
94
Howard,
War in European History,
Based on these influences, the classical airpower theorists began to think and to write about their vision for the future. These theorists, Italy's Guilio Douhet, the U.S.
Army's William "Billy" Mitchell, and the U.S. Army Air Corps Tactical School (ACTS) all incorporated Clausewitz's three key principles of warfare into their airpower theories.
Of the theorists, Douhet provides the most explicit description of the application of Douhet's first principle governing the operation of the air force is that it "should operate in mass." Making the direct comparison to ground combat, Douhet states that "the material and moral effects of aerial offensives … are greatest when concentrated in time and space." 96 This idea of airpower needing to mass its forces to ensure its most effective application can be directly linked to Clausewitz's principle of concentration. Douhet also notes airpower's special attributes with regards to surprise. Because of the airplane's great speed relative to soldiers and vehicles on the ground, and the inherent difficulties that he foresaw defending against an air attack, Douhet concluded that airpower would have a tremendous capability to conduct a surprise attack against an adversary. Douhet also comments about speed, a necessary attribute for surprise. With airpower's great speed advantage coupled with its great range, it becomes possible to bring a great deal of combat power to any point on the battlefield in a short period of time. For Douhet, this becomes another principle for air warfare: "Inflict the greatest damage in the shortest period of time." 
97
98
99
(Washington, D.C.: Air Force History and Museums Program, 1998), 49. 97 Ibid., 51. 98 Ibid., 73-77. 99
conclusions about the best way to employ airpower against an adversary. These differences are manifested in their various conclusions about what the center of gravity is within an adversary's society. For Clausewitz, the center of gravity was almost always the fielded forces. However, in the age of total war, where nations mobilized entire societies and economies to fight the war, there were now other options to choose as the "the hub of all power and movement, on which everything depends." And since military commanders and political leaders had, for the first time, the ability to apply combat power beyond the immediate battlefield, the airpower theorists came to differing conclusions.
Douhet's center of gravity was the enemy's civilian population: an attack on the civil populace would cause them to rise up against their government and demand an end to the war. 
100
102
100
101
The important point from this discussion is that while the three classical airpower theorists differ on what the Clausewitzian center of gravity might be, they all used this Clausewitzian construct to apply a new means of war, a means that uniquely applies the same principles that Clausewitz deemed critical to success on the battlefield a century earlier.
Having analyzed the ideas of Clausewitz and how these translated to the early airpower theorists, let us now examine modern airpower theories. Perhaps the most important airpower concept to evolve in the last decade is the idea of strategic paralysis.
One definition of strategic paralysis states that it is a military option with physical, mental, and moral dimensions which intends to disable rather than destroy the enemy. It seeks maximum possible political effect or benefit with minimum necessary military effort or cost. It aims at rapid decision through a "maneuver-battle" directed against an adversary's physical and mental ability to sustain and control its war effort to diminish its moral will to resist. 
103
104
105
1
106
107
108
109
110
Orient Decide Act
The key to Boyd's concept of strategic paralysis is to increase an adversary's decision-making cycle through varied and rapid attacks, increasing the friction within his army. Doing this effectively will eventually cause his physical and mental will to resist to crumble, which in turn will degrade and eventually destroy his moral will.
An imperfect, yet illustrative example of Boyd's conception of strategic paralysis appeared in the 1991 Gulf War. Coalition air attacks targeted the Iraqi Army's communications with Baghdad. The Iraqi Army, very centralized in nature, was not capable of autonomous operations. By cutting off most of the communication between it and the capital, Saddam was forced into using inefficient and slow means of communicating with his army in and around Kuwait, namely couriers. Because of this imposed friction, it may have taken as long as 48 hours for decisions to be made and executed: 24 hours for a report from the army to reach Baghdad and another 24 hours for the courier to make the return trip with the resulting orders. Meanwhile, the coalition, with its unimpeded command and control capability, was able to make and implement decisions significantly faster than their adversary. While it is difficult to assess how much of the collapse of the Iraqi physical and mental will can be attributed to the lack of communication with Baghdad vice other factors, this is still a good example that demonstrates the concept of strategic paralysis. mechanism. For the human body, these five rings represent the brain; food and oxygen; vessels, bones, and muscles; cells; and leukocytes. For the adversary state, these rings are the government; energy; roads, airfields, and factories; the people; and the military, police, and firemen. 
113
114
115
116
Boyd and Warden are similar to Clausewitz and the classical airpower theorists in that they all argue for the importance of the same three characteristics: concentration, economy of force, and surprise. In addition, Boyd and Warden propose different centers of gravity against which combat power must be focussed-centers of gravity that are not the enemy's fielded forces-the Clausewitzian view.
Let's now compare strategic paralysis to Schelling's ideas about gradualism. The main point of comparison between their theories is that for both Boyd and Warden, paralysis of an opponent requires a rapid and forceful attack throughout the depth of the adversary's nation. Gradualism takes a completely different approach. Since gradualism is essentially bargaining between two countries, diplomatic action dictates the pace of the campaign, and as a result, the campaign will generally not be rapid. Moreover, the graduated campaign's deliberate nature means that a quick attack against an adversary is not required, making the need for concentration of forces unnecessary. Finally, the key compellent threat in gradualism is the military's latent power to harm what the adversary holds dear. It is the threat of losing these "hostages" that will compel the adversary to accept the terms one is dictating. If the "hostages" are destroyed at the outset of the campaign, the adversary will no longer have any reason to concede to your demands.
Another point, perhaps more important, is that Boyd and Warden, although disagreeing somewhat on the means, both advocate a concentrated, rapid attack to overwhelm an adversary's national decision-making process. Schelling, on the other hand, is relying on the adversary's decision-making system to function in the manner in which it was designed. This difference is the key contradiction between the proponents of strategic paralysis and that of gradualism.
The key facets of gradualism thus at odds with the theoretical basis for how the West makes war. Clausewitz and airpower theorists all agree on the need for concentration, economy of force, and speed when attacking an adversary. Western militaries have adapted these Clausewitzian principles and codified them as their Principles of War. Current Air Force doctrine declares that "These principles represent generally accepted 'truths' which have proven to be effective throughout history. Of course, even valid principles are no substitute for sound, professional judgment-but to ignore them is equally risky." 
117
The last theoretical area that this chapter will examine is the psychology of decision making, of the effect of air attack on decision making, and gradualism's influence on them. Since compellence is a strategy whose objective is to force an adversary to change its mind, then understanding how decision making works is important to understanding compellence and gradualism. Airpower can provide a tremendous psychological influence on decision making. But when it had been used in a less than optimal manner, then airpower can hinder the compellent campaign.
Perhaps the simplest way to view decision making is that it consists of a costbenefit analysis between two or more options. 
118
119
where Costs N are the costs of non-compliance; Benefits N are the benefits of noncompliance; Costs C are the costs of compliance; and Benefits C are the benefits of compliance. This equation suggests that until the value on the left side of the equation becomes greater than the right side, an adversary's non-compliance will continue.
There are a number of ways a compelling nation can affect these variables in a compellence situation. A compelling government can increase the costs of noncompliance through damage that it inflicts, either through military strikes or economic sanctions. In a graduated scenario, if a compelling nation can destroy targets that its adversary values, then this factor could become quite large and dominating. The other variable a compelling government can affect is the benefits of compliance-these would be the carrots a government offers to gain compliance. If the benefits of compliance become great enough, then this variable could dominate the decision making. A compelling government is less able to influence the other two variables, Benefits N and Costs C .
However, there are other factors that the compelling government has little direct control over, which can influence these other two variables, Benefits N and Costs C . A historical examination of the coercive use of airpower demonstrates that these factors increase the values of these variables, which in turn may lessen airpower's coercive effects and change the complexion of an adversary's decision-making process significantly. The first factor that one must consider is whether the compelled nation has access to outside support, material, moral, or both. This outside support can decrease a compelled nation's costs of non-compliance (through the replenishment of combat losses)
or increase the benefits of non-compliance (such as benefits the compelled nation might receive if its non-compliance succeeds). This in turn improves the likelihood of noncompliance leading to success, which increases the expected payoff of resistance. The second factor that a compelling nation cannot directly influence is how strongly the adversary's leadership is committed to the goal it is trying to achieve. If the adversary's goal is important to it, then the benefits that it sees for non-compliance will be significant. This in turn will drive how much the adversary is willing to absorb punishment.
120
Understanding an adversary's decision-making process is important when one is contemplating a compellent campaign. The theory of gradualism suggests the importance of understanding what the adversary values so that one can threaten it. Yet it seems that there is more to successful compellence than just simply knowing this. The rational decision making equation demonstrates that a compelling state must realize that there are other variables in an adversary's decision making process, only some of which one can influence. And not only are there limits to how much one can influence these other variables, there are outside factors that may also affect these variables, factors that the compelling nation may not have any means to mitigate. The impact of all the variables in this equation of rational decision making must be considered and understood because any one of these, if sufficiently large, will make compellence through the threat of damage by air attack almost impossible to achieve.
Air attack has the potential to a have a tremendous psychological impact on an adversary: the wholesale surrender of the Iraqi army during the Gulf War in 1991 is evidence of this. To take advantage of this potential impact, one must understand how air attack psychologically affects a person or population. Not understanding this phenomenon could easily lead to the misapplication of airpower if the psychological effect is the most important effect that an air commander is trying to exploit.
Key to an air attack's psychological impact is the expectation of the person on the ground who is receiving the air attack. If the target expects the initial attack to be relatively light and undamaging and the attack is much worse than expected, this will have a negative psychological impact on that person, significantly lowering a person or population's morale, as well as their determination to continue the struggle. Conversely, if the person expects the first attack to be heavy and damaging, and it turns out to be not as bad as they had thought, then that person's morale will be bouyed by the experience, resulting in an increase in their determination to continue the struggle. 
121
This effect from the graduated use of airpower will influence a nation's leadership in the same manner. If the leaders of an enemy nation, as a result of a first impression they gain of a graduated campaign, perceive the mild military attack as an indication of lack of commitment or military capability, this perception will stay with the leadership for a long time, even when the campaign escalates and provides evidence contradicting this view. 
122
123
The converse is also true . If one is trying to persuade an adversary to change his view, it is better to provide him with a significant amount of information contradicting his view, rather than providing it to him piecemeal. 
124
125
An inherent consequence of airpower is the compellent psychological effect that an air strike has on the target. Understanding this effect and how it works is crucial in order to ensure that airpower's compellent effects are maximized. And even more important, if this effect of airpower is misapplied, then this psychological effect may give a significant boost in morale to the adversary, along with increasing his motivation to continue the struggle.
Gradualism's key tenets directly contradict the mainstream views of military, airpower, and psychology theory. The orthodox view from all three suggests that a quick, devastating attack is the way to overwhelm an adversary, both physically as well as psychologically. A comparison of Clausewitz and the classical airpower theorists with Schelling's ideas reveals a significant difference of opinion over the best way to conduct a compellent campaign. Schelling sees gradualism as the means of limiting the cost to both sides since the damage will stop occurring once the adversary concedes; Clausewitz et. al. limit their view to just the friendly side and see that the way to minimize friendly costs is to attack the adversary with all the assets available to the commander. A comparison between Schelling and the proponents of strategic paralysis, Boyd and Warden, reveals a similar key difference. While Boyd and Warden are intent on disrupting, if not destroying, the adversary's decision making capability, Schelling counts on that system working as it should. Finally, the importance of establishing the correct first impression of one's intent and capability reinforces the notion that a heavy initial strike against an adversary will result in the greatest psychological impact on an adversary in a compellence situation. The early limited air attacks in a graduated campaign may leave the target with the perception of weakness, a perception that will be difficult to change.
The This chapter will do just that. The first section will outline the derivation of a construct, based on the propositions for the theory of gradualism from Chapter Two, for analyzing the graduated use of airpower. Using this construct, the following section examines Rolling Thunder, the goal being to conclude substantive lessons from the graduated use of airpower in Vietnam.
This section derives a construct through which one can view the lessons of the graduated application of airpower in Vietnam. From Chapter Two, the four propositions of Schelling's theory of gradualism are:
1. "The power to hurt is bargaining power. To exploit it is diplomacyvicious diplomacy, but diplomacy." (Central proposition). 2. Since bargaining is a key aspect of compellence and gradualism, a graduated campaign must necessarily controlled at the highest level 3. If threatening harm to what an adversary values is a key tenet, then the coercer must have intensive and extensive knowledge of the adversary 4. If bargaining is a key facet of gradualism, clear, if tacit, communication between the adversaries is a critical component of gradualism
The first criterion for evaluating the graduated use of airpower comes from proposition two. Implicit in this proposition is the idea that the political effect that the government is trying to achieve is more important than the military effect. As a result, control and coordination at the highest level, as well as the need for the diplomatic effort to dictate the pace of the campaign to the military, could result in the military instrument not being employed to its fullest coercive effect. The criterion to evaluate this would be:
What are the positive and negative effects on the military instrument that result from its subordination to the diplomatic effort?
The second criterion comes from the melding of gradualism's central proposition The last criterion is easily derived from the fourth proposition. A compellent campaign is bargaining and communication between two adversaries. If the military is going to be used as a means of communication in this campaign, then knowing its ability to communicate a message is important. As a result, the final criterion is: how well does the military instrument communicate the government's message?
With the derivation of the construct, it is now possible to examine how well airpower was used during Operation Rolling Thunder.
In a compellent campaign, diplomacy dictates the pace and nature of the use of the military instrument. As a result, the military effectiveness of the campaign is not the most important goal, as long as the desired political effect is achieved. 
128
The gradual increase in the intensity of the airstrikes, as well as the restrictions limiting attacks against air defenses, allowed the North Vietnamese to increase the lethality of their air defenses. Some have argued that if the United States had struck North Vietnam with the full capability of its airpower early on when its air defenses were the weakest, U.S. airpower might have conducted the operation with minimal casualties and might have compelled Hanoi to change its policy about supporting the Viet Cong in South Vietnam. 
129
130
131
132
While Washington intended these as a sign of good faith in the bargaining process with the North Vietnamese, Hanoi used the respite in the bombing to reconstitute their air defenses and even increase its lethality. 
134
135
133
134
Partridge,
et. al.,
70. 135 Tilford,
116.
137
138
136
137
will be psychologically damaging to them and is likely to make them less willing to continue to provide their full support to the conflict. 
139
Another way the graduated use of airpower may have encouraged the military and the civilian population to resist was that the incremental increases in the intensity of the attacks allowed the military and civilians to adjust to the effects of the bombing.
Historical and experimental evidence suggests that a population's expectations about bombing play a large part in their reaction to it. If the effects of the bombing are less severe than expected, then a population will be encouraged about the prospect of continuing the war. Conversely, if the bombing's effects are much worse than initially expected, then the bombings will significantly discourage the population. 
140
One can infer a similar effect on the expectations of the North Vietnamese leadership. In the months prior to the beginning of Rolling Thunder, the United States conducted a public and private campaign to compel the North Vietnamese. One of the private efforts was Washington's use of a Canadian diplomat, J. Blair Seaborn, to communicate its intentions to the North Vietnamese and to receive communication from Hanoi. In a session on 18 June 1964 with North Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong, Seaborn conveyed a message from Washington that contained the explicit threat that if the conflict escalated, the U.S. would inflict the "greatest devastation" on the North. 
141
Rolling Thunder demonstrated that the restraints placed on the use of airpower in deference to the diplomatic effort severely limited airpower's coercive and psychological impact on the North Vietnamese. By not allowing airpower to establish air supremacy over North Vietnam, Washington robbed airpower of one of its most damaging compellent impacts-the psychological effect of knowing that aircraft are flying above you and that there is nothing that you can do to stop them. Instead of imposing this feeling of impotence on the leadership, military, and civilian population, U.S. airpower's lack of ability to hurt the North Vietnamese provided a source of encouragement to them.
The ancient Chinese military theorist Sun Tzu may have been the first to write about the importance of knowing the adversary:
One who knows the enemy and knows himself will not be endangered in a hundred engagements. One who does not know the enemy but knows himself will sometimes be victorious, sometimes meet with defeat. One who knows neither the enemy nor himself will invariably be defeated in every engagement. 
142
One of the tenets of Schelling's theory of gradualism is that to compel an adversary through military action, you must threaten what he values. Implicit in this statement is the idea that one does actually know what an adversary values. Needless to say, if a government is unable to determine what the adversary values, its actions will not be persuasive, or compellent.
valued the most? The Joint Chiefs believed they had. During the planning prior to the authorization for Rolling Thunder, the JCS proposed a quick and devastating attack against a set of 94 targets, all aimed at destroying North Vietnam's industrial and warmaking capacity. They believed that since North Vietnam's warmaking base was so small and since Hanoi had invested so much in it, that its violent and swift destruction would break Hanoi's will to continue supporting the Viet Cong. On the other hand, Johnson's civilian advisors recommended a graduated approach, believing that Hanoi would see the impending destruction of its industry as a grave threat, and would therefore concede to Washington's demands. 
143
144
143
144
145
But destruction of its industrial base did not stop Hanoi from assisting the Viet Cong in their armed struggle. Another look at the rational decision making equation, developed in Chapter Four, may provide some insight. The equation
shows that if the costs of non-compliance, Costs N, are high, then the benefits of noncompliance, Benefits N , must also be high if the adversary is to continue his noncompliance. Hanoi's main benefit for non-compliance was continuing towards its goal of reunifying Vietnam under the Communist government in the North. How important was this goal to the government in Vietnam? It appears that the ruling faction in the Politburo at the beginning of Rolling Thunder in 1965 was deeply committed to their goal of reunifying the country. Not only had they worked for 25 years to throw off the yoke of French colonial rule and reunify the country, but the ruling faction under Le Duan had also spent the previous ten years persuading the Politburo that Hanoi needed to help the cause of reunification in the South through armed, vice political, struggle. These men had devoted most of their lives to this cause, as well as their political reputations; it was asking a lot of them to give up something that they had worked towards for so long, and believed they were close to achieving in early 1965. 
146
147
148
The last example, Model III, is the model that explains how a government action is the result of a political process within the government. 
149
If knowledge of the adversary's government is so important, what did the Johnson Administration know about North Vietnamese government? Maxwell Taylor, an influential advisor to President Johnson as the U.S. Ambassador to Saigon, admits:
In 1965 we knew very little about the Hanoi leaders other than Ho Chi Minh and General Giap and virtually nothing about their individual or collective intentions. We were inclined to assume, however, that they would behave about like the North Koreans and the Red Chinese a decade before; that is, they would seek an accommodation with us when the cost of pursuing a losing course became excessive. Instead, the North Vietnamese proved to be incredibly tough in accepting losses which, by Western calculation, greatly exceeded the value of the stake involved. 
150
151
152
Since the principals in Washington did not know much about the government in Hanoi, they fell back to the model that was familiar to them. They (Washington)   imputed to the North Vietnamese an economic motivation, a mechanistic calculation of costs and benefits, a logical willingness to lower demand as price rose. It was as if General Giap would manage a revolution the way McNamara managed the Pentagon. It implicitly assumed that Vietnamese reunification was a relative value to Hanoi that could be relinquished as the pain threshold rose, rather than the absolute value that it was. 
153
Much has been written on the difficulties that governments have experienced trying to execute something as complex and difficult as a coordinated diplomatic and military campaign. Vietnam is no exception. A detailed examination of the U.S.
government's problems in trying to execute a coordinated diplomatic and military campaign against North Vietnam is beyond the scope of this paper. 
154
154
Johnson's advisors planned to use airpower as a means of communicating their intent to Hanoi at the beginning of Operation Rolling Thunder. While Johnson's military and civilian counselors had significant differences of opinion about the operation's objectives as well as the targets to be struck to support those objectives, civilian officials were almost unanimous about how to do it. They believed that gradually increasing the intensity of the air attacks would compel Hanoi to stop supporting the Viet Cong. To do this, the civilians advocated increasing the frequency and intensity of the airstrikes, increasing the sensitivity of the targets struck, as well as slowly moving the locations of the targets closer and closer to Hanoi. As one analyst neatly summarized the goal of this approach:
It was hoped by Administration planners that the North Vietnamese would realize what was happening to them relatively early in the process and would thus agree to negotiate (on the Administration's terms) before the pressures became too intense, so as to preserve their meager industrial base. 
155
156
The evidence of Rolling Thunder suggests that, at least in the early stages of the operation, a lack of sortie effectiveness contributed to the inaccurate transmission of the message that the Johnson administration was trying to send to the North Vietnamese.
The evidence supporting this assertion can be grouped into three broad categories: bombing accuracy, organizational behavior, and weather.
When Operation Rolling Thunder began in early March 1965, the military's bombing accuracy was already being questioned at the highest levels in Washington.
McNamara received bomb damage assessment that did not reflect well on airpower: "with a total of 267 sorties (including flak suppression, etc.) directed against 491 buildings, we destroyed 47 buildings and damaged 22." 
158
Although the four missions left the operations at the targets relatively unimpaired, I am quite satisfied with the results. Our primary objective, of course, was to communicate our political resolve. This I believe we did. Future communication of resolve, however, will carry a hollow ring unless we accomplish more military damage than we have to date. Can we not meet our military objectives by choosing different types of targets, directing different weights of effort against them, or changing the composition of the force? Surely we cannot continue for months accomplishing no more with 267 sorties than we did on these four missions. 
159
161
Driving this unpreparedness was an emphasis within the Air Force during the 1950s to prepare for a total, nuclear war with the Soviet Union. This emphasis was not misplaced at the time: it resulted from the Eisenhower Administration's policy of massive retaliation and its focus on building the military's force structure with the nuclear weapon at its cornerstone.
The Kennedy Administration came into office in 1961 with a new idea of defense policy, flexible response, which called for the United States to increase its conventional military capability, sadly neglected during the 1950s, in order to provide the President with military options other than nuclear retaliation. Unfortunately, the Air Force was slow to respond. This is reflected in the 1964 edition of Air Force Manual (AFM) 1-1, United States Air Force Basic Doctrine. AFM 1-1 acknowledges the existence of conventional air operations and counter-insurgency operations (COIN). However, in comparison to the two pages the manual devotes to each of these types of operations, it spends over nine pages discussing "Employment of Aerospace Forces in General War" and "Employment of Aerospace Forces in Tactical Nuclear Operations." 
162
Since the Air Force was wedded to the notion that the only way it could win a war was 
159
161
162
163
But there were two recent examples of successful counter-insurgency campaigns, the British effort in Malaya and the French in Algeria, that the Air Force could have turned to for guidance. These campaigns could have provided Air Force planners with a number of lessons about how airpower could support such a campaign: expect and prepare for a long campaign, understand the importance of joint-service action, use a simple command structure, and understand that airpower, while not decisive, still plays an integral role. 
164
The second result of the Air Force's emphasis on a nuclear warfighting doctrine was the force structure with which it went to war in Vietnam. The mainstay of the Air Force's bomber force in Vietnam was the F-105 Thunderchief, which flew more than three quarters of the Air Force's strike sorties during Operation Rolling Thunder. 
165
While the aircraft must accept some of the blame, aircrew training must also bear some responsibility: the emphasis on aircrew training for nuclear combat also limited sortie effectiveness. But it was not due to a lack of training. One analyst has noted that it was not the airmanship of the crews, many of whom had over 1,000 hours in their aircraft when Rolling Thunder began, but rather a poor mix of skills that crews brought to Vietnam after training for nuclear combat for many years. 
166
165
166
167
Organizational behavior also contributed to the diminishment of sortie effectiveness during Operation Rolling Thunder. According to Graham Allison, organizations will set their goals within the constraints defining acceptable performance. For the military services, "the constraints are formulated as imperatives to avoid roughly specified discomforts and disasters." 
168
169
170
171
167 Weiss,
31. 168
169
170
171
173
Weather is the final factor that hindered sortie effectiveness and airpower's ability to communicate a message. If a government is using airpower to transmit a message and part of the subtlety of the message deals with the targets that are struck, if the weather does not allow airpower to strike the intended target, then the message will not get through in the manner that the sending government expected.
Unfortunately for airpower, the weather over Vietnam is not conducive to visual deliveries of munitions for most of the year. The climate in the southern part of the country is tropical; in the north, the climate is monsoonal, with a hot, rainy season lasting from May to September, and the dry season occurring from mid-October to mid-March. 
174
One way to mitigate the effects of the weather is an all-weather capability for delivering air-to-surface munitions. At the time of Rolling Thunder, neither the Air Force nor the Navy had much of an all-weather air-to-surface munitions delivery capability, at least one with any accuracy. The best method they possessed for allweather delivery was a radar-aimed bomb. A few aircraft had this capability, specifically the Air Force's B-52 and the Navy's A-6. However, while the avionics for a radar-aimed delivery would have been sufficiently accurate for delivering nuclear weapons, the same avionics were inadequate for the delivery of conventional munitions against point targets. The military's lack of capability to mitigate the effects of Vietnam's climate hindered sortie effectiveness when the weather was bad. This would not have been a problem all year, but monsoon season was sufficiently lengthy that this became a significant impediment to sortie effectiveness and the effective communication of Washington's intended message.
Airpower was not an effective means of communicating Washington's message to the government in Hanoi. The Air Force's nuclear doctrine and force structure that produced a force poorly designed and prepared for a conventional air war, organizational considerations that emphasized sortie generation, and weather all contributed to reduced sortie effectiveness over North Vietnam. And since the Johnson administration's subtle message to Hanoi depended in large part on airpower striking a particular target at a designated time, less than optimal sortie effectiveness degraded the accurate transmission of this message.
The evidence from Rolling Thunder challenges the conventional wisdom regarding the use of airpower in Vietnam, specifically that the graduated use of airpower was an important reason contributing to airpower's failure in Rolling Thunder. The graduated use of airpower in this operation was not the reason why airpower failed to compel the North Vietnamese to stop supporting the Viet Cong insurgency in South Vietnam. It appears that, since the North Vietnamese Politburo's ruling faction held the goal of reunifying Vietnam through armed struggle so strongly, the United States did not possess the means, or could not use the means that it did have, to compel the North Vietnamese leadership to stop Hanoi's support of Viet Cong's armed struggle in the South in early 1965. Even if Washington had used its more intensive military means, it is doubtful that that these would have compelled Hanoi, while in all likelihood provoking a Chinese intervention. Moral reasons prevented the United States from dropping nuclear weapons. The American people probably would have found the economic, human, and political costs of a ground invasion of the North to be too great for the ends that it would have gained. It is even doubtful that a Linebacker II, "hard-knock"-style of operation, conducted in 1965, would have worked. 
175
176
But why was gradualism so roundly condemned based on the Vietnam experience? The idea of a graduated escalation in the use of force is antithetical to the western way of conducting war. Leading military and airpower theorists all proclaim the importance of concentration, economy of force, and surprise in the attack. The idea of not giving an adversary a chance for a fair fight is a prevalent theme pronounced by Air Force leaders today. The graduated use of force, to allow the adversary an opportunity to change his mind, is very different from the idea of brute force destruction of an adversary's army before it conquers your entire country.
The actual planning and execution of Rolling Thunder was the source of much frustration both for air commanders and for the crews that flew the missions. Target selection in Washington that made little sense to the crews flying these dangerous missions was one source of frustration. Sending crews out with partial bomb loads, because the services perceived that Secretary of Defense McNamara's incentive system for the evaluation of the services' wartime performance stressed the numbers of sorties flown and tons of ordnance dropped over sortie effectiveness or aircraft losses, is also a source of justified anger. But are these problems really linked to the idea of gradualism, or are they systemic issues related to a military system that was learning how to fight a limited war for limited objectives and with a military establishment that was not doctrinally or intellectually prepared to fight it? 
175
Since Vietnam was a war that American did not win, there must be a reason for it. And gradualism, so contrary to the western way of war, as well as being so novel, became one of many scapegoats. Graduated escalation was not the cause for airpower's failure in Rolling Thunder.
The failure resulted from the nation's attempt to achieve a near-impossible goal within a system of constraints that severely limited the available options. The graduated use of airpower is merely a manifestation of those constraints.
The planning and execution of the Rolling Thunder provide evidence that calls into question two of gradualism's theoretical propositions. The first is the notion that a graduated campaign must be coordinated at the highest levels of government. There are two facets of this, the first being how closely the political leadership should control the use of the military instrument. As has been previously shown, Johnson's advisors envisioned a plan in which airpower would be used to gradually increase the threat to the North Vietnamese industrial base. Yet when it came to turning this vision into a targeting plan, Johnson and his advisors were unable to translate this successfully into the reality that they faced. Why did Johnson and his civilian advisors not ask an experienced air commander for assistance in building the campaign plan that would be based on the goal of threatening North Vietnamese industry? History suggests two reasons why this was the case. The first is that Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, and their advisors, did not trust the military. Kennedy, in the aftermath of the Cuban Missile Crisis, is reported to have declared that "the first advice I am going to give my successor is to watch the generals and to avoid feeling that just because they were military men their opinions on military matters were worth a damn."
177
Heroes need battles and bombs and bullets in order to be heroic. That's why I am suspicious of the military. They're always so narrow in their appraisal of everything.
They see everything in military terms." 
178
179
Coupled with this distrust were the consequences of failure that Johnson and his advisors believed they faced in Vietnam. Perhaps the greatest fear that the Johnson administration held was that American military intervention might provoke a Chinese intervention, which might then spiral out of control to a nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union. This possibility, and the resulting threat to the very existence of the United States, was a consequence that they did not want to deal with. And they saw the military as proposing options that could quickly take them down this path towards nuclear confrontation with the Soviets. National survival, coupled with their distrust of the military, played a significant role in the Johnson administration's unwillingness to bring in an air commander to assist with planning Rolling Thunder.
In defense of Johnson and his advisors, one must also examine whether an air commander could have planned such a campaign. At the time, Air Force senior officers were steeped in the doctrine and the history of strategic bombardment. As such, it is questionable whether they would have been intellectually and doctrinally capable of planning the relatively subtle campaign that Johnson's advisors envisioned. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen Curtis LeMay's continual insistence on the "hard-knock" option is but one example supporting this assertion. It also demonstrates that the military leadership was not in tune with the Johnson administration's political realities.
All three of these conditions--the Johnson administration's lack of trust in the military, the potential threat to American security if the Vietnam spiraled out of control, and the apparent lack of political savvy on the part of the senior military officers--are important conditions that one must consider when examining the application of military force in Vietnam. And these conditions either directly or indirectly contributed to the Johnson administration's belief that it needed to control the application of airpower in Vietnam from the White House.
The second facet of gradualism's proposition that a compellent campaign must be controlled at the highest level is that the military and diplomatic efforts must be closely coordinated. However, the record of the Johnson administration's attempts to do this during Vietnam suggest that this is difficult, if not impossible, for a government like the one in Washington to do successfully. Two examples illustrate their problems. During the fifteen months prior to the beginning of Rolling Thunder, the Johnson administration attempted to coordinate a three-track approach to persuade the North Vietnamese to stop their support of the Viet Cong. These tracks consisted of the U.S.-led covert war, the planning for and threats of overt military action, and the carrot and stick approach to diplomacy (promises of aid and retaliation) that the administration conducted. Despite the goal that these efforts be coordinated, they often worked at cross-purposes, with the result of one track negating the effort of another. 
180
181
Moreover, the Johnson administration's lack of trust in the military and the stakes that they believed they might ultimately be playing for prevented them from listening to their military advisors, who, as it has been suggested, may not have been politically or doctrinally prepared to support such a plan anyway. Moreover, theory suggests the importance of coordination between the diplomatic and military efforts. But the realities of Vietnam suggest the difficulties that a government of the size and nature of the one in Washington has when it attempts to do this.
The second theoretical premise that the history of Rolling Thunder calls into question is how well the military instrument can be used as a means of communicating with an adversary. Airpower's inherent limitations at the time of Rolling Thunder hindered its effective application as a means of communication between the Washington and Hanoi. The message that Washington was attempting to send to Hanoi was subtle, and it relied on targets being attacked and destroyed in sequence to maximize the effectiveness of its transmission. Airpower's initial efforts exposed its limitations, and sortie effectiveness reflected them: the difficulties airpower initially experienced in bombing accuracy, organizational behaviors that resulted in aircraft being launched against targets without the maximum ordnance load, and problems of attacking targets in a climate where rain is a dominant climactic feature for a significant portion of the year.
At the time of Rolling Thunder, airpower was a heavy, blunt instrument. This, combined with the manner in which it was controlled, which was anything but dexterous, made it an unwieldy tool that was difficult to use to communicate a subtle message. It is analogous to planning to cut a patient with a scalpel, and then bringing out an axe to make the incision. American airpower at the time of Rolling Thunder was the product of the theoretical ideas of Clausewitz and its evolution through the classical airpower theorists and through its experience in the Second World War and the development of American strategic nuclear doctrine in the 1950s. As such, it was optimized for the delivery of nuclear weapons on either strategic or tactical targets-neither of which required the capability for the great accuracy that is necessary for the transmission of a subtle message.
The last challenge to gradualism's theoretical basis comes from a facet of the military instrument for which the theory does not account: the inherent psychological compellent effects of airpower, and the dangers of its misapplication. One of airpower's most compellent effects is not necessarily its ability to destroy targets, but the psychological impact that it can have on an adversary. At its core, compellence is an attempt to get an adversary to change his mind, and psychology plays a big part in this.
While the threat to valued assets may be the primary mechanism to compel an adversary, airpower also has the capability of imposing a tremendous psychological effect on the adversary-the feeling of impotence. U.S. airpower was never allowed to gain air supremacy over North Vietnam. As a result, the North Vietnamese leadership, military, and civilian population were never placed in the position of looking up into the sky, seeing enemy aircraft operating with impunity, attacking whatever assets it wanted, whenever it wanted. This feeling of imposed impotence in the past has proven to be an important weapon if airpower can achieve it.
There is an important tension here. Gradualism calls for measured attacks against the adversary, yet the best way to achieve air supremacy and impose its psychological effect is through the rapid suppression of the adversary's air defenses. But the achievement of air supremacy through the destruction of an adversary's air defenses does not mean that airpower will also wantonly destroy everything else that the adversary values-it is only an enabler that will allow airpower to make a more credible threat to the adversary's valued items. The psychological impact of an adversary who sees himself impotent in the face of such a threat, coupled with the threat of the destruction of its important assets, could produce a synergistic compellent effect on an adversary. The evidence of Rolling Thunder also suggests some problems of translating the theory of gradualism into reality. Close control of the military and diplomatic efforts is difficult due to the nature and the size of the national security apparatus in Washington.
More information about an adversary is needed beyond what items an adversary values in his country. And airpower at the time of Rolling Thunder was not a suitable means of communicating a subtle message.
Historical examples clarify everything and also provide the best kind of proof in the empirical sciences.
Thunder. Yet gradualism seems to have been successful decades later during Operation Allied Force over Kosovo. Perhaps critics drew the wrong conclusions regarding gradualism's efficacy based solely on the evidence of Operation Rolling Thunder. At this writing, it is too early to glean any solid conclusions from Allied Force, so an analyst must look elsewhere to broaden the evidentiary base. Because Schelling codified his ideas about gradualism in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the base of evidence would seem limited to the graduated air operations that have occurred since then-Rolling Thunder and Allied Force. However, there were graduated air operations, even if they were not planned to be that way. Even though an air commander may not have intended for an operation to be graduated, circumstances may have dictated that it be graduated, at least in effect.
There are at least two air operations, in addition to Rolling Thunder, that can be used to evaluate gradualism's efficacy. One such case is the Israeli-Egyptian War of Attrition that occurred between March 1969 and August 1970. The second is Operation Deny Flight, the NATO air operations in support of UN mandates in Bosnia, which lasted from October 1992 to September 1995. Deny Flight includes Operation Deliberate Force, which was NATO's use of airpower to compel the Bosnian Serbs to respect the UN established safe areas in Bosnia. The case studies that follow will describe these operations in narrative form. After these case studies, the chapter will evaluate how well they represent the graduated use of airpower, as well as draw conclusions about gradualism from them.
Although the War of Attrition between Israel and Egypt did not begin until March 1969, the seeds of this conflict lay in the ruins of the Arab armies at the end of the 1967 Six-Day War. 
182
183
184
The first priority, the absolute priority in this battle is the military front, for we must realize that the enemy will not withdraw unless we force him to withdraw through fighting. Indeed, there can be no hope of any political solution unless the enemy realizes that we are capable of forcing him to withdraw through fighting. 
185
182
183
184
185 Gamel Abdel Nasser, Al-Ahram, January 21, 1968, as cited in Bar-Siman-Tov, 44.
186
187
Nasser had two objectives for this part of the plan. The first was to raise the morale of the Egyptian army and the country, hopefully erasing the psychological effect of the Six-Day War. The second objective was to cause attrition against the Israeli Army. Nasser believed that he could convince Tel Aviv to change its stand regarding negotiations by inflicting a large human and economic cost on the Israeli economy. To do this, Egypt planned to exploit its one area of superiority vis-à-vis the Israelis, artillery, and to supplement it with commando raids against Israeli targets. 188
In contrast, Israeli aims were modest. Tel Aviv planned a defensive strategy with the goal of maintaining the territorial, political, and military status quo from the end of the Six-Day War. In the process, it hoped that to avoid escalation to another general war with the Egyptians. 
189
190
Previously, a lack of depth had forced the Israelis to adopt offensive strategies that emphasized massive preemptive strikes to gain the upper hand against the larger Arab armies. With the capture of the Sinai Peninsula in the Six-Day War, Israel possessed strategic depth for the first time. This sparked a debate within the government about the best way best defend the territory. They had two choices: a mobile defense or a forward 
186
187 Thornberry,
18;
Herzog,
214,
224. 189 Thornberry,
This in turn would lessen the effectiveness of a mobile defense. In deference to this concern, Tel Aviv decided on the forward defense to ensure that Egypt did not establish that bridgehead. 
191
192
IDF. 193
194
190 Shlaim and Tanter,
511. 191 Dupuy,
[358]
[359]
[360]
[361]
Gurion,
[54]
[55]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]
74. 194
against countervalue targets deep in Egyptian territory. Initially, the Israelis used the IAF to prevent a perceived Egyptian crossing of the Suez Canal. The IAF's targets during this first phase of the air campaign (20 to 28 July 1969) were Egyptian air defense sites, artillery emplacements, and commando bases near the Canal. The Israelis then paused the bombing to gauge the Egyptian reaction, as well as the reaction of the international community. 
195
Egyptians. 196
197
198
89. 196 Ibid.,
[88]
[89]
[90]
Dupuy,
363. 198
199
200
201
Moreover, the majority of the Israeli Cabinet believed that technological and political constraints would prevent Moscow from intervening on Egypt's behalf. 
202
203
204
205
President Nixon rebuffed the Soviet challenge and stated that the United States would match any arms escalation with the delivery of similar hardware to the Israelis. 
206
207
208
During the War of Attrition, over 400 Israeli troops were killed and another 1,100 wounded on the Egyptian front. 
209
210
During the War of Attrition, both Israel and Egypt initially went to some lengths, and assumed risk, to ensure that the conflict did not escalate into another general war, something that neither side wanted. The Egyptians, still bloodied from the Six-Day War, limited their military options to simply taking advantage of the one area in which they had superiority over the Israelis, artillery. The Israelis wanted to bring the Arabs to the negotiating table on their terms. Short of that, they did not want to absorb the human and economic costs of another general war. Moreover, Israel wanted to keep the United States and the Soviet Union out of the conflict. It was only after they saw that their initial attacks did not elicit a significant negative response that they believed that they could escalate their actions without risking superpower intervention. This miscalculation demonstrates two important points. The Israelis misread not only the Egyptian reaction to the provocation of their deep strikes, they also confused a lack of American and Soviet response to their previous actions as tacit permission to escalate their actions. Tel Aviv did not have an adequate understanding of their adversary and the other major players.
Moreover, despite their best efforts, the Israelis were unable to control the situation.
While it was their decision to escalate the conflict with the initiation of deep strikes, they could not control Egyptian and Soviet reaction to their move. This illustrates one of the critiques against those who try to impose rationality on warfare. A danger inherent to war on paper is that it can be one-sided; in reality, the adversary does get a vote and he often chooses the course that one does not expect.
Both Israel and Egypt wanted to limit the intensity of the conflict, yet they both targeted what they believed the other side valued to compel them to accede to their demands. The Egyptians believed that the Israelis wanted to avoid heavy human and economic costs to defend the east bank of the Suez Canal-this was their primary motivation for using artillery against Israeli forces near the Canal. This backfired when the Israelis built fortifications along the Canal (Bar-Lev Line) to protect their forces and to provide information about Egyptian actions. For their part, the Israelis attacked Egyptian economic and civil targets to compel Cairo to stop its attacks along the Canal.
They initially used commando teams for these deep attacks; they later used the IAF.
However, this too backfired when the IAF's deep attacks forced Nasser to bring the Soviets directly into the situation. There is a lesson to be learned from this. Both sides launched what they believed to be restrained attacks against the other, but they attacked assets that the other valued in an attempt to compel. Instead of recognizing their adversary's restraint, both sides saw the attacks against targets that they valued as provocations. These perceived provocations compelled both sides to escalate their own responses. It is all a question of perceptions: what to one side is a measured, retaliatory action is to the other a provocation.
Finally, Israel attempted to use airpower as a means of signaling or of tacit communication to the Egyptians. Tel Aviv did not use the IAF initially because it recognized that it would be too great an escalatory measure; its non-use was a signal of Israeli restraint and desire to limit the conflict. When the IAF was first used, Tel Aviv hoped that Cairo would recognize Israeli restraint through the limiting of IAF operations to the Canal area. Similarly, after Israel halted the IAF's deep attacks into Egypt and restricted operations to near the Canal in April 1970, Israel hoped Cairo and Moscow would recognize its desire to avoid conflict with the Soviet Union, but that it would defend the Canal if necessary. In neither case did the signal work. Finally, the Israeli decision to authorize the IAF to conduct deep strikes into Egypt was a restrained escalation in Israeli minds, it communicated an unintended message to Egyptian President Nasser. Facing a problem for which he did not have a solution, Nasser quickly went to Moscow to seek help, much to the overall detriment of the Israeli position. In all these cases, Israel attempted to send a tacit or subtle message through the use, or non-use, of airpower. The Egyptians and Soviets either did not receive the messages, misinterpreted them, or chose to ignore them.
NATO involvement in the skies over the former Yugoslavia, Operation Deny Flight, lasted from October 1992 to the fall of 1995. The last part of this campaign, Operation Deliberate Force, was the bombing of Serb targets within Bosnia to compel the Bosnian Serbs to respect UN mandates to leave the UN-designated safe areas alone. If Deliberate Force is considered an integral part of Deny Flight, then it is possible to view Deny Flight, in its entirety, as a graduated campaign. 
211
215
The dual-key authorization process resulted in the ineffective use of airpower throughout Operation Deny Flight. The few actual uses of airpower, mere pinpricks, had little effect on the Bosnian Serb leadership who continued their actions against the UN safe areas. What NATO did not publicize is that the NAC also approved a number of other measures. The first was a list of trigger events that, if they occurred, would start the bombing. This decision predetermined exactly what would instigate a NATO strike and in doing so would allow for a near instantaneous military response. NATO's Supreme Allied Commander, General George Joulwan, later noted that he "tried to get political clearance so we could instantly respond. You did not want to wait until the train wreck to occur before acting. You need will at the political level to give responsiveness to commanders on the ground." 
218
Ryan requested authority to attack targets throughout a ZOA if the Bosnian Serbs threatened or attacked a safe area in that ZOA. Second, Ryan submitted a proposal categorizing Bosnian Serb targets. Option One targets were those that directly threatened a safe area. Option Two targets were those that indirectly threatened the safe areas, i.e.
those targets that had the potential to threaten a safe area. Option Three called for wideranging strikes against Bosnian Serb infrastructure. The NAC approved the ZOA attack plan as well as authorizing strikes against Option One and Two targets in the event that one of the trigger events occurred. 
219
220
221
Boutros-Ghali recognized NATO's newfound political cohesion and believed that member states now had the political will to see through any air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs despite domestic political concerns. 
222
NATO did not have long to wait for a trigger event to occur. Deliberate Force began with air and artillery attacks on the BSA positions in and around Sarajevo, as well as the related air defenses. This made sense given that the event that triggered the air strikes was an attack against the Sarajevo safe area. After two days of strikes, General Janvier ordered a 24-hour pause in the bombing to begin in the early morning of 1 September. The pause's purpose was to allow Janvier to meet with the 222 Owen, 481. 
223
224 See Mark J. Conversino, "Executing Deliberate Force, 30 August-14 September 1995," in Deliberate Force, 131-175. 
225
BSA commander General Ratko Mladic. Janvier first extended the delay to accommodate further diplomatic discussions and then to allow the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo. It was only after the UN determined that the BSA was not pulling their heavy weapons out that NATO resumed its strikes on 5 September.
With the renewal of the air operation, NATO's and the UN's emphasis changed to trying to inflict pain on the Bosnian Serbs, but not necessarily trying to kill them. In this phase, NATO aircraft attacked communications nodes, bridges and roads with the objective of hindering the movement of Bosnian Serb ground forces. NATO also attacked BSA supply depots and ammunition dumps. 
226
On 8 September, Bosnian Government and Croatian forces launched a large-scale offensive against BSA forces in western Bosnia. This event was not directly linked to the air attacks, but it would have an important compellent effect on the Bosnian Serbs. There is no evidence to suggest that there was any kind of collusion or cooperation between NATO on the one hand and Sarajevo and Zagreb on the other regarding the timing of this ground attack. That said, synergy did result from the two attacks, even if it was unintentional. 
227
228
229
A number of observations about Deliberate Force are relevant to this discussion of gradualism. For General Ryan, since the NAC had approved his target lists prior to the beginning of hostilities and since he was given wide latitude on how to conduct the campaign, he was able to execute it in an effective manner, yet remain within the strategic constraints imposed on the campaign. In this strategically constrained environment, airpower produced tactically intense effects that helped compel the Bosnian Serbs to accept the UN mandates to leave the UN safe areas alone. It also demonstrated that the military could successfully execute a politically risky operation within the imposed constraints without high-level, day-to-day control of the operation by political decision-makers, as long as those decision makers had the will to give the commanders that control.
The early days of Deny Flight provide a useful comparison of the command and control of airpower. The dual-key authorization process for the use of airpower in Bosnia was so cumbersome and unwieldy that it negated one of airpower's most useful characteristics: responsiveness. 
230
The coordination, or lack thereof, between the military and diplomatic efforts during Deliberate Force is a second observation . The NAC's immediate objective for Deliberate Force was simply to compel the Bosnian Serbs to accept the UN mandates regarding the safe areas. There was no consensus within NATO to try to bomb the Serbs into submission. But the bombing did provide a compellent element to support the diplomatic effort that was trying to force the Serbs to agree to a negotiated settlement.
Leading this venture was Holbrooke, who was representing the United Nations through the Contact Group,
231
More importantly, both NATO and the UN wanted to avoid the Serbs gaining the perception that Deliberate Force was supporting Holbrooke's diplomatic effort. The military and diplomatic tracks were ostensibly separate efforts. NATO was bombing the Bosnian Serbs to compel them to respect the UN mandates regarding the safe areas in Israel wanted to ensure that Egypt's superpower patron did not begin direct participation in the conflict. On the other hand, NATO needed to keep their operation constrained to ensure that the alliance maintained its political cohesion. NATO was more successful at restraining the conflict than Israel-the preapproval of targets for NATO air strikes allowed General Ryan to prosecute Deliberate Force using airpower effectively within the constrained environment. Israeli political miscalculation led to their decision to change their policy about escalation, which resulted in their deep strikes and the subsequent Soviet intervention.
Israel and NATO both attempted to use airpower as a means of communication with the adversary. Israeli communication with Cairo either was not received or was ignored. Likewise, NATO's use of airpower to signal the Bosnian Serbs in the early years of Deny Flight was also not received or, more likely, ignored. It was only after this failure was reversed and airpower was used in a manner better suited to its nature, as a heavy, blunt instrument, that NATO was able to compel the Bosnian Serbs to agree to observe the UN mandates.
Both NATO and Israel believed they had extensive and intensive knowledge of their adversary. They both used airpower to threaten what they believed their opponents valued in an attempt to compel the adversary (Egyptian economic targets for Israel, Bosnian Serb fear of domination for NATO). While it seems that NATO had a better understanding about its adversary, it is debatable how well the Israelis understood theirs,
given their miscalculation regarding Nasser's, Moscow's, and Washington's various reactions to the IAF's deep attacks. Finally, it is interesting that control and coordination of the military and diplomatic efforts did not occur at the highest levels in either case.
Israel did not have a significant diplomatic effort working in conjunction with its military operations. For NATO and the UN, Holbrooke's diplomatic thrusts were not coordinated with Ryan's air operations; but despite this, Holbrooke was still able to make the most of the air operation's compellent effects.
The most important challenge to the conventional wisdom regarding gradualism resulting from an analysis of Deny Flight/Deliberate Force is that a graduated use of military power can produce the desired political effect. This completely contradicts the claims of critics following Operation Rolling Thunder that gradualism cannot work as a strategic concept.
The evidence of Deliberate Force also challenges the theoretical propositions of gradualism, specifically the importance of the centralized control of the compellent campaign. As noted in the previous chapter, one must examine two facets implicit in this proposition: the central control of airpower and the need for coordination between the military and diplomatic efforts. Deliberate Force demonstrated that it is not necessary for the political decision makers to control the day-to-day details of the air operation. The NAC's preapproval of military strikes if a trigger event occurred demonstrated the tremendous trust that they placed in NATO's military commanders to conduct the operation within the prescribed constraints. Two factors contributed to this trust. The first is that the survival of NATO member states was not in jeopardy if Deliberate Force failed. Granted, if Deliberate Force had failed, the alliance would have suffered a tremendous blow to its credibility and it is conceivable that it might have been weakened
or even collapsed as a result. But these states would still have existed. The second contributing factor to this trust is the increased political savvy of American senior military officers. In the manner of Colin Powell, the archetype political general, Adm Smith and Gen Ryan both realized the importance of the political constraints and dangers that the military operation posed to the alliance; they took the appropriate actions to minimize the risk to NATO's political cohesion.
Deliberate Force also demonstrated that, contrary to gradualism's theoretical propositions, that close coordination between the military and diplomatic efforts is not a necessary condition for success in a graduated campaign. Despite this, the evidence does suggest that coordination between the two efforts would have enhanced the effectiveness of both.
The importance of testing theory against empirical evidence cannot be overestimated. Seeing how well a theory translates into reality, identifying where it fails to translate accurately, and the subsequent refining of the theory are all key facets of the art of critical analysis. 
237
There are many striking similarities between the use of airpower by the United
States in Rolling Thunder and the Israelis in the War of Attrition. Conversely, there are many interesting contrasts between the execution of Rolling Thunder and the War of Attrition on the one hand, and NATO's execution of Deny Flight/Deliberate Force on the other. An analysis of these similarities and contrasts may yield important insights into not only the graduated use of airpower, but in some cases, general compellence.
All three campaigns demonstrate the impact that the strategic context can have on a compellent campaign.
The most fundamental similarity between Rolling Thunder and the War of Attrition is that both campaigns occurred within the context of the Cold War; an important contrast between these first two campaigns and Deliberate Force is that the latter occurred after the end of the Cold War. The United States and Israel were both engaged with nations that had the Soviet Union, in the case of Egypt, and the Soviet Union and China, in the case of North Vietnam, as patrons. Neither Washington nor Tel Aviv wanted these patrons to intervene in the conflict. As a result, they conducted restrained operations to ensure that they did not provoke the feared intervention. A powerful patron has the potential to be a decisive factor in a graduated campaign by providing significant military, diplomatic, and moral support to a smaller state that is being compelled. This patronage may provide enough incentive to a 
238
The end of the Cold War removed superpower patronage from the problems which NATO leadership had to resolve. However, the post-Cold War security environment created new problems with which NATO had to contend, the most important being NATO political cohesion. NATO was founded as an alliance to counter the perceived Soviet threat. If the Warsaw Pact had indeed invaded Western Europe, alliance political cohesion would not have been a concern. This changed after the Soviet Union's collapse. NATO could not take offensive action out of the area encompassed by its member states without the agreement of all its members. Britain, France, and other NATO members with troops deployed in Bosnia as UN peacekeepers were reluctant to approve significant NATO air strikes out of concern that the Bosnian Serbs would retaliate against these troops. And since alliance decision making requires consensus, the only way that decision makers could achieve consensus by authorizing only minimal retaliatory strikes in response to the worst Bosnian Serb provocations. Moreover, UN Secretary General Boutros-Ghali, recognizing the importance of NATO political cohesion for such military operations, ensured that any NATO military operation would be limited in nature and in scope by keeping strike authorization close hold through the dual-key arrangement. The combination of NATO-member concerns for troops on the Hungary against Serbia in 1914) is the fact that both Turkey and Serbia were backed by great power patrons, thus allowing them to be more intransigent in their negotiations with the coercing state.
ground and the unwieldy command structure resulted in airpower being used minimally, and when it was used, it was used ineffectively.
This changed after the intervening states achieved consensus at the London Conference in July 1995, where they agreed on the need for air strikes to compel the Bosnian Serbs to observe UN mandates regarding the UN-designated safe areas. This newfound political will and cohesion manifested itself in the NAC's authorization to NATO military commanders to conduct strikes if a trigger event occurred. Boutros-Ghali recognized this cohesion, and gained confidence that NATO members would now see the air strikes through to the end despite any domestic political repercussions. As a result, he delegated authority for offensive air strikes down to his senior military commander in the region, Lt Gen Bernard Janvier. It was NATO's consensus on the need to take action no matter what the cost that enabled NATO countries to authorize the use of airpower in a manner that emphasized its strengths. 
239
This degree of centralized control led some to charge that the campaign was being micromanaged like Rolling Thunder, but the sensitivities of the region and maintaining the alliance's political cohesion justified this level of control. 
240
239
The Americans succeeded in doing this; the Israelis failed. In both cases, the restraints kept airpower from being used to its greatest effect. NATO was fortunate that the Cold War had ended when it started its air operations in Bosnia. A new set of problems replaced the old, however, providing new challenges to the effective use of airpower in a graduated operation, challenges that the centralized control of airpower was able to overcome.
True to Schelling's ideals about compellence and gradualism, both the Americans The Israelis also used airpower, through its use and non-use, as a means of tacit communication not only with the Egyptians, but also with the Americans and the Soviets.
As noted in Chapter Six, the Israeli desire to keep the Americans and Soviets out of the conflict compelled them to use airpower in non-optimal ways. The initial withholding of airpower from the conflict was a signal to the Egyptians that Tel Aviv was limiting the nature of the conflict. Even when it unleashed the IAF, Tel Aviv limited it to operating near the Canal Zone in another attempt to signal its intent to limit the war's intensity.  Another facet affecting airpower's capability as a means of communication in the 1990s was that the U.S. Air Force was much better prepared in Deliberate Force to deal with the tactical and operational problem posed than it was for Rolling Thunder 244 .
Having built its tactical force structure around the Army's AirLand Battle doctrine in the 1980s, and after having prepared and trained for years to defend against a Soviet invasion through the Fulda Gap, attacking a Soviet-style army and air defense system was something that the Air Force was manifestly prepared to do. And over Bosnia, it did it well.
Fortunately too for NATO, the BSA and its support facilities were targets tailormade for airpower. In contrast to airpower's ineffectual use during earlier parts of Deny Flight, when it was used to signal with pinprick attacks, Deliberate Force's targets, chosen to produce the greatest compellent effect on the Bosnian Serbs, were vulnerable to air attack: fielded forces, targets direct and essential to military support, command, control, and communications (C 3 ), assets of the integrated air defense (IADS), and infrastructure. 
245
Yet Deliberate Force was successful. The differences between these two campaigns in this regard are intriguing. As noted in Chapter Five, Johnson and his advisors believed they had to control the application of military power in Vietnam to ensure that the situation did not spiral out control and risk the national survival of the United States.
This need for control was based in part on their distrust of the military, who arguably could not have executed such a campaign anyway, plus the advisors' confidence in their own ability to control the use force.
This was different in Deliberate Force. Chapter Six demonstrated that the NAC mustered enormous political will and courage when it delegated to NATO's military commanders the authority to strike the Bosnian Serbs. And NATO's military commanders proved worthy of that trust by demonstrating the political savvy to recognize the importance of NATO political cohesion and take all the steps possible to mitigate the risks to it. Ryan, in deference to this political reality, went so far as to ignore one of airpower's key tenets: centralized control, decentralized execution. 
246
While the evidence suggests that airpower's precision and the dexterity of its control may have evolved to the point where it can be used to communicate subtle messages, one must remember that airpower still does have significant limitations.
Weather will continue to limit airpower's effectiveness. Political constraints may prevent airpower from attacking certain targets. More importantly, there are a number of variables inherent in communicating a message that an air commander cannot control:
specifically, the adversary may not receive the entire message, or may interpret it incorrectly because of cultural factors, or may simply choose to ignore it. One must also remember that the capabilities of air defenses will not stand still. With the proliferation of modern air defense systems around the world, and the great desire on the part of many nations to find a means of limiting the effectiveness of American stealth technology, the U.S. may not always have the same ability to send a subtle message through the use of airpower that it enjoys today.
Finally, Gen Ryan's level of detail and control was practical for an operation as small and as short as Deliberate Force, but it does raise questions about the limits of any one individual's span of control. During the operation, General Ryan and a few members of his immediate staff at the Combined Air Operations Center worked 18-hour days.
These officers were naturally quite tired at the end of the operation. 
248
Based on this analysis, the evidence of the dexterity with which air commanders can now wield airpower, coupled with the increased precision of the instrument itself, suggests that, under the right circumstances, it may now be possible to communicate subtle messages through airpower if the message is sent through increasing the numbers of sorties and the intensity of the strikes, changing the location of the targets, and escalating the sensitivity of the targets. However, one must keep in mind that the problems inherent in the execution of an air campaign, the weather and the difficulty at times in finding and striking targets successfully, can limit airpower's ability to send messages; this is particularly true if the transmission of the message depends on the destruction of targets at the time required by the master plan. Moreover, airpower must have the capability to find and destroy these targets. The Air Force's doctrine and force 248 Owen, 487.
structure at the time of Vietnam, which contributed to a lack of sortie effectiveness, contributed to the poor communication. The increase in the Air Force's and Navy's capability to deliver precision-guided munitions, as well as the close control demonstrated in Deliberate Force, suggests that the services are on their way to solving this problem. Yet despite this capability, airpower works best as a communication tool when it is used in a manner more in line with its nature, a blunt instrument, instead of trying to use it as part of a nuanced diplomatic exchange. Finally, using airpower as a means of communication runs the risk of sending unintended messages to the adversary.
Because of the combat power that airpower brings to a conflict, an adversary is likely to view airpower's initial use or escalation in its use as a provocation that he must respond to, jamming the message that airpower's use was meant to convey.
Given the assertion that airpower now has an improved capability to communicate with an adversary, to do this effectively requires an even greater need for understanding one's adversary. An analysis of the three campaigns provides ample evidence reinforcing the need for this kind of knowledge. The Americans at the beginning of Rolling Thunder Fortunately for NATO during Deliberate Force, the alliance had a good understanding of the Bosnian Serb leadership as well as that of the BSA. NATO concluded that the Bosnian Serb center of gravity was their historic fear of domination.
The best way for them to affect this center of gravity was to alter the military balance in the region between the Bosnian Serb and Federation forces. NATO assessed that the Bosnian Serb military advantage came not from having a larger military, but one that was more capable and that could easily be redeployed to wherever the leadership thought it was necessary. By striking the communication system of the former Yugoslavia, NATO hindered Bosnian Serb ability to shift forces on the battlefield. This effort, in addition to striking the forces themselves, allowed NATO to effect a shift in the balance on the battlefield and make the Bosnian Serbs feel that their existence as an entity might be in jeopardy. 
250
251
252
Understanding an adversary's motivations, his decision-making processes, what he considers to be valuable within his society, as well as a good sense about his reaction to your moves are all essential for the successful use of airpower, regardless of how it is used. The Americans in Rolling Thunder and the Israelis in the War of Attrition demonstrated that they did not understand their respective adversaries, and paid the price.
NATO's success in Deliberate Force strongly suggests that they had at least an adequate understanding of the Bosnian Serbs and their leadership, an understanding that significantly aided their efforts at compellence. This evidence, in turn, suggests that intensive and extensive knowledge of the adversary is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for the successful graduated use of airpower.
The evidence in all three cases illustrates the importance of achieving air supremacy. As shown in Chapter Four, theory suggests that if one can establish air supremacy over an adversary's territory and then use airpower with relative impunity against targets that the adversary values, the adversary will develop a sense of impotence 
250 Ripley,
268. 251
that will degrade his morale and his will to continue resisting. Deliberate Force demonstrated the compellent effect that air supremacy can impose on an adversary. NATO quickly gained air supremacy over the Bosnian Serbs and then rapidly exploited it, not only for the physical damage that airpower was able to inflict on the BSA, but also, as detailed in Chapter Six, for its psychological impact on the Bosnian Serb leadership.
Three factors contributed to this contrast between Rolling Thunder and Deliberate Force. Unlike in Vietnam, the NAC authorized NATO military commanders to attack the Bosnian Serb air defense system anywhere in Bosnia once one of the designated trigger events occurred. This allowed General Ryan to suppress the air defense in the manner that proved to be a good balance between operational needs and protecting the lives of the aircrews. Moreover, the United States' airpower in the mid-1990s had a much greater capability to suppress a Soviet-style air defense than it did during Rolling Thunder.
Precision-guided munitions and sophisticated electronic warfare and defense suppression capabilities allowed airmen to attack the air defense in much greater safety than they could during Rolling Thunder. NATO airpower's ability to strike at the air defenses with great impunity in all likelihood imposed a significant feeling of impotence on the Bosnian Serbs, who knew that there was nothing that they could do to stop NATO's air attack. Finally, NATO possessed a significant qualitative and quantitative edge over the BSA, an edge that was much greater than the edge the U.S. had over the North Vietnamese. While the Americans did have air superiority over the North, the North Vietnamese Air Force's strategy of air denial forced the U.S. to fight for air superiority every time they penetrated North Vietnamese airspace.
The importance of gaining air supremacy over an adversary's territory is particularly important in a graduated campaign. In such a campaign, the amount of combat power that one can initially use to compel an adversary is limited; because of this, it is important to take advantage of every possible compellent effect. If one does not have air supremacy, or if one must continually fight for air superiority, then the resulting loss of assets, due to either the adversary's air defenses or to the diversion of assets and energy in order to gain air superiority, will decrease the physical compellent effect that one can apply to an adversary. And since the physical compellent effect that one can initially apply in a graduated campaign is limited, it places even greater importance on air supremacy's psychological compellent effect.
The evidence from the three campaigns, along with its implications, suggests that achieving air superiority is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for the successful use of airpower in a graduated manner.
The evidence from the three cases shatters the conventional wisdom regarding the theoretical proposition that the military and diplomatic efforts against an adversary must be coordinated at the highest level. Chapter Five demonstrated why Johnson and his advisors believed they had to control Rolling Thunder's strikes from Washington. It was a different story in Deliberate Force. Little coordination occurred between the NAC and military instrument after the conflict commenced. General Ryan received the authorization to strike targets prior to the beginning of the operation-how he stuck those targets was up to his judgment. NATO military commanders demonstrated during Deliberate Force that the military is capable of successfully executing a politically risky military operation within a tightly constrained environment. Deliberate Force also demonstrated that coordination between the military and diplomatic efforts is not necessary for the successful use of graduated airpower. It should be noted, however, that coordination between Ryan and Holbrooke would perhaps have resulted in a more effective use of airpower and of diplomacy.
253
Based on the evidence of the graduated use of airpower, it is possible to assess its implications for the propositions of gradualism developed in Chapter Two:
Central proposition: "The power to hurt is bargaining power. To exploit it is diplomacy-vicious diplomacy, but diplomacy." 
254
The historical evidence refutes the theoretical proposition of the necessity of coordinating the military and diplomatic instruments at the highest level for a successful graduated campaign. Vietnam demonstrated the practical difficulties that a large foreign policy apparatus experienced in trying to control these actions. Deliberate Force showed that while political control is important, day-to-day micromanagement may only hinder the effective implementation of the plan. Political decision-makers can exercise their control through prior authorization of many of the key aspects of the military campaign and then remain above the actual operational details. Deliberate Force also demonstrates that while close coordination between the military and diplomatic efforts, if not strictly necessary, is useful and beneficial to both the military and diplomatic efforts.
The historical evidence strongly reinforces the idea known since the days of Sun Tzu that an intensive and extensive knowledge of the adversary is critical. Not only is this true for what the adversary values the most, as Schelling's theory of gradualism indicates, but a political leader and his military commanders must also understand how strongly the adversary's leadership holds the goal from which it is to be dissuaded, his decision-making processes, as well as what his likely reaction might be to your threats and actions. As shown in Vietnam, it is possible that the most important thing that an adversary values is the goal that he is trying to achieve. A government must also realize that an adversary may simply not be coercible, at least within the limits of the punishment that a government can inflict, either for moral, legal, political, or military reasons.
Finally, the evidence from graduated campaigns demonstrates that through the close control of an instrument that is becoming increasingly precise, it may be possible to use airpower as an effective means of communicating a subtle message. However, airpower's limitations, and their effect on communication, must always be kept in mind.
Weather will continue to limit airpower's ability to strike targets. Cultural factors may result in a message being misunderstood. Finally, while this is a fascinating trend with intriguing potential, the preponderance of history suggests that if decision makers intend to signal intent or show resolve through the deployment of airpower or its innocuous use, the message is likely to be ignored. If airpower is used in a manner that emphasizes its strengths by quickly massing combat power on the battlefield wherever the military or political decision maker decides, then any message such use is intended to convey is very likely to be heard and understood.
The evidence of the three cases of the graduated use of airpower suggests the need for new thinking about gradualism. As suggested in Chapter Five, the strategic variables of the Vietnam conflict, coupled with the North Vietnamese leadership's strong desire to reunify their country, contributed more to the failure of Rolling Thunder than gradualism did. Moreover, the success of the graduated use of airpower in Deliberate Force demonstrates that gradualism can work. But what is critical to gradualism's success or failure are the numerous variables of the strategic context-these will determine whether a graduated campaign can even work or the political constraints that are imposed on it.
The success of Deliberate Force also shows that political decision-makers do not need to closely control the use of the military instrument. After giving broad political guidance, political decision-makers should then allow their military commanders the broadest operational latitude to conduct the operation. Finally, Deliberate Force indicates that while the conventional wisdom regarding close coordination between the military and diplomatic efforts is not necessary, it is still highly desirable.
Thomas Schelling's theory of gradualism presents an attractive policy option to national decision-makers. By attacking what an adversary holds dear, it should be possible to compel him to accept your demands. Gradualism and airpower together offer the policymaker an option that is both economically and politically inexpensive. By eliminating the need for the use of ground forces, the graduated use of airpower provides the policymaker the chance to conduct foreign policy on the cheap.
Historical evidence regarding the graduated use of airpower illustrates the difficulty of translating this theory into reality. While airpower is most effective when it is used in a manner accentuating its best characteristics, its ability to quickly mass combat power anywhere on the battlefield, national decision-makers and airpower leadership must be prepared to use airpower in a manner that is less than optimal. In preparation for this eventuality, this paper examined the graduated use of airpower in three campaigns: Rolling Thunder, the Israeli-Egyptian War of Attrition, and NATO's Deny Flight/Deliberate Force. This chapter answers the thesis's research question, what conditions must national and military leadership fulfill or avoid to maximize the chances for success of the graduated use of airpower?
This thesis examined only three cases of the graduated use of airpower, and therefore, it would be irresponsible to offer definitive prescriptions about what a government must do to ensure the success of the graduated use of airpower. Graduated escalation will not always be a suitable strategy since it depends so much on circumstances and the strategic context. It is possible, however, to describe some of the conditions that are important to consider, and their probable effects, that national leadership and their military strategists need to understand in order to determine when and how to use gradualism. Armed with this knowledge, they will be better prepared to avoid the sort of policy failures of that have given gradualism a bad name in the past.
Perhaps the most important condition that national leadership can achieve in a compellence situation is the diplomatic and economic isolation of the adversary. This is particularly true where the military instrument is applied in a graduated manner. Since an adversary's costs of non-compliance will only slowly increase in a graduated campaign, the support and incentive that a patron might provide may well be enough to overcome these costs and to allow a compelled state to hold out through the slow escalation of a graduated campaign. Moreover, if the patron is sufficiently powerful militarily, it may force the compelling state to restrict its actions to avoid an escalation. This was true for both North Vietnam during Operation Rolling Thunder and for Egypt during the War of Attrition. Ironically, it is this fear of intervention and the resulting need for constraint that drove Washington and Tel Aviv to choose graduated campaigns. Conversely, while the Bosnian Serbs had a powerful regional patron for a while in Serbian President Milosevic, the West had successfully compelled Milosevic, through economic sanctions, to cut ties with the Bosnian Serbs. Milosevic became an important player in establishing a Bosnian cease-fire and in the negotiation of the eventual Dayton Accords.
The analysis in the earlier chapters reconfirms the importance of knowing one's enemy. In the post-World War Two era of coercive airpower, Schelling's theory of compellence and gradualism suggested new requirements for information about the adversary: what does the adversary value that a threat to it would compel him to accept your demands? The historical evidence from the graduated use of airpower suggests a few more information requirements. As shown in Chapter Five's examination of Rolling Thunder, knowing how important the adversary's goal is to him is critical. If this goal is deeply valued, then it may be difficult to dissuade him from pursuing it. In addition, the analysis of Rolling Thunder's attempt to compel the North Vietnamese leadership also demonstrates the importance of understanding how an adversary makes decisions.
Washington's assumption that Hanoi made decisions based on the rational actor model oversimplified the process, and contributed to their incorrect conclusions about how easy compellence would be in this situation. Israeli decisions during the War of Attrition, outlined in Chapter Six, demonstrate the need for knowing how an adversary will react to one's moves. Tel Aviv not only miscalculated Nasser's reaction to their deep strikes into Egypt, but also did not correctly predict the Soviet and American reactions, much to their regret. As the complexity of these situations increases, so does the level of detailed information that must be known about an adversary. The nature of these requirements suggests that the information needed about an adversary is not limited simply to technical information about the adversary's military capabilities. It suggests an increased need for information and analysis regarding an adversary's historical and philosophical background, and its political motivations and processes. 255 255 Fortunately, the Air Force has taken a major step forward in this area. At Corona South 96, senior Air Force leadership mandated that 10% of all Air Force officers will be proficient in some foreign language by 2005 (proficiency is defined as achieving a score of at least 2 on both the reading and listening portions of the Defense Language Proficiency Test (DLPT)). This amounts to 6,900 officers; by the end of 1999, the Air Force had achieved half this goal. Furthermore, in response to Department of Defense tasking, the Deputy Under Secretary of the Air Force for International Affairs established the Air Force Foreign Area Officer (FAO) program in June 1997 and charged it with the development and proponency for the Air Force FAO and language training programs. The Air Force FAO Program's goal is to develop officers who are not only proficient in a language, but who are also knowledgeable about a region, either through experience or through education. The Air Force, by standing up its FAO program, has taken a step forward to understanding an adversary in wartime, in addition to understanding allies as the Air Force evolves towards the Expeditionary Air Force concept. Lt Col Brian Vickers, Air Force Foreign Area Officer Program, Deputy Secretary of the Air Force, "Foreign Area Officer (FAO) and Foreign Language Program: CY 1999 Consolidated Report."
Having such knowledge of the adversary is particularly important in a graduated campaign. Since airpower will only be able to slowly increase the amount of combat power it can apply against an adversary, it is essential that this combat power produce the maximum fear of punishment to an ensure that an adversary's expected costs for noncompliance are as large as possible. And to do this, knowing what an adversary values and how it makes decisions becomes essential pieces of information.
The graduated use of airpower in Deliberate Force strongly suggests that airpower may be becoming sufficiently precise and air commanders sufficiently dexterous in its control that it could be used as a means of sending subtle messages. But the problems inherent in operating in the medium will continue to make this a difficult goal to achieve, especially if the subtlety of the message is contingent on individual sortie effectiveness.
Moreover, there are other variables involved in such a communication process; these include whether the adversary receives the entire message, as well whether the adversary misinterprets it because of a cultural misunderstanding. "Hoping" that an adversary will correctly interpret such a message is not an assumption that any competent planner would make. While airpower has made strides towards increasing its ability to hit any target on demand, relying on it to do so in order to send a message should still be viewed as a risky proposition.
It is possible to improve airpower's capability to communicate. Investment in technology that will assist an air commander in a Deliberate Force-style close control campaign will go a long way to increasing a commander's span of control, as well as allowing that commander to conduct such a demanding operation for a lengthy period of time. And it goes without saying that the Air Force will continue its investment in precision-guided munitions that will increase its capability for precision strike in any kind of weather.
National leadership must allow air commanders to employ airpower to either achieve air supremacy over an adversary, or employ it in a manner that eliminates the need for air supremacy, such as with stand-off weapons. As Maxwell Taylor, an influential military and civilian advisor to both President Kennedy and Johnson, reflects in his memoirs about gradualism: "No one, not even the President, has the moral right to put a man on the battlefield or in hostile air space and restrict him from taking all the measures needed for his survival and the execution of his mission."
256
to gain air superiority every day that it went into North Vietnamese airspace. The diversion of assets and energy to suppress the adversary's air defenses means that there will be fewer aircraft available for imposing the physical compellent effect. The other benefit that air supremacy brings to a graduated campaign is the additional compellent, psychological effect that air superiority can impose on an adversary. Chapter Six showed how NATO's achievement of air supremacy in Deliberate Force added significant compellent force to the Bosnian Serb leadership: the impotence that one feels when an adversary's aircraft are flying over you, destroying the things that you value, and knowing that there is nothing that one can do to stop it.
While the theory of gradualism proclaims the importance of coordinating a graduated campaign at the highest levels of government, the historical evidence of Operation Deliberate Force demonstrates that this coordination is not necessary for a successful graduated campaign. However, despite the fact that Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke was able to use the compellent aspects of a graduated air operation to his advantage without coordination with the military instrument does not mean that such coordination will not be necessary or desirable in the future.
In the future, one possibility to ensure that this coordination occurs outside of Washington is for the government to form a joint interagency task force (JIATF) to control and coordinate all the various instruments of a compellent campaign. Currently in use in the counter-narcotics effort, a JIATF is analogous to a joint task force: all federal departments and agencies with a stake in the issue are represented in the organization and one person is appointed to ensure that the actions of all the agencies are properly coordinated. Like the North Atlantic Council did for their military commanders prior to the beginning of Deliberate Force, national decision makers would give the JIATF chief broad guidance regarding political and military objectives and restraints, and then let the JIATF chief and his team decide how best to implement this guidance. This would go a long way to reducing the inertia inherent in a large, clumsy national security apparatus, as well as providing much greater responsiveness to an adversary's countermoves. 257
The manner in which NATO's political and military elements planned and conducted Operation Deliberate Force should be viewed as an archetype for the future.
Political decision-makers should provide their input through the issuance of broad guidelines and constraints to military commanders, including, if possible, the preapproval of target sets as well as the overarching scheme for the campaign. Upon giving this political guidance, political decision-makers should then let the military commanders run the day-to-day execution of the operation. This will ensure that airpower can be employed in its most effective manner and ensure that the aircrews have the best chance of surviving the operation. By giving military commanders the operational latitude to conduct the campaign to its best military effectiveness, political leadership will go a long way towards maximizing the chances for success, especially in a graduated campaign.
Deliberate Force also provides lessons for the command and control of airpower in a graduated air operation. Because of the volatile nature of the region and the potentially disastrous strategic effect of one misplaced bomb, Lt Gen Ryan, the Commander of Allied Air Forces in NATO's Southern Region, kept close control of the air campaign. This successful close control of airpower suggests that it might be possible to control airpower in a manner where subtle messages can be sent through graduated 
257
The graduated use of airpower may be here to stay. Its apparent success in Operation Allied Force, as well as the demands of coalition cohesion, the imperatives of world and U.S. public opinion that demand limited damage to an adversary, or simply the lack of assets may all drive future air operations to be graduated. The graduated application of airpower contradicts the military and airpower theories upon which modern airpower is built. Modern airpower is not designed to send subtle messages; it is a product of almost a century of evolution in the delivery of massed combat power to the decisive point, whether that point be on the battlefield, the adversary's warmaking capacity, or his leadership's decision-making capability.
The lessons of recent applications of graduated airpower suggest that it is possible to successfully use airpower in a graduated manner to compel an adversary. But airpower cannot do this alone. Diplomacy must isolate the adversary. Intelligence must ensure decision-makers have extensive and intensive knowledge of the adversary.
National decision-makers must understand that airpower's nature limits its ability to send subtle or tacit messages to an adversary. Air supremacy has a significant inherent compellent effect that must be exploited. National decision-makers must have the courage to delegate close control of the diplomatic and military efforts to ensure timely responsiveness to the evolving situation, as well as to make sure that the military effort, while graduated, is conducted as effectively as possible. Analysis of Rolling Thunder, the War of Attrition, and Deliberate Force demonstrates that the unique circumstances of each situation will determine whether graduated escalation will be a suitable strategy.
National decision-makers and military leaders must be cognizant of these of these conditions and their impact as they decide when and how to use airpower in a graduated manner. An understanding of these conditions will go a long way to avoiding a repetition of the policy failures of the past. 
16  
16  
Viggo Jakobsen, Western Use of Coercive Diplomacy After the Cold War (New York: St. Martin's, 1998); and Lawrence Freedman, ed., Strategic Coercion: Concepts and Cases.
Viggo Jakobsen, Western Use of Coercive Diplomacy After the Cold War (New York: St. Martin's, 1998); and Lawrence Freedman, ed., Strategic Coercion: Concepts and Cases.
Union. President John F. Kennedy entered office in January 1961 at the height of the Cold War with Soviet Union. The Soviets, under Nikita Khrushchev, repeatedly seized opportunities to escalate international tensions to the brink, such as in 1961 when they erected the Berlin Wall. The Kennedy Administration viewed Khrushchev's objective for these moves as "a display of power sufficient to frighten the West into accepting a relaxation of tensions …" 39 Despite this, both Kennedy and Johnson were greatly concerned about these situations and were determined to avoid a confrontation with the Soviets because they did not know when a conflict might escalate uncontrollably to nuclear war.
Union. President John F. Kennedy entered office in January 1961 at the height of the Cold War with Soviet Union. The Soviets, under Nikita Khrushchev, repeatedly seized opportunities to escalate international tensions to the brink, such as in 1961 when they erected the Berlin Wall. The Kennedy Administration viewed Khrushchev's objective for these moves as "a display of power sufficient to frighten the West into accepting a relaxation of tensions …" 39 Despite this, both Kennedy and Johnson were greatly concerned about these situations and were determined to avoid a confrontation with the Soviets because they did not know when a conflict might escalate uncontrollably to nuclear war.
Washington were presented with a threat that did not place the United States' vital interests at stake, the United States would not launch a massive retaliatory strike. With the spread of revolutionary movements throughout the world as European Defence Publishers, 1986), 35; and Harry G. Summers, On Strategy: The Vietnam War in Context (Carlisle Barracks, Pa.: U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, 1981), 37. 47 Post-Vietnam scholarship is beginning to reveal Beijing's intentions regarding intervention. The Journal of Military History 60, no. 4 (October 1996): 731-62. John Mueller asserts that the threat of Chinese intervention in the Vietnam conflict decreased after 1965 and the beginnings of the Cultural Revolution. Of course, the Cultural Revolution began after Rolling Thunder. See John Mueller, Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War (New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1989), 178. 48 Gaddis, 151.
Washington were presented with a threat that did not place the United States' vital interests at stake, the United States would not launch a massive retaliatory strike. With the spread of revolutionary movements throughout the world as European Defence Publishers, 1986), 35; and Harry G. Summers, On Strategy: The Vietnam War in Context (Carlisle Barracks, Pa.: U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, 1981), 37. 47 Post-Vietnam scholarship is beginning to reveal Beijing's intentions regarding intervention. The Journal of Military History 60, no. 4 (October 1996): 731-62. John Mueller asserts that the threat of Chinese intervention in the Vietnam conflict decreased after 1965 and the beginnings of the Cultural Revolution. Of course, the Cultural Revolution began after Rolling Thunder. See John Mueller, Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War (New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1989), 178. 48 Gaddis, 151.
69  
126 These critiques can be divided into a number of different schools. At the national strategic level: Harry G. Summers in On Strategy: The Vietnam War in Context (Carlisle Barracks, Pa: U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, 1981) asserts that the United States, by emphasizing the insurgency in South Vietnam instead of the North Vietnamese assistance to the insurgency, misread the nature of the war. He concludes that the only way the United States could have won the war was through an all-out invasion of the North. Larry Cable, in Conflict of Myths: The Development of American Counterinsurgency Doctrine and the Vietnam War (New York: New York University Press, 1986) takes a different view. He claims that the United States misread the nature of the insurgency, and as a result, placed too much emphasis on trying to affect the will of the North instead of conducting a good counter-insurgent campaign. For different views on decision-making at the national level, see H.R. McMaster, Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, The Joint Chiefs of Staff, and The Lies That Led to Vietnam (New York: HarperPerennial, 1997); Leslie H. Gelb and Richard K. Betts, The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked (Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1979); Robert S. McNamara, et al. Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy (New York: PublicAffairs, 1999); McNamara with Brian VanDeMark, In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam (New York: Times Books, 1995); Guenter Lewy, America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978); and Robert L.
126 These critiques can be divided into a number of different schools. At the national strategic level: Harry G. Summers in On Strategy: The Vietnam War in Context (Carlisle Barracks, Pa: U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, 1981) asserts that the United States, by emphasizing the insurgency in South Vietnam instead of the North Vietnamese assistance to the insurgency, misread the nature of the war. He concludes that the only way the United States could have won the war was through an all-out invasion of the North. Larry Cable, in Conflict of Myths: The Development of American Counterinsurgency Doctrine and the Vietnam War (New York: New York University Press, 1986) takes a different view. He claims that the United States misread the nature of the insurgency, and as a result, placed too much emphasis on trying to affect the will of the North instead of conducting a good counter-insurgent campaign. For different views on decision-making at the national level, see H.R. McMaster, Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, The Joint Chiefs of Staff, and The Lies That Led to Vietnam (New York: HarperPerennial, 1997); Leslie H. Gelb and Richard K. Betts, The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked (Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1979); Robert S. McNamara, et al. Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy (New York: PublicAffairs, 1999); McNamara with Brian VanDeMark, In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam (New York: Times Books, 1995); Guenter Lewy, America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978); and Robert L.
245  
245  
Unfortunately for the Israelis, gaining air superiority backfired on them. Nasser's realization that Israel's air superiority was a problem that he could not deal with forced him to go to Moscow and secure Soviet military assistance. It was Moscow's patronage of Nasser that foiled Israeli air superiority's chance to impose its compellent effect.
See Carl von Clausewitz, "Critical Analysis," in On War, Michael Howard and Peter Paret ed. and trans. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976), 156-169.
Dr. Harold R. Winton, unpublished lecture notes, SAAS
600, Foundations of Military Theory, Lesson 3,  19 August 1999.   
Herman Kahn, On Escalation: Metaphors and Scenarios (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1965), 12.   
Ibid., 12.   
Ibid.,[37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51] 26.   
George C. Herring, "'Cold Blood': LBJ's Conduct of Limited War in Vietnam," in An American  Dilemma: Vietnam, 1964
-1973
Thomas C. Schelling, e-mail to author, 6 April 2000.
Thomas C.Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1966), 79-80. Emphasis in original. Compellence is one of two concepts within Schelling's construct of coercion, the other is deterrence. Schelling defines deterrence as "to turn aside or discourage through fear; hence, to prevent an action by fear of consequences." Schelling, 71. To put it another way, deterrence attempts to prevent an adversary from taking a specific action; compellence persuades an adversary to take an action that he would not have otherwise taken, usually through the use, or the threat of the use, of force. Another concept closely related to compellence is Schelling's idea of forcible offense, "taking something, occupying a place, or disarming an enemy or a territory by some action that an enemy is unable to block." Schelling, 79. Both compellence and forcible action are offensive in nature, vice deterrence which is defensive. The main difference between the compellence and forcible offense is that in compellence, the goal is to get the adversary to cooperate; in forcible action, the goal is to do whatever you want to the adversary because he does not have the means to prevent it.
Ibid., 3. Emphasis in original.
Peter Viggo Jakobsen, "The Strategy of Coercive Diplomacy: Refining Existing Theory to Post-Cold War Realities," in Strategic Coercion: Concepts and Cases, ed. Lawrence Freedman (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 66.
Schelling, 1.   
Lyndon B. Johnson, as quoted inKearns, 264.   
An excellent biography on McNamara is Deborah Shapley, Promise and Power: The Life and Times of Robert McNamara (Boston: Little, Brown, 1993).
David S. Fadok, John Boyd and John Warden: Air Power's Quest for Strategic Paralysis (Maxwell AFB, Ala.: Air University Press, 1995), 10. This is reprinted almost in its entirety in Paths to Heaven: The Evolution of Airpower Theory.
Ibid., 48. Fadok's work, originally  his School of Advanced Airpower Studies thesis, is a superlative study of the ideas of Boyd and Warden.
This was because the F-86's full power flight controls that gave Sabre pilots the ability to shift from one maneuver to another quicker than their MiG-15 opponents.
While the Air Force has been slow to incorporate the OODA Loop into its operational doctrine, the Army and Marine Corps have embraced it. See FM 100-5, Operations, June 1993.
Fadok, 14. Emphasis in original.   
The Army uses the OODA loop's idea of decreasing one's decision-making cycle by emphasizing training and application of the Military Decision Making Process.
Fadok, 15. Emphasis in original.   
Ibid., 15.   
John A. Warden, III, "The Enemy as a System," Airpower Journal 9, no. 1 (Spring 1995), 44-49.
Ibid., 49.   
Ibid., 51-2. However, Warden believes that attacking the fielded forces is not the most efficient or effective way to coerce an adversary's leadership.
Ibid., 54.   
Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 1, Air Force Basic Doctrine, September 1997, 12. Emphasis added. See also FM 100-5, 2-4 -2-6; and Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of American Military Strategy and Policy (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1973), 212-4. For a theoretical derivation of the Principles of War, see J. F. C. Fuller, The Foundations of the Science ofWar  (London: Hutchinson & Co., 1926, reprint, Fort Leavenworth, Kans.: U.S. Army Command and General  Staff College Press, 1993).
This assumes that the decision maker is rational actor as explained by Graham T. Allison's Model I view of decision making. See Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis(New  York: HarperCollins, 1971). As later chapters will show, this is not necessarily a safe assumption to make.
This explanation of the benefits and costs of compliance was extrapolated from Thomas W. Milburn's discussion of deterrence. The cost-benefit analysis is similar for coercion as it would be for deterrence, i.e. deciding which option is the most beneficial.See Milburn, "What Constitutes Effective Deterrence?"  Journal of Conflict Resolution 3, no. 2 (1959): 138-145.   
Stephen T. Hosmer, Psychological Effects of U.S. Air Operations in Four Wars, 1941-1991: Lessons  for U.S. Commanders (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 1996), xvii.
See Irving L.Janis, "Fear and Emotional Adaptation," in Air War and Emotional Stress: Psychological  Studies of Bombing and Civilian Defense (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1951): 98-125.   
Robert Jervis, Perceptions and Misperceptions in International Politics (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton  University Press, 1976), 187-193.  
The term hard-knock signifies the quick, overwhelming attack against an adversary instead of the graduated approach that Schelling advocates.
Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1966), 3.
Ibid., 
Group Captain A. P. N. Lambert, RAF, The Psychology of Air Power (London: Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies, 1995), 85-93.
Drew, 27.   
Thies, 262.   
The different factions within the Politburo only differed about the means of reunification, not the ends.
Thies, 262.   
Graham T. Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis (New York: HarperCollins, 1971).
Maxwell D. Taylor, Swords and Plowshares (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc, 1972), 401.
Ibid., 319.   
McNamara, et al., Argument Without End, 185.   
Gelb and Betts, 139.   
Thies, 300. Emphasis added.   
Ibid., 300.   
Ibid.,[300][301][302][303][304][305][306][307] 
"Evolution of the War: The Rolling Thunder Program Begins," in UnitedStates-Vietnam Relations,  1945
-1967
Jack Broughton, Thud Ridge (Philadelphia, Pa.: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1969), 79.
Central Intelligence Agency, World FactBook 1999; on-line, Internet, 6 March 2000, available from http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/index.html.
John F. Kennedy, as quoted in McMaster, 28.   
Lyndon B. Johnson, as quoted in Doris Kearns, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream (NewYork: Harper & Roe, 1976), 252.
McMaster describes McNamara and his civilian staff's relationship with, and distrust of, the military. See especiallyMcMaster,[24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40][41] 
Thies, 
Ibid., 311.   
Shlaim and Tanter,. Almost all Cabinet members later denied that the fall of Nasser's regime was an objective, but at least one official did assert that this was a prevalent idea in the Cabinet at the time.
 121.   
Airpower has yet to cause the fall of a government.
Shlaim and Tanter,[492][493][494] Although Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir later denied that the Cabinet discussed possibility of Soviet intervention, Shlaim and Tanter assert that the Cabinet did consider this possibility. They conclude that the government's discussion of this issue was "cursory, uninformed, and speculative."Shlaim and Tanter, 495.   
Shlaim and Tanter, 496.   
Ibid., 498.   
Ibid., 499.   
Ibid., 500.   
Ibid., 502.   
 Dupuy, 366; Shlaim and Tanter, 505.   
Dupuy, 369.  Dupuy comments that while precise information regarding Egyptian losses is not available, Israeli claims of 15,000 Egyptians killed are at least three times too high.
Dupuy, 369.   
Mueller, 
Ibid., 
George Joulwan, as cited in Tim Ripley, Operation Deliberate Force: The UN and NATO Campaign in Bosnia 1995 (Lancaster, U.K.: Center for Defence and International Security Studies, 1999), 161. Emphasis added.
Robert C. Owen, "Summary," in Deliberate Force, 480.   
Ripley, 
Ripley, 165.   
Ripley, 268.   
Ibid., 
Ibid.,. Not only were the regional commanders unable to communicate with each other, the attack's effects prevented General Mladic from communicating with these commanders.
Adm Leighton Smith, "Further Comments on 2 nd Draft of BACS," fax transmission, 2 August 1997, as cited in Owen, 492.
AVM Tony Mason, Air Power: A Centennial Appraisal (London: Brassey's 1994), 177. Mason cites responsiveness and speed as airpower's two most important characteristics that the dual-key authorization process negated. However, this author does not see any significant difference between the two in this instance.
The Contact Group, consisting of the U.S., Britain, France, Germany, and Russia, was formed in 1994 to head up the effort to achieve a negotiated settlement of the conflict.
Owen, 500-1.
Ibid., 495. This lack of communication did have an effect on how Holbrooke and Ryan conducted their various portions of the campaign. Ryan, concerned that the politicians would end Deliberate Force before he could achieve the military objectives, sought to strike targets as quickly as possible, even at the risk of running out of targets. Conversely, Holbrooke was worried that NATO would run out of targets before he could bring the Bosnian Serbs to the negotiating table. As a result, Holbrooke pushed both Milosevic and the Bosnian Serbs to come to terms before the targets ran out. Owen, 502-5. Since Holbrooke was successful in bringing all sides to Dayton, the discussion is academic, but it does illustrate the importance of communication between the diplomatic and military communities.
Lt Col Richard L. Sargent, "Aircraft Used in Deliberate Force," in Deliberate Force, 207.
Ambassador Christopher Hill, as cited in Owen, 498.
Mueller, 22. Serbia had been suffering the effects of UN-imposed economic sanctions for two years for their support of the Bosnian Serbs. It was the pressure of the sanctions and his desire to have them lifted that persuaded Serbian President Milosevic to break ties with the Bosnian Serbs. The UN eased some of the sanctions a short time after Belgrade broke ties with Pale.
See Clausewitz's views on this subject in "Critical Analysis," in On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976), 156-169.
This tenet states that airpower should be centrally controlled to ensure that it is used to its greatest effect, but that the details of the execution should be decentralized to the greatest extent possible to allow lowerlevel commanders the greatest flexibility to execute the mission. See Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 1, Air Force BasicDoctrine, September 1997, 23.   
Adm Leighton Smith, "Further Comments on 2 nd Draft of BACS," fax transmission, 2 August 1997, as cited in Robert C. Owen, "Summary," in Deliberate Force, 492.
 149.   
This assumes, of course, that an air commander has the assets to do this and that there are not other more pressing targets that need to be struck.
Owen, 
Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1966), 2.
Maxwell D. Taylor, Swords and Plowshares (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc, 1972), 404.
Wallace J.Thies, When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the Vietnam Conflict, 1964- 1968 (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1980), 301-306.   
Huggins' first assignment was to Moody AFB as a squadron intelligence officer; he deployed with his unit to the 
Arabian Peninsula during Operations Desert Shield and Storm
Eastern European Studies at the University of Kansas
Air Force
Foreign Area Specialist Program
Major Huggins
National Air Intelligence Center's Directorate of Intelligence Analysis
White House Situation Room, National Security Council
Army's Command and General Staff College
Air Force's School of Advanced Airpower Studies
Lt Col Brian Vickers
Air Force's Foreign Area Work Unit Number Performing Organization Name(s)
Address(es) Performing Organization Number(s) Sponsoring/Monitoring Agency Name(s)
Address(es) Monitoring Agency Acronym Monitoring Agency Report Number(s)
In a variety of ways, gradualism contributed to a prolongation of the war and gave time not only for more men to lose their lives but also for the national patience to wear thin, the anti-war movement to gain momentum, and hostile propaganda to make inroads at home and abroad.
Nations. The operation grew and acquired the name of Operation Deny Flight on 12 April 1993 in response to United Nations Security Council Resolution 816, which authorized NATO to intercept and shoot down any aircraft violating the no-fly zone. Deny Flight's scope increased again on 22 July 1993, when the UN authorized NATO to fly close air support (CAS) missions to protect UN peacekeeping troops. One month later, the UN authorized NATO to plan non-CAS strikes with the hope of deterring, and if necessary retaliating against, attacks on UN peacekeepers. 
212
213
1
The central reason for this lack of NATO air activity was the "dual-key" approval process that was required before any kind of weapons discharge could occur. Analogous to an ICBM missile crew who must both consent to the release of nuclear weapons, the dual-key approval process ensured that representatives from both the United Nations and NATO approved the use of air strikes in a particular situation. There were two reasons for this. UN Secretary General 
212 Mueller,
[19]
[20]
The War of Attrition and Deliberate Force yield insights into the best way to conduct a graduated air campaign, as well as significant challenges to the conventional wisdom regarding the graduated use of airpower and the theory of gradualism. NATO quickly gained air supremacy over the Bosnian Serbs in Deliberate Force. In all likelihood, this enabled NATO to impose on their adversaries the additional compellent effect of impotence in the face of airpower; this in turn suggests a practical way to help achieve a greater compellent effect through the military instrument for which the theory does not account. The story for Israel is different. The Israelis were able to establish air superiority over Egypt. However, it was Nasser's reaction to this air superiority, a problem that he could not solve by himself, that led him to turn to the Soviets for assistance. Once the Soviets became engaged in the conflict, Tel Aviv ceded control of the air on the western side of the Suez Canal to avoid conflict with the Sovietseffectively losing air superiority. Finally, in Deliberate Force, NATO demonstrated that airpower can operate successfully in a politically risky, constrained environment. NATO's political decision-makers provided military commanders with broad political constraints within which they had to operate. Within these constraints, however, the NAC granted the military considerable operational freedom to conduct the air operation using airpower to its fullest effect. Part of this included their preapproving target sets and authorizing strikes against any part of the Bosnian Serb air defense system.
Both the War of Attrition and Deny Flight/Deliberate Force are a rich source of evidence for reassessing gradualism as a strategic concept. It is to this analysis that this paper turns to next.
In a democratic country it is the duty of soldiers to know how to wage war in any of its forms… General Sir Frank Kitson, Low Intensity Operations, 1971   If there is one attitude more dangerous than to assume that a future war will be just like the last one, it is to imagine that it will be so utterly different that we can afford to ignore all the lessons of the last one. 