# ID: 42acc3c750914332aa14b241fb178ce0
# Title: German-American security relations within NATO and the UN
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1994.0
# Fulltext:
The war in the Balkans suggests that despite the end of the East-West conflict, general instability casts a pall of doubt over hopes of enduring peace in Europe and beyond. As one sees in South East Europe, post-communism creates nationalism which can lead to war. The former Yugoslavia is the test case. In East Central Europe, where former Soviet satellites are facing a similar power vacuum and Russian imperialism celebrates its possible rebirth, war could be the consequence if NATO is not able and willing to provide security and stability in this region. This thesis investigates the factors which define the current crisis in NATO and trawsatlantic security relations. This in turn brings up the question of structural realities in German-American strategic interaction. This thesis examines how lasting internal conflicts gain new explosive force today and presents conclusions regarding the survival of NATO. In the end, the thesis suggests that NATO and the tantamount security partnership with the United States is vitally significant for Germany and for stability in Europe. This maxim applies to the past and it holds equally true for the future.
The future challenges for transatlantic partnership will take place outside old NATO boundaries. Former clearly defined limits of regional and global perspectives, as well as the limits of the Alliance, thus become ambiguous. For the United States this means that in the future it is likely to become involved in a regional crisis. For united Germany it means that the Germans can no longer think only in terms of security guarantees for its NATO allies. Thus the most difficult future structural problem in German-American security relations will revolve around the share of responsibility for collective security outside its own regional interests that Germany will be willing to accept. The share of responsibility that Germany will be able to cope with will determine whether German-American security relations have a positive future.
The latest challenges for the United States and united Germany within the framework of NATO and UN have also demonstrated that the structural realities in their security relations have gained more explosive force, because there is no longer a common threat. Deterrence in the nuclear age was in American hands. The new deterrence will not be controlled by the United States alone. Clear goals and a solid political will stood behind the old deterrence. There will not be a new deterrence as long as there is an absence of such clear goals and a solid political will. ix The war in former Yugoslavia and the Persian Gulf War indicate in their own respective ways that the United States must continue to provide world leadership. The Gulf War showed an example of a strong American leadership role from which the Europeans could benefit for their own security purposes. The present crisis in the Balkans demonstrates that Europe will continue to rely on security and political ties with the United States, despite efforts to create common foreign and security policies within the European Union.
The case studies also suggest that since the end of the Cold War, European crises do not appear to involve United States' interests. However, a world power cannot long neglect crises in the international community. The absense of American leadership in former Yugoslavia may cause problems in the years to come because the example Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky or others like him take from Bosnia is that the Americans will act more with rhetoric than with force unless their direct security interests are concerned.
The Europe of the future will need the leadership of the sole remaining world power: the United States of America. Without the leadership of an overseas and non-partisan power, NATO would lose its ability to act, because the West European partners' national interests would get in the way. Europe would then lose the only functioning security system capable of filling the existing power vacuum in East Central Europe. Given recent events in Russia, the absence of the United States and NATO would again make Europe vulnerable to political developments that might result in a "Second Cold War."
x The future of NATO will especially depend on the future of German-American relations. The United States needs a dependable European "partner in leadership" who will play an active role in European unity and at the same time serve as a bridge to Eastern Europe. Germany is the only country that can do this. Gernwny, on the other hand, needs America not only because Germany as a non-nuclear power is dependent on US nuclear security guarantees, but because only through this German-American partnership can the fears of the political and economic power of a unified Germany, particularly in East Central Europe, be alleviated.
The war in the Balkans suggests that despite the end of the East-West conflict, general instability casts a pall of doubt over hopes of enduring peace in Europe and beyond. NATO may have won the Cold War against the Warsaw Pact, but the possibility of a wider war in South East Europe challenges the alliance daily. If wars of aggression return to Europe while the leaders of NATO look the other way, then such chaos will not only undermine a new security structure for Europe, but also global insecurity and instability will be the consequences.
The war in the Balkans is the result of a power vacuum in Europe which emerged after the end of the Cold War. As one see in South East Europe, post-communism creates nationalism, which can lead to war. The former Yugoslavia is the test case. In East Central Europe, where former Soviet satellites face a similar power vacuum and the possible rebirth of Russian imperialism, war could be the consequence if NATO is not able or willing to provide security and stability in this region.
For united Germany, the key to security has always been the NATO alliance and partnership with the United States. Nonetheless, the successful history of NATO and German-American security relations is also marked by repeated phases of internal crises 1J and conflicts. Such conflicts create the strategic reality. As the example in the Balkans dramatically shows, the final test of a security alliance is war.
This thesis investigates the factors that define the current crisis in transatlantic security relations. This analysis in turn brings up the question of structural realities in German-American strategic interaction. This thesis examines how lasting internal conflicts gain new immediacy today and it presents conclusions regarding the survival of NATO. Finally, the thesis suggests that NATO and the paramount security partnership with the United States is vitally significant for Germany and for stability in Europe. This is the maxim illustrated by the past, and it holds equally true for the future.
NATO must restore deterrence to thwart the use of force. The aggressors of tomorrow must realize that they have no chance of reaching their goals with violence.
This reality requires might and decisiveness in NATO actions. This is made more difficult by the fact that, after expending tremendous energy during previous periods of confrontation, Europe and the Western World have directed their energies to internal affairs. People forget that esprit de corps, solidarity, and the readiness to shed blood when necessary have been the historical foundations of peace in Europe.  derivations. These problem areas make up the structural realities in German-American security relations. Their effects on these relations up until the end of the Cold War will be examined in Chapter II of this thesis.
The illustration in Figure 
1
World 
(New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970)
domestic political battle of these two deeply-rooted trends determines the kind and extent of foreign political engagements, which in turn affects Europe's security.
Unlike the US which is protected by oceans, the continent of Europe lies as an appendix on the western periphery of the greater Eurasian land mass. During the Cold
War, the superior conventional potential of the Warsaw Pact posed a direct threat to Europe. Europe was also confr'onted with the Eurostrategic nuclear threat of the former Soviet Union.
Invulnerable to direct conventional attacks against their own country, America considered its greatest risk to be that conventional disparities in Europe would push the US into nuclear confiontation with the former Soviet Union. In the case of conflict, this would have meant risking America's existence for the sake of protecting Europe.
Because of this perception, the Americans were on the one hand interested in minimizing their own risk through nuclear deterrence and arms control measures, something of which the West Europeans were always suspicious. On the other hand, America, in exercising its leadership, insisted that the alliance partners in Europe who were responsible for conventional defense take on a greater defense role.
The goal of being relieved of world power status became an inherent source of conflict resulting from latent American isolationism after the US had entered the "entangling alliance" with Western Europe at the beginning of the Cold War. The source of conflict was further intensified by (what the Americans considered) the Europeans' unwillingness tc -,. more for their own defense. American disappointment over this European attitude toward burden-sharing has characterized transatlantic security relations since the 1950&s.
The burden-sharing conflict and concern about American willingness to genuinely share the risks when talking about nuclear guarantees for Europe caused the Europeans to further unite. This is especially true in the case of two former arch enemies, Germany and France. Besides seeking a solid partnership with the US, Germany was also seeking reconciliation with France. This relationship with its neighbor on the other side of the Rhine developed into a constant dilemma for Germany. The cause of this dilemma was the French demand since 1958 that it preserve its unrestricted national independence.
The French figured that this demand would rule out military integration of their troops into the alliance, thus giving rise to a conflict with the United States. From then on the United States followed the German-French dialog with great interest. The United States was concerned that the Federal Republic might also turn its back on NATO.
The Federal Republic was especially at risk because of its boundary position between two different political systems and its geopolitically key position in Central
Europe. The most important principle of German security became mulitnationality, with eight partners already enjoying peace in the NATO alliance. A singularization of the Federal Republic was to be avoided at all costs. Because West Germany could not change its geostrategic position in Europe on its own, it wanted to at least mitigate negative consequences of its exposed position. Germany wanted the most tension-free relationship between East and West because any tension between NATO and the Warsaw Pact would put pressure on the sensitive relations between the two Germanies.
Dismantling sources of conflict and creating a trust-building environment thus became the driving force for West German Ostpolitik
Another structural problem came in the form of the correlation of security policy developments in and out of NATO territory. This is how the question of the alliance's limits came up. One can see that today's out of area discussion is not a new problem, particularly in Germany. Since the Korean War, this topic has led to tensions because the United States, following a maritime strategy, incorporated the political and strategic developments of the entire world in its foreign and security policies. Meanwhile, the Europeans concentrated on more of a regional approach, which essentially led to conflicts.
With the end of the Cold War and collapse of former totalitarian regimes, the political situation and threats to peace in Europe have changed considerably. After the breakup of the Soviet Union, the world learned that violently suppressed ethnic tensions are still highly dangerous; the outbreak of several regional armed conflicts in Southeastern Europe demonstrate this. Chapter III will examine three case studies that demonstrate how German-American security relations have further developed under the conditions of the post-Cold War era. These case studies will demonstrate that the structural realities in this relationship still remain valid, although they have another valence. This also applies to German-American strategic interactions under UN auspices.
Chapter IV deals with the future of NATO and the future of Europe. The chapter will suggest that a successful future for the transatlantic partnership (which must include the newly independent states in East Central Europe) will be guaranteed only if the structural realities in all important areas, especially in the area of burden-sharing, comply with the framework of new security policy. Reunited Germany has a key role to play in the formation and execution of such policy. The thesis will end with Chapter V, which offers suggestions on what such compliance should entail.
ff. FROM POTSDAM TO 
MAINZ (1945
MAINZ ( -1969))
Post-World War H development of German-American security relations may be divided into two stages which, one could argue, accurately represent the psychological development of Germany's international role. These stages are associated with two places in Germany: 
Potsdam (1945)
Mainz (1989)
(Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press: 1993)
3
The United States and the Federal Republic have always been firm friends and allies; but today we share an added role: partners in leadership. Of course leadership has a constant companion: responsibility. And our responsibility is to look ahead and grasp the promise of the future.
It is a fact that Germany owes tremendous thanks to the United States for its unmistakable, guiding support in attaining reunification. However, the long road from Potsdam to Mainz was also a road pockmarked with German-American crises. These crises illuminate the character of German-American security relations, a subject which is poorly understood in the United States.
A. FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE COLD WAR TO THE KOREAN WAR 
(1944/46-1950)
The founding of NATO in April 1949 resulted from the Soviet Union posing a threat to Western Europe. Though deterring a Soviet attack was NATO's principal interest, it was not its only concern. As Lord Ismay, NATO's first general secretary put it, the alliance had three goals: "To keep the Soviets out, the Americans in and the Germans down.s" Just as everyone agreed on plans in Yalta in 1945 to keep Germany down after the war, it was also clear that in talks between Roosevelt and Stalin, the last thing on America's mind was a future military presence and military alliance in Europe. Rather, the United States wanted to have all American troops out of Europe within two years of the war's end.' In the United States at that time, public pressure was mounting for rapid
Quoted in Feldmeyer, K., "Die NATO und Deutschland nach dem Ende des Ost-West-Gegensatzes,w in Zitelmann, R., Weissmann, K., and Grossheim, M. (eds.), Westbindung (Frankfurt/M.: Propylien, 1993), p. 460. See Joffe, J., "Nach der Revolution: Die amerikanischen Interessen in Europa in den demobilization. Everything indicated that for the second time in this century, an American withdrawal from Europe would leave behind a power vacuum that would, in turn, result in instability and insecurity in the face of looming Soviet expansion.! At the time, United States' military doctrine specified that extensive conventional forces would not be necessary to protect American interests; rather, the US could depend on military bases in both the Atlantic and Pacific theaters. Herein ties the initial crisis of the Atlantic partnership with the United States: ever-important sea and air dominance in the leading western power's strategic thinking and the strong belief at that time in the power of deterrence by America's nuclear monopoly.' With solid trust in the atom bomb's power of deterrence, Washington was set to redeploy American troops from overseas to America after Japan was defeated. The United States military, which during the war had grown to 12 million soldiers, was reduced to 1.6 million. The US forces in Germany were reduced just as drastically: from 2.6 million to 103,749 soldiers.9
The outbreak of the East-West conflict in 1947, especially the events in Greece and Turkey," changed the United States' foreign affairs plans. The Western powers had neunziger Jahren," in Mahnke, K. (ed.), Amerikaner in Deutschland-Grundlagen und Bedingungen der transatlantischen Sicherheit (Bonn: Bouvier 1991), p. 182.
See Nelson, K.L., Victors Divided-America and the Allies in 
Germany, 1918
-1923
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975)
See Sherry, M.S., Preparing for the Next War-American Plans for Postwar 
Defense, 1941
-45 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977)
See Haftendom, H., "Historische Entwicklung, politische Motive und rechtliche Grundlagen," in 
Mahnke, 1991, p. 140.
For the first time in United States history, the US wanted to continue its military presence in EuropW' in order to contain Soviet expansion, .rather than follow through with the planned withdrawal from Europe at the end of World War II. This meant a change of direction in American policy, even if only half-heartedly implemented.
National leaders had always hoped that America's skeletal navy, coastal fortifications, and latent strength would discourage an attack on the homeland. But the nation's feeling of security before World War II arose primarily from its sense of geographical remoteness from the cockpits of conflict, not from confidence in its modest professional military forces. The nation usually built a large war machine only after hostilities began, and then in order to punish aggression or pursue other national goals rather than to deter an attack."
The United States had already fought Germany on the European continent once in this century, but following World War I, American troops only remained five years as part of the Allied occupation forces in the German Rhineland. The decision to be a part of this occupation force was justified (the presence of American troops served as a stabilizing device, appeasing the Germans and restraining the French), but the withdrawal of the last American troops in January 1923 was difficult to accept. The French invasion of the Ruhr and increasingly tense Franco-German relations in that year are directly 10 See Nogee, J. 
L., and Donaldson, R.H., 1992, pp. 92-93.
After the American Senate had rejected the Versailles Treaty, the United States government maintained a position of decided aloofness from European disputes. In the separate peace treaty that was concluded between Germany and America in August 1921, Washington disclaimed all responsibility for the political and military provisions of the Versailles peace settlement and their execution. it was understandable that the US government remained in the background when, in 1923, tensions in Germany reached a new high and led to the French occupation of the Ruhr. America's only reaction was to withdraw the last American troops of occupation that had remained in the Rhineland. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes thought that a 'bit of chaos' would not hurt the Europeans but might bring them to their senses. ' 3   Once again Europe was on its own. The United States left the Europeans to take care of their own business until 1941. But a "bit of chaos" eventually was enough to convert Europe into a region of insecurity and instability, which finally led to war. The Americans had wanted to withdraw from Europe because most European countries did not seem to be morally-suitable allies. There was no way even the Americans could know that this Europe, left to its own devices, would turn out to be an uncontrollable disaster for the next three decades. Even if the United States strongly considered it its duty to contain an increasingly aggressive, expansive-minded and powerful Soviet Union," 5 the US still wanted to eventually withdraw from Europe for the long term. In order to avoid leaving a power vacuum, and to keep Germany from losing ties to the West, the British initiative toward the Brussels Treaty' 6 was finally supported by the US in 1948. A year later, in April 1949, the United States and its European allies signed the North Atlantic Treaty.
With its military contribution for a common defense plan of NATO in Europe, the US followed the principles of an unchanged dominating maritime (air) strategy: the US was determined to supply its strategic air force and navy, Great Britain and France were to be responsible for a tactical air force and, finally, continental Europe would be  
1948
-1956
," in Maier, K.A. and Wiggershaus, N. (eds.), Das Nordatlantische Bijndnis 1948
-1956
, Munich, 1993, pp. 18-21. 16
Europas 1948-1950. Eine Darstellung aus amerikanischer Sicht," in Wiggerhaus, N. and
Foerster, R.G. (eds.)
Sicherheitsgemeinschaft 1948
-1950, Gemeinsame
Rhein, 1988, pp. 37-56.
See Haftendorn, 1991
See Greiner, C., "Militarstrategische Konzeptionen ftr die Verteidigung 
Westeuropas 1948 bis 1950," in Wiggershaus, N. and
Foerster, R.G.(eds.)
Sicherheitsgemeinschaft 1948
Sicherheitsgemeinschaft -1950
After the Soviets tested their first atom bombs in August of 1949, the American strategy of nuclear deterrence and its defense plans for Europe were questioned. The success of Soviet nuclear technology represented a nuclear threat alongside the conventional; furthermore, the Soviets were in the process of significantly expanding their long-range bomber fleets. Instead of concentrating more on its conventional The ensuing document, NSC68, recommended a major expansion of both general-war and limited-war capabilities and the strengthening of America's allies; a special point was made of allied weakness in Europe. The report estimated that the danger of a major Soviet attack could become acute by 1954, when it was expected that the Soviets would have built up a sizable strategic nuclear force. 2 '
The NSC-68 analysis dictated that the West depart from pure atomic deterrence in favor of a conventional strategy.' The mandatory inclusion of Western Europe in the more narrow security plans of the United States had to include the Federal Republic of Germany. The rearmament of West Germany was now only a matter of time.
Germany occupied the front line position throughout the Cold War. Had the Soviet Union chosen to risk armed conflict in Europe, Germany would have been the first country to be overrun, and this is perhaps the first geopolitical reality that the Germans 20 Graebner, N.A. (ed.), The National Security. Its 
Theory and
Fiactice, 1945-1960 (New York:
24
Today, one may consider the area east of the rivers Oder and Neisse to be no man's land.
Later, this point will be further explored.
From 1949 on, Adenauer wanted West Germany to become a full member in NATO and be responsible for its share of alliance duties. In return, he wanted the Federal 23 See Wiggerhaus, N., "Zur Frage der Planung fOr die verdeckte Aufstellung westdeutscher Verteidigungskrlfte in Konrad Adenauers sicherheitspolitischer Konzeption 1950," in Militargeschichte seit 1945: Dienstgruppen und westdeutscher Verteidigungsbeitrag, pp. 
15-16.
The outbreak of the Korean War in June of 1950 caused the United States to drastically alter its policy toward Europe. The surprise attack on South Korea served as a indicator to the world, especially Western Europe, of future Soviet policy. Meanwhile, Western Europe was starting to have more and more doubts about the effectiveness of American nuclear deterrence. The Western Europeans seriously questioned America's strategy of balancing out the Red Army's superiority through nuclear deterrence. On the other side of the Atlantic, America was ready to take energetic measures with allies to improve the West's defense capabilities."' However, sharp increase in the Europeans' defense contributions did not occur because of the Europeans' weak economic power; 25 
See Rautenberg, H.j., and Wiggershaus, N., Die Himmeroder Denkschrift vom Oktober 1950 (Karlsruhe: G. Braun, 2nd ed.,1 985)
See 
Greiner, C., "Militarstrategische Konzeptionen fOr die Verteidigung West Europas 1948
bis 1950," pp. 278-282.
Thus Washington decided to send four additional divisions to Europe and appointed General Dwight D. Eisenhower to be commander-in-chief of NATO troops in Europe (SACEUR). But deploying these troops was perceived to be support for the short term, gradually allowing the Europeans to become responsible for their own defense.
Deploying these six divisions represented the clearest, strongest commitment the United States ever had toward Europe. As far as the Americans were concerned, however, this link would not be permanent. In contrast, the European partners' main objective was making the commitment a permanent one, even at that early point in time. The principal function of such a commitment in the early 1950's was "duel containment" of both the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany.'
This became all the more significant when West German defense contributions became America's prerequisite for sending more troops to Europe. So the Federal Republic had benefited from the Korean War in that it was allowed to rearm itself, although rearmament did not occur until 1955.
For the young Federal Republic of Germany, the presence of American troops and resulting guarantee against the Soviet threat meant political stability and a gradual introduction into the international community. The American military presence became an important political factor in Europe and the most important structural reality in German-American security relations.  
NATO von 1949
bis 1958
,: in Maier, K.A. and Wiggershaus, N. (eds.), Das Nordatlantische Bundnis 1949
-1956
, Munich, 1993, p. 154
See Greiner,C., 1993, pp. 154-159. 34
Bondnis 1949
-1956
, Munich, 1993, p. 279.
Into NATO 
(1952)
(1953)
(1954)
(1955)
There was no way that the new tip wire conception could possibly have been in the interests of the West Germans, however. Because the state of conventional defense necessitated nuclear weapons deterrence, a nuclear confrontation would have meant a catastrophe on German soil. The Germans, therefore, fought even more for the conventional defense option and the forward defense associated with it. This took place in the hope that every small-scale clash would not eventually develop into a nuclear confrontation. The United States' conventional reduction plans and technical weapons strategies were not the only reasons that forward defense failed in the 19501s. The concept was never fully implemented. The British reduced their forces on the continent in order to pay for nuclear armament. The French deployed four divisions to Algeria in 1954."' The number of divisions in Central Europe sank to 18 in 1956, compared with the 54 that had been planned for this time period in 1950. German contribution remained the heart of forward strategy, as far as the United States was concerned. America had taken special note of West Germany's defense efforts even before official entry into NATO. This American consideration of the German defense contribution also counts as one of the structural foundations of American interests in Europe and continues to be significant to this day.
West German defense contributions were not concretely defined until 1955, despite the fact that America had openly demanded that West Germany be rearmed and allowed to enter NATO. Before the treaty concerning Germany's admittance into NATO could be signed in the fall of 1954, and rendered effective in May of 1955, enormous domestic and foreign political opposition had to be overcome. The interior opposition revolved around the question of whether associating with the West or embracing neutrality would be more effective in attaining reunification with Soviet-occupied East Germany." Strong political opposition in France represented the external opposition that had to be overcome.
In the first ten years after the war, France was afraid of a new German threat.
Therefore, the European Defense Community (EDC), which was strongly influenced by the French, initially tried to make a German military reemergence possible only if under French control."' France took seriously the threat of an American withdrawal out of Europe in the event that the Europeans were unsuccessful in agreeing to common defense efforts." 9 The failure of a common European defense plan in 1954 strengthened the 1950 American argument for rearming Germany under American auspices, but it especially weakened the European idea. Solving the German question was no longer to be a European problem, rather an Atlantic one.
The Paris 
Treaties (1954)
Wehrverfassung 1954
bis 1956
," in Anf.inge westdeutscher Sicherheitspolitik 1945
-1956, Band 3
Association with the West for a united Germany was not acceptable to the Soviet Union in 1955; see Rupieper, H.J., Der besetzte Verbundete. Die amerikanische 
Deutschlandpolitik 1949
-1955
(Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1991)
See Militirgeschichtliches Forschungsamt (ed.), Militargeschichte seit 1945: Die Europaische Verteidigungsgemeinschaft-Stand und Probleme der Forschung (Boppard am Rhein: Boldt, 1985), p. 2.
Europe that the Federal Republic wanted. However, the Paris Treaties confirmed the Federal Republic's association with the West, the end of occupied rule, and West Germany's entry into the Western European Union (WEU), and later into NATO. The development of permanent institutions also included the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), which became the model for future cooperation between Germany and France, and the first steps toward the development of a European Union.'
The Germans, as well as the Americans, wanted Germany to be treated as an equal among equals but French/European demands dictated that Germany receive a discriminatory special status. Thus the EDC treaty was adhered to, which had a provision stipulating that West Germany not manufacture or possess atomic, chemical, or biological weapons.
To conclude, the United States, by its presence in West Germany, inherited the duty of ensuring that the Federal Republic could not engage in any suspicious military/political adventures. When the Federal Republic of Germany was founded, the United States became the protector power for Germany; after Germany's entry into NATO, this was backed by a treaty. The American troops served as a trip wire foi triggering a nuclear retaliation in case of a Soviet attack. The US took special care to link West European defense with that of North America. This is how a nuclear unequipped West Germany finally came under the nuclear umbrella of the United States. All in all, Germany's admittance into NATO meant that the geopolitical heart of Western Europe  
(1952)
(1953)
(1954)
(1955)
When, beyond the alliance's limits and borders, France became more caught up in Algeria and the British became involved in Cyprus, the German Bundeswehr inherited a key role in Central European defense. In the eyes of the allies, however, it seemed as though the Germans wanted to postpone the rearmament program. In 1955, for example, 605,000 troops were promised by 1958, but the Germans wanted only 323,000 redeployed by 1961. The Germans, however, assured the United States that 323,000 troops would not be the maximum number of troops.41 The rearmament of German forces 41 See Greiner, "Die militarische Eingliederung der Bundesrepublik Deutschland in die WEU was delayed in all areas. The causes for this included not only a tight budget,• but continuous domestic political disputes involving a large sector of society which was and had always been against German rearmament. This was important for the Adenauer administration during the uncertain 1957 parliamentary elections. During NATO's Annual Review Conference, the German government, and especially the German Minister of Defense, Franz Josef Strauss, had to take sharp criticism from the Americans concerning insufficient financial efforts to rebuild the German military. 43   Further American, and also British, criticism came as a result of Germany's sluggishness in paying the costs for stationing Allied troops on German soil. The Americans increasingly criticized the Germans for not carrying their fair share of the financial and military burder• to defend the Atlantic community." This kind of accusation, associated with the factor of burden-sharing, would become the most important structural reality throughout NATO's history and German-American security relations.
The question of German force contribution to NATO remains a major concern in US-German security relations. The United States fears that today Germany could carry und die 
NATO 1954
NATO -1957," pp. 750-751. 42 ," pp. 750-751. 42
Verteidigungsbeitrag, 1954
bis 1957," in MiliiArgeschichtliches Forschungsamt (ed.)
Volume 4, Herford 1983
, p. 133. See Thol, B., "Der Beitritt der Bundesrepublik Deutschland zur WEU und NATO im Spannungsfeld von Blockbildung und Entspannung (1954
-1956)
Sicherheitspolitik 1945
-1956
, Band 3, Munich, 1993, pp. 204-205.
In the mid-1950's, increasing stagnation of the alliance's policies were not only evident in Germany's clumsiness in rearming or in France's and Great Britain's activities in the Mediterranean fringes of alliance territory. The situation became more serious when the United States, in light of President Eisenhower's doctrine of a New Look, began to openly discuss curtailing its conventional activities in Europe. According to a New York Times article on 
July 13, 1956
Radford, caught the West German government off guard. 48  
See 
Richardson, 1966, pp. 41-42.
Germany's mistrust grew when the October 1956 Suez Crisis demonstrated that the alliance partners could not count on political consultation with the United States.°T he Suez Crisis also demonstrated that the alliance was continuously being influenced by the national interests of individual member states outside of alliance territory, as was the case with French military operations in Algeria. This leads back to the consideration of the limits of the alliance as a structural reality in NATO and transatlantic security relations. In this case Great Britain and France wanted to respond to the nationalization of the Suez Canal with military force, if needed. The British call for NATO solidarity in this crisis threatened to intensify the north/south conflict within NATO. The United States sought to play the role of neutral mediator and had condemned the hasty use of violence.
The Suez Crisis brought about the realization of a central prerequisite for the alliance's negotiating power, and has made NATO's reform difficult to this day. NATO emerged as a regional security alliance necessitated by a common security threat analysis. 
See Fischer, 1993
, pp. 280-281. so See Thol, B., 1993, pp. 224-226.
Efforts going beyond NATO's spatial and scope limits had to solve all internal conflicts of interest and gave the alliance a permanent alternative: coming to a consensus by finding a lowest common denominator, or risk a break-up of the alliance.
After the New Look was implemented in NATO through NATO Strategy MC 14/2 ("Massive Retaliation"), the focus on nuclear defense increased at the expense of conventional defense. This was widely criticized in Bonn. There was only one way out of the cycle of nuclear deterrence (which meant nuclear defense and implied a German nuclear wasteland): building up conventional defenses. The Radford Plan provided the impetus for Bonn to participate in efforts aimed at the reduction and control of nuclear weapons, rather than focusing exclusively on a nuclear defense. The Germans felt that increased dependence on nuclear weapons would run the risk that these weapons would be used as soon as any conflict developed."' In light of the Soviet satellite Sputnik liftoff on October 4, 1957, there was another danger: decreasing trust in the reliability of American nuclear protection for Western Europe. If it was expected that United States soil was no longer invulnerable to nuclear attack, the US would have decided to respond to the threat of nuclear weapon deployment only if its own vital interests were at stake. 5 2
It was feared that a regional conflict, one involving Berlin for example, would not justify using nuclear weapons. As a result of these fears, the French started thinking about obtaining their own nuclear forces and emphasizing closer relations with the continental European NATO states. Adenauer thought about this goal too, considering a review of the international ban on Germany producing NBC weapons." Tactical nuclear weapons were more important to him than German nuclear-equipped long-range bombers and rockets. Temporary nuclear euphoria even allowed him to go so far as to talk about nuclear hand-held weapons to make up for reduced conventional forces."
The already mentioned open harmony between German and French defense expectations strengthened the American justification of its policy for European interests, but did not stop France from pursuing its own nuclear program. Germany, which ended up not possessing nuclear weapons, had gained more of a voice in nuclear affairs as a result of the creation of a Nuclear Planning Group (NPG) in 1966.
CONTROL OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS 
(1958)
(1959)
(1960)
(1961)
(1962)
(1963)
(1964)
Ibid., p. 220. Like many Europeans, Americans were surprised and concerned by the Franco-German Treaty of Cooperation signed by de Gaulle and Adenauer on January 22, 1963, during Adenaues official visit to Paris. Adenaue's great respect fbr de Gaulle and his desire to use their friendship to bring Germany and France together were well known. The treaty came so soon after de Gaulle vetoed British entry into the Common Market that his move had the aura of German approval, or at least acquiescence. The US government had been particularly disturbed by the anti-American implications of the press conference in January 1963 at which de Gaulle pronounced his veto. Germany was concerned about the effect of the treaty on German relations with the United States and on NATO, from which France was in the process of disengaging. 5 ' George McGhee, US ambassador to Bonn, expressed concern over a common Franco-German, anti-NATO, and anti-American policy. This represented another cornerstone in German-American relations that had from the beginning been a headache.
American uneasiness concerning the establishment of the Franco-German Eurocorps 
(1991)
(1992)
President John F. Kennedy wanted to hinder such a special relationship between Geimany and France by creating an "Atlantic Partnership" and promising a united Europe equal rights of co-determination, especially in nuclear affairs. Moreover, the widely discussed Multilateral Nuclear Force (MLF) in the beginning of the 1960s 
(1959)
(1960)
(1961)
(1962)
(1963)
(1964)
Berlin crisis 
(1958)
(1959)
(1960)
(1961)
The increase 6f American toops in Germany had another purpose. The Soviet Union's development of inmterconital missiles meant that US territory was now vulnerable; thus the strategy of Massive Retaliation was no longer feasible. This strategy had been subject to widespread criticism fbr allowing little or no options even before Sputnik 
(1957)
(MC 14/3, 1961
(MC 14/3, /1967
(MC 14/3, -1991) )
to the ground. This is why West Germany pushed for nuclear participation. The MLF was an opportunity to do just that. With the formation of the MLF, Bonn hoped to become involved in nuclear deployment and planning operations."
However limited its military functions, the MLF would be an effective symbol of American-European intedependence. It is very likely that, at least in 1963, this was the most important German motive for supporting the MLF, not merely the most frequently voiced. An interest in entering the nuclear business would necessarily be much less publicly voiced, but there is little reason to suppose that this was the 'real' motive; the indications are that in the circumstances of 1963, with the 'first-things-first' mood of German officials, the interest in strengthening Atlantic interdependence was in fact the overriding objective of German policy on the MLF. In the mid-1960's, the first substantial reduction of American troops in Europe took place. Significantly reduced tensions between East and West in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis and improved strategic air transport capabilities made this move possible.
The Vietnam War made it necessary. On the one hand, personnel in Germany were withdrawn because they were needed in Vietnam. On the other, they were withdrawn because of budget constraints. These budget constraints led to American troops in Germany being reduced from 280,000 to 265,000.61 The US balance of payments deficit was growing at the same rate Western Europe was recovering economically from the consequences of World War U. Because of the subsiding East-West conflict and See 
Haftendom, 1991, p. 138.
If such actions were political warning signs for Western Europe, then the offset payments in the 1960's had a much more concrete meaning for Germany, as evidenced by the following quote from George McGhee:
The United States, in light of its balance of payments problems, could not continue the present rate of military expenditures abroad. We had already taken concrete steps to improve our position, as recently reported by the President to the Congress. We appreciated greatly the assistance that Germany had rendered in the past through the offset purchases of military equipment. It was, however, absolutely essential that we receive as an offset the full amount of our dollar expenditures in Germany -$1.3 billion in the next two years, not the $1 billion that had been suggested by the Germans.' For the first time, a correlation between currency offset and troop deployment had been established. Chancellor Ludwig Erhard's administration, fighting budget difficulties of its own, had such problems with this in 1966 that the administration fell apart and had to form a grand coalition with the SPD.
The offset payments created an exceptional example of the burden-sharing problem, because the payments were made only by Germany. Besides being financially burdensome, these arrangements were also difficult because the principle of equal rights 62 
McGhee, 1989, pp. 90-91.
The burden-sharing debate went on until 1988, and the demise of the Warsaw Pact as a military threat. The end of the threat meant that NATO lost the outside pressure that motivated solidarity in the alliance. Since then, burden-sharing, such a fundamental factor in German-American security relations, has taken on a whole new meaning, with new consequences to be considered. This became clear with regard to the Gulf War, as the following pages suggest.
Quoted by Schweigler, G., "Die Politik der Bundesrepublic Deutschland als Faktor amerikanischer Politik," Mahnke, 1991, pp. 487-488.
No subject in German-American security relations better demonstrates the structural contrast between US global interests and West Germany's mainly regional interests than the attitude toward the Soviet Union concerning d6tente and deterrence. West Germany's fear of sacrificing German security interests on the superpowers' altar of strategic balance is seen throughout German-American post-WWIR relations."
Interestingly enough, these German-American conflicts of interest had characteristics that varied with the political climate. Wanting to turn more to the West, Adeuauer pressed for a tougher policy toward the Soviet Union, especially during the Berlin Crisis and the building of the Berlin Wall that followed soon after. A cautious and reserved American policy toward the Soviet Union, especially when tensions were easing after Stalin's death, made Bonn fear Germany's becoming neutral as a result of American policy. 67   The Willy Brandt chancellorship during the early 1970's had exactly the opposite view." Motivated by Kennedy's foreign policy, Willy Brandt, together with Egon Bahr (Brandt's close assistant in Berlin in the 1950s and later in the Chancellor's Office) developed a policy of "change by approaching" the East, or Ostpolidk. '  West Germans who were establishing a policy to ease relations with the East as well as Washington, where there was a mistrustful reaction. "Brandt and Bahr accumulated a host of critics who believed that the intentions and certainly the consequences of their policies would in fact lead to a revival of German nationalism, neutralism, and a loosening of West Germany's Atlantic ties."7°T he conflict that had the most consequences for German-American security relations in early NAI 0 history originated out of differing interests and concerns of both countries involving the Soviet Union. This conflict took place when President Carter and Chancellor Helmut Schmidt were in office. Both seemed to agree that German-American relations were never worse than they were in the late 1970's.7' The Neutron Bomb Affair also played a role in this, although this incident will not be explored any further here. 
72
See Schweigler, 1991, p. 509
Herf 1991, p. 2 2 6 . which involved the disarmament of all nuclear systems not only between 1,000 and 5,000 km but also over 500 km, underlines the US effort since the 1960's to limit as much as possible its own risk of being involved in a nuclear confrontation in Europe. One might even conclude that the INF Treaty represented the beginning of the end of American nuclear guarantees for Europe.  
See Denison, A., "Die Haltung der USA gegenuber dem 'Euro-Korps': Akzeptanz oder Ablehnung?" in Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, ed., Kurzpapier der Abteilung Aulenpolitik, Nr. 50, Bonn, 1992.
As mentioned earlier, the Eurocorps was a new occasion for old worries. In 1963, the Americans were concerned about a reconciliation between Germany and France. Now the Americans were afraid that the Franco-German Eurocorps project would again weaken NATO and loosen German integration into the alliance.
That the United States was a power representing protection and support became clearer than ever during German reunification in 1989 and 1990. A hastily concluded Two-Plus-Four Treaty, which gave Germany its full sovereignty, would have been impossible without American support." One of the deciding factors for the Americans was that a reunified Germany would remain a member of NATO."
The Bush administration considered it a high priority to keep reunified Germany from turning away from the West It was important to maintain good relations with reunified Germany, which suddenly became the greatest power east of Washington and west of Moscow. It was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter that America had challenged Bonn to be a "partner in leadership." This was not only important for the Bush administration's above-mentioned interests; it is also an expression of an American expectation that the US would not be the one to carry the burden of responsibility for Germany and Europe in the future, as was the case during the Cold War. This expectation was doomed to go unfulfilled. This is one of the most important lessons the Transatlantic alliance must learn in the post-Cold War era.
Being named a "partner in leadership" was as big a surprise to Germany as reunification. Since the end of World War II, a special relationship between Germany's citizens and force and statecraft has been created. As long as a potential front line ran through the middle of Germany, Germans in former West Germany had been prepared to accept the costs resulting from the East-West confrontation and the need to maintain a defense contribution. These German forces existed only as a part of the greater NATO military organization, and there was no independent General Staff from which to coordinate exclusively German military operations.. Hence, not only would the then 500,000 man strong Bundeswehr not have been capable of carrying out a self-reliant military operation, but there was also the suggestion that Germany was not responsible for itself, relying on the actions of NATO to provide protection. The Germans saw NATO as a kind of insurance policy, where one contributes a certain amount to the insurance company, who will cover the costs of a future emergency. NATO, as the insurer of West Germany, was responsible for handling all of activities involving a claim, as it were. The F-deral Republic therefore considered NATO, and mainly the United States, responsible for its securiv.u 
See Feldmeyer, 1993, pp. 470-471.
Thus reunification has meant the end of a special role for Germany. For the Germans this means that they must find their way around in a political reality which, since 1945, they thought they had escaped. The 1991 Gulf War, for instance, caught the Germans completely off guard. They learned a bitter lesson: that war is still a political instrument and is, under certain conditions, justified.
After World War II ended, the United States was not especially willing to take over the role of world leader. The American role as a European power in an entangling alliance contradicted an apparently sacred isolationist tradition. But this role was unavoidable in the face of looming Soviet expansionism. After all, nobody wanted to repeat the mistakes of 1923 and leave Europe to an unsure future again.
The "grand strategy" of the United States not only included democracy but free market economies and establishing an open world economic system for military and political containment of the Soviet Union. The combination of military alliances and
See Baumgartner, H.M., and Wellershoff, D. (eds.), Frieden ohne Macht? (Bonn: Bouvier, 1991). footholds around the Eurasian power block, military strategies, and forces as well as arms control treaties held a global opponent (the Soviet Union) in check. These factors threatened to severely limit the Soviet Union's offensive option to unilaterally change the post-war order of Yalta while at the s-m time providing security to the allies in Europe, especially the Germans in the Federal Republic.
The principle of this "grand strategy" remained in effect for nearly a half century.
Only the means and methods changed; the all-important role of nuclear weapons, a centerpiece of almost every strategy debate, was key in all phases of American post-war policy. Conflicts over the question of means and methods repeatedly arose, especially in the Atlantic community. The strategic interests of the European allies, whose main goal was to prevent a regional war in Central Europe, was destined to clash with the global interests of the United States. This was especially true for the nation whose territory would have become the primary battlefield: the Federal Republic of Germany. This explains why the Federal Republic constantly worried about becoming ,ictim to the strategic goals of the United States, whose security interests included both regional and global crises. The differing strategic and operative views were also of critical importance. The maritime/air strategy of the US had always been an expression of a limited commitment; it allowed for a prompt response to a crisis as well as a prompt disengagement. The same could be said of the peripheral/indirect defense method, in which one seeks to avoid a direct and bloody confrontation with the opponent on the battlefield. There was no way that these methods could have been pursued by 5o convendta means. For the United States, the key piece in its foreign policy strategy has been and continues to be the atom bomb, both as a threat to be used and a comequnce to be avoided Germany's membership in the Atlantic alliance was not only in Adenauer's interests. The rearming of occupied and demilitarized West Germany was not a goal of the United States in the period after World War II, but the Korean War created a new structural reality. German membership in NATO and close securty ties with the United States were a necessity for the US, and became a blessing for the Federal Republic.
German security would bear a price for Germany, however, and debate over burden-sharing began, at the latest, in the 1960's. Although threatened many times in order to achieve a more "fair" sharing of the security burden, a significant American withdrawal never took place before the events of 1989.
There was also a correlation between burden-sharing and the regional and political limits of the alliance. Solidarity among NATO members was required when operating outside alliance territory (out-of-area), and was proven necessary when participant nations began to act based upon their own national interests. The worldwide containment of the Soviet Union necessarily led to the withdrawal of troops from Europe during the Vietnam War, when US troops were needed elsewhere. Western Europe is now looking, with a certain degree of uneasiness, at the scale of the American military presence in the Atlantic and Pacific regions in order to determine where the predominant American interests lie.
NATO owes most of its success during the Cold War to the fact that the members not only defined their interests, but found the common will to pull together to pursue those interests. Furthermore, it was crucial that there was agreement on the United States taking on the leadership role in the alliance. The future of NATO, as well as the future of close German-American security relations, will in particular depend on whether the necessary harmony of interests among NATO members can be achieved in the future.
The end of the East-West confrontation seemed to leave the US with no focus for its deterrent efforts. Initially, the sudden disappearance of the former global opponent seemed to have moved a crucial step closer to ever-lasting peace. Euphoria soon turned to concern, however. This was not the end of history dealt with by Francis Fukuyama, nor is it likely to come in the foreseeable future."g On the contrary, the collapse of the USSR has opened a Pandora's box of nationalist, fundamentalist, secular, and ethnic animosities long overshadowed by the Cold War. These animosities present the most immediate threat to international stability. Additionally, power struggles have emerged to fill vacuums created by the collapse of the former USSR. Against all wishful thinking, there is a New World Disorder that confronts not only NATO but also the UN with new challenges. Through unification, the Federal Republic of Germany not only became a larger and sovereign nation, but it also had to assume a larger portion of international responsibility. The crisis in the Gulf, at the Horn of Africa, and in the Balkans were moments of truth for Germany. It was no longer a matter of the allies coming to Germany's defense at its inner border; rather, Germany was now expected to contribute its share to international crisis management, even outside NATO's area of responsibility.
The roles that were played by the US and Germany in these crises, and the conclusions to be drawn with respect to American-German security relations are the subject of this chapter.
See Schmidt, R., "Das Instrumentarium der Vereinten Nationen zum Kriesenmanagement und seine Entwicklung in den letzten Jahren," in Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik (ed.), Sonderforschungsvorhaben 'Analysen Sicherheits-AVerteidigungspolitik IV" (SASVP), Ebenhausen, 1993, Band 6, pp. 31-33.
On August 2, 1990, Iraqi military forces poured across the frontier and quickly occupied the tiny oi-rich state of Kuwait. President Bush quickly declared the annexation of what Iraqi President Saddam Hussein called the nineteenth province of Iraq' an unacceptable act of aggression. Reviving the moribund collective security provisions of the United Nations, Bush called on the nations of the world to join the Americans in reinstating Kuwait sovereignty. Secretary of State James Baker was dispatched to enlist volunteers; in the end, a coalition of thirty states stood opposite the Iraqi lines. Standing rhetorically with the coalition was the former Soviet Union." 3   Only a few days after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, President George Bush, in a speech before Congress noted the requirement of creating "a new world order in which the nations of the world, East and West, North and South, can prosper and live in harmony."9 4 The role of force and the role of the United States in this "new world order" were reflected in an exemplary way in the Gulf War.
The reason for the United States' intervention in the Gulf was its strategic interest in securing the oil wells that provide the western industrial nations with an essential portion of their energy. Saddam Hussein's disregard of that interest earned him punishment by military means. Unlike America's Vietnam experience, the Gulf War exploited the full conventional potential of the US arsenal. Since it was a coalition army that had to be commanded and controlled, it was inevitable to reduce objectives to  presence in a variety of theaters. The best and, arguably, the last example, considering the magnitude of the operation, is the Persian Gulf War, which involved the deployment of 500,000 US military personnel. Notwithstanding the United States' intention to use its potential for intervention to fight no more than two regional wars at any one time in the future," it does retain recourse to implementing the "British Strategy." This strategy is global but discriminating, as will be highlighted in discussing the war in the Balkans.
The Persian Gulf War has shown that the United States wants, and is able, to play the part of a world policeman only in the case of crises that are deemed to involve US interests. Also, the US will assume this task only if other nations, too, provide their financial or military contributions. This requirement also casts a new light upon the issue of burden-sharing.
As far as the liberation of Kuwait was concerned, ideal preconditions existed for the application of military means in the New World Order. What was at stake was a strategically important raw material in a strategically important region where three continents meet. There also lingered a supraregional threat stemming from Iraq's impending nuclear arms buildup. The UN Security Council condemned the Iraqi attack on Kuwait, and approved a liberation operation through an ad hoc coalition, the nerve center of which, however, was not in New York, but in Washington.
The Persian Gulf War clearly showed that the American "Grand Strategy" of the Cold War had to undergc, a thorough review. In the future, the United States would have 97 See Aspin, L., uThe Bottom-Up Review: Forces for a New Era." September 1, 1993, and Gordon, M.R., "Pentagon Seeking to Cut Military but Equip it for 2 Regional Wars," in The New York Times, September 2, 1993, p. Al.
to place increased emphasis on its ability to prevent regional crisis or to solve such crisis by using military force, if required." The criteria governing such a mission have been highlighted previously, but one must also consider the domestic pressure on the leadership in Washington to reduce America's foreign commitments 2. The Germans to the Front During the Persian Gulf War, the Germans once again drew heavy criticism to themselves. The media of the western allies denounced the Germans as being ungrateful, maintaining that the allies had done everything they could to help bring about German unification." There was mention of the "shirking of responsibility" and "checkbook diplomacy," but the main accusation was that Germany did not exhibit common command responsibility within the alliance framework. The way Germany acted, they were quick to state, "has also demonstrated that many Germans, like the Japanese, remain transfixed by years of postwar conditioning to view their country as an economic giant but a political dwarf."''1
When the United States counted its allies at the beginning of the Gulf conflict, Germany initially kept a very low profile. There soon emerged the old alliance of the United States, England, and France, while Germany, along with Japan, was sharply 98 See Pocalyko, M.N., "Riding on the Storm: The Influence of War on Strategy," in Tritten, J.J., and Stockton, P.N., Reconstituting America's Defense. The New US National Security Strategy (New York: Praeger, 1992), pp. 53-56.
See Schierwater, H.-V., "Deutschland, der Golf und die Allianz-Fragen an die deutsche Augenpolitik," in Rissener Rundbrief, April (4), 1991, p. 85.
Hamilton, D., and Clad, J., "Germany, Japan, and the False Glare of War," in Washington Quarterly, Autumn 1991, p. 41. criticizd in America. It was pointed out that Germany, consdering American supp since the end of World War H, and recent German economic prospenity, had every reason to shoulder Gulf War burdens with the United States. The Germans could find little solace in the fact that the Japanese, whose interests in the Gulf region wer affected much more directly and whose constitutional considerations were drastically different than those of Germany, at times came under even sharper attacks."M For Germany, the Persian Gulf War was totally unexpected. The Germans would realize once again that "playing an active part in world affairs was not confined to a politically friendly environment."." It should also be mentioned, however, that Germany was confronted with the Persian Gulf crisis during a period of difficulties arising from the process of German Unification.
At that time, Bonn's options were limited in several respects. On one hand, it had to follow the escalation of the situation in the Baltic states, where the moribund Soviet Union was making a violent last-ditch attempt to keep the empire from falling apart." 3 At the same time, the German unification process, the importance of which was totally underestimated by the outside world,'04 had to be implemented at the domestic level and secured at the international level. From the German point of view, it was 101 
See Merkl, 1993, pp. 16-22.
As a matter of fict, Germany did provide significant assistance to the coalition forces operating in the Persian Gulf region. The initial deployment of the US troops from Germany and, indeed, Operation Desert Storm itself, would probably not have been possible without German assistance. Prior to providing that assistance, though, the Germans had temporarily been tongue-tied and paralyzed. The lesson to be learned in view of the future of American-German cooperation can only be: "Better not to hesitate to do what needs to be done anyway and walk away with a bonus, than act belatedly and get no credit at all."' 0 '
The major part of Germany's contribution was financial aid, which led to the already mentioned accusation of Germany pursuing a checkbook diplomacy. According to a cost breakdown by Michael J. Inacker, the financial contribution totaled 17 billion German marks as of April 1991. Of this amount, about 3.5 billion German marks were paid to the allies as direct military assistance.' 0 6 Considering the fact that the amount of 17 billion German marks, which is more than one third of the total annual defense budget, suffices to maintain a full-strength armored division of 18,000 personnel for 20 years or to maintain the entire Federal Armed Forces, or Bundeswehr, for more than six months,' 0 ' one becomes aware of the actual magnitude of Germany's contribution. Yet something ,os joffe, J., 1991, p. 218.
See Inacker, M.J., *Der deutsche Golfkrieg," in Rheinischer Merkur, September 20, 1991.
Ibid.
else was expected of Germany, something money cannot buy, namely, sending troops to fight and risk their lives. "The Germans to the front!" This is what was expected of a united Germany. Sending just one tank battalion to the Persian Gulf would probably have sufficed to live up to expectations. Both the government and the domestic opposition maintained, however, that the legal situation ruled out any participation of German armed forces in the liberation of Kuwait Committing German soldiers abroad was considered in line with the constitution only as long as such commitment served to defend, if only indirectly, the Federal Republic of Germany. This would have been the case had Iraq, during the Persian Gulf crisis, attacked, for instance, NATO member Turkey."'0 What held true for this Turkish scenario did not in the case of Kuwait. The legal aspects of committing German troops, particularly in out-of area missions, will be discussed in more detail in the context of the case study on Somalia.
In the early 1990s, the Persian Gulf War rekindled the debate over burden-sharing and solidarity within the alliance. As the Korean War had shown: war creates reality. In the final analysis, the latest confrontation in the Persian Gulf has created the need for a basic redetermination of a fair and just sharing of financial burdens and responsibilities between the United States and the European allies. From the American angle, this was urgently needed in view of the US economic situation increasingly demanding cuts in the defense budget. All of this was possible because the Soviet Union, and later Russia, had switched from confrontation to cooperation. Also, the Americans considered it appropriate, because the Europeans seemed to become stronger economically and to be determined to engage in wider political cooperation.' 0 9
The Federal Republic of Germany will ultimately have to deal with the issue of "out-of-area" Bundenwehr missions. Germany can no longer afford to be an exception to the rule of international participation. "The Persian Gulf War was," as Hondrich put it, "the first war after World War H where the insistence of one's own peaceableness and nonparticipation ran counter to the German economic and security interests -and especially to Israel's security interests -and, given these interests, was even bound to be considered untruthful."' 10
It is a fact that the Federal Republic of Germany, in becoming a member of the United Nations in 1973, accepted, without reservation, all the rights and obligations associated with UN membership. This provides the general basis for Bundeswehr participation in UN peace-keeping and peace enforcement operations."' The example of the Persian Gulf War also demonstrates that in the face of today's intertwining of international politic3 at an all-encompassing global level, it is no longer possible for Germany to limit its security efforts to the regional ievel. When President Bush talked of "partners in leadership," he also implied that Germany should contribute to protecting international law and implementing democracy and the rule of law as part of the effort to  See The New York Times, "Somali Leader Gets Mixed Signals From the US About Its Ne:.t
Steps," 
October 9, 1993, p. 7.
See Bolton, 1994, p.
?17
See Holmes, S.A., "Clinton Defends Aspin on Action Regarding Request for US Tanks," in
The New York Times, 
October 9, 1993, p. 7.
Another direct outcome of this devel t is the new US policy of a more restricted paic in future UN peace-keeping operations.1'
With regard to Somalia, the withdrawal of US troops will be a signal to all other nations to withdraw their troops as well.'m As a result, Somalia will probably very soon lapse back into its old anarchic stnctures and everything that helped calm the situation throughout almost the entire country will be gone within a few weeks.
When the operation started, many Europeans and even more people in the Balkans were wondering about the commitment in Somalia. In Bosnia, where Serb genocide quickly spread in April 1992, US intervention using ground forces would have had a major impact -also for hmnanitarian reasons. If it is true that the United States in the future will confine its commitment as a world policeman in the "new world order" to strategically important regions, the question inevitably arises as to whether Somalia has any strategic importance. What are the legitimate national interests that would warrant such an operation? Are there any oil fields in that region? Does the United States need Somalia as a "flattop" for global power projection?
As mentioned before, the United States is in a position in the post-Cold War era to choose whether, where, and with whom to engage. The question raised at the "118
See Sommer, T., "Dem Sheriff wird der Stem zur Last," in DIE ZEIT, October 29, 1993, p. 1.
See Williams, D., and Devroy, A., "US Limits Peace-Keeping Role," in Washington Post, November 25, 1993, p. A60.
beginning is therefore quite simple to answer: the United States went to Somalia because it did not go to Bosnia. The reason is obvious. In contrast to assistance given to Bosnia, assistance given to war-tom Somalia seemed to be an easy gain in prestige without taking too great a risk.
Since 3 October 1993, Bosnia's future -and the future of Europe as a whole for that matter -has been even more insecure than before. The US Congress and the general public have never shown much interest in becoming involved in the war in the Balkans, and, since the events in Sonalia, the chances of a US engagement with ground forces in Bosnia have plummeted to an absolute low.
The ambitious goals of the no less ambitious UN Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to help troubled Somalia to get not only rice, but also a new political structure, were directly related to tbW Balkans.1 2 Annoyed that the Europeans had, in Boutros-Ghali's view, passed on to the UN one of their very own problems, the Secretary General pushed through an intervention in Somalia.
Yet a third party is also in Somalia, because it is not in Bosnia: the Federal Republic of Germany. This illustrates that the united Germany is taking great pains to find its role in the world and that it is still quite unsure of how to go about it.
It was a long way to the first armed mission of the Bundeswehr outside the NATO area. During the almost forty years of forward defense on domestic territory, hardly anybody in the Bundeswehr had seriously believed until 1989 that Bundeswehr frmes would ever be employed for purposes other than national defense. The utmost that was conceivable was to defend another member of the alliance in accordance with Article 5 of the North Atlantic treaty.
Given its high degree of professionalism and its outstanding equipment, the Bwtdeswehr was considered one of the most effective armies, if not the most effective, among the European NATO members. Other nations envied Germany for its conscript army that was every bit as combat capable as a professional army. They also showed admiration for the Bundeswehr concept of Innere Fthung, or leadership and civic education, a concept that became the backbone of the internal structure of the new West German Armed Forces and distinguished them very clearly from the former Wehrmacht of the Third Reich. With this new internal structure "never again could blind obedience to orders become the alibi for crimes."'" Both proud and respected, the Bundeswehr had demonstrated defense preparedness side by side with the allies, thus successfully contributing to deterrence.
Here again, the Persian Gulf War brought about a change. The other NATO members suddenly left Germany to deploy first to the Gulf region and later to the Adriatic, while the German soldiers, made uncertain by the politicians and considered cowards, and deserted by their allied comrades in arms -both friend and foe -stayed at home."' 3 In the view of many observers within and without the Federal Republic, it was high time that something was done about the credibility of Germany's foreign policy and its ability to act. In order to prevent a singularization of Germany in NATO, which was for more then four decades a major German concern, the UN mission in Somalia, which carried the label "humanitarian operation," was a welcome opportunity to find a way for Germany to act. As early as 17 December 1992, the German government offered to provide the United Nations, in support of UNOSOM, a reinforced supply and transport battalion of up to 1,500 (later 1,700) personnel to perform "humanitarian tasks."' 2 4 in particular, German soldiers were offered as personnel to set up a distribution organization for relief goods. However, this offer was made with the understanding that the mission would be camed out in regions "where peace had been established." The reason that this was so important to Bonn was that it provided the only way to win wide support for the mission among the German public and also in the Federal Parliament.
For the Bundeswehr, Bonn's decision did not come as a surprise. As early as February 1992, the Federal Government had decided to redefine the mission of the Bundeswehr. New risks and threats on one hand, as well as a new strategy and structure of the NATO alliance on the other, led to new tasks for the German Armed Forces.12 5 A new mission package has been established in detail in the "Defense Policy Guidelines," 124 See Hoffmann, 0., Deutsche Blauhelme bei 
UN-Missionen (Bonn: Aktuell 1993), pp. 86-87. 125
5/1993, p. 444.
In 1992, the force stutr planning of the Bundeswehr, was carried out with the so-called "expanded mission spectrum" in mind. The military leaders had done their homework based on the experience gwaied by observing coalition operations during the Persian Gulf campaign.' 2 This was especially true of rapid deployment and logistical support issues, in which the German mil'tar, had actually been involved during the deployment phase of Gulf operations. While the old structure of the Bwndeswehr was primarily tailored to the needs of a Forward Defense of West Germany, the future structure of the German Armed Forces will be not limited to the exclusive defense of the Central Region. It will also incorporate components for crisis management and humanitarian aid operations under NATO or UN auspices. So, while the Bundeswehr was prepared for the Federal Government's decision of 17 December 1992,12 the opinion-fonming process with respect to Bundeswehr i See Bundesminister der Verteidigung, Verteidigungspolitische Richtlinien, November 1992.
See TAP-Dienst 5icherheitspolitik, "Die Neuplanung der Bundeswehr," 1-2/93, january 1993.
,26
See Neue RuhrZeitung, "Die Truppe ist bereit zum 
UNO-Einsatz," April 17, 1993.
Germany's relations with the United States are at stake, as was the case in the years before 1955. As it was then, it is Konrad Adenauer's party, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) which is the drivine force behind an acceptance of the military, in full consonance with Clausewitzian notions," as an indispensable instrument of responsible politics --and this applies also to out-of-area missions.
On 4 October 1990, the Federal Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, said in Berlin that "the unified Germany will meet its increased responsibilities within the United Nations, the European Community, and the Atlantic alliance." Continuing, he noted that it was the intent of the Federal Government to "establish unambiguous constitutional prerequisites soon and to clarify the constitutional bases."'" Since there are no clarifying comments in the Basic Law concerning the employment of German Armed Forces outside the national German territory or in combined/joint operations with the armed 129 
See Clausewitz, C.v., On War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976)
forces of other countries, there is room for broad interpretation by the political partiesas was the intent of the authors of the constitution.' missions is seen as unacceptable on the grounds that a clarifying amendment to the Basic Law should effect a change in Germany's international situation, rather than putting additional restrictions in place that do not recognize current developments., 33   While the CSU is pursuing similar objectives, the FDP, as a member of the government coalition, is calling for an amendment of the Basic Law to allow participation in peace-keeping and peace-enforcement minsions, the latter being, only permissible with a two-thirds majority vote of approval in the Bundestag (Federal Parliament).'-' Finally, the SPD, the most important opposition party at the federal level, wants to allow exclusively "blue helmet missions" by an amendment of the Basic Law, but to exclude other military missions beyond NATO territory once and for all."' Although, in terms of the Basic Law, there is a consensus that the deployment of military units for UN missions gives no cause for concern in the areas of humanitarian aid, disarmament measures, transportation tasks, and medical care, the UN deployment of the Bundeswehr in Somalia prompted the SPD to file a complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe. According to the SPD, the Somalia operation clearly constituted a violation of the Basic Law.' 3 ' However, the SPD's motion was dismissed. The Bundeswehr advance units, which had already deployed to Somalia, were not ordered to return to Germany. After 23 June 1993, the Bundeswehr could start deploying its main forces. The area of operations assigned to the Bundeswehr contingent was Belet Huen in the northern part of Somalia, a safe region "most likely pacified like no other Somalian region.""'
In contrast to the American allies, who right from the start of Operation "Restore Hope" suffered losses by 134 See 
Bartke, 1993, p. 25
See Kolner Stadtanzeiger, "SPD will deutsche UN-Einsitze nur bei friedenserhaltenden the dozen in Mogadishu, there were no German casualties in Belet Huen. The German press, which followed every move of the Bundeswehr on this first out-of-area mission with German combat and combat support troops, had nothing to report apart from spiders, desert sand, and the scorching weather the German "boys" had to endure until their withdrawal in early March of 1994.'-"
The Federal Government had picked Belet Huen quite deliberately. Any mission other than a purely humanitarian one, such as providing protection or surveillance which might involve heavy losses, would have had disastrous consequences for domestic politics in Germany just as it was starting to take a larger role in the international community. The structural realities of German involvement were not rewritten as a result of Somalia, however. The Germans were spared the CNNfactor of Mogadishu with its pictures of death and violence. In the long run, Germany will have to confront the fact that burden-sharing will inevitably involve risk-sharing as well.
Notwithstanding the desire to participate on the international level, the Federal Government followed the American example and called the German soldiers home. The reason given for the German withdrawal, according to Defense Minister Volker Rfihe, was that the Germans would not be able to continue their mission without the US supply lines.' 39 Of course, one must also consider the fact that the absence of US supply lines also meant the absence of US integration in the security arrangements for German troops.
)]a See Frankfurter Neue Presse, "Nur der Sand und die Post machen Arger," July 28, 1993.
In conclusion, it can be stated that German participation in UNOSOM U was a succes, even though the original mission of providing logistical support to an Indian brigade could not be carried out because that force never arrived in the German area of operations. Without the assistance of the German soldiers, it would not have been possible to provide drinking water and to set up hospitals and schools in the devastated region in such a short period of time. The military results of the Somalia operation are asserted by some to be a failure, by others to be a success. While this issue may continue to be a source of debate, one thing is certain: as a vehicle for Germany to explore the realities of participation in out-of-area disputes, the Somalia deployment of German forces was a success.
Politically speaking, the mission was a success because a strong commitment to "humanitarian objectives" may help open the door to "normal" UN missions while maintaining the positive direction of German public opinion regarding military involvement. In view of the obvious connection between political will and public consensus, one must doubt, at least for the time being, that constitutional clarification will follow. As long as both politicians and the military want to completely erase the perception that Germans will inherently seek to become involved in "military adventures,"'40 the majority of parliamentary votes required for an amendment to the Basic Law will be forestalled. The course which the Germans are following, namely promoting public acceptance of a new international role, assuming political responsibility in the world, and, finally, creating a new image the Bundeswehr within the scope of humanitarian aid missions can in the long run, however, lead to public consensus and a reinte aion of the Basic Law.
The road from the shots in Sarajevo in June 1914 to the siege of Sarajevo in 1992 was long. This road has seen the disasters of the 20th century and passes through nuclear-era peace of 1945-1989. Looking down this road, one knows only that the dream of a new world order and/or a European peace order remain unfulfilled. For forty years the West was able to hold in check the most powerful war machine the world has ever known. Now, the West has problems to bring even small armies and irregular units to account.
Conventional deterrence made a comeback during the Gulf War. But what was won in the desert was lost during the first two years of the war in the Balkans: the will and competence to use conventional deterrence. Although deep-seeded tensions between Serbs and Croats have long been documented,"" the war came as a complete shock to the European public. If anything, one expected the beginning of a new era of peace, rather than the outbreak of such a bloody war, particularly at the end of the Cold War.
Daily pictures of the dead and wounded, flattened villages and desperate refugees stir up feelings of terror and raf,;. The mortar shell attack of 5 February 1994, which killed 69 people in the main Sarajevo market, 14 is the latest peak in such violence.
Negotiation attempts, peace talks and cease fires-continually raised hopes that the nightmare would soon end. But the more diplomatic efforts failed, and the longer Serb-nationalist conquest continued, the more resignation and dejection took their toll.
The people who had become victims of Serb aggression could not believe how the continent of Europe was abandoning them and idly standing by while the murder in the Balkans continued. They could not figure out why the civilized world, in light of such murder, banishment and devastation, had forgotten its moral principles.
The massive firepower of an international air-land-sea armada came to the aid of an overrun Kuwait, but the dying victims in Bosnia had to be satisfied for almost two years with aid in the form of food convoys. The invasion of one country by another, especially in a region containing such a large portion of the world's oil supply, brought forth a provocation that the world could not accept. Furthermore, if one takes into consideration that the aggressor was trying to build atomic weapons, a fierce response was only a matter of time.
Bosnia, on the other hand, situated in Europe's own backyard, has initially been met by an Atlantic world of indecisiveness, ignorance, and resurgence of individual national interests. Bosnia was hoping for help from the sole remaining world power, but the United States was reluctant to continue playing the role of world policeman.
differentiation has become so widespread in the Alliance because different European countries, especially Germany and France, wanted to set limits to the Alliance's solidarity and deterrence principles. In the case of Alliance solidarity, France did not want to become a normal NATO member. This explains why France in the beginning of the war absolutely rejected military action in Bosnia under the auspices of NATO; only under the supreme command of the United Nations was military action acceptable to France. In the case of the principle of deterrence, there was a general German desire for protection, but Germany did not want to be a protector. That is why, according to Gillessen, Germany "came up with so many constitutional restrictions.""4 Great Britain feels, as does Howard, that British interests lie beyond Europe.'" This is why the British feel that it is important that the realization of European interests do not hamper their ability to pursue a more wide-ranging foreign policy. Nineteenth and twentieth century European history has clearly shown that British interests have rivaled whatever the strongest European nation happened to be (balance of power). As far as the British are concerned, would not a Greater Serbia play a welcome role in the European power structure?
The makers of strategy in Serbia and the Serbian dominated parts of Bosnia were aware of this fundamental problem of NATO from the start. Because they did not fear NATO, they continued with their crusade for domination and basically ignored everything the security institutions had to say. 4 9   147   Ibid.
Finally, in February 1994, after the events on the market place in Sarajevo and the starting effect of the CNN-factor on public opinion both within and without the United States, NATO made a decisive step in order to regain the power of deterrence in Europe. Under the threat of NATO air strikes, Serbian artillery around Sarajevo was being moved elsewhere. Thanks to NATO's belated detemnination to intervene, the war in the Balkans has hopefully come to the beginning of its end.
The application of collective power found its clearest demonstration on February 28, 1994, when US fighter jets shot down four ground-attack jets flown by Bosnian
Serbs. This was a milestone for the 45-year-old Alliance, because NATO has never before engaged in combat.15°A s was the case during the Gulf War, in the Balkans the Germans were the cause of unrest in NATO: once again Bonn refused to participate in NATO or UN sponsored military actions because of constitutional restrictions and the risk of singularization.
"The Americans are running out of patience with the Germans""' dominated German headlines in February 1993. The reason for increasing American impatience with Alliance partner Germany was the alarming news that Geilenkirchen-based German soldiers in AWACS (airborne warning and control system aircraft) were under orders to abandon their airplanes, should the no-flight zone over Bosnia-Herzegovia have to be  with NATO air power if necessary." 4 As a result of this decision, AWACS surveillance aircraft, along with German crew members, indirectly took part in military maneuvers to insure that airspace was not violated. This took place outside of NATO territory.
Because of concern that German-American relations would further deteriorate, Bonn ruled (with CDU/CSU ministers' votes) to allow German personnel on board the aircraft. Bonn did this despite unclarified constitutional restrictions. The SPD considered this action, as was the case later with intervention in Somalia, to be a violation of German Basic Law. This is why the SPD, together with the FDP, strove for constitutional consistency and clarification in the form of a 1 eversal of the ruling.' 5
On 
April 8, 1993, the Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht)
See Frankfurter Allgemeine, "Der Zweite Senat des Verfassungsgerichts bemuht sich um den Awacs-Konflikt in der Koalition," 
April 6,1993. 1s6
April 8, 1993
AWACS forces might have had repercussions on Germany's foreign policy.'7 The Federal Constitutional Court was seeking to reduce mistrust toward Germany brought on by (what the Americans and others considered to be) Bonn's unbearable constitutional debate. But the world is not rid of this problem yet. Final constitutional clarification concerning Bundeswehr out-of-area deployment, including amendment of the Basic Law if necessary, requires a 2/3 majority vote in the Bundestag (Lower House); nobody expects this to happen in the near future.
As became evident in the case of Somal-a (Operation Restore Hope), Germany will finally start to fulfill its global responsibilities, but first on the basis of case by case rulings. Burden-sharing and sharing the responsibility thus remain an important faultline in the structure of the transatlantic partnership. In light of America's partially ambiguous interest in Europe, the significance of these realities in German-American security relations is likely to grow.
The world officially conceded understanding for the fact that Germany could not become actively involved in the Balkans for historic reasons. But the Americans, as well as others, cannot understand why the Germans are "once again shirking responsibility."
There is a perception in the American public that Germany has much more to loose in the former Yugoslavia than any other European country, especially because of the streams of refugees from this region that want to live in Europe's richest country. How can a US President explain to American citizens that US ground troops have to risk their lives for
See Hefty, G.P., "Bonner Glaubwurdigkeit -aus Karlsruhe," in Frankfurter Allgemeine, 
April 10, 1993.
The Gulf War was a classic example of what conditions must be fulfilled in order for the United States to intervene militarily in the "New World Order." Yugoslavia is an example of an obvious lack of conditions for intervention, especially with ground troops. As far as the Americans are concerned, certainly moral interests, not strategic or economic, are at st-ke in the Balkans.'-" The conflict appeared to remain within the boundaries of the actual battlefield. Nobody -in Europe, in the UN or the Americar public -has ever really expressed real support for full scale military intervention.
According to American Secretary of State Warren Christopher, ".. . that is why the President, I think, has taken a prudent policy of not over-extending United States' commrrmitment."160 ,ss Sommer, T., "Bomben gegen Gewissensbisse?" in DIE ZEIT, August 20, 1993, p.1.
See 
Tucker and Hendrickson, 1993, p. 23
The New York Times, "Backing Away Again, Christopher says Bosnia Is Not a Vital Interest," June 4, 1993.
Thus, troop deployment and a ground offensive, as were needed to liberate Kuwait, were unlikely. But the United States turned to an already well-known means; it offered air strikes, the "American way of war."'6' However, consistent with American strategic thought, "air strikes" had already been carried out to bring forth the complete opposite effect: "American C-130 planes dropping supplies."" 2 How could real air strikes open Serb containment around Sarajevo and at the same time prevent endangering the mostly British and French UNPROFOR troops in Bosnia? Until the events of 5
February 1994 Paris and London did not go for such plans." 3 Whether they were just worried about the safety of their own troops remains unclear; the fact remains that the US could not convince them of the need for action, especially the British government, until 69 people were killed at one time.
The American concept for ending the Balkan War involved another component:
lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia. Once again the British and French thought that their "Blue Helmets" would be endangered as a result of anticipated increased fighting. As far as the Germans were concerned, Bonn from the beginning of the conflict had made it clear that the Bundeswehr could not participate in air strikes or ground attacks because of constitutional restrictions.'" But Bonn, in solidarity with the US, supported lifting the 161 Sommer, T., August 20, 1993.
The New York Times, "Europeans Welcoming US Help in the Balkans," February 25, 1993.
See Frankfurter Allgemeine, ODie NATO erwagt Luftangrifte," 
May 7, 1993
"164
See Stvttgarter Zeitung, "Keine deutschen Soldaten nach Bosnien," 
May 6, 1993.
After an American President, who was undecided and unsure toward the former Yugoslavia, had unsuccessfuily sent his secretary of state to Europe to win the support of European allies for his "lift and strike" concept,'" Bill Clinton asked the German
Chancellor in writing to promote his plans.6" Kohl did as he was asked. At an EC heads of state conference in Copenhagen in Spring 1994 he promoted Ciinton's embargo policy.
This promptly upset his colleagues. As Kohl stood out in the rain, Washington did something to make him become even more wet. Washington played down the whole affair and said that it was not meant to be as such.
Clinton's letter to Kohl appears to not only be further evidence of America's present attitude of part wait-and-see, part resignation...It was an ambiguous letter that is much more a sign of questionable diplomatic expertise and lack of political orientation. Further, it serves to cloud fundamentally stable American-German relations which had been strained the preceding week by Christopher's implied accusation that Bonn's early recognition of Croatia and Slovenia had led to escalation of the war.'" Bombarding Serb artillery positions (as a result of tht. .,timatum in February 1994), destroying Serb reinforcements, and even attacking strategic targets in Serbia itself 165 See Bonnet Rundschau, "Kohl und Rohe: Waffen nach Bosnien liefern," February 1, 1993.
See The New York Times, "How European Unity Over Bosnia Eluded Clinton," 
May 12, 1993. 167
would eventually end the war in the Balkans. However, one must remember that even the Gulf War, after 100,000 air attacks, ended only after ground troops were deployed.'6" But undoing Serb war success "Desert Storm style" will not be possible. To do that a massive number of ground troops, as in Desert Storm, would be needed. These troops would then have to spend years in the ravines of the Balkans, fighting a murderous war against the Serbs. The examples of WWI and WWII clearly demonstrate how difficult military action in this region can be.' 70 Nevertheless, no matter what American-led NATO air strikes on Serb targets could regain, deterrence could be probably reestablished. The next task will be to make it clear to the US that the situation in what was Yugoslavia is among the factors to be considered in determining its national interests.
The great interest at stake in Bosnia is neither more or less than order and stability in post-Cold War Europe. If a persuasive case cannot be made on these grounds, it probably cannot be made at all.1 7 ' As one sees in southeastern Europe, post-communism creates nationalism, which often leads to war. The former Yugoslavia is the best example for this. Slobodan Milosevic's road to a Greater Serbia could serve as a prime model for Russia's ultranationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky or his successor on how to create a Greater Russia."n The threat of rising Russian nationalism could start war in East Central 169 See Joffe, J., "Der Frieden lA9t sich nicht herbeibomben," in SOddeutsche 
Zeitung, April 30, 1993.
There is another analogy: a power vacuum in Europe which is not filled by NATO will be filled by Russia.
But nature and politics abhor a vacuum and the NATO allies may have allowed the vacuum to last too long. In Russia's December election, foreign policy hard-liners were a big winners. Russia is beginning to assert itself once more. It is finding that it no longer must plead with NATO to respect its weakness. Given the division and lack of direction in NATO, Russia finds it can wheel and deal once more, taking advantage of its operational freedom.17
The deployment of about 800 Russian troops in Bosnia in mid-February 1994 was in deed a "brilliant decision," as Vitaly Churkin, the Russian Deputy Foreign Minister, pointed out. 74 Russia has not only started fill the power vacuum in the Balkans, it has also guaranteed by doing so the territorial gains of the Bosnian Serbs.
The fact is that NATO's ability to function continues to lie with the United States' presence in Europe. The war in the former Yugoslavia proves this in a dramatic way. Despite the steps taken in February 1994, American hesitance in the former Yugoslavia indicates a lessened interest in crisis-laden Europe. One forgets that it was the US presence in Europe that brought that continent a half century of peace.
See The New York Times, "Nationalist Vote Toughens Russian Foreign Policy," January 25, 1994.
But why is it America's business? If the Europeans have failed to meet the challenge, why look to us? The answer is that this country is the only superpower. And the world will not move unless and until our President does. 
'7
The war in the Balkans and the Persian Gulf War clearly indicate, in their own respective ways, that the United States must continue to lead world efforts aimed at peace. The Gulf War is an example of a clear American leadership role from which the Europeans can benefit for their own security purposes. The war in. Yugoslavia is an example of what can happen in the absence of such leadership. Both cases underline Joseph S. Nye's "bound to lead"' 7 ' as a response to Paul Kennedy's Decline Thesis.
Further, the present crisis in the Balkans demonstrates that Europe will continue to rely on security and political ties with the US, despite efforts to create common foreign and security policies within the European Union.
These case studies also show that, since the end of the Cold War, each international crisis does not --or does not appear -to involve the United States' interests. America's relative dependence on established military alliances has also dwindled since the East-West confrontation was nullified.
175 
Lewis, A., "Waiting for Clinton," The New York Times, April 19, 1993. 176
(New York: Basic Books, 1990)
The international community is not an involvement that can be neglected for very long. The absence of American leadership in the former Yugoslavia may very well cause problems in the years to come. This is the case because the example Vladimir V.
Zhirinovsky takes from Bosnia is that the Americans will act more with rhetoric than with force unless their direct security interests are concerned. The Zhminovskys will misjudge NATO and the Western World, and when they misjudge them, this may provoke a war. If that happens it is much more the fault of NATO than those who would misjudge its reactions. In Bosnia the United States and its allies left their standards behind them, but the world will judge NATO by those standards. They will judge NATO by those standards in Ukraine, they will judge the Alliance by those standards in the Baltics and in Kazakhstan. There is a power vacuum in Europe. No power vacuum is ever absolute, but the very fact that it exists may in some sense provoke aggressive attitudes.
Nevertheless, the structural foundations of German-American security relations have remained unchanged in the New World Order. In some areas, these foundations have become even more significant. History suggests that democracies -especially American democracy --shift in their collective attitudes and beliefs. The person in Germany who believes that America's relationship to Europe is in German interests has to be concerned about America losing its trust in Germany. This is dependent on the Germans fully accepting foreign policy responsibilities of burden-sharing when issues go beyond mere German interests. The old borders of the Alliance were justified for maintaining stability in the bipolar world order of the Cold War: in the New World Disorder, these borders are simply relics from a time long past.
The most serious future controversies between Germany and America will deal with how much responsibility Germany will be willing to accept in the world -be it in free world trade or in collective security outside traditional NATO boundaries. This renders unacceptable the German attitude of not being able to deploy German soldiers to help out in humanitarian missions outside of Germany or well-defined NATO borders because of constitutional restrictions. This assertion becomes all the more true in light of the negative turn of events in Somalia and its effects on American domestic policy.
As one sees in Somalia and Bosnia, guerrilla forces, terrorists, and bandits involved in violent confrontations embrace a new type of military action. This is characterized by tribal, ethnic, and religious factions engaged in partisan warfare without using high-tech weapons and respecting the traditional conventions of war.'" Counter-guerrilla warfare remains politics by other means. Armed action -even in low-intensity conflict -must therefore correspond to political objectives.17' As demonstrated in the case of Somalia, unclear political goals lead to questionable and unclear military goals, which inevitably lead to a higher casualty rates. The unsuccessful hunt for Somali clan leader Aidid is an excellent example of this.
The traditional Americans military concepts and strategies that were successful in the Gulf War cannot solve low-intensity conflicts as seen in Somalia and Bosnia. "The M See 
Snow, 1993, pp. 64-84. 178
Mystique of US Air Power," as described by Cohen in light of the Gulf War, means little in guerrilla warfare.'" Firepower and military technology can never be a substitute for careful and flexible political thinking and military planning. This was true in the past and will especially hold true in future regional and/or low intensity conflicts. "The American Way of War" has proven to be a cornerstone of deterrence and played a tremendous role in winning the Cold War, when deterrence has failed, however, and it is necessary to use military force to deal with conflict, especially low intensity conflict, the need for a reexamination of US operational thinking becomes apparent.
Deterrence in order to avoid fighting was a principal of NATC, security policy in the Cold War-era The cases of Kuwait and Bosnia clearly demonstrate the appropriateness of such an approach, even in the New World Order. In the past, the followers of the German and American freedom movement (Friedensbewegung) had always wanted to overcome deterrence. Today, even a token peace would undoubtedly be a priceless commodity in the Balkans. How wonderful it would be if a country like  
(1990)
(1991)
The eve of World War II presents the worst case of neglected deterrence. A lack of deterrent will and capability, as well as the lack of security guarantees from powerful nations, made the attack on Poland possible. This is an historic lesson, which becomes all the more significant in light of the current debate on NATO's potential expansion to the East and rising ultranationalism in Russia.
The external security position of Germany has improved after the end of the Cold War in fiflly unexpected ways. The immediate threat by a hostile Eastern world power no longer exists. A united Germany remains allied to its Western neighbors. It is today "encircled by friends," but those who would therefore conclude that Germany no longer needs collective security and defense, should reflect on the imponderables in East Central Europe as well as on the southern flank of Europe.
Germany continues to depend on ties to the nuclear and naval forces of the North Atlantic Alliance as stated in the German Defense Policy Guidelines (Verteidigungspolitische Richilinien) of November 1992, because Germany remains a "non-nuclear power and continental middle-power with world-wide interests."'' The reliability of the allies and the reliability of the Germans as partners are the guarantors of Germany's security. Any attempt to change this state-of-affairs, to base national assertion more on national means, would not only be futile, it would lead directly to isolation and coalitions against Germany.
It is also evident that NATO, as an organization founded in the era of the Cold War, must be adapted to the new security environment and probably redefine its general mission as well as its roles and functions in order to overcome its present crisis. The disaster in the Balkans makes it crystal clear that no international organization can function without the political will and the consensus of its member states. This is also true for NATO. The war in the Balkans has proven traumatic for the Atlantic Alliance, as it points out how quickly the security consensus its members once shared dissipated after the Cold War had ended.
The current situation of the Alliance is rather fittingly described in NATO circles with an analogy. A huge dragon has been slain, but now one lives in a jungle with an alarming number of poisonous snakes. In many ways it was easier to keep an eye on the dragon. With respect to NATO, this implies it is very unlikely that all sixteen member states would be prepared to participate in joint defensive measures against each poisonous snake in like manner and at the same time.  No demographic study has yet been published that maps out his followers. But interviews and samplings showed strong support among soldiers and sailors, disaffected youth, pensioners, workers in military industry -those, who, like the young Zhirinovsky, felt rejected, abused, humiliated and impotent as their country tumbled from great power to economic cripple.'"
The Russian neo-fascist Zhirinovsky has not yet seized a foreign country as announced in his book "The Last Jump Towards the South"|9°; however, he is already playing an important part in Russian foreign policy. The "Zhirinovsky Factor" has, in the meantime, become Boris Yeltsin's most efficient instrument for urging Western support for his reform policy. In addition, he provides Yeltsin and his foreign minister Andrei V.
Kozyrev with arguments for a warning to Western Europe and the United States not to take any action that conflicts with Russian interests; this applies particularly to an eastward expansion of NATO. Any such step, Moscow argues, would only support the cause of Zhirinovsky and the ultra-nationalists and further add to their strength. In the meantime, however, the "Zhirinovsky Factor" is also used for countering Western criticism aimed at Russia's increasingly aggressive attitude toward its neighbors in the "near abroad".1 9 1
While the Western world is keeping a close watch on the course of Russia's reform policy, ready to provide trillions of dollars in economic aid, Moscow is 1a9
The New York Times, "Muscovite with Bravado," December 14, 1993, p Al.
See 
p. 7
In the current international political climate, the former Soviet republics and East Central Europe are being drawn into Moscow's orbit because of Russia's political weight in the region and the unwillingness or inability of states and groups of states outside the region to counter the Russian Federation. Such a situation grants Moscow all of the benefits and none of the responsibilities typically associated with a hegemonic status. Indeed, a case could be made that Russia enjoys, in some significant ways, a more advantageous geopolitical position now than the Soviet Union did at the height of its 
Ibid., p. 1 NATO membership. There is no immediate threat to Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, but the presence of about 12,000 to 17,000 Russian troops in Latvia alone,'" a population of more than 1.7 million ethnic Russians, and declining economies in the Baltics are identifiable as potential trouble spots, and will influence European security in the years to come."19 Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania understandably view the presence of Russian troops in their countries as an affront to their sovereignty. While the last Russian troops left Lithuania on 31 August 1993, protracted talks over troop withdrawal in Latvia have met with limited success.'" As far as these troops are concerned, the United States is trying to broker an agreement between both nations under which Russia will withdraw its remaining troops by the end of August, 1994, in exchange for a four-year extension of Russian civilian control of its early-warning installation near Skundra. 2 °Russia's Foreign Minister Kozyrev "reportedly told a meeting of Russian ambassadors to the former Soviet states that it would be dangerous for Russian troops to withdraw completely from the area of the former Soviet Union, because 'unfriendly 197 See The New York Times, "US Tells A Visiting Latvian Official That Russia Is Moving to Withdraw its Troops," February 1, 1994, p. A4.
See Trapans, J. A. (ed), Baltic Security: Conference in Salzburg," in RFE/RL 
REPORT, Vol. 1, No. 49, December 11, 1992
See Jackson, W. D., "Russia after the Crisis. Imperial Temptations: Ethnics Abroad," in Orbis, Winter 1994, pp. 9 -12.
The New York Times, 
February 1, 1994.
For this purpose, both the levers of economic pressure and the attempt to involve Ukraine in the process of formation of interstate structures within CIS, as well as in joint 201 Ibid.
Ibid.
The New York Times, January 25, 1 '94. of this vacuum would provoke these two countries to either regard Poland as a classic, 19th-century-style buffer state or as the interface of the two spheres of influence."' In general, the present situation, like that of the entire region, reminds one very much of West Germany's situation at the beginning of the Cold War. Initially, with respect to security policy, West Germany was also a conceptual "no-man's land" the defense of which was originally not intended. West Germany's only advantage as compared to Poland was the fact that allied forces had already been stationed on its territory. Poland's current advantage, as compared to West Germany back in 1947/48, is the fact that it is exposed to a diplomatic rather than a military threat. Yet, the ultimate consequence might be the same: instability and decline instead of stability, security, and economic development. DER SPIEGEL, "Die Knute zeigen", 
January 10, 1994, p.
Hence, the attitude toward Russia poses a particular problem to the West. There will be no Russia tailored to the preferences of the West. On the one hand, everything must be done to support Russia's projected reform policy; on the other hand, we must point out to Russia the limits of its imperialist aspirations. This amounts to a policy featuring a balance between cooperation and confrontation. In pursuit of its interests, the West must seek to protect Russia from its own temptations.
NATO: "A dead knight in armor?" This was the provocatively posed question in the German newspaper DIE WELT ("The World").2 0 One can also ask which new tasks for NATO can forge a new bond between both sides of the Atlantic, after the old main mission has been fulfilled?
The communiqu6s of NATO in recent years have rather been reading like "want ads" in a local paper. There is praise for the surely useful but limited activities in the
See ROhM, L., "Ein toter Ritter in der Roistungr' in DIE WELT, August 28, 1993.
North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) with the Eastern European countries and those of the former Soviet Union. There is the Alliance as a possible military subcontractor of the CSCE and the UN. And the American warnings are not the only ones to point out that the Western military organization should actively participate in international crisis management (out-of-area), if it is to have a function at all. To quote the influential American Senator Richard Lugar. "out of area or out of business"; either NATO engages in international crisis management or it will have to shut down. NATO Security General Manfred W6rer, however, adamantly refuted Lugar's logic in his speech from 
September 10, 1993
Germany sees NATO's most important future mission as promoting stable political conditions in East Central Europe. 2 "' This ultimately means the acceptance of the East Central European countries into membership of the Atlantic Alliance.
The journey of the East Central European countries toward democracy and market economies must be supported and be made irreversible. For the sake of its 210 See NATO Press Service, 
September 10, 1993, p. 1. 211
Vol. 35, No. 2 Summer 1993, pp. 135 -136.
The concept of stability transfer is not directed at anyone in particular but designed to benefit everyone. Stability in and for Europe is a task for the future to be tackled by the so-called Euro-Atlantic community. This requires a lasting US commitment to Europe and due consideration of the interests of all European countries (including Russia).
The NATO leadership is in the process of realizing that the transfer of stability to the East is currently the most important challenge of the Euro-Atlantic community besides the war in the former Yugoslavia. NATO is thying to develop a viable concept for meeting this strategic challenge. Parallel to this process, the key players -the United States and Russia --are still trying to redefine their national positions in order to adapt to the drastic changes in the international environment.
During his campaign, Bill Clinton, the first US president after the Cold War, committed himself to resolving the domestic problems of his country. The shift of priority from foreign to domestic policy was the essential element of his program. 2 "' In doing so, President Clinton is tackling a difficult task. He maintains the US claim to leadership while seeking to keep the lowest profile possible.
See Rube, 1993, p. 134.
According to Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, the concept of "enlargement" is to substitute the previous concept of "containment"; instead of countering the former expansionist Soviet foreign policy, market economy and democracy are supposed to be extended.'" However, it has not been specified yet how these challenging objectives are to be achieved in practice. In fact, Washington's policy toward the East is in sharp contrast to an enlargement policy; it leaves the countries of East Central Europe in a state of insecurity and instability while seeking, in a "Russia first" approach, "global partnership" with the old strategic counterpart in Moscow."6 As in the days of the Cold War, it is once again the nuclear arms and arms control considerations which serve as the current guidelines for the US foreign policy with respect to Europe. From the American point of view, this policy requires that all nuclear weapons of the former Soviet Union be concentrated in the hands of Russia. This arises from the fear that, in view of the uncertain future of this region, the nuclear arsenals might fall into the wrong hands and thus turn into an immediate threat to the United See for example, The New York Times, "Bill Clinton, The New Kid On the Block," 
January 9, 1994, p. 6.
The question is whether this is really the appropriate way of pointing out to Russia the limits of its imperialist ambitions. It remains to be seen whether the new military doctrine spells much blessing in this context. As a matter of fact, no lessons Germany is aware that a strong partnership with the United States and a solid US commitment in NATO and the European security structure are decisive requisites for security and stability in Europe. It is on this solid basis that it must also be in US interests to bring security and stability to the East. This is the only way lasting peace can be guaranteed in Europe. When Germany therefore supports NATO membership for East Central Europe, it is trying to prevent the conditions Treverton described that characterized the interwar period.
Germany does not want a security partnership with Russia to replace its partnership with the United States. A "Berlin-Moscow Axis" can and must not exist; but it is possible to come to terms with a European security structure that neither excludes Russia nor is directed against Russia. One must agree with Vaclav Havel when he said that NATO's advancing toward Russia's borders is "not the advance of an enemy, but that of a sphere of democracy and stability." 2 32 The enormous reconstruction process of this huge 231 Aspin, L., The Bottom-Up Review: Forces for a New Era, September 1, 1993.
Security relations between the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany have always been relations between two unequal partners, and this will be the case in the future. Nevertheless, relations continue to be successful to this day.
The active support of the US allowed Germany to realize its most important foreign political goals during the postwar period. At the height of the Cold War, the relationship with the United States within the framework of NATO enabled Germany's gaining partial sovereignty, reintroduction into the community of European nations, and the creation of external security, which is a requisite for domestic stability. On the basis of these solid security relations, cooperative relations with the East were realized, not to mention the end goal of German policy: full sovereignty and German reunification.
The United States also reached its most important goal of the postwar period: the collapse of the Soviet Union. Accordingly, the geostrategic and political factors involved in the relationship between Germany and the US have drastically changed. Both countries appear to need each other less in the future than they did in the past.
The latest challenges for both countries within the framework of NATO and the UN have demonstrated that the known structural realities in their security relations have gained more explosive force as a result of the fact that there is no longer a common threat. The asymmetries in these structural realities act as faultlines that run through transatlantic relations; they are the cause of constant tremors when the senior partner changes the direction of policy, and the junior partner has to adjust his policy to those changes.
The role of nuclear weapons and American nuclear guarantees for Europe's security (especially Germany's) have been the biggest area of conflict in German-American security relations for over four decades. The latent, long-term crisis in this area began with the buildup to the nuclear stalemate of the superpowers, and ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The Federal Republic, which had been thinking in terms of conventional defense from the beginning, had worried since the beginning the American policy of nuclear deterrence that America could not back its nuclear guarantees, which risked involvement in a nuclear confrontation. Germany therefore closely followed all negotiations in the area of nuclear arms control and all developments in the area of nuclear weapons technology, particularly because Germany would have been in the center of the nuclear battlefield. The biggest crises in German-American security relations necessarily centered around nuclear issues.
The United States will probably remain ready to provide protection to Europe in the framework of extended deterrence. This readiness, however, will be combined with a policy revolving around greater independence from alliance responsibilities in Europe.
The Europeans will not be allowed to relent in their own conventional (and nuclear)
efforts. Russia as a giant Eurasian empire remains a major nuclear power and will continue to act as such in Europe, even in a European order based on cooperation instead of confrontation. The appropriate response for alliance policy is to improve the firepower and mobility (including deployment mobility) of European forces. NATO efforts to create reaction forces that are deployable on short notice for crisis management and crisis response is a step in the right direction. Non-nuclear Germany will have continue to lay claim to inclusion under the American nuclear umbrella to avoid the possibility of nuclear threat and blackmail; the other West European states (and the evolving East Central
European states) will have to do the same.
American experts predict that the nuclearization of German forces will come to pass. 
233
Meanwhile, American foreign policy in the post-Cold War era continues to be defined by the presence of nuclear weapons. New conflicts and crises occur because Washington, in following its "Russia first" approach, accepts the fact that the newly independent states in Eastern Europe remain in the Russian sphere of influence. The US is doing this to assure that strategic partner Russia is the only nuclear counterpart which must be dealt with in this region of the world. A firm and decisive American foreign policy is still necessary, however, a policy that would respect and support the will and national interests of East Central European states and clearly demonstrate to the Russian side that there are clear boundaries to realizing the Russian imperialist vision.
Deterrence in the nuclear age was in American hands. The new deterrence will not be controlled by the Americans alone because they are now putting more emphasis on their own domestic policy. Europe is being tested, mainly outside old NATO borders, as a result of the failure of current policies to provide a deterrent to aggression. Clear goals and a solid political will stood behind deterrence as practiced in the Cold War.
Deterrence in the present era will not be possible as long as there is an absence of such clear goals and a solid political will.
America today enjoys a significantly greater freedom of action in the world than it did when confronting the Soviet Union in the context of every international issue. The almost complete elimination of a ballistic missile-based nuclear threat for the "island of America" and the end of the East-West confrontation have made this possible. During the Cold War, America was obliged to maintain a military presence to the east and west of the American continent. This continually led to conflicts with the allies within regional NATO, who considered every American military deployment in the Pacific sphere as a compromise to their own security. The same was true when the Americans would demand support from the West Europeans when deploying outside of Europe. demonstrate that future challenges for transatlantic partnership will take place outside old NATO boundaries. Formerly clearly defined limits of regional and global perspectives, as well as the limits of the alliance, thus become ambiguous. For the United States this means that in the future it is likely to become involved in a regional crisis. For Germany it means that the Germans can no longer think only in terms of security guarantees for its NATO allies. Thus the most difficult future structural problem in German-American security relations will revolve around the share of responsibility for collective security outside its own regional interests that Germany will be willing to accept. The share of responsibility that Germany will be able to cope with will determine whether German-American security relations have a positive future.
One cannot assume that a power on the other side of the Atlantic from Europe, 5000 kilometers away, would feel obligated to take on defense duties which have as their objective the preservation of Western Europe. The mother in Chicago must constantly be told why it is necessary that her son is defending the "Fulda Gap." The person in Germany that believes that Germany has an irrefutable right to US protection must be reminded of the domestic political problems the US has experienced in relation to overseas involvement, even at the height of the Cold War, that make it so difficult to fulfill the security guarantees which have constituted Americn foreign policy. Senator Mike Mansfield's efforts to reduce the American military presenice overseas serve as an example of this.
Every new military challenge on the part of Moscow has always done the Americans and West Europeans the favor of providing a justification for keeping US soldiers in Europe. As has been seen, the elimination of the global military threat has led to more emphasis on domestic politics in the US. This takes place at the same time that economic and other domestic concerns force Washington to downplay foreign issues in order to focus on what American voters feel are issues "closer to home," making it even more difficult to raise the issue of foreign commitments, much less justify the deployment of American soldiers overseas. This is another important reason for America's hesitation toward involvement in the situation in the former Yugoslavia and a NATO expansion to the East. Nothing could be more fatal for the credibility of American policy than for the American government to take on new security guarantees that nobody at home agrees with, because it has never been able to successfully maintain any foreign policy without popular support, and its allies around the world know this.
The pressure on American domestic policy to reduce American commitments overseas necessarily increases the already-mentioned expectations and pressures on the security forum of the EU -excluding the North American partners -while still relying on NATO to execute any military operation? In the long run, the interests of the United
States and Canada cannot be maintained if the Europeans formulate positions without
North American participation and move to act on those positions in the NATO Council.
These nations will doubtless perceive such attempts as a fundamental rejection of the community spirit of NATO.
NATO remains the most important forum for consultation as far as the security of its members is concerned. For this reason, the WEU must be seen to enhance NATO's strength, rather than being a duplication of structures. Finally, there should be no competition between NATO and WETJ; the development of WEU's operational role has to be continued in an open and complementary manner.
Discussion of burden-sharing issues took place in the shadow of the military superiority of the Soviet Union until 1989. The new dimension of burden-sharing, which is closely related with the key phrase "out of area," has already been expanded on in the area of geopolitical perspectives.
In the future, the phrase "burden-sharing" will no longer be seen only in the narrow sense of military and financial burden-sharing, but must involve the sharing of leadership and responsibility as well, in order to alleviate pressure on the US. The example of
14 See Borgert, H.-L., "is See Wiggershaus, N., "Nordatlantische Bedrohungsperzeptionen im Kalten Krieg
George, A.L., and Smoke, R., 1974, p. 31.   
b
b
181
181
See Nogee, J.L., and Donaldson, R.H., Soviet Foreign Policy since World War II,
4th ed. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992), p. 81. Europa-Archiv, 12/1989, pp. D536 ff.
SeeWiggershaus, N., "Nordatlantische Bedrohungsperzeptionen im Kalten Krieg  1948-1956," pp. 25-30.   
See Freedman, L., The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989), pp. 69-71.
  Adenauer, K., Konrad Adenauer -Erinnerungen 1955-1959 (Stuttgart: Deutsche  Verlags-Anstalt, 1967), p. 15 ff.
SeeHaftendorn, 1991, pp. 144-148.   
SeeHanrieder, W., Deutschland, Europa, Amerika. Die Aussenpolitik der Bundesrepublik  Deutschland 1949-1989 (Paderbom: Ferdinand Sch6ningh, 1991), p. 7 ft.
See Mai, G., Westliche Sicherheitspolitik im Kalten Krieg: Der Korea-Krieg und die deutscheWiederbewaffnung 1950, Boppard am Rhein, 1977, pp. 23-24.   
3SSee Prasuhn, B., Strategisches Denken in Frankreich und den USA (Herford: Mittler undSohn, 1985), p. 77.
See Greiner, C., "Die militarische Eingliederung der Bundesrepublik Deutschland in die WEU und dieNATO 1954-1957,: in Militargeschichtliches Forschungsamt (ed.), Anfange westdeutscherSicherheitspolitik 1945-1956, Band 3, Munich, 1993, pp. 627-629.   
See Kaiser, K., and Lellouche, P. (eds.), Deutsch-Franzosische Sicherheitspolitik. Auf dem Wege zur Gemeinsamkeit? (Bonn: Europa Verlag, 1986), pp.6-9.   
5,Ibid., p. 219.S2SeeGeorge, A.L., and Smoke, R., 1974, p. 30.   
  Richardson, 1966, p. 70.   
  See Herf, 1991, pp. 60-62.   
SeeNogee and Donaldson, 1992, pp. 368-369.   
See Zehrer, 1992, p.3 1 0 .   
Ibid., p. 63.
SeeTime, October 18, 1993.   
See SOddeutsche Zeitung, "Deutscher Abzug im Sog der USA," October 18, 1993.
See Lerch, G., "Wie weiter in Somalia?" in Frankfurter Allgemeine,
October 12, 1993.
SeeMartenson, S., "Von Feind und Freund verlassen," in Deutsches AIlgemeines  Sonntagsblatt, February 19, 1993.   
See Deutscher Bundestag,Plenarprotokoll 12/5, Bonn, January 30, 1991, p. 69   
See Sommer, D., "Das Eis ist gebrochen," inTRUPPENPRAXIS 5/1993, p. 458.   
See Sikfdeutsche Zeitung, "Robe: Bundeswehr in Somalia von USA abhangig," November16, 1993.   
'oSee DER SPIEGEL, "...morgen die ganzeWelt," 16/1993, pp. 18-22.   
SeeGlenny, M., The Fall of Yugoslavia (New York: Penguin Books, 1992).
See The New York Times, "NATO to Hold Emergency Talks on Fighting Around Sarajevo,"February 7, 1994, p. A7.   
'46SeeGillessen, G., "Vers~umte `bschreckung," in Frankfurter Allgemeine, April 28, 1993.   
SeeHoward, M., 1972, pp. 31-52.    
See Europjische Sicherheit"Die NATO und der Balkan," 7/1993, p. 326.   
Ibid.
See Cancian, M.F., "The Wehrmacht in Yugoslavia: Lessons of the Past?" in Parameters,Autumn 1993, pp.76-81.   Tucker and Hendrickson, 1993, p. 15.   
See Wall Street Journal, "Score One for Russia at Sarajevo," February 22, 1994.,74See The New York Times, "Russia' s Balkan Card," February 18, 1994.
See Cohen, E.A., "The Mystique of US Air Power," in Foreign Affairs, January/February 1994, pp. 109-124.
Bundesminister der Verteidigung, Verteidigungspolitische Richtlinien, November 1992, p. 4.
l9,See Crow, S., "Drang nach draulgen," in DIEZEIT, Jan 21, 1994, p. 4.   
SeeSommer, T., DIE ZEIT, October 29, 1993.   
See The New York Times,February 1, 1994   
Quoted from Rahl, L., "Etappe zur NATO," in DIEWELT  December 28, 1993.   
See for example,Treverton, 1993, p. 11.   
The author would like to thank 
Lt Colonel Larsen
Institute for National Security Studies (INSS), U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado
Neue Ruhr Zeitung
Die Truppe ist bereit zun UNO-Einsatz
The 
New York Times
Europeans Welcoming US Help in the Balkans
The 
New York Times
How European Unity Over Bosnia Eluded Clinton
The 
New York Times, "Clinton's Security Aide Gives A Vision for Foreign Policy
The 
New York Times
Somali Leader Gets Mixed Signals From the US About Its Next Steps
The 
New York Times, "Muscovite with Bravado
The 
New York Times, "Treacherous Transition
The 
New York Times
"Bill Clinton
New Kid On the Block
The 
New York Times
NATO Warns Bosnian Serbs Of Air Strikes
The 
New York Times, "Clinton Looks Homeward -Abroad
Folks Back Home Won
The 
New York Times
Accords Signed on Ukraine's Atom Arms
The New York Times, "
US Tells a Visiting Latvian Official That Russia Is Moving to Withdraw Its Troops
The 
New York Times, "Ukraine Joining Plan for NATO Partnership
The 
New York Times
NATO to Hold Emergency Talks on Fighting Around Sarajevo
The 
New York Times, "Russia's Balkan Card
Changing Nature of American Power (New York: Basic Books
1990
essentials. Many different interests, including regional interests, had to be reconciled.' Hence, the basic focus of the coalition effort was on restoring Kuwaitfs sovereignty, bringing hostilities to an early end, and, in the American view, rapidly pulling the US forces out of the theater. Before long, the failure to reach agreement on eradicating the fundamental cause of the problem, Saddam Hussein, proved to be a serious mistake.
Having overcome the former bipolar division in the world community, the United States was in a position, in this first war of the post-Cold War era, to pursue the classical approach to maintaining a balance of power that has been pursued for the past two centuries. The United States, as England in the past, has two global monopolitical advantages that perfectly lend themselves to a maritime strategy. On one hand, the United States is the only nation to still retain the military resources required for global power projection -similar to England with her fleet in the past." On other, given the demise of the Soviet ballistic missile threat, the US has regained the relative invulnerability of a maritime power protected by surrounding seas. Invulnerability and the potential for power projection provide the United States with options no other power in the world has. Invulnerability engenders independence and self-assurance. One can afford to maintain alliances, to join ad hoc coalitions like the one in the Gulf, or to act on one's own. As with Great Britain in the past, the potential for power projection has always permitted intervening in any comer of the world without having to maintain a 95 
See Snow, 1993, p. 186
See Howard, M., The Continental Commitment. The Dilemma of British Defense Policy in the Era of the Two World Wars (London: Ashfield Press, 1972).
"The need for NATO to assert its continued relevance in the absence of a 'clear and present danger' to the Fast, provided part of the background for the decision to expand its activities into the undartered territory of peacekeeping."'43 Nevertheless, up until the summer of 1992, NATO had more or less stayed out of the Balkan War (except for a few warships and planes to enforce the embargo).
NATO's reluctance to become involved was attributable in part to the United States' attitude toward the Balkans. "On May 18, 
[1993]
See Schmidt-HAuer, C., "Sein Kampf," in DIE ZEIT, January 21, 1994, pp. 7 -8.
See The New York Times, January 25, 1994.
Ibid., p. 7.
Ibid.
According to Foreign Minister Kozyrev, Russia plays a "special role" in what was the former Soviet Union. "To ignore that role", he said in a recent speech, "is to ignore historic ties, what has been achieved over centuries and special relations in this space sealed by the common history and culture of the muitimillion Russian-speaking population.""'5
Russia's new military doctrine, by stating "that the security interests of the Russian Federation and other members of the CIS may make it necessary to station Russian troops outside Russia's borders"" 6 , provides another serious indication as to Moscow's view on the sovereignty of Russia's neighbors. Moscow continues to regard the former Soviet republics as subordinates and not as equals.
In East Central Europe, as in the former Soviet Union, history has taught Russia's neighboring countries to be cautious. Recent events, like Vladimir V.
Zhirinovsky's success in the parliamentary elections and the resignation of top economic reformers in the Russian Cabinet, have alarmed the whole region.
Among the former Soviet republics, it is, besides Ukraine, the Baltic states which are most concerned about their freshly gained independence. Thus, it is no Sonderforschungsvorhaben "Analysen Sicherheits-fVerteidigungspolitik IV' (SASVP IV), Ebenhausen, 1993, Band 3 B, pp. 59 -65.
See The New York Times, OUkraine joining Plan for NATO Partnership," 
February 7, 1994.
Olechowski, A., OPolen und die Nordatlantische Allianz," in Frankfurter 
Rundschau, January 3, 1994.
Hence, it is Germany in particular which commits itself to advancing cooperation with the Eastern partners.
This concept of policy entails several ideas. The less crisis-prone the East Central European states are, the safer Western Europe will be, the more effective unforeseen events from the great, yet unfinished Russian empire can be absorbed.
Germany and Europe need a stable political environment, this means first of all stable neighboring countries.
In order to achieve long-term stability in East Central Europe, the following conditions must be realized: Democratic structures and democratic institutions; sound economic development based on a market economy: balanced ethnic interests, respect for minorities, and guarantees of fundamental and internationally recognized human rights. 2 1 2 However, the basic requirement for a stable East Central Europe is the elimination of the existing power vacuum. Security policy and economic policy are intimately linked to each other. A successful security policy will create the prerequisites for political, economic, and social advancement. Strong liberal economies are essential to security, and good trade relations are an important characteristic of international stability. The containment policy that was applied by the Atlantic allies to the Warsaw Pact countries in the Cold War era has to be replaced by a policy of political and economic cooperation and development. All this -from a German perspective -is only 212 See Kinkel, K., Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany, "Die Rolle Deutschlands in der Wehpolitik," in Presse und Informationsamt der Bundesregierung (ed.), Bulletin, 
March 3, 1993.
Kozyrev, A., "Don' t Threaten Us," The New York Times, March 18, 1994, p.
See The New York Times, "Accords Signed on Ukraine' s Atom Arms, 
January 15, 1994. 220
Frankfurter Allgemeine, "Bonn liegt nichts an einer neuen ' Bipolarit~t'," January 29, 1994, p. 1 .
particularly important to avoid a new American-Russian bipolarity at the expense of the other East Central European states.'
When President Clinton, after one year in office, took off to Europe for the first time to participate in the NATO summit in Brussels on January 10 and 11, 1994, he could be assured that the majority of the American people and of Congress would not approve any additional commitment to Europe, not after the pictures of an American soldier being dragged through the streets of Mogadishu had been shown on television.1 3 However, since any expansion of NATO --and thus the commitment to mutual assistance -might ultimately imply the employment of American soldiers for instance for the defense of Poland or even Latvia, it would be difficult to make this plausible to a country which is shifting priority to domestic issues.
The "Russia-firsters in charge"22 4 are not unhappy about this stance, since it provides the US president another domestic political argument for offering -in line with Moscow's opposition to an eastward expansion of NATO --"partnership" rather than "membership". For the European allies this is one more rea.on for concern. "Many Europeans worry that the Administration is so determined to avoid offending the 222 Ibid.
See The New York Times, "Clinton Looks Homeward -Abroad, President Is Careful Not to Promise What the Folks Back Home Won' t Support," 
January 13, 1994, p.
The New York Times, 
January 9, 1994.
Treverton's essay is so important because it reflects America's fears toward Europe's future development. German-Russian relations in the European power structure especially warrant attention. The old ghosts of Rapallo are still around.' It is fear that Germany will once again (as in 1922) try to establish itself as the sole major power between East and West, and possibly trying to pit them against each other. Further, it is feared that Germany could improve its relations with Russia and at the same time loosen its ties with the United States.'
Treverton is right in his analogy that the vast Russian empire today, as was the case after tsardom, finds itself in a deep domestic crisis with an uncertain way out. He is also right in saying that the United States has reduced its presence in Europe. America's 227 See Treverton, G.F., "Europe' s Past, Europe' s Future: Finding an Analogy for Tomorrow," in 
Orbis, Winter 1993, pp. 1-20. 22a
See 
Kennan, G.F., Russia and the West under Lenin and Stalin (New York: Penguin, 1961)
See Greiner, B., "Angst vor Rapallo -Amerikanische Reaktionen auf den Fall der Mauer," in BIJtter fOr deutsche und internationale 
Politik, 2/1990, pp. 159-167.
Federal Rqpblic of Germany to take on foreign policy responsibility beyond Germany's traditional regional interests. The United States is changing its policy. The junior partner must once again follow.
It is therefore critical for Germany to successfully conclude its domestic debate on the deployment of German troops outside of Germany or well-defined NATO borders; it is critical that Germany fully participate in all of the kinds of military missions which fall under the leadership of NATO and/or the UN. European pillar, the WEU, which had been emphasized by the Europeans as the security component of an integrated and more politically independent Europe, encountered structural realities of its own.. The establishment of the WEU, which was supposed to demonstrate consensus, actually presented additional problem issues to be resolved.. The question is whether security is really served by a proliferation of security institutions that are all created for the same purpose? Does it make sense to postulate the WEU as the Yugoslavia, however, demonstrates that it will be a long time before such levels of shrn are realized.
The European defense identity and the desired European security structure appeared as paper tigers in the former Yugoslavia. Despite the European Union, Western Europe is not yet mature enough for political leadership. This is also an important reason why the WEU -for the present, at least -cannot take the place of NATO.
The Europe of the future will rely on the leadership of the sole remaining world power: the United States of America. Without the leadership of an overseas and non-partisan power, NATO would lose its ability to act, because the West European partners' national interests would get in the way. Europe would then lose the only functioning security system capable of filling the existing power vacuum in East Central Europe. Given recent events Russia, the absence of the United States and NATO would again make Europe vulnerable to political developments that might result in a "Second Cold War."2
The future of NATO will especially dependent on the future of German-American relations. The United States needs a dependable European "partner in leadership" who will play an active role in European unity and at the same time serve as a bridge to Eastern Europe. Germany is the only country that can do this. Germany needs America not only because Germany as a non-nuclear power is dependent on US nuclear security guarantees, but because this partnership offers the best way to alleviate fear about a reunified Germany, particularly in East Central Europe.
234 
The Wall Street Journal, "The Second Cold War," February 17, 1994.