# ID: 4303db854b8d40aca28e43ef8bfb5ba1
# Title: Prussian absorption of US lessons in the military uses of railroads
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
The introduction of the railroad into military operations in the mid-nineteenth century allowed armies to maneuver and extend operations in locations that previously would have been inaccessible to large formations of soldiers. The United States' prosecution of the Civil War set the standard for using this new technology to support operations. Other nations observed the American example, including Prussia, which also had substantial rail assets and a strategic capability gap that locomotives could fulfill. This thesis examined three campaigns of the mid-nineteenth century, the U.S. capture of Atlanta in 1864, the Prussian invasion of Bohemia in 1866, and the Prussian invasion of France in 1870. These three case studies illustrated that the U.S. Army's experiences in the Civil War offered valuable lessons in using railroads that could have addressed strategic risks assumed by Prussia in the prosecution of its wars with Austria and France. However, differences in geography, limitations in time, lack of experience, and divergent approaches to war meant that Prussia only appreciated and absorbed those lessons in part and resorted to past expedients rather than full adoption of the American model.
The introduction of the railroad into military operations in the mid-nineteenth century allowed armies to maneuver and extend operations in locations that previously would have been inaccessible to large formations of soldiers. The United States' prosecution of the Civil War set the standard for using this new technology to support operations. Other nations observed the American example, including Prussia, which also had substantial rail assets and a strategic capability gap that locomotives could fulfill. This thesis examined three campaigns of the midnineteenth century, the U.S. capture of Atlanta in 1864, the Prussian invasion of Bohemia in 1866, and the Prussian invasion of France in 1870. These three case studies illustrated that the U.S. Army's experiences in the Civil War offered valuable lessons in using railroads that could have addressed strategic risks assumed by Prussia in the prosecution of its wars with Austria and France. However, differences in geography, limitations in time, lack of experience, and divergent approaches to war meant that Prussia only appreciated and absorbed those lessons in part and resorted to past expedients rather than full adoption of the American model. As a total phenomenon, its dominant tendencies always make war a paradoxical trinity -composed of primordial violence, hatred, and enmity, which are to be regarded as a blind natural force; of the play of chance and probability within which the creative spirit is free to roam; and of its element of subordination, as an instrument of policy, which makes it subject to reason alone.
-Carl von Clausewitz, On War
The century between Waterloo and the Somme saw war transform from an event decided in an afternoon among well-drilled formations on grassy knolls to a multi-year saga of attrition endured by millions huddled in trenches. The Industrial Revolution arbitrated this conversion of human conflict from ritual maneuver to mass carnage.
Conscription and the steam engine fed this growth in the breadth and ferocity of combat.
The introduction of the railroad enabled the employment of newfound military might across the operational environment.
Revolutionary France's social and political development of levée en masse in the late eighteenth century offered nations an unprecedented quantity of troops to mobilize in a time of war. 
1
3
4
In order to exercise these potent legions as instruments of policy, governments sought proficient measures to sustain the conscripts. The increasing size of armies made it more difficult to feed the assembled soldiers and rendered the tradition of forage or requisition on the march unreliable. 
5
to provide a means of provision that reduced spoilage and allowed for long-distance transport of rations. 
6
2
3 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 89. 
4
In all conflicts prior to the mid-nineteenth century, the only method of carrying provisions overland consisted solely of muscle-powered conveyance propelled either by foot or hoof. This organic means of transport had set limitations upon capacity and velocity due to the laws of nature. For example, a Civil War-era supply wagon pulled by six mules could move a two-ton cargo, fifty percent of which would be fodder, at fifteen miles per day for a maximum distance of approximately 300 miles. 
7
10
The steam engine proffered a mechanical potency to close that capability gap and provide field commanders freedom of action to exploit their massive formations further 
7
8
10
11
12
The increased opportunities offered by railroads became the key ingredient in maximizing the effectiveness of the conscript armies of the post-Napoleonic age. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the great powers and those aspiring to greatness sought to take advantage of the pallet of martial prospects enabled by the steam locomotive. The achievements of conscription and industrialization may have facilitated each nation's efforts to mobilize and arm its citizenry. However, such labors only saw fruition via the development of railroads to deploy and maintain those forces in distant areas of operation. The volume and tempo of replenishment by steam train removed the restraints that nature had in time immemorial held over the desires of states and generals.
The capability of rail allowed armies to exercise greater operational reach and nations to fulfill unprecedented strategic aims.
American exploitation of rail in support of the Civil War represented the first historical example of steam locomotives playing a comprehensive and decisive role in prosecuting a major war. There were no equivalent predecessors. 
13
14
15
16
13
15
Moltke did not lack for data to accomplish that goal. In 1863, the Prussian General Staff dispatched a formal observer, Captain Justus Sheibert of the Preußische Ingenieurkorps, the Prussian Engineer Corps, to scrutinize technical and operational developments in the war. 17 However, Sheibert was not alone in his observations of the Civil War. Approximately 200,000 native Germans volunteered to serve in the U.S.
Army, and a number of them published their experiences. One participant, Otto Heusinger, served from 1861 to 1865 with the 41 st New York Infantry Regiment and, in 1869, published a well-written account of his experiences in a book entitled Amerikanische Kriegsbilder. 
18
17
18
Borcke. He had his wartime pursuits and reflections recorded in a series of popular articles in Blackwood's Magazine from 1865 to 1866. Borcke's commentary concentrated mainly on cavalry tactics and addressed other military disciplines, including the importance and difficulties of logistics. 
19
20
Prussia's official observer, Captain Sheibert, provided the General Staff with an all-encompassing review of Confederate military operations in the Civil War. His original mandate had been to examine and record the effect of rifled artillery against fortifications of earth, masonry, and iron. 
21
22
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
However, he also appreciated the problems of bringing those resources to bear through transportation and supply systems in America's rugged terrain and vast distances. 
27
23
24
25
26
28
29
30
31
Upon his return to Prussia in late 1863, Sheibert submitted a complete report of his experiences to the Prussian General Staff. He also discussed his findings with key military leaders, including Generalfeldmarschall Friedrich Graf von Wrangel, who assumed supreme command of the Austro-Prussian army in the war with Denmark in 1864, and Prince Friedrich Karl, who commanded the Prussian First Army in the 
28 Luvaas,
The Military Legacy of the Civil War,
227. 29 Ibid.,
66,
72. 30 Ibid.,
122. 31
Bohemian Campaign of 1866. 
32
33
32
33
34
35 Ibid.,
119. subject. 36
37
With that in mind, the historical question remains: If the United States offered valuable lessons regarding the military uses of railroads in the Civil War, could Prussia have absorbed them in time to apply that knowledge to enhance the execution of its campaigns against Austria in 1866 and France in 1870?
The introduction of the railroad into the military campaigns of the American Civil War (1861-1865), the Austro-Prussian War (1866), and the Franco-Prussian War (1870-71) brought a whole host of opportunities and challenges for these nations and their armies. Historians have studied how each country responded to this groundbreaking technology. However, scholars have not paid as much attention to comparing and contrasting their efforts or examining if either nation could have absorbed and applied the lessons from the other. Scholarship has fallen into three categories, general histories, technical subject analyses, and examinations of lessons offered.
The first type of examination has consisted of general history reviews of conflicts in which the writer considered logistics and railroads within the greater context of an 
36
37
The second category of the study examined the technical subjects of railroads and logistics as stand-alone subjects, similar to concentrating on the precise details of other warfighting functions. The first such treatises arose from the mid-nineteenth-century observations of military officers recording their views on these subjects in the American Civil War. The reports of the U.S. Quartermaster General and Sheibert exemplified these early primary source accounts. As subsequent wars produced new instances of the exploitation of rail, historians gained perspective on developing trends. Edwin Pratt set the standard in this regard with his one-volume history, The Rise of Rail-Power. He examined the military use of the steam locomotive in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and other authors have frequently quoted his work. Christian Wolmar's A Short History of the Railroad offered an excellent summary of rail technology from its earliest beginnings to its latest iterations. His survey is given from a global perspective encompassing corners of the world not typically seen in American texts. Christopher Gabel's Railroad Generalship proffered an in-depth analysis of the role of trains in the Civil War, and Earl Hess' Civil War Logistics presented a well-rounded review of the supply efforts and transportation platforms of the war. Finally, Martin Van Creveld's Supplying War and Kenneth Macksey's For Want of a Nail provided excellent critiques of railroads and logistics in wars across the modern era. The only limitation to these works has been the technical focus that sacrifices a larger historical context that might explain why expertise in train usage was or was not transmitted between nations.
The third area of related historical research centered on the transmission of lessons between nations to improve performance and doctrine. These tomes centered mainly on the three main branches of combat arms in the nineteenth century, infantry, cavalry, and artillery. Arthur Wagner's treatise The Campaign of Königgrätz and Jay Luvaas' The Military Legacy of the Civil War made excellent arguments on how the experiences in the Civil War offered fertile ground for study by military analysts of contemporary military powers in the nineteenth century. However, these works did not focus or provide much detail on railroad usage, nor did they examine whether the knowledge transmitted between nations was absorbed and applied to follow-on campaigns. That omission became the purpose of this thesis.
The record shows that observations of American action by foreign entities took place during the Civil War. Those experiences were recorded, published, and transmitted to their respective services in their home countries. However, such surface treatment of the data proves nothing regarding education. As with every other aspect of war, the proof of learning lies in its practical application in the classroom of martial experience. This paper will present a trio of case studies, each representative of a nation's handling of rail technology within a conflict contemporary to the other country's experience. From this examination, the goal is to determine how each state gained a greater understanding and insight into the use of the steam locomotive and whether the transmission of data from one's experience to the other showed signs of fruition in the latter's experience.
Three operations, the Atlanta Campaign of the U.S. Civil War (1864), the Bohemian Campaign of the Austro-Prussian War (1866), and the invasion of France in the Franco-Prussian War (1870) serve as case studies to explore the question of this thesis. The railroad played a critical role in each of these conflicts. All the campaigns consisted of large armies, over 100,000 soldiers, maneuvering overland to engage in combat with a nineteenth-century peer. Thus, these offensives placed significant sustainment demands upon each army's line of communication. Those logistical challenges, in turn, offered opportunities for each military force to illustrate their expertise in the exploitation of railroad technology to satisfy those exigencies.
The 
In the beginning of the war, military railroads were an experiment: and though some light as to their management had been gleaned by the operations of 1862 and 1863, yet so little progress had been made that the attempt to supply the army of General Sherman in the field, construct and reconstruct the railroad in its rear, and keep pace with its march, was regarded by those who had the largest experience, and who had become most familiar with the subject, as the greatest experiment of all.
-Daniel C. This loss further undermined the economy of the Confederacy and vindicated Lincoln's war strategy, illustrating that U.S. forces continued to make steady progress in defeating the rebel forces and occupying key terrain.
41
To understand the prominent and effective position that the steam locomotive played in supplying the Army in this campaign, we must first examine how the United States embraced this new technology and harnessed it to streamline sustainment for its military forces. An evolution had to occur in how the Army approached logistics before the railroad could play a vital role in the Civil War and the march to Atlanta. The U.S. military had to develop and prioritize a centralized and systematic approach to supply and transportation. Such a thoughtful scheme and organization did not exist in the young nation's earlier military experiences, but the seeds of that stratagem resided in the decades prior to the Civil War.
Once Army planners had elaborated a doctrine and agencies for sustainment, the exploitation of rail transport came as a natural evolution of the American use of other technology and means of distribution. The Quartermaster General incorporated the steam locomotive to fill a capability gap that was recognized and prioritized based on knowledge and experience gained in the preceding half-century of military operations.
Even though Army logisticians had not preprogrammed the nation's trains into the mobilization and opening actions of the Civil War, they integrated this mechanical system into their warfighting function, and the Army's leadership embraced the advantages of rail and prioritized its use to prosecute the war. The American recognition of the criticality of train transportation enabled utilization of its full potential and shaped military strategy within campaigns such as the march to Atlanta and became an objective in defining victory.
The development of the supply agencies that contributed to that final Civil War victory can be traced to the nation's first major war in 1812. 
42
43
44
45
42
43
44 Erna Risch, Quartermaster Support of the Army: A History of the Corps 1775-1939 (Washington DC: Center of Military History, United State Army, 1989), 135.  armies in the field. That responsibility drove the agency to seek out efficiencies and close capability gaps in the movement of military stores.
The Quartermaster Department gained its first challenges in long-range sustainment with the establishment of a chain of forts along the nation's border regions in the first half of the nineteenth century. Territorial expansion and settlement required the maintenance of defenses along the frontier to protect settlers, support Native American interactions, and counter possible European encroachment. 
46
Commanders could not rely upon local acquisition to fill those needs. As had been the case since the first European and colonial armies contended for control of the continent, large portions of American territory remained trackless wilderness in the nineteenth century. 
47
48
46 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 119. 47
48 Edward Hagerman, The American Civil War and the Origins of Modern Warfare: Ideas, Organization, and Field Command (Bloomington, IN: Indiana  University Press, 1988), 45. could seldom depend upon the Napoleonic custom of foraging for sustainment and instead often had to plan on resupply from bases hundreds of miles distant. 
49
50
51
The Quartermaster Department faced a new test when confronted with hauling goods in locations not serviced by navigable rivers. In contrast to the eastern half of the continent, acquiring territory west of the Mississippi introduced regions with fewer waterways located to support military outposts. This paucity of traversable rivers in the vicinity of western garrisons made the challenge of provisioning the nation's frontier forts more acute. The plains, deserts, and mountains west of the Mississippi challenged the U.S. Army's logisticians to find new means to deliver supplies.
52
49
Rail-Power in War and Conquest 1833
-1914
, 14. 50 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 129. 51
Despite efforts to construct roads, the distances from supply depots to remote outposts in the western half of North America exceeded the ability of supply wagons to arrive with timely support. 
53
54
Military authorities worried about the difficulties of defending this widening domain. In 1838 Major General Edmund P. Gains proffered a plan to take advantage of the speed of steam locomotives and proposed constructing a system of rail lines to speed mobilization and deployment of troops. 
55
Jesup, concluded that locomotives' carrying capacity and speed could close the gap in sustaining the nation's military infrastructure. 
56
57
53 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 150
54
55
56 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 150
57 Gabel,
Railroad Generalship,
3.
58
The conflict that added much of the territory requiring this transcontinental train network also contributed to developing a logistics system that would exploit it. The Mexican-American War (1846 -1848) gave many Army officers an appreciation for the challenges of supplying field armies over long distances and the need to standardize their approach to sustainment. This early nineteenth-century conflict was the first time the U.S. deployed large bodies of troops, approximately 115,000, far beyond its borders. 
59
58 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 150. 59
The movement of troops to the front highlighted the need for innovation and systemization of transportation. The journey permitted the nascent technology of steam engines to make a meaningful impression on the war's participants. Alongside the earlynineteenth-century debut of steamboat service on the nation's waterways, the first 3,000 miles of train track had been laid by 1840. 
60
61
At the anchorage in Louisiana, the assembled troops awaited passage to Mexico via seagoing vessels. With the Navy charged with blockading the whole of Mexico's east coast, military ships were unavailable to move the force. 
62
60 Hess,
Civil War Logistics,
67. 61
62 Millett,
Maslowski,
and Feis,
For the Common Defense,
135.
63
In addition to gaining these wartime insights on deployment, quartermasters endured hard lessons regarding supply and distribution. The need for robust planning and centralized management came to the fore. Even though the War Department established depots to stockpile food, clothing, and other stores to maintain its armies in the field, the efforts fell short of requirements. 
64
65
66
63 Winders,
Mr. Polk's Army,
114. 64
65 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 164. 66
67
68
When the Civil War began, the demand for support dwarfed all previous efforts as the Army grew from a pre-war strength of 16,367 to a force twenty-seven times greater in less than four months and a million-strong by 1865. 
69
67 Winders,
Mr. Polk's Army,
108. 68
69 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 191, 194.
70
71
1
72
73
74
75
It took between twenty and thirty wagons to support a thousand men stationed within a fifteen-mile radius from a forward logistics base. 
76
73
74 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 202, 208
75
further afield, the added distance and travel time generated both a requirement for more days of supply to be carried and a corresponding loss of freight capacity as the amount of conveyed fodder grew. Based on this dynamic, the practical limit for an army to progress beyond its replenishment source and receive adequate sustainment was ten days' march.
The toll of such a move was a doubling or tripling of the ratio of wagons to troops supported. 
77
78
79
80
81
82
79 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 207. 80
81
served as the only checks to this passage along the nation's rivers and canals. Rail took over to handle the remaining movement. Trains could operate in all weather and across most landscapes, though at a reduced capacity compared to watercraft. 
83
84
85
86
87
83
84
85
86
87
Northern States and Great Britain. 
88
89
90
No greater example can be found of the steam locomotive enabling and shaping a Civil War campaign than Sherman's offensive to capture Atlanta in 1864. This operation would not have been possible without the logistical capability of railroads. 91 Both the U.S. attackers and Confederate defenders relied upon this transportation system to sustain their forces and prioritized its possession and destruction. 
92
88 Hess,
Civil War Logistics,
70. 89
90
91
95
96
97
93
94
95 J. G. Coombs, "The Atlanta Campaign: Principle of the Objective Revisited," (Master's thesis, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1975), 14. 
96
97
defense. 
98
99
Unfortunately, this concision of transportation options carried over to the available landward choices. For sustainment, the region offered no desirable substitutes for the single track of the Western & Atlantic Railway that ran the full length of the 138mile trajectory from Chattanooga to Atlanta. 
100
98
99
100
101
In March 1864, upon assuming command of the Military Division of the Mississippi, which controlled the three armies preparing to march upon Atlanta, Sherman confronted the greatest challenge of the campaign, how to supply a force of over 100,000 men and 35,000 animals set to maneuver across more than 100 miles of hostile territory. 
102
104
Fortunately, for the Army, Sherman possessed a background of particular applicability to this situation. As a young lieutenant, he had been assigned to posts in Alabama and Marietta, Georgia, and possessed a familiarity with these geographic constraints. 
105
103 MacDonald, Great Battles of the Civil War, 156. 
104
105
106
107
108
110
111
106
107
108
109 Ibid.,
17. 110 Ibid.,
18. throughput goals. 112
On April 6, 1864, the headquarters of the Military Division of the Mississippi published General Order No. 6., which banned all civilian passenger and private freight traffic from riding the rails into Nashville and Chattanooga. Upon arrival at the first stop in Eastern Tennessee, all troops would march the remaining distance to their duty stations. All horses, cattle, and livestock would be herded along the region's dirt roads. In addition, all military units within 35 miles of Nashville and 20 miles of Chattanooga would distribute their supplies by wagon and no longer rely upon the rails. The order was a draconian move that triggered numerous appeals for relief from local citizens to Lincoln, but they failed. General Order No. 6 doubled the rate of supply accumulation at the front. 
113
115
116
112
Campaign,
18. 113 Ibid.,
[15]
[16]
[17]
115
116
with General Order No.6 resulted in a throughput of 193 rail cars of supplies per day and a buildup of the required one-month surplus at Chattanooga. 
117
118
The evident criticality of using railroads to support field forces combined with the complexity and vulnerability of the system's trackage, rolling stock, and infrastructure mandated a new organization to oversee this strategic asset. 
119
120
121
117
118
119
120
shipping rates, inadequate maintenance, and scheduling difficulties on commercial lines hampered employment. 
122
Officials had no interest in permanent control of railroads in States loyal to the U.S. government. 
123
The rail lines that came into the possession of federal forces as they reconquered Confederate territory required significant oversight and improvement to come into service. 
124
125
122 Hess,
Civil War Logistics,
[74]
[75]
124
125
127
128
129
130
126
127
128
129
131
132
133
134
131 Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775
-1992, 210
132
133
135
136
137
138
139
135
136
137
War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 29. 138
139
140
149
150
151
McCallum when Grant appointed him as general manager of all railways in government possession in the Military Division of the Mississippi on 4 February 1864. 
152
147
148
155
156
157
153
154
155
War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 32-33. 156
158
159
In his preparations for moving into Georgia, Sherman prioritized support for Wright to ensure the Construction Corps could repair what the rebels could wreak. He directed a stockpiling of replacement ties, bridges, and rails at Chattanooga and developed plans to move those materials forward to field sites along his route of advance.
Locomotives and flat cars loaded with these construction resources were pre-staged and ready to respond when disruptions occurred. In addition, an entire infantry division was stationed in a network of Merrill Blockhouses to defend the repair crews. 
160
161
162
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
The Construction Corps re-laid 115 miles of track, installed nineteen miles of new sidings, and added 45 water tanks to support movement along the Nashville and Chattanooga Railroad. As Sherman's armies advanced into northern Georgia, the Corps rebuilt 22 ½ miles of the Western & Atlantic Railroad and 4,081 lineal feet of bridges. 
165
166
167
163
164
165
166
War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 34. 167
The generals had faced a similar dilemma a year earlier and played comparable roles in the quest to control the Mississippi state capital. 
168
169
For this enterprise, the U.S. had endowed Sherman with sufficient forces. The Commander of the Military Division of the Mississippi had at his disposal an army group composed of three field armies totaling 113,000 troops with 254 artillery pieces. The Army of the Cumberland had the bulk of Sherman's combat power, with 75,000 soldiers organized into three infantry corps and one corps of cavalry. The Army of the Tennessee came next in size and possessed 25,000 infantry formed into two corps, while the 
168 Hess,
Civil War Logistics,
[237]
[238]
170
To oppose U.S. moves, the Confederacy had one field force under the command of Joseph Johnston. This defense consisted of 55,000 soldiers and 144 guns, organized into two infantry corps and one cavalry corps. 171 Thus, U.S. forces outnumbered the rebels in northern Georgia by approximately two to one at the campaign's outset.
However, in May 1864, Jefferson Davis approved the incorporation of 20,000 troops from the Army of Mississippi to Johnston's command, significantly improving the odds. 
172
173
This passivity would be a source of criticism for Johnston and eventually lead to his ouster by Davis. 
174
170
171
172 Ibid. 
173
174
formulate and carry out his plans without interference from his adversary. 
175
176
177
178
179
180
175
176
177
178
181
182
183
184
181
182
183
184
185
186
Sherman mimicked his attack on Jackson, Mississippi, the year prior and attacked "his enemy's line of transport." 
187
189
Sherman twice attempted to cut the two Southern rail lines through cavalry raids on 13 July and 18 August. 
190
186 Hess,
Civil War Logistics,
246. 187
188
189 
McMurry, Atlanta 1864, 141-142. 190 Ibid., 119, 166.
191
192
The campaign to capture Atlanta illustrated how the railroad evolved from a logistical expedient into an essential objective to ensure victory. Sherman's march through northern Georgia and subsequent victory could not have occurred without the sustainment capability of the steam locomotive, but that was not a novel development of the campaign. The priority that trains and tracks assumed for the armies vying over Georgia's capital and for much of the American Civil War derived from a half-century of experience, organizational growth, and doctrinal elaboration. All of those prerequisites had to be in place for the capability of rail to be appreciated and necessitated.
The United States and its Army had to undergo a series of challenges to desire the organized and directed supply model that would require a locomotive. The conflicts and geographic expansion of the country in the first half of the nineteenth century proffered an array of stumbling blocks that the young nation had to overcome. The adversities of each episode built a growing body of logistical knowledge. The distances to traverse encouraged innovation and an openness to exploring technology. The inefficiency and disorganization of moving and supporting troops in situations that were far from ideal drove a requirement for professionalism and institutional development. These experiences made the Army into an organization that prioritized sustainment and supply and sought solutions for capability gaps. One answer to the Army's queries was the railroad and its ability to span geography and efficiently connect strategic depots to the nation's advancing armies.
That harnessing of locomotive power to solve logistical constraints produced an awareness amongst military leaders of its value and its ability to extend their operations.
Trains and tracks became vital assets to be protected or destroyed. Agencies such as the USMRR and its Construction Corps had to be established to maintain this key mechanism and ensure its worth and effectiveness. This technology became the centerpiece around which opposing armies maneuvered. Generals drew their campaign plans with rail lines as essential ingredients.
In the case of the Atlanta Campaign, the antagonists pursued avenues to threaten 
The transport of reinforcements, provisions, and other requirements of the Army need not be included in this sketch.
-Henry M. Hozier, Campaign of 1866 in Germany
In 21 days, from 16 May through 5 June 1866, the Kingdom of Prussia transported 197,000 soldiers, 55,000 horses, and 5,300 wagons via rail from mobilization depots to tactical assembly areas in preparation for war against the Austrian Empire. 
193
194
195
196
197
198
To understand their editorial choice, an examination of how the Prussian army addressed logistics in the mid-nineteenth century is necessary. At this point in history, the military planners of this German kingdom lacked practical experience in supplying a large army over any substantial distance. The previous large deployment of their forces had consisted of Prussian battalions marching to the sound of the guns at Waterloo two generations earlier. 
199
198
199 Christopher Clark, Iron Kingdom: The Rise and Downfall of Prussia, 1600-1947 (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2006), 510. military strength that invaded Bohemia two years later. 
200
Planning sustainment and incorporating technological innovation into that plan introduced challenges to the Prussian military. These factors inserted new and untested dynamics into the execution of their campaign against Vienna's armed forces. The ability of Moltke's planners to develop a successful concept of support integrating the steam locomotive remained hostage to their inexperience with this new medium and their prioritization of maneuver over operational logistics.
The last time a Prussian army advanced to a foreign battlefield en masse, the Napoleonic concept of foraging off the land and the ancient doctrine of resupply by fortress magazine held sway. 
201
202
203
204
In 1864, one such officer, Captain Justus Scheibert, whom the General Staff dispatched to observe the American Civil War, noted that Union General Grant appeared to have the movement of his armies limited by a dependence on maintaining lines of communication to railheads and seaports. 
205
206
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
208
209
213
214
215
216
Beyond the lack of priority given to logistics planning, the early-nineteenthcentury Prussian high command did not readily embrace the innovation of the steam 
212
213
214
215
217
218
219
220
218
219
by rail while such a move on foot only required sixteen. 
221
It would take the 1850 mobilization for a possible war with Austria to spotlight the need for incorporating railroads into Prussia's war plans. Prussia had hoped an ample show of force in May 1850 would deter Austria from escalating relations into conflict.
The plan began with a mass mobilization of a half-million troops, including the regular army, the reserve, and the Landwehr (provincial militia). 
222
223
224
221
222
225
226
The staff did not publish its first policy letter for the use of trains in large troop movements until 1858. 
227
225
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
234
235
236
237
238
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
the tracks received priority. The civilian representative sought to prevent the military from making technically impossible demands upon the railways. 
247
248
249
250
247
248
249
251
The next step in his integration effort comprised developing logistical systems and doctrine that included the railroad's role in mobilizing, deploying, and sustaining Prussia's army. Moltke dictated that rail would transport troops to the assembly areas from which they would march into the theater of operations. 252 Supplies and reinforcements would follow along the same lines. At the railheads, each army corps' train battalion would rendezvous with the supply locomotives to have cargo transferred into wagons for transport and distribution to their supported command. As the mobilization of 1850 had illustrated, a single line of communication could not effectively sustain more than 30,000 troops or one army corps. 
253
251
252 Goerlitz, History of the German General Staff 1657
-1945, 76-77.
254
Fulfilling this doctrine required a change in the organization and procedures of the Prussian Army and how it sustained itself. The Prussian Army had relied upon forage and local requisition for its needs in the campaigns of the Napoleonic age and earlier. 
255
256
257
258
254
255
256 van Creveld, Supplying War, 77. 
257
259
As part of a series of army reforms in the wake of Prussia's poor performance at mobilization in 1850, the Ministry of War recommended the creation of a logistical organization to address each army's supply needs. Accordingly in 1853, King Frederick   Wilhelm ordered each corps to appoint an officer and staff section dedicated to quartermaster duties and engage them in annual training exercises to hone their logistical skills. In 1856, Prussia established formal trains battalions to supply each corps and administer each command's remount depot, field hospitals, and bakeries. 
260
261
262
259
260
261
262 Spenser Wilkinson, The Brain of an Army: A Popular Account of the German General Staff (Westminster: Archibald Constable & Co., 1895), 36. each of the three armies that invaded Bohemia. 
268
269
270
271
272
Though he had access to data from the American Civil War, the information only became available in the final months before going to war with Austria. It allowed him to take action upon it only in a very short window before hostilities commenced. Furthermore, the absence of logistical knowledge and experience within the Prussian Army meant Moltke had no organic template to follow or against which to test his theories. As a result, the agencies and systems that the Prussian General Staff created to support their field forces had inherent inadequacies and would face significant challenges in the Bohemian campaign.
An examination of how major operations unfolded in Bohemia and the challenges in that theater demonstrates how these supporting units and Prussia's plans for steam locomotives would come to fruition during the war with Austria. By the mid-nineteenth century, planners in Prussia and Austria predicted that war would be inevitable between their nations. As early as 1857, Moltke had begun working on contingency plans for such an engagement. He had finalized a proposal for a concentration of the Prussian Army for probable Austrian hostilities by the spring of 1860. 
273
In 1866, that critical terrain centered on the Austrian province of Bohemia, which today consists of the Western half of the Czech Republic. Bohemia abutted the Prussian province of Silesia to the north and the Austrian-allied Kingdom of Saxony to the west. This location provided Austrian forces a central point of concentration to carry out a variety of courses of action, including an invasion of Silesia or threatening the Prussian capital of Berlin. Thus, this territory formed a vital strategic interest in the conflict, and both nations chose to conduct their main efforts in this location. 
274
275
276
277
274
275
276
277
278
280
281
278
Barry,
The Road to Königgrätz,
175. 279
280
281
282
283
Königgrätz. 284
285
282
283
284
286
287
288
289
In 1866, the Prussian Army was the only major military force on the European continent armed with a breech-loading rifle. The Dreyse Zündnadelgewehr, or "needle rifle," was named after its long needle-shaped firing pin. This breechloader fired a bullet encased in a paper cartridge that its unique firing pin would pierce. Moreover, the weapon's bolt-action allowed the soldiers from any posture to fire and reload at a rate four times faster than the muzzleloaders utilized by most other European armies. 
290
286
287
288
289
290 Ibid.,
[21]
[22]
291
292
The Second Army arrived separately upon the battlefield to deliver its coup de grâce because it suffered delays due to border skirmishes with Austrian forces and poor communication with the other two Prussian armies. The difficulty in contact resulted from the loss of telegraph capability once units crossed into Bohemia. Despite possessing detachments tasked with maintaining that critical signal system, Prussia's armies never regained that capability while maneuvering to meet the main Austrian force and endured lags in reacting and coordinating its forces. Even Moltke bore this communication blackout because he chose to advance his headquarters forward to Gitschin without telegraph support. 
293
291 Wawro,
274. 292 Ibid.,
245. 293
294
Keeping with the maxim that no plan survives contact with the enemy, Prussia's concept of sustainment for its forces and its plan for utilization of railroads in that effort collapsed once Moltke's troops crossed the Austrian frontier. Among the many factors that contributed to this failure, the four most significant were the lack of roads in Bohemia, the inability of Prussian forces to extend rail lines, the inability of the trains battalions to move supplies, and the lack of supervision for the rail lines.
As noted in the logistical equation of Prussian doctrine, a single road was generally limited to supporting no more than a single 30,000-man corps to maintain an adequate rate of advance. 295 However, Moltke's field armies were maneuvering in a locale dominated by agriculture with few roads. Only two major thoroughfares paralleled their axis of advance. Thus, each line of communication had to support a body of troops over three times greater than its practical capacity. 
296
To compound that lack of throughput, the meager resources of the railway detachments, particularly for transport, did not allow them to build or extend rail lines to 
294
295
297
298
To compound these distribution limitations further, Moltke did not prioritize the transportation of supplies over these constrained road networks. Instead, he prioritized teeth over tail and gave the combat arms elements first right of movement along the roads. 
299
300
297
298 van Creveld, Supplying War, 85. 
299
300
With wagons unable to move towards their supported units, trains battalions could not readily return to the railheads to pick up inbound supplies. Yet, even if they could make it back, insufficient labor existed to transfer the thousands of tons of supplies from rail car to wagon. 
301
302
Moltke's decision removed the Railway Section officer from the Executive Commission in Berlin, and Wartensleben's absence halted that body's ability to manage rail operations after mobilization. 
303
Railroads accepted the shipments, rushed supplies forward to the railheads, and delivered provisions in excess of any known requirement and without consideration of how the cargo would be unloaded or stored. Even when trains were unloaded, empty rail cars 
301
302 van Creveld, Supplying War, 84. 
303
304
305
306
307
304
305
306
307
Moltke dispatched the following order: "Tomorrow is a general rest day. The troops will only move in so far as is necessary for the comfort or the re-formation of the corps." 
308
Allowing the Austrians to retreat that day could have had catastrophic effects on the campaign and the course of the war. Moltke allowed his opponent to fall back and refit to continue the fight. As Lieutenant Wagner noted, the casualties suffered by the Austrians were half the rate of those suffered by forces in a typical Civil War 
308
309
310
311
Those stocks would likely have been exhausted if further Austrian engagements had occurred.
A key reason the Prussians completed operations at Königgrätz without an ammunition shortage was the accuracy and effectiveness of the Dreyse needle rifle. The weapon's bolt-action allowed a rifleman to fire from the prone position and maintain his firing posture while reloading, which increased the odds of shots staying on target and reduced the need to expend additional rounds. Lieutenant Wagner noted that the rifle's accuracy could be seen in the number of Austrians killed due to a single shot to the head. 
312
313
Furthermore, the Prussian tactical reliance on rifle fire over cannon conserved expenditure of ammunition for artillery. However, Lieutenant Wagner noted that the Prussian dependence on small arms might have had more to do with a general slowness and underutilization of their artillery batteries rather than a directed strategy. 
314
315
316
Despite the Prussian Army researching and developing plans and doctrine for a concept of logistical support and the incorporation of locomotives for their Bohemian campaign, it is clear they fell short upon execution. The inability to deliver food and ammunition to their field armies once hostilities began illustrated a misreading of the logistical capabilities needed and a lack of prioritization and oversight by their chain of command.
The general staff's lack of practical experience in these areas likely contributed to these missteps. Moltke did break critical ground in supporting the use of rail in the 
314
315
316
318
Moltke did hold great respect for history and upheld a standard of professionalism as a soldier. He could admit that not everything had proceeded as planned in his campaign against Austria in 1866. Moltke could see errors had been made, and some improvement could be gained in organization, materials, and doctrine. 
319
319
320
321
The General Staff's priority in the preceding conflict had been the speed of mobilization, which was only made possible through the efficient planning of its railway section. 
322
323
324
325
326
323
324
325
Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 105-106. 326
328
327 Pratt, The Rise of Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 108-109. organization. 329
Another aspect of the rail system that Moltke sought to improve was the capability of the Feldeisenbahnabteilung, the field railway detachment. Consisting of only 129 personnel and having just three such units assigned to operations in 1866, the Feldeisenbahnabteilungs demonstrated the ability only to carry out minor repairs on captured lines. They could not build new tracks such as emergency loop lines or sidings. 
330
331
332
333
334
329
330
331
332
Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 127. 333
334
Feldeisenbahnabteilungs was adequate for maintaining the rail lines in support of a single field army but not for multiple such forces. This shortfall made maintaining lines across a broad offensive front a challenge and impacted Prussia's logistical efforts in France. 
335
336
337
338
339
340
341
342
343
344
345
346
347
342
343
344
345
346
348
349
351
Even once supply columns became available, the Prussian Army did not prioritize them in operational plans. Just as Stosch institutionalized the expedient of field requisition to supplant problems with distribution, Moltke's staff sought to resolve the past traffic congestion for the corps' trains battalions by redirecting the supply convoys 348 van Creveld, Supplying War, 103. 
349
352
353
354
355
356
357
353
354
355
356
357
On 15 July 1870, the mobilization plan conceived by Moltke came to fruition. 
358
359
361
358
359
360
361
362
363
364
365
362
363
364
365
366
367
368
369
To appreciate this transition in operational dynamics, examining the unique elements of the campaign's opening phase is necessary. In the invasion's first month, several circumstances of fortune allowed Prussian armies to triumph without logistics interrupting operations. These fortuitous factors fell into two categories, time and geography.
The first contributing issue centered on the season of the campaign and the speed of resolving the initial clashes. The operational timeline encompassed the harvest season, and by default, this maximized the agricultural bounty available in the region of maneuver. 
370
371
Moreover, this abbreviated period of maneuver translated into lower-thanpredicted ammunition consumption. Moltke's infantry only expended 56 cartridges per soldier for the entire war, slightly less than the quantity carried on each person. 372 370 van Creveld, Supplying War, 107. 
371
Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 113. 372
Similarly, each field artillery piece only fired an average of 199 shells for the entire duration of hostilities, and each corps began the campaign with a basic load of 157 rounds per gun. When one considers that every battery did not fire in every battle, consumption fell well within the limbers of each formation. 
373
Adding to these timed premiums, the factor of location played an equally significant role in relieving the deficits of logistical planning for Moltke's advancing columns. Because Napoleon III's generals chose to give battle so close to the frontiers, with many engagements occurring within 40 miles of the border, Prussia's armies had to march for only a few days prior to combat, resulting in a minimal expense of initial resources. 
374
375
377
Providence was on the side of Prussia in the opening phase of the campaign.
Many factors that Moltke's planners did not control alleviated their failures in logistical preparation. If the French farmlands had not had a successful harvest or Napoleon's armies had waited to give decisive battle further inside their territory and prolonged combat, these unforeseen advantages supporting Prussia's offensive could have evaporated. 
378
After subjugating the French field force, Moltke determined that the schwerpunkt, the campaign's center of gravity, had become France's capital, and resolution of the conflict required its capture. However, elaborate fortifications protected the city and precluded a direct assault.
379
377
380
381
383
384
Also, the Prussians lacked transport to distribute available provisions. The armies had lost most of their wagons during the advance. 
385
386
380
381
382
War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 349. 383
384
385
Paris, the Prussian armies had a capability gap in sustainment that endangered the longevity of their siege.
To add to these logistical challenges, Bismarck pressured Moltke to bombard the city to hasten an end to the siege rather than await capitulation via the occupants' starvation. 
387
388
390
A timely extension of the railroad would have alleviated Prussia's logistical and operational challenges at this point in the campaign. A single line held the capability to deliver what the besieging forces required. 
391
387
388
Staff 1657
Staff -1945, 92. 389 , 92. 389
390
391
393
394
395
393
Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 128. 394
395
396
398
401
397
398
399
Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 131. 400 Ibid., 130. 401 Ibid., 123, 126.
402
403
Such poor craftsmanship by German forces also added to the ease by which Francs Tireurs, French saboteurs, could contribute to rail service interruption. 
404
405
406
402
War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 216. 403 Ibid., 35. 404
405
406 Macksey,
For Want of a Nail,
[31]
[32]
407
408
409
410
411
412
407
408
409
410
411 van Creveld, Supplying War, 108. 
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
415
War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 108. 416 Ibid., 111. 417
418
419
The pre-war choices to prioritize maneuver over logistics and ignore proposals to improve rail operations took on national implications as the war stretched into winter.
Fortunately for Moltke and the Prussian Army, the track to Paris was completed on 22 November. 420 Supplies were finally able to flow forward. The batteries of siege guns, initially ordered in September, were transported to the front line. 
421
422
The choice by Moltke's staff to embrace requisition and forage had an impact on operations when his armies became immobile in the final phase of the Franco-Prussian War. Field commanders had their operations limited by logistics. Feeding their armies required redirection of combat power to assume sustainment activities. This expedient and the months lost awaiting completion of a rail connection and the subsequent degradation of the national rail network represented unforecasted costs to Prussia in pursuit of her strategic goals. Experience and lessons abounded from the Civil War to 
420
Rail-Power in War and
Conquest 1833-1914, 128. 421
422
423
foretell the challenges an army faced when immobilized by siege operations and how thoughtful management of railroads could alleviate some of those problems. More prewar analysis by the Prussian General Staff could have set different priorities and minimized or avoided these losses incurred by this stasis.
In the years preceding the war with Austria, Moltke and his planners on the General Staff had lacked practical experience in supporting the deployment of combat power and maintaining a modern army in the field. However, significant data existed concerning sustainment in the largest of contemporary conflicts, the Civil War. While no significant interval of time existed to absorb those lessons and put organizational changes into practice prior to the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, that constraint did not apply to the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. Moltke and his staff had four years to implement operational improvements based on observations of the recent American conflict along with their own. The Prussian General Staff gained first-hand knowledge of the challenges inherent in the movement, maneuver, and logistics of large formations in war from the Bohemian campaign. This experience granted Prussian planners a baseline from which to draw lessons and a frame of reference to understand instructive examples from other nations. The General Staff wrote an after-action review and analyzed their shortcomings in the conflagration with Vienna. The years that followed offered ample time for the reorganization of formations and the training and rehearsing of personnel to correct recognized deficiencies. The factors of experience and time no longer served as impediments to Prussia establishing a modern logistics system and maximizing the use of rail in their next conflict.
Yet, the General Staff's examination of past operations and their four years of preparatory time did not result in effective and efficient logistical support for the armies in 1870. Rather than prioritizing change, victory over Austria built a complacency for the expedients of 1866 and laid the groundwork for repeating those actions in the war with France. Prussia did not plan for echelons of depots interconnected by expanded or repurposed rail systems and regular deliveries of goods via supply trains arrayed behind advancing corps and armies. Instead, Moltke's planners expected field commanders to assume again the responsibility of provisioning their troops and rely on providence to satisfy shortcomings. Thus, when Prussian forces crossed the French border, foraging parties fanned out throughout the countryside to requisition staples, while hundreds of train cars accumulated at railheads along the German frontier, full of wasted goods. It seemed a small price to pay for quick tactical success, but the conflict with France did not proceed along the course of the war from four years earlier.
Continued French resistance after the opening battles and the need to subdue the French capital presented new factors that required an organized concept of sustainment and long-range support by rail to continue the prosecution of hostilities. However, the General Staff had not planned for an extension of track in pace with the campaign.
Without any preparation for this course of action, the execution of such a rail line took months to accomplish, which incurred high costs for Prussia. As a result of the extended timeline, commanders had to redirect combat power to sustainment rather than offensive operations, and the civilian economy of Prussia suffered deficiencies. Such sacrifices could have been minimized or prevented with contingency planning based on lessons from past conflicts. However, Moltke had no guarantee of either campaign concluding when it did. Austria 
427
428
429
and France could have each prolonged hostilities beyond their historical termination points. The Prussian decision to proceed without reliable rail support illustrated a gamble of immense proportions and deleterious possibilities, all of which could have been avoided with prior planning based on recent American experiences.
The wars with Austria and France revealed a reluctance on the part of Prussian planners to exploit the technological innovation of the steam locomotive for logistics.
The opportunities for such exploitation were broadcast by the success of American Civil The United States' differing approach to war developed a sustainment doctrine and organizational structure that enabled its armies to maintain unprecedented operational reach. The exploitation of the steam locomotive in conjunction with steam-powered water transport established lines of communication that permitted its forces to maneuver in locales previously inaccessible to large formations due to logistical limitations. Founding a substantial, autonomous organization to construct and manage those train tracks enabled field armies to make advances in depth without risking a loss of support.
Prioritization of supply movement along roads ensured those expeditions could continue beyond their railheads without compromising their sustainment. This system of efficient, high-capacity replenishment directed by quartermasters and supported by the USMRR allowed commanders unprecedented freedom of action and the ability to exercise their divisions in the field indefinitely. With such developments and lessons, the American military broke new ground in logistics that multiplied combat power and ensured sufficient force could be brought to bear upon objectives. Thus, the United States sought to apply its might via thoroughness and efficiency, while Prussia relied upon expediency to accomplish its goals.
With such strategic dissimilarity, a rationale can be seen in Moltke only absorbing the American model in part. He grasped how railroads could enhance the movement of forces and exploited their use for mobilization. However, Moltke did not have an equal compulsion to prioritize their use for sustainment. Prussia's geographic position fostered an approach to war that emphasized quick execution and short duration, and its theaters of operation had not precluded forage. Moreover, the preceding half-century of martial inactivity deprived Prussian leaders of having experiences that would counter the priority of Bewegungskrieg. Gaining a prompt battlefield decision in the wars with Austria and
France remained Moltke's priority, and he had no hesitation in subordinating other concerns, such as logistics, in meeting that goal. With that lens in place, Prussian planners lacked the urgency to establish the logistical systems and institutions utilized by
McCallum, Supply of Sherman's Army
McCallum, Supply of Sherman's Army
running
152  
152  
MacGregor Knox, "Mass Politics and Nationalism as Military Revolution: The French Revolution and After," in The Dynamics of Military Revolution, 1300-2050, ed. MacGregor Knox and Williamson Murray (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press,
2001), 66.
Martin van Creveld, Supplying War. Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 75-76.
Elam, "Transforming Under Fire," 14.   
Gabel, Railroad Generalship, 3.    
Ibid., 4.   
Luvaas, The Military Legacy of the Civil War, 72, 74.   
McMurry, Atlanta 1864, 177.   
Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775-1992, 118.   
Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775-1992, 149.   
Sokolosky, "The Role of Union Logistics in the Carolina Campaign of 1865," 18.
Gabel, Railroad Generalship,[9][10][11] 
Sokolosky, "The Role of Union Logistics in the Carolina Campaign of 1865," 22.
Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775-1992, 208.   
Hagerman, The American Civil War and the Origins of Modern Warfare, 62-63.
 78  Sokolosky, "The Role of Union Logistics in the Carolina Campaign of 1865," 30.
Hess, Civil War Logistics, 64.   
Elam, "Transforming Under Fire," 17.   
Pratt, The Rise of Rail-Power in War and Conquest 1833-1914, 20.   
Hess, Civil War Logistics,[74][75] 
Pratt, The Rise of Rail-Power in War and Conquest 1833-1914, 30.   
Hess, Civil War Logistics,[237][238] 
MacDonald, Great Battles of the Civil War, 161.   
Hess, Civil War Logistics, 248.    
MacDonald, Great Battles of the Civil War, 166.   
Henry M. Hozier, Campaign of 1866 in Germany (Berlin, DE: Topographical and Statistical Department of the War Office, 1872), 24.
Geoffrey Wawro, The Austro-Prussian War: Austria's War with Prussia and Italy in 1866 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 8.
van Creveld, Supplying War, 83.   
Ibid., xiv-xv.   
van Creveld, Supplying War, 82.   
Dennis E. Showalter, The Wars of German Unification, 2nd ed. (London, UK: Hodder Arnold, 2004), 61.
Showalter, Dynamics of Military Revolution, 102   
Showalter, Wars of German Unification, 66.   
Pratt, The Rise of Rail-Power in War and Conquest 1833-1914, 104.   
Wawro, 17.   
Showalter, Wars of German Unification, 61   
Showalter, Dynamics of Military Revolution,[102][103] 
Macksey, For Want of a Nail, 25.    
van Creveld, Supplying War,[91][92] 
Edward Newdigate, The Army of the North German Confederation (London, UK: Henry S.King & Co., 1872), 36, 60.    
Ibid., 60.    
Macksey, For Want of a Nail, 25.   
Charles D. Daves, "The Battle of Königgrätz: The Evolution of Operational Art," (Master's thesis, U.S. ArmyCommand and General Staff College, 1988), 7.   
Wawro, 202.   
van Creveld, Supplying War,[81][82] 
van Creveld, Supplying War, 81.   
Macksey, For Want of a Nail, 31.   
Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775-1992, 208.   
Showalter, Wars of German Unification, 245.   
Macksey, For Want of a Nail, 29.   
van Creveld, Supplying War, 107.   
Showalter, Wars of German Unification, 302.   
Pratt, The Rise of Rail-Power in War and Conquest 1833-1914, 112.   
Schrader, United States Army Logistics, 1775-1992, 155.   
Hess, Civil War Logistics, 8.   
committee chair, 
Dr. Kautt
Thanks to 
Fort Leavenworth
Combined Arms Research Library
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other
mobilization of his armies, but he and his subordinates had not yet gained an appreciation of the difficulties involved with using that technology to supply their forces once they took to the field. Inside the borders of Bohemia, their scheme of logistics collapsed, and they fell back upon unreliable stopgaps for sustainment and communication, risking mission failure as a result.
The campaign in Bohemia revealed that the Prussian Army had considerable room for improvement in the execution of logistics and developing railroads' role in that effort. With such shortcomings in sustainment and rail usage, it is understandable why the authors of Prussia's official account of the 1866 conflict would be reluctant to record their post-mobilization logistical actions.
The alleged perfection of Germany's arrangements when she went to war with France in 1870-71 is merely one of the fictions of history, so far as her military rail transport is concerned.
-Edwin A. Unfortunately, this building on recent experience also carried forward past mistakes.
While Prussia had capitalized on its use of locomotives to concentrate troops along its adversary's border, utilization of this platform for sustainment remained out of 317 T. N. Dupuy, A Genius for War: The German Army and General Staff, 1807-1945 (McLean, VA: The Dupuy Institute, 1984), 96.
The presumption that France would capitulate via decisive battle and that providence along the march would provide adequate sustenance for the campaign's duration turned out to be flawed and revealed a dangerously undeveloped concept of modern war by the Prussian General Staff. Far from showing itself as an innovative and efficient fighting force, Moltke's army in the Franco-Prussian War demonstrated blindness to logistics, relying more on good fortune than sound planning to gain victory.
Such archaic preconceptions represented significant obstacles to overcome before lessons on organized sustainment via rail technology could ever be absorbed and implemented by the Prussian Army. cases, reverted to practices and contingencies resembling the eighteenth century rather than the industrial age.
Four obstacles may explain Prussia's partial absorption of Civil War logistical precedents and willingness to abandon modern sustainment practices in its wars.
Disparities in geography, limitations in time, lack of experience, and divergent approaches to war contributed to differing views by the United States and Prussia concerning railroads and sustainment.
First, the necessity to feed U.S. armies and frontier forts over vast expanses of trackless wilderness had no parallel in the western half of the European continent. High population density and centuries of agricultural development in the locales of Germany, France, and Austria meant that food and fodder were available to support large armies operating in those regions, even if only for a short period. For example, the average population density of the mid-nineteenth-century French countryside was 140 people per square mile, an order of magnitude greater than the 17 per square mile of the United States. 
430
Second, the North American continent's long overland distances and ocean boundaries determined that any war fought by the United States would involve a significant length of time to execute. On many occasions, this could be years. Such long intervals allowed the U.S. Army to develop and perfect practices such as a supply depot system to support its forces. Prussia, by contrast, was situated close to multiple rival nations that could present a significant strategic threat in a matter of weeks. Moreover, wars involving Prussian forces were generally short and happened in quick succession.
Thus, Prussia rarely had the time to experiment and prove new ideas during conflicts or in the short intervals between wars. An example of this time constraint is Moltke's brief window to absorb lessons from the American Civil War between that conflict's termination and the beginning of hostilities with Austria in 1866. Furthermore, the short duration of the wars with Austria and France left Prussian leaders with no time to review, alter, and prove these new practices during operations.
Before initiating hostilities with Austria in 1866, Prussia had gone a half-century without deploying its army in a major war. That lack of martial experience during the Industrial Age meant Prussian military leaders in the mid-nineteenth century had no recent experience by which to judge developments in warfare by contemporary nations.
The lens through which Prussian observers and senior officers digested and analyzed outside conflicts such as the American Civil War was colored by Napoleonic traditions rather than more modern views. In contrast, the United States' conflict with Mexico in the 1840s built a body of institutional knowledge regarding supply distribution that gave the U.S. Army an appreciation for new practices that would enhance its sustainment capabilities during the Civil War.
The three components of geography, time, and experience contributed to a key fourth factor, the development of different national outlooks on war. With the benefit of no continental peer to challenge its sovereignty and possessing the geographic space to U.S. forces in the Civil War, and inexperience blinded them to the risks assumed by the omission. Compounding this problem, Prussia was constrained in time to establish and develop the bodies and procedures necessary to regulate and support the railroads adequately. Neither of its conflicts was of a duration that allowed the systems to mature in the crucible of operations. Such challenges led to an incomplete application of rail technology in war prosecution, a corresponding assumption of avoidable risks, and a reversion to antiquated and deficient means of support. Rather than illustrating a developed understanding of modern war, the Prussian use of railroads in its campaigns against Austria and France symbolized an affirmation of its past beliefs.
Though the subsequent reichs of Germany, Prussia's successor state, showed improvements in rail usage over the performances in 1866 and 1870, indications of a German preference for maneuver at the cost of logistics remained. Whether one examined the prosecution of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914 or Operation Barbarossa in 1941, the evidence of strategic and operational overreach feeds the argument that the Großer Generalstab may have continued to struggle with the lessons offered by the U.S.
Quartermaster General and the U.S. Military Rail Road in the Civil War. Further research along the lines of this thesis but with a longer view of history may reveal a pattern of greater proportion.
On a related note, a broadening of study to look at the possible impact of American rail doctrine on other major military powers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries could illuminate an extensive legacy of American influence. The plentiful