# ID: 438f65daee6b4a9a9a7866e1dd3b87ad
# Title: The Future Character of Warfare and Required Capabilities
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data
The Army Science Board (ASB) believes the character of future (CFW) warfare will be marked by demographic, social, climatic, economic, technological, and geopolitical trends which will decisively shape the future Strategic Security Environment (SSE). This SSE will be even more complex and lethal than that which confronts the Army today, characterized by shifting alliances among geopolitical actors, persistent conflict with Violent Non-State Actors (VNSA), and the rise of capable and volatile peer and near-peer competitors. Ubiquitous access to technologies by friend and foe alike enable lethality across this entire spectrum. Moreover, U.S. and Allied forces will face asymmetric exploitation of technologies with lethal capabilities by adversaries who don't share the same legal and ethical restraints regarding, for example, weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and robotic and autonomous systems (RAS).
Future SSE trends on the Army Operational Environment (OE) will increase complexity and lethality, and present numerous operational challenges. Two overarching challenges are characterized in the Joint Operating Environment (JOE): 
1
Drawing upon the JOE, the ASB study team defined five major OE changes that will profoundly influence the Character of Future Warfare (CFW) for the Army and Joint military forces in the 2030-2050 timeframe:
• Conflict Extends to Cognitive Diension -where the competition for will moves from primarily kinetic to increasingly non-kinetic operations.
• Domain Supremacy Contested -the U.S. military is shifting from supremacy in most domains to more contested in all domains.
• Transparent War -a shift from limited, stove-piped command, control, communications, and computer (C4) intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), to continuous and pervasive, commercial C4ISR.
• Battlespace Reconfiguration -from maneuvering primarily in open terrain and contiguous areas of operation to maneuvering in Dense Urban Areas (DUAs) and dispersed, noncontiguous areas of operation.
• Contested Expeditionary Operations -moving from power projection at will to continuously contested strategic lines of communication, from alert to employment.
To continue operating within this complex but uncertain environment, the Chief of Staff of the Army believes the Army will need to place big bets on modernization. The abundance of options available for new systems and capabilities will further complicate that effort. There's an explosion of potentially disruptive technologies entering exponential growth phases of development (e.g., RAS, AI, commercial ISR and communications, and human enhancement). The Army will need to choose among many viable options while abiding government-imposed constraints in the development, acquisition, deployment, and use of new systems. These constraints include:
• A fiscal environment that restricts research and development (R&D), and procurement funding due to continuing pressures on defense spending by the growth of non-discretionary accounts and national debt.
• The comparatively slow Department of Defense (DoD) acquisition processes that the Army must follow for new programs of record (PORs) as opposed to adversaries' more streamlined processes.
• Asymmetric policy, laws, and regulations between the U.S. and its adversaries regarding the use of lethal capabilities.
The Army needs to establish a Capability Development Strategy (CDS) that addresses these constraints and provides a method to make informed decisions on which of the modernization options to place big bets. Three essential tasks of the CDS should be to:
1. Gain insights into the operational utility of a proposed capability and to explore innovative concepts of operations (CONOPS)/tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) that best exploit that capability to provide a well-informed basis for acquisition decisions on the big bets.
2. Accelerate the fielding of limited operational capabilities (LOC) with proven value prior to the formal and agile acquisition of full operational capability (FOC).
3. Build in the ability of new RAS/AI systems to dynamically activate dormant "war reserve" functionality in response to battlefield conditions and changes in the rules of engagement (ROE).
Over the course of its research, the study team developed a series of findings constituting a clear "call to action" for the Army to address the CFW:
• Changes to the CFW create opportunities; exploiting Big Bets will provide overmatch.
• Changes to the Character of Future Warfare (CFW) are inexorable and accelerating, which make maintaining overmatch, without appropriate response, more difficult. Our adversaries are reducing, if not eliminating, our overmatch.
• Easy global access to emerging technologies (Robotic Autonomous Systems (RAS), Cyber, Influence Operations (IO), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and human enhancements) are leveling the playing field, and increasing lethality.
• "We've been here before," (e.g., 1941, 1978):
-When confronted with an existential threat, the U.S. unified & exploited our technological & entrepreneurial strengths. -U.S. Army recognized the value of the individual Soldier resulting in the allvolunteer force. -Recognition of new threats (e.g. Israeli 1973 war) motivated Army leadership to respond.
• Even without Allies' recognition of an existential threat, the U.S. will have to make the preponderance of the Allied national security investment.
• Army leadership has recognized the impact of the Ukrainian war yet has not communicated the solutions for our Army to respond to this type threat.
• The Army has underinvested in new, fielded munitions since mid-80's.
• Army lacks Capability Development Strategy across Centers of Excellence to exploit:
-Innovative and disruptive Training & Talent Management.
-Operational experimentation & simulation to understand capabilities and to formulate innovative CONOPs. -Prototyping to accelerate fielding of limited operational capabilities.
• The all-volunteer force provides the U.S. a clear advantage. The value of individual Soldiers and teams drastically increase as combat capabilities proliferate to our adversaries. Battlespace reconfiguration and transparency argues for smaller, dispersed & trained units.
• Combined and Joint capabilities migrate to lower echelons, with leaders more capable for conflict in all dimensions (physical, information, cognitive).
• The Army has no plan to defeat enemy integrated air defense. Non-developmental Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS), coupled with innovative CONOPs, appears a viable approach to mitigate Integrated Air Defense (IAD) challenge.
• The introduction of ground and air robotic combat vehicles changes both the lethality and survivability parameters.
Key recommendations derived from these findings include the Army implementing the CDS, developing innovative CONOPs to gain overmatch in an era of technological parity, and prioritizing Manned-Unmanned Teaming (MUM-T) investments across successive Programming Objectives Memorandums (POMs). The study team also recommended the Army increase lethality, embrace commercial and Non-Developmental Item (NDI) technology acquisition practices for C4ISR, and redesign the Army for the future OE. Specific investment opportunities for the big bets recommended are:
• MUM-T armed ground robotic vehicles Specifically, the CSA challenged the Army with three imperatives:
3
• To place the big bets, the big bets in research and development and science and technology, while simultaneously conducting legitimate and genuine experiments with our force designs and our doctrine.
• Every assumption we hold, every claim, every assertion, every single one of them must be challenged. … Those of us, or those nation-states that stubbornly cling to the past will lose. They will lose that war, and they will lose it in a big way.
• Think of nothing in the past as sacred, except the concept of victory.
The study team adopted these principles as guidance from the CSA for the conduct of this study. The fundamental shifts that he identified, some of which encompass the changing CFW, tend to expose the Army's response, or lack thereof, to the changing OE.
The study team also adopted a second point made by the CSA, an important distinction between the nature and character of warfare. To summarize, the nature of war is immutable, "the threat of violence, as an extension of politics, to compel the enemy to our will within the fog, friction, and chance of combat." On the other hand, the character of warfare, or the manner in which wars are fought, "changes due to unique geo-political, social, demographic, economic, and technological developments interacting, often unevenly, over time." 
4
The Commanding General (CG), U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) sponsored this study, asking the ASB to assess the character of warfare in the 2030-2050 timeframe. The TOR
5
The future operational environment will be characterized by a high potential for instability driven by the diffusion of power and technologies among rising regional states, non-state actors, and increasingly empowered individuals. Adversaries will attempt to apply emerging technologies, diverse organizations, improvised weapons, and weapons of mass destruction to increase battlefield lethality, impede access, and deny the initiative to the U.S. military, contesting it in the air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace military warfighting domains.
To assist the Army in determining how best to address these challenges, CG TRADOC specified six tasks for the study team: During the study, the team conducted over twenty data-gathering visitations (see Appendix C) and interviews with Army agencies, the Office of the Secretary of (OSD), and other Services, think tanks, and commercial companies. The study team also made use of a broad array of earlier studies that describe the future strategic and OE trends out to 2050. Rather than attempt to devise an a-priori, "blank slate" assessment of the character of future warfare, the study team surveyed and synthesized the most important and relevant recent studies, roadmapping, and strategy documents within partner nations, OSD, the Army and the other military services (see Appendix D).
The study team worked to identify the most significant current-to-future discontinuities, or "from-to" comparisons, likely to generate significant changes in the future character of warfare Fig. 
1
Man is a deterministic device thrown into a probabilistic universe -Kahneman and Tversky
6
It's dangerous to attempt to predict what the future will hold between 2030 and 2050 because we're all influenced by the heuristics that we've developed over time. We might build a probable future throughout the next five-year, Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) (Fig. 
2
The U.S. and other well-developed countries show trends with aging populations and birth rates dropping to historic lows,
8
Many developing countries have slower declines in birthrate than developed nations (Fig. 
2
Previous trends demonstrate this change, coupled with economic disparity and high unemployment rates, may result in significant numbers of disenfranchised youth. In turn, this may lead to increased incidents of civil unrest (state-or non-state actors), terrorist-like activities, and or migration by those seeking better standards of living or escaping persecution. The U.S. Army may be called upon to assist allies in addressing civil unrest or providing humanitarian aid to those seeking asylum.
As Thomas Friedman wrote, "The world is flat," thanks to decreasing transportation costs, global business expansion, U.S. corporate tax rates, and increasing access to networks and connectivity. Corporations such as Netflix
9
2
2
The reduced costs of manufacturing and transporting goods have created an open marketplace for almost anything in the world, helping to raise the standard of living around the world, and serving as a partial economic equalizer for previously disadvantaged populations. They may also grow the economic power of larger state-actors or corporations, shifting today's current economic power status. World trade is predicted to continue to grow in the future, making big winners out of those who can develop the latest technologies first, but those economic advantages may be short-lived if the leading-edge technologies are easily obtained and duplicated.
Corporations are also predicted to continue to grow internationally, influencing global, geopolitical dynamics in unique ways. In the past, U.S. companies provided assistance during humanitarian crises, both domestically and abroad. In the future, corporations may also serve as more involved partners, promoting the positive message of democracy and capitalism.
Futurists also anticipate that climate change will continue to result in increasing temperature variations, increased incidents of extreme weather disruptions, and devastating storms, with the potential to cut or change routine access to essential resources supporting populations (i.e., water, food, and energy). 
12
With the advent of worldwide, high-speed internet access (e.g., OneWeb
13
14
16
17
18
Although cyber security continues to improve, increasing numbers of hacking incidents, identity thefts, and insider leaks 
19
20
There's a very real risk that the U.S. will lose its tactical supremacy, because current, potential adversaries continue to improve their weapons precision and lethality, and weapons technology (e.g., the potential use of lethal RAS 21 capabilities) proliferates unabatedly. The situation is exacerbated by the likelihood that adversaries won't abide by the same codes of conduct or ROE as the U.S. and its allies due to differences in policy, treaties, and legal and ethical frameworks. Thus, it's likely the U.S. will encounter an overmatch scenario resulting from technological parity that's overcome by adversaries willing to maximize the indiscriminate, destructive power of technology. How will the Army respond to the policy and ROE disparities?
The study team believes back-up capabilities and processes need to be developed and assessed now, so that they can be dynamically activated when these disparities arise.
Futurists also predict that internet access to weapons technology will continue to reach broader populations, eroding the potential for a U.S. advantage. For example, North Korea 22 has benefitted from WMD proliferation, challenging the Army's preparedness for expeditionary maneuvers and response capabilities in a WMD or nuclear environment. From an Army OE perspective, there's a potential for any military, technological advantages to be cut short, because adversaries of all types may gain unprecedented access to disruptive technologies and capabilities. A future challenge will be how to conduct military operations within this rapidly evolving dynamic.
Futurists also predict increased spoofing of all communications, sensing, and operational network capabilities, forcing the Army to operate in an environment flooded with erroneous information. Ultimately, the Army must consider cyber security a priority in tandem with the operational assumption that it won't be able to maintain any new, tactical, technological advantage for long. Thus, the Army must plan to exploit other potential capabilities, including but not limited to AI, human enhancements, and information operations (IO).
The improvement of AI through the 2030-2040s promises to yield new capabilities for the Army. Machines have demonstrated a better ability to make decisions about uncertainties and probabilities than humans. A human's cognitive bandwidth restricts our ability to make decisions as quickly, and humans can use improper heuristics when dealing with decisions in uncertainty. The development of AI will exponentially compress the Observe-Orient-Decide-Act (OODA) decision space, and AI will likely surpass human abilities in all cognitive tasks (Fig. 
2
23
More recently, since 2012, Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) R&D activities have advanced, resulting in thousands of research papers and the start-up of multiple companies in the U.S. 
27
Finally, adversaries' non-kinetic IO 28,29 will play a more significant role in future environments, with greater impact prior to, during, and after any kinetic engagements. Near-peers such as Russia and China 30 consider IO a key element in influencing local populations and gaining support. For both nations, IO is part of their ongoing operational activity that never ceases. Given U.S. law and military doctrine, the Army will need to consider what changes in national policy and international agreements, if any, it may wish to pursue in the near-term to prepare successfully for maneuvers in non-kinetic, IO environments. More explicitly, the Army may also need procedures that allow for dynamic activation of certain ROEs, given the rapidly evolving character of warfare.
produce the grey CDFs. The "Aggregate Forecast" is the mean distribution over all individual CDFs (also called the "mixture" distribution). The confidence interval was generated by bootstrapping (clustering on respondents) and plotting the 95% interval for estimated probabilities at each year. The LOESS curve is a non-parametric regression on all data points. 
There's significant overlap among the previous categories regarding factors that affect the geopolitical situation. Futurists predict that competition between state-and non-state actors will continue, and that the U.S. "superpower" supremacy gap will narrow or disappear. China, for example, has been positioning itself to challenge the U.S., and its continued economic growth will further improve its global status. 
31
32
The potential shifts in global power will also be driven by domestic constraints on U.S. and allies' military budgets and rapid changes in technology, all leading to increased parity between military capabilities.
China and Russia are exploiting these trends to grow their regional power in what they see as declining American supremacy. Currently, the re-establishment of former Soviet Union/Warsaw Pact alliances in Europe and the "One Belt, One Road" (Fig. 
2
More explicitly, futurists anticipate that the military will need to not only identify new procedures and policies, but also develop training that allows the commanding officer to rapidly adapt the OODA process given a rapid turn of events. The Army needs to prepare for these trends by discerning what effects changes in economic dependencies and international security agreements will have for the force. These trends will play out in any number of potential futures. 
34
Understanding the constraints of uncertainty in trying to predict the future, the study team drew from the previous trends five likely consequences that will drive more specific Army and Joint military capabilities in the OE (Fig. 
2
2. Domain Supremacy Contested -the U.S. moves from supremacy in most domains to more lethal and contested in all domains.
3. Transparent War -the U.S. military moves from limited, stove-piped military capabilities in command, control, communications, and computer (C4) and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) to continuous and pervasive commercial C4ISR.
4. Battlespace Reconfiguration -from maneuvering primarily in open terrain and contiguous areas of operation to maneuvering in DUAs and dispersed, noncontiguous areas of operation.
5. Contested Expeditionary Operations -from power projection at will to continuously contested power projection across the global commons, from alert to employment.
As we moved into the 21 st Century, the United States' near-peer competitors, China and Russia, have adjusted their approach in employing the instruments of national power (diplomatic, economic, informational, and military) to achieving their political and national security objectives. Military and nonmilitary, particularly informational means, are seamlessly coupled with informational measures receiving increased emphasis (Fig. 
3
35
36
• Psychological Warfare -seeks to undermine an enemy's ability to conduct combat operations through operations aimed at deterring, shocking, and demoralizing enemy military personnel and supporting civilian populations.
• Media Warfare -aimed at influencing domestic and international public opinion to build support for China's military actions and dissuading an adversary from pursuing actions contrary to China's interests.
• Legal Warfare -used international and domestic law to claim the legal high ground or assert Chinese interests; may be employed to hamstring an adversary's operational freedom, shape the operational space, and build international support to manage possible political repercussions of China's military actions.
The General Political Department is responsible for training all military personnel in the PLA on the full scope of "Three Warfares;" however, the activities of the more tactical organizations (e.g., divisions, regiments, and battalions) seem to be more focused on psychological warfare. Media warfare and legal warfare are more strategic. 
37
The PLA, with its continued military modernization, will be able to achieve resolution of regional conflicts involving land, sea, air, and possibly the offensive and defensive cyber domains. If successful, efforts like these will be "hard" power gains. However, as part of its broader national political objective of increasing what it calls "Comprehensive National Power" (CNP), China would like to create and enhance its "soft" power as well, e.g., with "One Belt, One Road."
Soft power for China entails raising the attractiveness or esteem of the Chinese culture, people, and way of life among other nations and nationalities. Despite censoring the information to its citizens, China's leadership wants to convey to the rest of the world, through the coordinated media, social networks, and information/influence operations, a favorable national identity. It's a competition for dominance in the cognitive dimension of the rest of the world, as nations and nationalities will be persuaded to follow China's lead. This is a bold vision of the future for China, wrapped in ideals. What if their persuasion is ineffective or refuted? Will persuasion become coercion? Or will it lead to disputes or conflicts? Is China's hidden objective a uni-polar world that it dominates? "Three Warfares," CNP, and "soft" power are aggressive doctrines for regional expansion. Though we haven't seen China transition to combat operations under current geopolitical activity, the Chinese are investing to ensure it remains a viable national security option.
In 2013, Russia perceived itself as surrounded by enemies. It wasn't a new thought, it's been a belief that has existed since Tsarist times, but with the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the concern had grown more acute. Russia lost the security belt provided by the Warsaw Pact countries, with some former members, (e.g., Poland, Latvia, and Estonia) joining the European Union and NATO. Without the belt of countries, Russia lost the zone where politically dangerous ideas could be stopped before they threatened the Russian leadership's hold on the reins of power. Independent Ukraine, of significant importance to Russia, began looking more to the West, as well. 
38
39
40
General Gerasimov doesn't view NGW as settled doctrine. Rather, he states, "Each war represents an isolated case, requiring an understanding of its own particular logic, its own unique character." 41 Even so, there are certain similarities in the Ukraine operations. Focusing solely on IO, Russia deployed many government assets to find military, political, or economic weaknesses which could be exploited. The IO campaign began by obtaining media assets such as the RT network, which it could control. Non-Ukrainian governmental organizations were persuaded to support Russian policies. Additionally, diplomatic and media narratives were established to support the actions by those who oppose the Ukrainian government.
Through NGW, Russia has brought war back to Europe in a hidden, undeclared, and ambiguous form. Also, despite Russia's use of military operations and the breaking of treaty agreements, neither the U.S. nor its European allies have responded militarily. Thus, the information war was successful at all levels. The Ukrainian defense was confused and isolated. Russia's denial program in the West was also successful in moving war into the cognitive dimension.
The future erosion of U.S. supremacy in every domain is both real and apparent. Increasingly aggressive challengers are developing and fielding a full range of modern, advanced military capabilities. Investments in EW and space systems threaten U.S. command and control, while forward bases, naval vessels, and aircraft are menaced by integrated air defenses and longrange cruise and ballistic missile systems. The ability of the Joint Force to operate effectively in the air and maritime domains hundreds of miles from adversary coasts has eroded, and large land formations are increasingly ranged by accurate fires of increased volume. Rather than exercising supremacy in all domains, U.S. forces will be contested in all domains, encountering more lethal operations, and cannot assume sanctuary in any part of any domain.
The nature of future peer-competitor tactical engagements will reflect the loss of U.S. advantage in each domain. The study team believes future tactical engagements will follow these fundamental characteristics (Fig. 
3
• Compressed in Time -the speed of battle at the engagement level will accelerate, collapsing the decision-action cycle to micro-seconds. In many cases, autonomous systems will be needed to deal with the complexity, scale, and speed of engagement decisions.
• Extended in Space -the range of sensors and weapons will progressively extend, expanding the battlefield both physically (with respect to geography and space) and virtually (cyberspace). This will enable competitors to affect each other at extraordinary depth -even globally -as capabilities with far greater range proliferate across all domains. 42
• Far More Lethal -complex and lethal engagements will permeate the battlespace. Land, sea, air, and space platforms encounter long range precision munitions, highly accurate guided missiles, lasers and microwave weaponry, stealthy and agile swarming robotic systems, and continuous probing of cyber systems. This contest extends to both control and use of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
• Connected Across Domains (air/land/sea/space/cyber) -lethal engagements are not only characteristic within each domain, but also between them. The range and precision of sensors and weapons allows routine cross-domain engagement. Forces without countermeasures and defenses integrated across all domains are quickly degraded.
• Interactive Across the Conflict Dimensions (physical/informational/cognitive)engagements will interact not only across every domain in the physical dimension, but also the cognitive dimension, and even the moral dimension of belief and values. Information will be weaponized, either directly through cyber techniques or implicitly through social media techniques. 
43
As protection becomes less feasible for land platforms, vehicles will logically follow trends from the air domain and trade passive protection for mobility, speed, and the safety of remote controls. The disaggregation of armored combat vehicle platforms and manned-unmanned teaming (MUM-T) for both sensing and striking systems will enhance initial engagement survivability in a highly lethal battlespace. 
45
Innovative CONOPs will be required to leverage disruptive technologies into advanced combined arms capabilities. The CONOPS must recognize the peer or near-peer status, the proliferation of precision weapons, the expanding reach of sensors and weapons, and the concomitant expansion of the battlefield. They must address the relative advantages and disadvantages of the available technologies and combine them for maximum leverage across all domains. Universal concepts will be problematic, for an operational concept must address the strategic and regional circumstances unique to each adversary, accounting for their specific "way of warfare."
Today, billions of people worldwide enjoy wireless access to a commercial communications network. Although the network is comprised of complex engineering, its top-level functionality is relatively simple to describe.
To access the commercial network, an individual uses a smart, intuitive, user-friendly wireless device (cell phone, laptop, tablet, etc.) to send a data message or a voice/telephone call to one or more individuals. Typically, the RF transmission from the individual's device travels to a fixed cellular tower or a fixed wireless access point where, in both cases, it's routed and switched via very high capacity cable and RF trunks. As the message or call gets near its destination, it automatically leaves the high capacity trunks and moves to a single wireless or wired connection. At that point, it connects to the target individual's device, enabling voice or message communications. Cellular capable user devices can operate on the move, connecting to one fixed cellular site's high capacity trunks and then getting handed off automatically to another cellular site without noticeable communications interruption.
Commercial wireless devices and the fixed high capacity trunks are constructed and engineered to standards that ensure the network seamlessly connects. Compatible software code recognizes and acts upon the message at each connection. In the commercial network, additional equipment and sites are added frequently to improve the network's coverage and resiliency. Hardware and software technology are continuously upgraded to improve features of the user's device and the speed of the high capacity trunks.
To date, global investment in the commercial network has exceeded trillions of dollars, and it continues to increase with satellite internet constellations like Iridium, OneWeb, and SpaceX Starlink.
There will also be explosive growth in commercial ISR from satellites, drones, and the Internet of Things (IoT). Information will be readily available to DoD, near-peers, and non-state actors alike. Sensor processing and engagement speeds shift the decision space increasingly to machines and AI. Below threshold hostile activities and criminal activities will continue to attempt to usurp good order by disrupting connectivity via cyber, IO, and EW.
The use of small satellites (e.g. Cubesats) for imagery and other forms of sensing is rapidly making low cost intelligence networks available to anyone with a credit card. One Finnish company, IceEye, has 30 synthetic imaging radar (SAR) satellites that can image the earth even under clouds. 
46
The U.S. military is also competing with advances in commercial communication because its airland tactical network operates similarly to commercial Wi-Fi and cellular networks, with a few significant differences. The operational conditions are more demanding, and traffic needs to be protected with government approved encryption. Both the user devices and the various RF links, to include high capacity trunks, must operate on the move in rugged terrain. They're also required to operate in the full range of worldwide temperature, humidity, and environmental conditions (e.g., sand, dust, rain, saltwater, etc.), and they need to provide reliable communications in built-up cities, dense wooded areas, and mountainous terrain.
The military communications network must survive operating in an increasingly sophisticated hostile electromagnetic and cyber environment. The RF devices are subject to monitoring, jamming, spoofing, and damaging cyberattacks. Lacking protection and mitigating measures, military RF emissions can be identified, located, and targeted by the enemy.
The Army has used multiple PORs over the past three decades to design, acquire, and field specialized terminals, RF links, and networks comprised of various individual wireless devices, single channel radios, and high capacity, multi-channel/trunk radios. Each of these PORs was built and tested and complied with the contract specifications deemed necessary for successful operation. Unfortunately, the specialized RF links and networks were not required to operate seamlessly with one another.
That one shortfall exists for a significant number, if not the majority, of the Army's PORs, which has created a suite of stove-piped networks with limited interoperability. As a result, the C4ISR System in the Army today and programmed to be fielded in the next decade isn't sufficiently effective to meet the Army's operational needs. The Institute for Defense Analysis (IDA) cited in a detailed report released in May 2017 that the Army's PORs, "Fall short of demonstrating a survivable, effective and suitable air-land tactical network that meets the need of the warfighter."
47
For decades, the Army expected to fight in battlespace that would be generally open, rural geography across contiguous areas of operation. Several factors have contributed to changing that condition. Future maneuver will routinely occur in dense urban areas (DUA) and/or dispersed and noncontiguous operational areas (Fig. 
3
DUAs have historically challenged land U.S. forces (e.g., Manila, Sadr City, Mosul) but by midcentury, they'll be far more pervasive and populated due to changing demographics and world economic growth. Urban environments will sprawl horizontally and vertically in space, but also socially, posing both challenges and opportunities. Land forces must operate in these areas for sustained periods and will view such operations as the norm, vice the exception. Urban areas will be particularly attractive because peer competitors will seek the complex clutter of large built-up areas for both concealment from ubiquitous sensors, as well as the abundant available overhead cover that offers some protection from peer-capable weapons systems.
As it becomes necessary to conduct urban operations, opportunities will also emerge. Cities will become "smarter" and more instrumented by a vast array of cheap and connected sensors measuring traffic, human, and material flows. They'll also have massive resources that can be directed for war, such as computer-controlled machine shops, 3D manufacturing facilities, small-scale chip foundries, and a dense selection of consumer electronics, wireless nodes, and commercial and private fiber networks. There will be ample opportunities for foraging for water, energy, 3D printing materials, and communication and transportation assets.
Urban verticality and subterranean infrastructure will complicate land force operations, freedom of movement, and force protection requirements. Some combatants will continue to employ the "control by devastation," technique of previous wars, while others will seek very precise, low collateral damage combat. There will be a premium on the ability to separate combatants from non-combatants in dense urban environments. Forces will employ sophisticated human and cultural mapping, biometric assessment, and tagging at long range, and other technologies that enable combat forces to understand and to selectively control city services and utilities. U.S. CONOPs that "destroy to save" will become obsolete, as controlling the critical infrastructure, economic zones, flows of people will be necessary to winning in DUAs.
Non-combatant considerations-including preserving both life and quality of life-may become the dominant factors that shape and define the outcome of military operations. Key planning functions such as intelligence, preparation of the battlefield, and situational awareness will need to focus on and emphasize cultural factors, historical considerations, and predominant patterns of life.
Outside of large urban areas, units will disperse and disaggregate to frustrate detection by ubiquitous sensor networks and associated weapons systems. U.S. Army units will need to mass effects, not forces. Consequently, range overmatch will be at a premium for both sensors and weapons. The requirement to disperse, disaggregate, and conceal will make wide area control less feasible. Any battlespace reliably "controlled" in a traditional sense by military forces will be typically non-contiguous. In this new rendition of a battlespace, with ubiquitous sensors and long-range, precision engagement systems, the likelihood of surprise, engagement, and destruction won't be significantly different between areas previously described as "deep," "close," and "rear."
In that new battlespace, sustainment will no longer be a continuous background function over linear lines of communication. Rather, logistics will require an overt, integrated, combined arms activity that "pulses" and protects support packages across non-contiguous battlespaces. A successful sustainment pulse resets a unit's "expiration clock," but that clock inexorably counts down until the next sustainment pulse is delivered.
Communications across a non-contiguous battlespace will be uncertain, with persistent and pervasive attacks on networks in all domains, from space to local radios, through cyber, integrated EW, and other means. Adversaries will contest communication wherever possible, organization-to-organization, man-to-man, man-to-machine, machine-to-machine, etc. That contest will prove crucial for dispersed and disaggregated forces. Competitors will seek assured communication through redundant, heterogeneous networks, employing innovative techniques, including low power and highly directional transmissions over multiple portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Dispersed forces constantly on the move will need continuous beyond-line-ofsight connectivity, such as through SATCOM and digital HF.
Anticipating extensive periods of interrupted communication, the study team predicts combined arms and Joint capabilities will migrate to lower echelons, creating a demand for flexible, scalable force structures that can accommodate joint and combined capabilities, disaggregated to lower levels or aggregated without loss of efficiency. Super-enabled, small unit formations will reinforce the need for innovative approaches to generating joint and combined arms synergy.
In such a reconfigured battlespace, mission command will evolve substantively. A commander's original intent will rarely persist for extended periods, so the rapid presentation of tactical threats and opportunities will require an advanced level of mission command. Subordinate commanders must be willing to initiate significant new missions based on recognition of new, emerging conditions, without the traditional, positive confirmation or refinement of original missions. Seasoned, experienced, and well-trained leaders will need to be grown to operate in these uncertain tactical environments.
U.S. Army units are under constant surveillance (ISR) by adversaries taking advantage of ubiquitous sensors, from commercial imagery to the IoT, operating over global civilian and military networks. Strategic surprise will be challenged by near-peer adversaries able to constantly monitor U.S. deployments from home station to the operational area (Fig. 
3
The sustainment challenges will be significant. Life will almost certainly be extremely austere. Water, chow, ammo, fuel, maintenance, and medical support will be about all we should plan for… and our lines of communication will for sure be contested, and probably denied. Being surrounded will become the norm, the routine, the life of a unit in combat. In short, learning to be comfortable with being seriously miserable every single minute of every day will have to become a way of life for an Army on the battlefield that I see coming.
Deploying forces will be at risk of engagement in multiple domains starting with early stage cyber and information warfare attacks aimed at delaying early entry. Robust A2/AD defenses will restrict expeditionary maneuver into expected areas of entry. With the advancement in long range precision fires, A2/AD would endanger U.S. land and air forces at the edge of the theater of combat.
It's unlikely peer competitors will cede expeditionary warfare to the U.S., as they've demonstrated their own expeditionary capabilities (Russia in Syria and the Chinese in Djibouti). This increases the potential for an immediate clash in traditionally remote regions where the U.S. has traditionally moved and operated unchallenged.
Success in such an environment will require an "en masse impact" from fires and the maneuver of dispersed, covert, concentrated small units to achieve local surprise. More importantly, the U.S. will need to retain and leverage forward presence in Central Europe and Asia to leverage the advantages of the tactical defense, minimize the nominally long delay of moving expeditionary forces into theater, and to reduce exposure to long range fires. Even then, land forces will need to fight into and under a robust enemy A2/AD regime.
The complexity and uncertainty of the future SSE present a plethora of operational challenges to the Army. One of the SSE trends having particularly important implications is the commercialization and diffusion of technologies around RAS, AI, and human enhancement, areas expected to experience exponential growth over the next decades. These technologies will become available to friend and foe alike. In such an environment of technological parity, the Army will be challenged to maintain (or recover) overmatch against adversaries with like capabilities. Overmatch will depend on the superiority of U.S. integration of the technologies into DOTMLPF capabilities and of the CONOPs and TTPs for employing those solutions.
An equally important challenge will be the abundance of potentially disruptive technology investment options available to the Army in the short-term to modernize the future Army in the 2030-2050 timeframe. Judicious decisions must be made in the context of constraints that affect the Army's ability to fund development and procurement of future capabilities, to rapidly field the capabilities, and to adapt future capabilities in an uncertain environment in which adversaries enjoy legal and ethical asymmetries. These constraints require that the Army employ a CDS that ensures not only making the right choices on big bets (i.e., technologies that yield high payoff with some risk), but also providing maximum flexibility and adaptability in fielding and employing them.
The first constraint facing the Army over the next decade is a potentially a tough fiscal environment. In the absence of a major conflict, the Army's Total Obligation Authority (TOA) may fluctuate under different administrations but may not grow substantially over the long term. A possible scenario will be a decreasing TOA, driven by the squeeze on discretionary funding accounts (including Defense) within the federal budget caused by growing nondiscretionary accounts (e.g., Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid), as well as interest on the growing national debt. The Government Accounting Office 48 projects that the national debt will exceed 100% of Gross National Product (GNP) around 2030, further pressuring the solvency of social welfare accounts (Fig. 
4
Within this fiscal environment, Army modernization budgets are particularly vulnerable because readiness will continue to be the funding priority as current optempo is not projected to drop in the near future. The Army can't expect to offset its stagnant or declining R&D by capitalizing on other federal R&D spending, which have experienced similar pressures (Fig. 
4
The Army will need to look more to the private sector as the source of innovation in making technology-driven modernization investment decisions. While commercial R&D is expected to grow, the investment growth will not uniformly apply to all market segments. For example, the global markets for manned rotorcraft systems has leveled off in recent years and is expected to experience a decline, as the demand decreases for manned civil and commercial rotorcraft needed to service the oil industry. As a result, investment and innovation in this market segment will become increasingly dependent on the military, and the Army will find relying on private sector R&D as a primary or supplemental source of advanced manned aircraft technology increasingly difficult (Fig. 
4
In contrast, commercial investments in UAS and UAVs are increasing and driving the civil and commercial markets (e.g., precision agriculture, infrastructure inspection, electric grid monitoring) up the S-curve. Given the Army's limited R&D budget, the Army will need to carefully weigh investment in future manned versus unmanned systems that can perform the same functions. This is an illustrative example of the type of tradeoffs the Army will need to apply to other technologies and applications as well.
49
The second constraint the Army faces in fielding disruptive capabilities comes from the asymmetry in acquisition timelines between the DoD's formal acquisition process and adversaries' more nimble procurement processes. There have been multiple attempts over the past several decades to reform and streamline DoD acquisition and fielding of new PORs, including the Joint Capabilities Integration Development System (JCIDS) requirements development process; the DoD 5000 rules and regulations for POR development and procurement; the Planning, Programming, Budget, and Execution (PPBE) process; and Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E); but attempts at reform have made the overall life cycle management system even more complex (Fig. 
4
In contrast, adversaries aren't constrained by such onerous processes. The timelines for development of highly sophisticated systems (e.g., combat aircraft, combat ground vehicles, air defense systems) by peer and near-peer competitors may be protracted because of technological challenges, but not because of self-imposed process restrictions. Additionally, once these systems are developed, they become readily available to other adversaries through unfettered foreign military sales. The full spectrum of U.S. adversaries, from peer to VNSAs, are proficient at adapting commercial systems or NDIs into instruments of warfare, and rapidly employing them (e.g., ISIS' use of quadcopter drones with lethal capabilities
51
The Army and the other military services do have means of rapid fielding outside of the formal acquisition processes. These vehicles are responsive to Joint Urgent Operational Needs (JUONs), usually through the tailoring of NDI and/or commercial systems. Rapid procurements are generally funded outside of the PPBE process by means of the Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding associated with named operations, such as Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), and Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF). As these operations wind down, OCO funding is expected to decrease. It's also the case that rapidly acquired capabilities are deployed without full DOTMLPF integration, and don't have a sustainment pipeline. Thus, after the urgent need ceases to exist, the funding for these systems isn't sustained within the POM, and they don't transition to POR status for fully integrated DOTMLPF capabilities. The DoD and the Army continue to search for means of institutionalizing more rapid fielding of tailored NDI capabilities within the formal JCIDS, acquisition, and PPBE processes, but they've had limited success to date.
Asymmetries in legal, ethical, and moral norms exist between the U.S. and potential adversaries, particularly VNSAs, which have no compunction over the unfettered use of lethal autonomy and human enhancement, or in causing civilian casualties. They also have no compunction in violating international and multinational treaties that restrict the proliferation of WMD and the use of certain munitions, such as cluster munitions. The U.S. and many of its close allies are perhaps uniquely constrained in the use of similar capabilities by norms associated with democratic societies that respect international law (e.g. spectrum allocation, international boundaries, rights of navigation) and inviolable human rights.
One capability currently being debated at policy levels within the government is the use of AI for lethal applications of RAS. There's much concern within the policy community (sensationalized in the popular press and in motion pictures and video games) about "killer robots." A very clear DoD policy (DODD 3000.0, 2012) requires "appropriate levels of human judgment over the use of force." This guidance is widely interpreted as the need for human "eyes-on-target" for supervisory control over RAS for any lethal action. Adversaries, on the other hand, may not impose the same constraints for lethal RAS on the battlefield, creating an overmatch disadvantage based strictly on policy and ROE. Similar adversary overmatch may result from differing policy, legal, ethical, and treaty-compliance constraints imposed on the use of other disruptive technologies, such as human enhancement and cluster munitions).
With the myriad of challenges, the future SSE and OE also present numerous opportunities for the Army. Many potentially disruptive capabilities are on the cusp of exponential growth. The Army will need to make well-informed, trade-off decisions on which few specific capabilities it should select out of the many available to place its big bets regarding modernization for 2030 and beyond. A CDS that facilitates the selection, development, rapid fielding, and innovative employment of those big bets (within the identified constraints) is essential to retaining overmatch.
The study team developed one potential CDS addressing each of the capability constraints. The objectives of the CDS are to:
1. Gain insights into the operational utility of a proposed capability and to explore innovative CONOPS/TTPs that best exploit the prototype capability to provide a wellinformed basis for acquisition decisions on the big bets.
2. Accelerate the Fielding of IOC that prove operational value prior to formal but agile acquisition of FOC.
3. For new capabilities where we currently "self-deter," such as AI-enabled decision aids or human performance enhacements, build in the ability to dynamically activate dormant "war reserve" functionality that respond to battlefield conditions and changes in ROE.
The Army has many big bet opportunities emerging from expanding technologies, but fiscal constraints require that it make judicious decisions on the few it can afford. Technological parity also requires the Army do a better job than adversaries of integrating technologyenabled capabilities into its force structure, employing them with innovative CONOPS and better utilizing the human element in producing those capabilities.
A key element of a CDS requires use of operational experimentation and simulation to understand how best to (a) employ candidate capability development options, (b) explore effectiveness of organizational and human integration options, and (c) develop innovative CONOPs and TTPs. Experimentation and simulation provide a sound basis of comparison between capabilities competing for limited funding and a solid understanding of the operational requirements and estimated costs for development of the capability.
Operational experimentation is distinct from product-level experiments conducted to improve the technology maturity of a physical system or component. Operational experiments are used to exercise functional interfaces and interactions, and to understand functional performance of a proposed capability within a realistic system-of-systems environment. They can be conducted with physical surrogates that faithfully represent the functions of the proposed capability and that stimulate functional interactions with other systems (e.g., command, control, and communications). Such experiments would be like the Army's Advanced Warfighting Experiments but more focused on a single capability (rather than many) to clearly delineate the change in operational utility and effectiveness of the single capability. The change in utility would be measured by the difference in measures of effectiveness between a control team not having the proposed capability and a capability-enhanced team. Both teams would operate against a red-force team and would have opportunities for learning through multiple iterations of the exercise.
Operational experiments would typically operate in a combined live, virtual, and constructive simulation environment. High fidelity simulation is an important component in several ways. First, it reduces the cost and burden of conducting the experiment by emulating many of the interfacing systems. Second, because the experiments can be conducted with only a limited set of scenarios, threat capabilities, and operational conditions, the simulation, once validated through the experimental results, can be used to extrapolate the results to a much wider set of scenarios, threats, and conditions. Also, much of the software functionality for the proposed capability can be embedded in the simulation. This is particularly useful for AI-enabled capabilities in which the non-deterministic behavior of the system (e.g., RAS) is difficult to predict. The behavior and transparency of the system can be calibrated under differing conditions to optimize human-machine interactions and to improve trust.
Many, or most, new capability solutions will cut across Army Centers of Excellence (COEs). The CDS must account for the need for multi-COE participation in the experiments to ensure cross fertilization among COEs in the design and conduct of the experiments, development, and validation of the simulations. A good example of the need for participation across COEs is the expanded use of UAS to meet the needs of multiple COEs. The Aviation COE is responsible for design and development of UAS, but advocacy for specific UAS missions cuts across several COEs (e.g., Fires COE for targeting or for conducting SEAD, Log COE for supply delivery, Intelligence COE for ISR, etc.). The tendency would be for each COE to require a unique UAS platform and sensors for its mission; however, as indicated in the 2016 ASB study on Robotic and Autonomous Systems, it's feasible to develop modular payload UAS's that can provide capabilities across multiple missions. Such cost-effective solutions require coordination that can bridge the daunting barriers between many of the current "stovepipes of excellence." 52
The Army's inability to field new, major system PORs under the DoD formal JCIDS, DoD 5000 acquisition, PPBE, and OT&E processes provide adversaries, unencumbered by formal acquisition processes, with an asymmetric advantage in the ability to rapidly field new capabilities.
An approach that would facilitate earlier fielding of capabilities that could be institutionalized within the formal acquisition processes, without using JUONS and OCO funding, involves advanced prototyping. The study team identified a promising model in the Joint Capability Technology Demonstration (JCTD) type of purpose-built prototype, used when the prototyped system has limited operational capability and the project has residual assets that could be deployed into a theatre.
The principal differences between the proposed, JCTD-type of prototyping and the standard Technology Maturation and Risk Reduction (TMRR) type of prototyping (part of a POR) are that (a) the project would have the objective from the outset of providing deployable assets, and (b) it wouldn't necessarily be funded through a POR. While JCTD-like, the project wouldn't have to be Joint, i.e., funded through OSD. Instead, it would be funded and directed through Army 6.3/6.4 budget authority and contracted by means of agile contracting methods, such as Other Transaction Agreements (OTA). The prototype needs to be of sufficient design and performance fidelity that it offers a path from LOC to FOC without significant redesign of the prototype, contingent upon a successful proof of operational value during the prototyping project and subsequent in-theatre operations. This proposed approach would have the added advantage of transitioning the prototype to a POR by proceeding directly to a Milestone B acquisition decision.
These prototyping projects differ from the operational experiments described above in that the prototype projects develop physical systems, while the experiments evaluate functional attributes by emulating the physical systems using surrogates. While the experimentation and prototyping may be conducted separately, synergies can also be attained by coupling the projects for a candidate disruptive capability.
The proposed JCTD-like prototyping efforts are promising for use with major platform systems, such as manned or unmanned ground combat vehicles, UAS and UAV, and Manned-Unmanned Teaming (MUM-T) platforms. For Soldier or network systems, the study team believes the Army should seek alternate approaches for rapid fielding, based on service contracts. Because of the anticipated proliferation of commercial communications and ISR space systems, the Army network will likely increasingly use and exploit commercial systems. It may be advantageous for the Army to field improved C4ISR capabilities by some means other than the tedious FAR acquisition processes, such as nimbler service contracts with the commercial operators.
Many of the technologies that will contribute to the CFW have legal and ethical issues associated with their employment, including: AI for lethal RAS; human enhancement; weapons or munitions with indiscriminate, highly lethal effects; and the intentional distortion of information through social media. U.S. adversaries enjoy potentially devastating overmatch advantages with their lack of legal and ethical constraints on the development and use of these technologies.
U.S. policies will continue to be shaped by the acceptable norms of our free society and not subject to the degrading norms of some adversaries. However, in past conflicts, the U.S. has changed policies and ROEs to accord with battlefield realities. To be prepared for these kinds of adjustments in future conflicts, the Army may need to conduct R&D to mature technologies that enable emplacing latent capabilities to be utilized if circumstances require.
The Army may proceed in this vein with lethal RAS. Adversaries are already employing lethal capabilities delivered indiscriminately from commercial UAS. Peer and near-peer adversaries are developing highly lethal, autonomous ground robotic vehicles and air vehicles. The Army's quite capable of developing similar systems but is constrained in transitioning such capabilities from R&D to PORs by DoD policy. The study team believes a concept of "dynamic autonomy" provides a path for breaking through the transition roadblock while still complying with current policy and ROE restrictions. 
53
Rapidly improving AI capabilities anticipated over the next decade or two require a modular open system architecture (MOSA). The development of any new RAS system can be initiated with limited, mature autonomous functionality that can be continuously improved over time as AI-enabled functionality evolves. An "autonomy roadmap" with MOSA standards would prove to be a powerful design tool for Army RAS to fully and rapidly exploit AI in future conflicts, offsetting asymmetries with the lack of adversary constraints. 
53
The study team's survey of future estimates identified a clear consensus of increasing complexity in the SSE. A daunting array of peer and near-peer competitors demonstrates an increasing ability to exploit legacy and emerging technologies, and many of these technologies are accessible to non-state competitors. Consequently, the Army will encounter increasingly diverse and demanding operational challenges. On the positive side of these trends, the Army will find the space of big bet opportunities for the Army expanding. Judicious exploitation of the big bets will enable the Army to restore battlefield overmatch.
Unfortunately, the Army's ability to exploit the range of big bet opportunities is at risk. The Army faces fiscal constraints and policy restrictions that take some big bets off the table for development. In addition, normal acquisition timelines will limit the Army's responsiveness when future battlefield engagements convince the nation to relax or completely forego current policy restrictions.
Therefore, the study team's recommendations include specific areas for Army investment, as well as divestment, to enable big bets. The Army will need agile development strategies to identify the best big bets and innovative CONOPs to best utilize the capabilities derived from them. An agile capability development strategy will dynamically adjust to technology surprises, including policy reversals.
Findings:
• Changes to the Character of Future Warfare are inexorable and accelerating, which make maintaining overmatch, without appropriate response, far more difficult. Our adversaries are reducing, if not eliminating, our overmatch.
• Even with Allies' recognition of an existential threat, the U.S. will have to make the preponderance of the Allied national security investment.
• Army leadership has recognized the impact of the Ukrainian war yet has not communicated the solutions for our Army to respond to this type of threat.
• The Army has underinvested in new, fielded munitions since the mid-1980s.
• Easy global access to emerging technologies (Robotic Autonomous Systems (RAS), Cyber, Influence Operations (IO), AI, and human enhancements) are leveling the playing field and increasing lethality.
• The Army has no plan to defeat enemy integrated air defense. Non-developmental Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS), coupled with innovative CONOPs, appears to be a viable approach to mitigate the Integrated Air Defense (IAD) challenge.
• The introduction of ground and air robotic combat vehicles changes both the lethality and survivability parameters.
Recommendations:
• Prioritize MUM-T investments across successive POMs. Focus on ground MUM-T; it is a unique Army capability and will not occur without Army investment. Leverage the efforts of other services for air MUM-T. Exploit commercial AI developments and adapt them for Army-unique applications.
• Increase lethality through new payloads and longer-range fires, area effect munitions, and kinetic energy missiles.
• Invest in:
-MUM-T armed ground robotic vehicles -Commercial network capability for Army participation in Multi-Domain Battle (MDB) -Lethality -Education, training, cadre, facilities, and infrastructure to enhance overmatch in Soldier (enlisted, warrant officer, and officer) and team performance -Cyber, Influence Operations, and EW as Army tactical weapon systems -Leverage DARPA innovation (e.g., Cognitive EW, Swarming UAVs & Offset, Squad-X)
• Divest from:
-Army-developed unique networks that do not meet the needs of MDB -Enhancements to armored combat vehicles that add weight -Manned aviation platforms and their enhancements not required in a MUM-T environment
Findings:
• The Army lacks a capability development strategy across Centers of Excellence to exploit:
-Innovative and disruptive Training & Talent Management -Operational experimentation and simulation to understand capabilities and to formulate innovative CONOPs -Prototyping to accelerate fielding of limited operational capabilities Recommendations:
• AROC enforce agility to reach informed decisions for big bets.
-Employ operational experimentation with surrogates to understand the utility of disruptive capabilities and to develop innovative CONOPs. -Use capability prototyping to accelerate fielding of limited operational capabilities, followed by agile development of full operational capabilities meriting full-scale development.
-Require AOAs for all new system PORs. Examine autonomous versus manned capability solutions. prototypes that facilitate distributed sensing, targeting, and engagement across services to enable multi-domain battle. -Exploit commercial as-a-service contracts process (i.e., buying outcomes).
• ASA(ALT) establish policies to:
-Develop a high-fidelity simulation toolset for understanding RAS, IO, Cyber, AI, and human enhancement behavior in complex, realistic environments (e.g., MDB). -Build in dormant AI capabilities that can be dynamically activated as rules of engagement evolve.
Findings:
• The all-volunteer force provides the U.S. a clear advantage. The value of individual Soldiers and teams drastically increase as combat capabilities proliferate to our adversaries. Battlespace reconfiguration and transparency argues for smaller, dispersed, and trained units.
• Combined and Joint capabilities migrate to lower echelons, with leaders more capable of conflict in all dimensions (physical, information, cognitive).
• "We've been here before," (e.g., 1941, 1978).
-When confronted with an existential threat, the U.S. unified and exploited our technological and entrepreneurial strengths.
-U.S. Army recognized the value of the individual Soldier resulting in the all-volunteer force. -Recognition of new threats (e.g., Israeli 1973 war) motivated Army leadership to respond.
Recommendation:
• Redesign the Army for the future OE.
-Develop and test small combat unit (company or below) prototypes led by more capable leaders leveraging more combined and joint power in a distributed, noncontiguous battle space. -Implement organizational design changes in the operational army based on prototype outputs. -Adopt talent management and diverse, advanced civil education to prepare the officer corps for conflict in all of its dimensions (physical, information, cognitive). 
• Commercial network capability for Army participation in Multi-Domain Battle (MDB) • Lethality • Education, training, cadre, facilities, and infrastructure to enhance overmatch in Soldier (enlisted, warrant officer, and officer) and team performance • Cyber, Influence Operations, and Electronic Warfare (EW) as Army tactical weapons systems • Leverage DARPA innovation (e.g., Cognitive EW, Swarming UAVs & Offset, Squad-X) 1. INTRODUCTION
42  
42  
Joint Operating Environment
2035, The Joint Force in a Contested and Disordered World, 14 July 216.
Milley, Gen. Mark A. Address to the AUSA Eisenhower Luncheon, Washington D.C., 4 October 2016. http://wpswps.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/20161004_CSA_AUSA_Eisenhower_Transcripts.pdf; p. 15.
Ibid.    
Ibid.   
The TOR is reprinted at Appendix A.
Michael Lewis, The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds, 2016.
See Appendix D for full list of reports reviewed by the study team.
Max Roser and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina (2017) -'World Population Growth'. Published online at OurWorldInData.org. Retrieved from: https://ourworldindata.org/world-population-growth/ [Online Resource].
Steel, E., Netflix nears
million subscribers, New York Times, January 18, 2017. 10 Mickel, T., Apple's Cash Hoard Set to Top $250 Billion, Wall Street Journal, April 30, 2017. 11 See Justin Paul (2016) The Rise of China: What, When, Where, and Why?, The International Trade Journal, 30:3, 207-222, DOI: 10.1080/08853908.2016.1155513; and https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/trade-winds-685-trillionfuture-global-commerce-debra-d-agostino/.
Bort, R., How Climate Change's Effect on Agriculture Can Lead to War. Newsweek, Feb. 17, 2017.
Wyler, G., We All Need Access, One Web, Dec. 19, 2016. Note from Founder and Chairman available at http://oneweb.world/.
Private communication: Briefing by Bryon Hargis, SpaceX Federal Program Manager, July 10, 2017.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_World_Is_Flat.
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress -Military Power of the People's of China 2008 (Washington D.C.: Department of Defense, [2008].
Office of the Secretary of Defense (DoD), Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2011, Annual Report to Congress (Washington, DC: DoD, 16 August 2011).
In keeping with Sun Tzu, "For to win one hundred victories in one hundred battles is not the acme of skill. To subdue the enemy without fighting is the acme of skill."
"Understanding Russia's Concept for Total War in Europe", Martin M. Murphy, PhD, September 12, 2016, The Heritage Foundation.
Getting Gerasimov Right", Charles K. Bartles, Jan-Feb 2016 Military Review.
A Comprehensive Assessment of the Army's Air-Land Mobile Tactical Communications Network", Marwick, M.S. Project Leader, Laprade, E.J., 2017, IDA, Alexandria, VA.
Teal Group research http://www.businessinsider.com/the-drones-report-market-forecasts-key-players-and-usecases-and-regulatory-barriers-to-the-proliferation-of-drones-2016-3.
DAU Integrated Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Life Cycle Management System, https://dap.dau.mil
Schmitt, E., Papers Offer a Peek at ISIS' Drones, Lethal and Largely Off-the-Shelf, NY Times, Jan. 31, 2017, Retrieved from: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/31/world/middleeast/isis-drone-documents.html.
OMB No. 
0704-0188
Department of Defense, Executive Service Directorate 9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Department of the Army Office of the Deputy Undersecretary of the Army Washington
DC 20310-0103 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) HQDA/DUSA 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing the burden