# ID: 449242585fed47bbbc03cf9298e18c90
# Title: War and empire: the American way of life
# Database: Libgen
# Year: 2010
# Fulltext:
Germany had not been defeated but neither had it won.
Many Germans hoped that in the peace negotiations that would follow the armistice they would achieve at least some of their war aims.
What actually followed is critically important in understanding why the Nazis would be so successful in the early 1930s.
Though at the time of the armistice German troops had been beaten back, they had not technically surrendered and they still occupied French soil.
Thus German leaders, soldiers and its people believed that 'honor' could still be salvaged.
Yet despite the armistice Britain continued its blockade, thus intensifying Germany's economic collapse, with grievous conditions for civilians.
Simultaneously, the success of the Bolsheviks in Russia emboldened German socialists and communists and a civil war broke out between them and rightists who claimed that Germany had been 'stabbed in the back' by traitors like the leftists and Jews.
In the Peace Treaty of Versailles Germany was obliged by its weakness to accept humiliating terms.
It had to take full culpability for initiating the war, though there was blame aplenty to go around among all the belligerents, and to pay enormous reparations for the costs of the war to Britain and France, thereby leaving Germany unable to care even for its millions of maimed and wounded.
It also had to accept the profound humiliation of French troops occupying German soil, especially mortifying because Germany had stopped fi ghting while it still occupied French territory.