# ID: 449242585fed47bbbc03cf9298e18c90
# Title: War and empire: the American way of life
# Database: Libgen
# Year: 2010
# Fulltext:
The war erupted in 1914 but its real origins lay deeply buried in Europe's history, as a result of alliances and secret deals between the European powers, each seeking its own advantage and aggrandizement.
Britain, France and Russia had entered into an alliance known as the Triple Entente, while Germany, Austria and Turkey had fostered the Triple Alliance, promoting a dangerous arms race that promoted paranoia and mistrust all around.
In both cases secret agreements were made such that, in the case of war, territories, resources and markets under the control of the enemy would pass to the opposite side.
When immense reserves of oil in Persia (present day Iran) were discovered, with similar fi elds certain in Mesopotamia (Iraq and Kuwait), where Britain, France, and Germany vied for infl uence, the great prize of the Middle East was also at stake.
All that was needed in such tinder was a mere spark.
That fl ashpoint arrived with the assassination of the Austrian heir to the throne in the Austro-Hungarian province of Bosnia by a Serbian.
When Austria declared war on Serbia, Russia then came to the aid of its Slavic cousin.
This set in motion Germany's treaty obligation to Austria, then Britain and France entered as allies of Russia.
While Germany is usually blamed for the war by its enemies, culpability lay with all of the competing European powers.
Their self-aggrandizing, imperial antagonisms all but ensured war.