# ID: 449242585fed47bbbc03cf9298e18c90
# Title: War and empire: the American way of life
# Database: Libgen
# Year: 2010
# Fulltext:
Korea bordered Russia's traditional Far Eastern provinces in Siberia.
One reason Russia had gone to war with Japan in 1904 was over Korea.
The rivalry between Russia and Japan, and the penetration of East Asia by Britain and Germany, had led the US to issue the Open Door Notes (see Chapter 7), lest the entire area be closed to American enterprise.
In 1909 Japan occupied Korea, exploited it as a colony, and remained until Japanese defeat after World War II in 1945.
When the Soviet Army entered the war against Japan in May 1945 it easily swept the Japanese aside and quickly occupied northern China.
It could easily have occupied all of Korea at the time but it had entered into an informal agreement at Yalta to occupy only the north and let the US to do the same in the south.
Roosevelt had proposed a trusteeship for Korea and the Soviets were open to the idea but feared it was a tactic to incorporate the country as part of a permanent American presence in their own sphere of infl uence.
So Korea's future remained an open question.
The agreement between Stalin and FDR had come before the atomic bomb when US-Soviet relations were still somewhat amicable and while the US still believed Soviet assistance against Japan was militarily necessary.
By 1948 the wartime alliance had morphed into bitter enmity.
As the Cold War heated up, the Truman Administration tried to outmaneuver the Russians, pretending that there had been no Yalta agreement on Korea.