# ID: 44dda9a674c74293bb2aa0d087444399
# Title: The Russian Way of War: Opearational Art, 1904-1940: Reviews of New Books
# Database: ProQuest
# Year: 2001.0
# Fulltext:
  Harrison, Richard W. The Russian Way of War: Operational Art, 1904-1940 Lawrence: University of Kansas Press 351 pp., $39.95, ISBN 0-7006-1074-X Publication Date: April 2001 The Russian Way of War explains how Russian and Soviet officers developed a new concept of war called "operational art," which is roughly defined as the aspect of modern war that lies between the traditional divisions of strategy and tactics. If strategy deals with the deployment of national resources to win a given conflict and tactics deals with the employment of those resources on the battlefield, operational art emerged as a doctrine dealing with the dramatically expanding scale of warfare in the late nineteenth century. With armies deployed over hundreds of miles and the ranges of weapons similarly expanded, the Napoleonic notion of "decisive battle," the lodestar of generations of commanders, was increasingly out of date. The blood baths of World War I graphically illustrated the immense difficulties of directing massive armies in operations that dwarfed in size, scale, and duration the paradigms of the past. In this book, Richard W. Harrison asserts that it was Russian officers who developed the doctrines to solve those problems. Beginning with theoretical works produced at the turn of the twentieth century, Harrison traces how two generations of soldiers used Russia's own military experiences-against Japan (1904-05), in World War I (1914-1917), and during the Russian Civil War (1918-20)-to develop and test highly sophisticated doctrines designed to guide the employment of large-scale forces at the "operational level." The text skillfully interweaves the development of theory with the cruel testing ground of war. Harrison summarizes Russia's experience in each of the above conflicts to illustrate how theory was refined by experience. A major strength of this book is its coverage. Other authors, most notably David Glantz and John Erickson, have described the mature operational art of the titanic campaigns of World War II. Harrison, however, has gone back to the archives to explain the development of this distinctive Russian methodology that helped defeat Hitler's Wehrmacht. The reader might wish that the text endeavored to compare operational art with other theories: France's methodical battle, or Germany's blitzkrieg, for example. Harrison, however, is dismissive of such comparisons, stressing the uniqueness of the Russian contribution.