# ID: 454cbcc5f41d43c191cd915f4bf378bd
# Title: Do the Principles of War Apply to Cyber War?.
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this monograph is to examine whether the Principles of War, as defined within the U.S. military's Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, can be applied to cyber war. Since 2005, the U.S. military recognized cyber conflict as a new domain for conducting military operations. Consequently, in order to ensure future success on the battlefield, commanders need to understand cyberspace operations and how these operations fit within the Principles of War.
The methodology of this paper is to first examine, and subsequently show the history of the Principles of War in order to provide a context from which military personnel can then categorize cyberspace within the historic model. Such an examination is relevant because not only is U.S. cyber policy and strategy currently being developed, but the United States is also standing up a United States Cyber Command for the first time in history. Having discussed the Principles of War and woven them across an understanding of cyber operations, one can then see that the current Principles of War do in fact apply to cyber war. There is no need to create new Principles of War that apply exclusively to the cyber domain.
The form of any war--and it is the form which is of primary interest to men of war-depends on the technical means of war available Giulio Douhet 1
A core responsibility of the U.S. government is to protect the American people -in the words of the framers of our Constitution, to "provide for the common defense." Over the past decade, a discussion on the application of cyber war capabilities has become increasingly prominent due primarily to the fact that as many as 120 international governments are pursuing information warfare programs. 
2
3
1 Giulio Douhet, Command of the Air, trans. Dino Fer-ari (New York: Coward-McCann, 1942).
Based on the requirement to operate in all domains, the U.S. military needs to discern if the current Principles of War apply to cyber war. Is there a need to develop new Principles of War to address the challenges of cyber war? If so, to what extent does the United States need to reshape its armed forces to meet such challenges to ensure freedom of maneuver in the cyber domain?
The world has seen an increase in state and non-state actors utilizing cyber war techniques against the United States, in both a domestic and military application. 
5
7
In the block quote at the beginning of this monograph, General Douhet referred to the application of air power technology. General Douhet speculated that sometimes technology represents not only a revolution in military affairs, but also perhaps a military revolution. In The Dynamics of Military Revolution 1300-2050, MacGregor Knox and Williamson Murray defined a military revolution as having sweeping impacts on not only the battlefield, but also within society. Using this definition in their research, the authors identified five military revolutions Consequently, the U.S. military needs to develop within joint doctrine a common and comprehensive definition for the application of cyber war.
5 A.J. Bosker, "SECAF: Dominance in cyberspace is not optional," Air Force Print News, May 2007.
6 Malicious Code: Software designed to infiltrate a computer system without the owner's informed consent. Lt Col Shane Courville, Air Force and the Cyberspace Mission: Defending the Air Force's Computer Network in the Future, Occasional Paper No. 63. (Maxwell AFB, AL: Center for Strategy and Technology, December 2007), 42.
7 Joint Publication 3-0 Joint Operations: 17 September 2006, Incorporating Change 1 (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 13, 2008).
8 Joint Publication 6-0 Joint Communications System (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff,  March 20, 2006), I-11. 
9
10
11
As cyber war grows increasingly more prevalent and critical to survival, one must recognize its significance.
Essentially, U.S. leaders must discern if the world stands on the precipice of a life-altering military revolution or merely a revolution in military affairs.
12 10 Knox and Murray identified Military Revolutions: 1) Creation of the modern nation-state, 2) French Revolution, 3) Industrial Revolution, 4) World War I and 5) the advent of nuclear weapons. MacGregor Knox and Williamson Murray, The Dynamics of Military Revolution 1300-2050 (Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 2001), 6.
However, even beyond a military context, this nation cannot perform the most basic functions without unencumbered access to cyberspace. Given the impacts to society and the increasing information requirements in our military today, we stand in the midst of a new military revolution.
11 Ibid, 6. 
12
In 2005, Colin S. Gray published The American Way of War in which he identified twelve specific characteristics on how America fights its wars. 
13
14
13
14 Gray, 29.  study defines common cyber war terms to establish a beginning reference point for future analysis. After examining these two concepts, the paper then compares and analyzes both in order to determine whether the existing structure and content of the Principles of War adequately address the nature of cyber war. Some theorists believe that cyber war does not fit within the The author of this monograph will address some of Leonhard's contentions in the following chapters and challenge his argument that cyber war does not fit within Joint Publication 3-0. A common understanding of these complex issues allows commanders and leaders to more effectively conduct operations within the cyber war domain. Having reviewed the Principles of War and concepts associated with the cyber domain, the reader should understand that the Principles of War do apply to cyber war and there is no need to develop additional principles.
An irresolute general who acts without principles and without plan, even though he lead an army numerically superior to that of the enemy, almost always finds himself inferior to the latter on the field of battle. Fumblings, the middle course, lose all in war.
Napoleon 
16
Jomini wrote, "It is proposed to show that there is one great principle underlying all the operations of war,-a principle which must be followed in all good combinations." 
19
Throughout history, military strategists and theorists have identified techniques they felt an army needs to ensure success on the battlefield. As new technology has become available, people have often challenged and, at times, changed these techniques in order to make them more relevant. Regardless of the deletion and addition of certain precepts, there are a few concepts that have withstood the test of time. The more enduring concepts have evolved into the current Principles of War. While a particular practice may have lasted due to certain environmental conditions, a principle demonstrates a more enduring capacity. History shows that some of the Principles of War remain constant through time despite the introduction of new technology or military revolutions. To show these constant principles, this paper breaks down the evolution of the Principles of War from early theory, through the Age of Enlightenment, and to the 20 
In his work The Art of War, Sun Tzu was one of the earliest theorists to identify what armies must do to be successful in the conduct of warfare. Similar to today's doctrinal references, Sun Tzu included "how to" chapters on basic ideas dealing with maneuver, ground formations, and planning attacks. 20 Sun Tzu's definitions of these basic ideas are similar to some of the definitions in current U.S. doctrine outlining the Principles of War. For example, Sun Tzu wrote that upon maneuvering forces, one should place his enemy in a position of disadvantage through flexible application of combat power. 
21
22
Thucydides was a Greek General who wanted to capture the history of the Peloponnesian War to provide written documentation from which to derive certain principles from Greek battles.
Similarly, another Greek writer, Herodotus, captured Greek experience in battles in The Histories.
Herodotus wrote a detailed account of the Battle of Marathon, which highlighted the criticality of 20 Sun Tzu, On the Art of War, trans. Lionel Giles, 1910,  http principles like mass and economy of force. 
23
During the Age of Enlightenment, Western Europeans reinvigorated their study of history to understand basic military skills. Nation-states were growing in size and the armies of the period tried to understand how to take virtuosity in war at the tactical level to the operational or strategic level. In doing so, theorists again contributed to a body of knowledge from which militaries would eventually draw the Principles of War. Due to environmental changes within societies, armies grew from homogenous small professional armies to large conscript armies throughout Europe. 
24
Jomini's writings were translated globally and most armies of the 19 th century, including the United States military, adopted his concepts within their respective doctrinal references. 
25
26
From these maxims come the Joint Publication 3-0 basic principles of mass, objectives, offensive, maneuver, surprise and security. 
27
29
In 1903, Marshal Ferdinand Foch of France published a book called The Principles of War as an abstract of Clausewitz's ideas. 
31
32
33
As a testament to this author's significant influence, the principles developed by Foch became the baseline for French officers to train and operate during World War I. After the war, military leaders reflected on the experience of World War I, especially with regard to their ability to command and control armies in battle. Because of their reflections, some of these 
30 Howard,
Clausewitz: A Very Short Introduction,
33. 31
32
War, trans. Hillaire Belloc (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1903), v. 33
Carl von Clausewitz defined war as "… an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will." 44 This definition is the foundational basis for the development of Joint Publication 3-0 that serves as the primary reference for conducting operations within the U.S. military. As outlined by the U.S. National Security Strategy, the military must not only provide for the common defense but also ensure that the nation can compel enemies to act in a way that best achieves U.S. national objectives. In presenting the basic tenets for conducting joint operations, authors of Joint Publication 3-0 give the nine basic principles, adding three additional tenets; authors added restraint, perseverance and legitimacy as principles in order to more holistically capture what is required for the successful conduct of joint operations in the contemporary operating environment. 45 44 Clausewitz, On War, 75.
These additional principles have the same weight in joint operations as do the historical Principles of War. For reference, the definitions of the U.S. Principles of War from Joint Publication 3-0 can be found in Appendix B. 
45
Nations throughout the world continue to develop Principles of War for their militaries in order to achieve successful results on the battlefield. Figure 
3
46
We should base our security upon military formations which make maximum use of science and technology in order to minimize numbers of men.
Dwight D. Eisenhower 47
Defining cyber war is a challenge. Commanders in the past have seen the application of cyber war as only a supporting mechanism and not as a direct tool to be used in the conduct of operations. Upon reviewing joint doctrine, one can subtly witness how the military community ironically heralded within Joint Publication 3-0. 54
This disjointed guidance leads to a lack of common understanding of cyber operations inside the military community. This chapter presents the severely underdeveloped and disjointed understanding of cyber war that currently exists within the DoD in order to establish a common knowledge base for further analysis.
Joint Publication 3-0 defines the operational environment as "the composite of the conditions, circumstances, and influences that affect the employment of capabilities and bear on the decisions of the commander. It encompasses physical areas and factors (of the air, land, maritime, and space domains) and the information environment." 
55
Additionally, doctrine currently lists only air, land, maritime and space as the domains in which the U.S. military operates. Since the release of this joint publication in 2006, the definition of the operational environment has expanded within DoD strategic planning documents to include cyber as a domain for operations in addition to air, land, sea and space. land, sea, air, and space battlespaces, the cyber arena crosses the spectrum of the other domains. 
63
4
67
The latter definition addresses all aspects of aerospace operations while cyberspace operations are defined only in a support role. The DoD definition of aerospace covers the airfields needed for launch and recovery of aircraft, as opposed to the DoD definition of cyberspace where authors do not include the corresponding network switching hubs, network control centers and electromagnetic spectrum. Despite an increasingly comprehensive definition of cyberspace through the years, the publication of England's memorandum to all services marks a backwards trend with regard to the topic. England only defines cyberspace using a very limited Internet focus that addresses support infrastructure, but fails noticeably to include wireless aspects including data links covered under the electromagnetic spectrum.
As is apparent, the definition of cyberspace is still in flux. Moving forward with the analysis, this monograph uses a combination of the last two definitions for cyberspace: a global domain within the information environment consisting of the interdependent network of information technology, physical infrastructures, and the electromagnetic spectrum to store, modify, and exchange data via networked systems. Unlike previous definitions of cyberspace, this definition covers the natural and artificial hardware aspects of cyberspace to include the data links between vehicles operating across the other domains (air, land, sea or space), the traditional Internet, the integrity and nature of data, and all information transport hubs.
The next topic that readers must understand involves the current definition and extent of cyber war. In his article "The Cyber-defence Force's Virtual Shield," Robert West defined cyber war as "the use of computer intrusion techniques and other capabilities against an adversary's information based infrastructure to intentionally affect national security or to further operations against national security." 
70
To further explore the nature of computer network operations, Joint Publication 3-13 defines computer network attacks as "actions taken through the use of computer networks to disrupt, deny, degrade, or destroy information resident in computers and computer networks, or the computers and networks themselves." 72 Someone launched a massive, no-warning cyber. In its opening minutes, bursts of electronic messages began to flood Estonian government websites. Firewalls were up, extra servers were ready, and an emergency response team was standing by for just such an eventuality. Yet these defenses were easily breached. The attack count experienced exponential growth. There were about 1,000 assaults on the first day. On the second day, there were 2,000 attacks per hour. These denial-of-service attacks quickly forced the Estonian government to shut down several websites-some for hours, some for days.
One classic example of a computer network operation is the cyber attack on Estonia in April 2007. In her article Victory in Cyberspace, Dr. Rebecca Grant described this event as Web War 1: 73 U.S. Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne also commented on the attack: "Russia, our Cold War nemesis, seems to have been the first to engage in cyber warfare . . . Over the past four weeks, it is reported that Russia has been conducting massive cyber attacks against the small Baltic country of Estonia -the first known incidents of such an assault on a state." 74 72 Joint Publication 3-13, GL-5.
Wynne's comments and other forewarnings from cyber officials, the United States and the world took notice and began to integrate cyber war into the planning process. 
73
74
According to draft U.S. Air Force cyber doctrine, computer network attack includes network attack, electronic attack, or physical attack. Network attack is an attack using networkbased capability aimed to destroy, disrupt, or corrupt information resident in or transiting through networks. 
75
76
77
A physical attack may also be used to shift an enemy's command and control communications onto a network that one already has compromised; for example, one may deliberately destroy an adversary's fiber optic network in order to deliberately force them to utilize instead significantly more vulnerable radio communications.
The next definition critical to understanding the cyber domain involves both active and reactive defensive measures that nations must take to protect information, software, and systems.
Joint Publication 3-13 defines computer network defense as "actions taken through the use of computer networks to protect, monitor, analyze, detect and respond to unauthorized activity within Department of Defense information systems and computer networks." 78 directly counter adversary activities that seek to penetrate a network or actions taken to terminate an ongoing intrusion. 
79
Computer network attack, computer network defense and computer network exploitation are three aspects of computer network operations and taken collectively, provide the reader with an understanding of DoD's existing conception of cyber war. However, to ascertain a more complete definition of cyber war one must understand more than just the different types of attacks and defensive measures and explore the nature, intent, and source of such attacks. Due to the amorphous structure of the cyber domain, both state and non-state actors can operate across cyberspace. As a result, to fully understand cyber war readers must learn the subtle distinctions between cyber crime, cyber terrorism, and hacktivism.
The 2006 QDR tasked DoD to be able to effectively shape and defend its cyber networks. 
83
84
86
Although the attackers certainly had malicious intent, the individuals were more than likely acting with financial, not ideological or political motivation. Regardless, as the example indicates, the United States needs to focus its efforts on providing a flexible cyber force that can meet a wide range of threats, not just from known or suspected terrorists.
Major Adkins further defined cyber terrorism as "the premeditated, politically motivated attack against information, computer systems, computer programs, and data, which result in violence against noncombatant targets by sub-national groups or clandestine agents."
87
Complicating efforts to define the nature of the attack, Russia denied any responsibility for the measures and pointed out that it was a concerted effort of hackers functioning in a supposedly unsponsored fashion. 
88
critical infrastructure such as the electrical grid or telecommunication network. A report by the
Congressional Research Service highlighted a potential scenario referred to appropriately as the "Digital Pearl Harbor":
In July 2002, the U.S. Naval War College hosted a war game called "Digital Pearl Harbor" to develop a scenario for a coordinated cyber terrorism event, where mock attacks by computer security experts against critical infrastructure systems simulated state-sponsored cyber war. The simulated cyber attacks determined that the most vulnerable infrastructure computer systems were the Internet itself, and the computer systems that are part of the financial infrastructure. It was also determined that attempts to cripple the U.S. telecommunications infrastructure would be unsuccessful because builtin system redundancy would prevent damage from becoming too widespread. The conclusion of the exercise was that a "Digital Pearl Harbor" in the United States was only a slight possibility. 
89
An introduction to hacktivism, another grey area between criminal activity and terrorist attacks, will more fully contribute to an overall understanding of cyber war. Hacktivism is defined as "computer activism and operates in the tradition of non-violent direct action and civil disobedience." 90 Hacktivism uses the same tactics of trespass and blockade from earlier social movements and applies them to the Internet. This type of operation occurs as a denial of service during certain politically controversial events. 
91
The advent of cyber warfare, which can go straight to the vital centers and either neutralize or destroy them, has put a completely new complexion on the old systems of making war. It is now realized that the hostile main army in the field is a false objective, and the real objectives are the vital centers.
With the advent of airpower, officials had similar discussions as the current debate over cyber war and the Principles of War. In the epigraph above, John failures that apply in a contemporary context. As airpower in the past, cyber power today represents a new application of military technology that some initially argued brought a revolution in military affairs; also like airpower in the past, cyber power has instead turned out to be a military revolution that will continue to have far-reaching impacts for both military and civilian sectors alike.
The remainder of this chapter compares the Principles of War from chapter two with the cyber definitions from chapter three. This comparison shows where cyber fits within the current and generally accepted understanding of the Principles of War and highlights particular areas where the existing paradigm proves insufficient.
The purpose of the objective is to direct every military operation toward a clearly defined, decisive, and achievable goal. 
95
As a result, the joint force commander does not need to take into consideration the need to rebuild the power infrastructure during post-conflict operations. By including cyber capabilities in such a
With cyber operations, planners need to integrate computer network operations into the stated objective of the joint force commander. Leveraging the ability of the cyber domain, offensive cyber operations can enable strategic, operational, and tactical effects through functional missions such as strategic attack, counterair, counterland, countersea and space control.
direct role, equal to a conventional bombing campaign against the same target, a joint force commander can significantly reduce the amount of time required to bring about stability and meet the national strategic objectives identified by the President. Additionally, by minimizing the amount of time and forces required to stabilize an area of operations, leaders can drastically increase the combat power available for other issues that a commander may face to ensure that the right forces are applied towards the objective.
In his book, The Principles of War for the Information Age, Robert Leonhard argued that the principle of objective does not apply to cyber war. Leonhard contended that the principle of objective focuses military forces on the decisive battle. 96 
96
Furthermore, since the nature of cyber war is inherently continuous and it is often difficult to identify a clear and decisive virtual "battle," Leonhard contended that objective, as traditionally defined, does not apply to the cyber domain. Despite Leonhard's contention, commanders do nevertheless need to identify a clear objective to focus all efforts to include cyber operations. Leonhard focused on the tactical level of battle and consequently failed to consider the principle at the strategic level of war and the effect desired. In fact, joint force commanders are guided by the principle of objective at the higher echelons of war. Without an objective to focus the actions of joint forces, how do subordinate commanders know when they have reached termination criteria? Strategic level objectives should be based on the termination criteria that the commander or higher civilian authority has published. Therefore, once the appropriate officials have established such objectives, military officials must then strive to incorporate how, and to what extent, cyber related activities could best achieve the desired effects. Contrary to Leonhard's remarks, the decisive battle in today's world could very well focus the joint force on an objective that is appropriately accomplished through cyber operations.
The purpose of an offensive action is to seize, retain, and exploit the initiative. 
97
Although a traditional understanding of this principle may indicate that initiative involves seizing terrain, a more contemporary understanding significantly broadens the definition. Just as airpower seizes, retains and exploits the initiative in the air domain, cyber can seize, retain, and exploit the initiative in the cyber domain. As an example of a cyber offensive, consider the computer network attack on behalf of supposedly non-state actors in Russia against the state of Estonia described in chapter three. The offensive in cyber war may include a network, electronic warfare or a physical attack to seize the domain for exploitation and follow-on operations.
In his book The Principles of War for the Information Age, Leonhard again disagreed with the validity of the principle of offensive in the information age. Since the definition of offensive, according to Leonhard, does not address the defensive responsibilities of military forces, the principle does not adequately cover cyber efforts. 99
97 Joint Publication 3-0, A-1.
If one analyzes the nature of cyber conflict with respect to the principle of offensive in isolation from all the other precepts, then
Leonhard may have a valid contention. However, the author fails to consider that defensive responsibilities are covered extensively through other principles such as security. Clausewitz highlighted in his book On War that "If the enemy is to be coerced you must put him in a 98 Tom Espiner, "Georgia accuses Russia of coordinated cyberattack," CNET, 11 August 2008. 
99 Leonhard,
82.
In other words, a commander may not be able to inflict sufficient consequences on an enemy if his forces remain in the defensive mode. Only through offensive action can a commander compel an enemy to comply with a commander's intentions. An attack, with exclusively cyber forces, can retain an offensive nature that potentially convinces an enemy to face a more desirable situation than any alternative.
The purpose of mass is to concentrate the effects of combat power at the most advantageous place and time to produce decisive results. 
101
Just as in a kinetic fight, it is necessary to concentrate cyber firepower at the right place and time for decisive results. A joint force commander can mass electronic warfare packages on the right location to blind an enemy, to force movement, or to provide security. A military force can also conduct a cyber network attack to deny an enemy satellite communications or telephone infrastructure.
102 
100
Regardless of resource challenges, even using the most traditional definition of the principle of war, the principle of mass clearly applies to the cyber domain.
However, Leonhard again disagreed and equated mass exclusively with boots on the ground, i.e. mass can only equal the number of available personnel. 103
In his limited definition, however, Leonhard does not address the concept of massing effects. In modern warfare, the concept of mass also applies to the effect that a joint force commander seeks and not just the forces available. A commander weighs how best to achieve an effect and then determines the method of massing to gain that effect. A modern commander considers his approach across all domains including air, land, sea, space and cyber to decide which domain he wants to engage the enemy through the application of mass. For example, a commander may choose to mass effects through multiple domains simultaneously such as a concurrent cyber network attack and a kinetic air strike to disrupt an enemy commander's command and control capacity. Based on this expanded and commonly accepted definition of mass, one can refute Leonhard's contention; the principle of mass absolutely applies in the cyber domain as much as or more than the traditional domains.
The purpose of economy of force is to allocate minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts. 
104
105
However, just as there are only so many kinetic forces for use, there are also only so many cyber capabilities within the U.S.
military. A joint force commander needs to prioritize the most efficient use of his force for the desired effect. The joint force commander can choose to destroy a target with either kinetic or non-kinetic means. If the joint force commander uses a cyber capability to achieve an effect, he can then free up additional combat power for another mission. Especially on the modern battlefield, one can understand how the joint force commander may want to accomplish more with a limited force and preserve other assets for requirements that can only be accomplished in a more traditional manner. In light of such an analysis, the reader can begin to understand how the concept of economy of force invariably applies to the cyber arena.
Despite his predominantly critical outlook on the Principles of War applying within the cyber domain, even Leonhard agreed with the notion that cyber efforts definitely support an economy of force approach. Leonhard appropriately indicated that there are only so many forces available and some are not replaceable. Therefore, using a cyber asset in lieu of an indispensable one makes complete sense. Leonhard also noted that the principle of economy of force has economic implications for a nation with limited financial support for its military's actions. 106
Therefore, since a cyber effort can potentially save financial resources in accomplishing a mission in place of traditional firepower, one can further witness how this long-standing principle of war still applies to the cyber domain.
The purpose of maneuver is to place the enemy in a position of disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power.
107
106 Leonhard, 124.   In this sense, the long reach and the rapid flexibility of cyber assets are especially noteworthy. However, the challenge of maneuver in the conduct of cyber operations is that the cyber environment is constantly changing and the enemy often possesses similar advantages. Portions of cyberspace change due to technical adjustments including the addition, removal, replacement, or reconfiguration of components or networking protocols. U.S. military and civilians must understand that maneuver paths available in the past might not be available for exploitation in the future. For example, in January of 2009, an underground fiber cable was cut off Egypt isolating the country and significantly reducing Internet access to the Middle East and India. 
108
Just like ground forces moving up a road to find a bridge is out or the road mined, a cut cable makes a cyber avenue unavailable. Consequently, with the loss of the physical structure, any cyber efforts tied to that cable were also lost. Like a destroyed bridge negatively influencing the maneuver capacity of a ground force, the destroyed cable negatively affected the virtual maneuver capacity of cyber actors.
109
Leonhard wrote his book in 2000, the world was not as connected as it is today. Cyber was just coming forward conceptually and the Internet boom that occurred in the first ten years of the 21 st With information growing in an exponential fashion, the benefits and downsides of cyber maneuver are also increasing. Expanded connectivity, facilitates the conduct of cyber warfare by all entities, both good and bad. In 2009, 25 percent of the world's population (1.7 billion) used the Internet.
century had yet to occur. Through globalization, the Internet offers a maneuver capability that is logical versus physical. 
Completing a feat that might not have been possible in the past, non-state actors exploited maneuver room within the cyber domain, conducted cyber operations to expose the democratic weaknesses of the nation-state, and ultimately transmitted a message out of a country that supposedly restricted Internet access.
Because of this information, other nations were then able to diplomatically pressure Iranian leadership, letting them know that the world not only disapproved of the conduct of the elections, but was also watching carefully how they handled the situation. In this expanded, yet strikingly similar, definition of maneuver, a reader can certainly understand how this Principle of War applies to the cyber domain.
By its doctrinal definition, unity of command is currently out of alignment with respect to the conduct and management of cyber forces operating in the cyber domain. 
112
Similarly, command and control of cyber related activities must be assigned to a single organization to avoid severely disjointed efforts on behalf of joint forces and to decisively establish unity of command within the operational environment.
Within DoD, the Secretary of Defense has directed that all cyber units and operations fall under the new Unified Functional Combatant Command called United States Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM). 
116
117
118
In his book, Leonhard argued that unity of command is another outdated principle with respect to the cyber domain. Leonhard highlighted that U.S. military forces have become too big for one commander to command and control. 
119
120
Furthermore, with increasingly large force developments within the cyber domain have made it possible to improve command and control as well. USCYBERCOM, as a functional component command, will provide not only the necessary forces but also the requisite structure to ensure that command and control is maintained by and for friendly forces. Such efforts are a testament to the validity of the unity of command principle in a cyber context.
The purpose of security is to never allow the enemy to acquire an unexpected advantage. 
121
Another computer network defense capability is self-imposed degradation. If an enemy is exploiting friendly cyber capabilities for their own operations, friendly forces can degrade or isolate the capability the enemy is using. One potential scenario would be to degrade the Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite constellation so that only United States military could get its full capabilities. However, the higher order effects of such a decision would be virtually endless.
A commander would have to consider first the impact on coalition forces operating outside the area of operations. Additionally, the commander would have to weigh the impact on neighboring countries dependent on such a system. If the GPS constellation was intentionally degraded by U.S. forces without appropriate coordination beforehand or the appropriate strategic communication message afterwards, such an action could potentially alienate neutral countries or, worse yet, encourage them to support an opponent.
To ensure continued cyber security, cyber forces need to maintain constant vigilance of the cyber domain for potential threats. U.S. officials must take such security measures to prevent the cyber Pearl Harbor from happening to the nation. U.S. cyber entities have already caught Russian and Chinese cyber espionage forces conducting reconnaissance of the U.S. electrical power grid. With such data in the hands of an adversary, the enemies of the United States could easily conduct directed cyber network attacks on the electrical power grid that would result in the destruction of power generation capabilities. The Department of Energy conducted an exercise in which officials successfully destroyed a generator through computer commands. By exploiting automation that has put virtual control systems in place to reduce the work force's requirement for power production, Sandia Laboratory successfully forced a generator to self-destruct by remotely pushing the generator out of its normal operating tolerances. Generators such as this are expensive and can take up to six months to replace. 
123
If a state or non-state actors could successfully target the U.S. energy infrastructure using the type of information countries have already sought to acquire, one can expect that paralysis of the nation would result.
In his book Principles of War, Clausewitz emphasized the principle of surprise, stating that it "plays a much greater role in strategy than in tactics. It is the most important element of victory. Napoleon, Frederick II, Gustavus Adolphus, Caesar, Hannibal, and Alexander owe the brightest rays of their fame to their swiftness." 
124
125
The U.S. cyber forces need to maintain freedom of maneuver to be able to conduct a surprise cyber operation where and when least expected. This could include a computer network attack in which friendly cyber elements destroy a country's command and control capability through a quick cyber response, such as a first strike.
In April of 2007, Russia achieved surprise in the cyber domain against the country of Estonia. The former Soviet bloc country was not prepared for the severity of the attack. Although Russian efforts did not completely cripple Estonia, the disruption of services affected every citizen, sending a very clear message to the Estonian people from their former Russian masters.
As the first documented cyber attack against a nation, the Russians not only surprised Estonia but also NATO and the United States who realized, upon analysis, that their military forces needed to be able to counter a similar computer network attack. 126
In response, NATO stood up the Cyber Warfare Center of Excellence to train NATO forces on cyber warfare within Estonia. As the Estonian government can certainly attest, the principle of surprise, with origins as far back as Sun Tzu and beyond, remains especially relevant when considered in the context of the modern cyber domain.
The purpose of simplicity is to prepare clear, uncomplicated plans and concise orders to ensure thorough understanding throughout the chain of command.
127
128
He then defined friction as "the force that makes the apparently easy so difficult."
Clausewitz expanded on his explanation of friction using a metaphor of fog, which represented the uncertainty that shrouds any battlefield. A good commander wants to eliminate friction or "fog" in order to "see" to take advantage of any opportunity that might occur. By developing and adhering to a simple plan, the joint force can reduce Clausewitz's proverbial fog and see the complex battlefield more clearly.
Since the cyber domain crosses all traditional domains including air, land, sea, and space, aspects of the cyber domain may be more difficult to control and monitor. However, by keeping the conduct of cyber operations simple, one can help reduce potential elements of friction that inevitably occur as the best laid plan comes into contact with reality; a simple cyber operation integrated into a joint force commander's larger operation can help achieve desired results.
Robert Leonhard argued that the principle of simplicity is again outdated in a cyber context; according to Leonhard, simplicity is impossible since modern military conflicts involve large forces, which only increases complexity rather than reduces it. 129 129 Leonhard, 170. Although Leonhard's basic premise may have elements of the truth, his logic assumes that only a complex plan will work in a complex environment. Although large forces may certainly increase the complexity of a given situation, this truth does not invalidate the utility of simplicity, especially in planning large operations. Even a large military force can benefit from a simple plan that makes it easier for the subordinate commander to focus forces on a given objective. Complex plans on the other hand have the potential to create confusion on the battlefield. Leonhard's contention does not detract from the fact that the appropriate application of the principle of simplicity can still have resounding positive results in the cyber domain.
The purpose of restraint is to limit collateral damage and prevent the unnecessary use of force. 
130
Just as other military operations organized in space and time to maximize their effect, a joint force commander must balance force exerted to defend a cyber network with force applied to achieve other objectives. If the commander places too much emphasis on computer network defense, he may risk collateral interference of other missions, such as logistical supporting efforts. In many existing networks, one communications link may provide both secure and nonsecure voice and data transmission capabilities. However, if a friendly element disconnects the link in an effort to provide computer network defense, one might inadvertently disable an isolated unit's sole secure link to both higher headquarters and subordinate units.
Finally, a joint force commander may want to exercise restraint in the cyber domain as knowing what the enemy is doing is often worth more than denying the enemy a capability outright. If an adversary was using a particular command and control asset that friendly cyber assets can deny or destroy, perhaps a better course of action would be to exercise restraint in order to gain intelligence. Additionally, if friendly intelligence has cracked the security protecting the enemy's communications node, by allowing friendly cyber forces to monitor the enemy's command and control, the joint force can extract an even greater benefit as they know what their enemy is doing. Just as in the application of kinetic weapons, the joint force commander needs to apply considerable restraint when deciding how best to employ cyber capabilities. Therefore, the concept of restraint as a principle of war has valid contemporary applications in the cyber domain.
The purpose of perseverance is to ensure the joint force demonstrates the appropriate level of commitment necessary to attain the national strategic end state. 
131
132
133
134
Second, unlike in the past, the notion of perseverance in a cyber context represents perhaps the easiest and cheapest means to achieve objectives that would have traditionally required ground forces. Although deriving their operational capacity from within the continental United States, cyber forces can maintain a continuous presence globally with a minimized footprint at any location. It is significantly easier to persevere over a longer period with less resources in the cyber domain than in the other physical domains. Perseverance as a principle of war is not only still applicable to the cyber domain but also even more relevant than in the past.
The purpose of legitimacy is to develop and maintain the will and image necessary to attain the national strategic end state. 135 135 Joint Publication 3-0, A-4.
The legitimacy of an operation is based on the legality, morality, and rightness of the actions undertaken. Just like kinetic operations, cyber operations must be viewed as legitimate in the eyes of both the cyber community and the impacted population. First, actions and responses within the cyber domain must be in proportion to each other to be deemed legitimate. For example, responding to a non-state actor committing cyber criminal activity by conducting an in-depth cyber attack that disables a region's power grid may not be viewed as a proportional, and therefore an illegitimate response. However, blocking a nonstate actor's attempt to steal data, then cooperating with his home government to prosecute him under the nation's internal laws would be perceived as fair, just, and legitimate.
With respect to the cyber domain, U.S. intelligence oversight laws prevent illegal collection methods while protecting the populace from dangerous intrusions or attacks. By carefully balancing the requirements for national defense with legal obligations, the U.S. cyber force can retain the highest levels of legitimacy. As criminal prosecutions of cyber related violations occur, properly collected evidence gives legitimacy to both the legal system as well as the cyber force.
Legitimacy extends beyond legitimate collection and monitoring techniques, to targeting as well. If a commander decides to use cyber techniques to accomplish an objective, then the actions conducted by the cyber force need to be legitimate. If cyber operations direct efforts against traditional non-military targets like the Red Cross, or against non-state actors within clearly defined state boundaries, then the United States could face legitimacy issues that might adversely affect U.S. interests.
The notion of legitimacy is particularly difficult in the cyber domain since data collection or exploitation in not as clear-cut as unnecessary use of conventional force or human rights violations. Unlike the traditional domains with more defined rules of engagement, the cyber domain exists in a virtual world that defies precise definition. Nonetheless, without question legitimacy as a Principle of War applies to the cyber domain and is perhaps even more critical then with conventional operations. strategic documents identify cyberspace as an operating domain equivalent to the air, land, sea and space domains. A review of current joint doctrine has shown that the joint community needs to further develop cyber operations. The U.S. military needs to standardize terminology within cyber operations through the publication of a separate joint publication series for cyber operations. With the activation of USCYBERCOM, the United States will gain an advocate within DoD to further the development and integration of joint doctrine for cyber operations.
Additionally, with USCYBERCOM the U.S. military has taken the first step toward defending national interests through the consolidation of all DoD cyber assets under one commander. This brings about the unity of command necessary to ensure the standardization of cyber forces. The next step for USCYBERCOM is to document the command and control relationship cyber forces will have with other traditional combatant commands. Just as Joint Publication 3-30 Command and Control for Joint Air Operations defines the command and control responsibilities for the air domain, the creation of an equivalent cyber publication will define similar authority. Taking such deliberate actions to codify the cyber domain will eliminate the confusion that exists about who has the command and control of cyber forces at the functional component commander level (e.g. JFACC, JFMCC, and JFLCC).
The Principles of War stand as an effective means to provide a level of clarity and insight into the operational capabilities of cyber. Cyber allows joint commanders to focus on an objective using more tools, to maintain an offensive spirit that further disrupts the enemy's decision cycle, to mass effects in conjunction with traditional methods, to economize the use of force while saving lives, to surprise the enemy with an instant first strike capacity, to leverage a less physically demanding form of perseverance, and to maneuver into areas without occupation.
Additionally, the Principles of War highlight the fact that joint commands must still retain unity of command in the cyber domain, take adequate security measures to protect the force, and maximize the coordination of cyber operations through simple and logical courses of action. intelligence; deception; application of unexpected combat power; operational security; and variations in tactics and methods of operation.
The purpose of simplicity is to prepare clear, uncomplicated plans and concise orders to ensure thorough understanding. Simple plans and clear, concise orders minimize misunderstanding and confusion. Simplicity and clarity of expression greatly facilitate mission execution in the stress, fatigue, and other complexities of modern combat and are especially critical to success in multinational operations, thus reduce the fog of war.
The purpose of restraint is to limit collateral damage and prevent the unnecessary use of force. A single act could cause significant military and political consequences; therefore, judicious use of force is necessary. Restraint requires the careful and disciplined balancing of the need for security, the conduct of military operations, and the national strategic end state. Excessive force antagonizes those parties involved, thereby damaging the legitimacy of the organization that uses it while potentially enhancing the legitimacy of the opposing party.
The purpose of perseverance is to ensure the commitment necessary to attain the national strategic end state. Prepare for measured, protracted military operations in pursuit of the national strategic end state. Some joint operations may require years to reach the termination criteria. The underlying causes of the crisis may be elusive, making it difficult to achieve decisive resolution. The patient, resolute, and persistent pursuit of national goals and objectives often is a requirement for success. This will frequently involve diplomatic, economic, and informational measures to supplement military efforts.
The purpose of legitimacy is to develop and maintain the will necessary to attain the national strategic end state. Legitimacy is based on the legality, morality, and rightness of the actions undertaken. Legitimacy is frequently a decisive element. Interested audiences may include the foreign nations, civil populations in the operational area, and the participating forces. Legitimacy may depend on adherence to objectives agreed to by the international community, ensuring the action is appropriate to the situation, and fairness in dealing with various factions. Restricting the use of force, restructuring the type of forces employed, and ensuring the disciplined conduct of the forces involved may reinforce legitimacy.
century.
21  
21  
56  
56  
85  
85  
Osterholz questioned why the United States should ever risk attacking with physical assets when an attack with cyber capabilities can produce similar results. As discussed earlier, contemporary U.S. leaders have relegated cyber related activities to primarily a support role rather than an active or direct tool. Similarly, when Brigadier General Mitchell advocated the use of airpower to achieve national objectives, critics questioned whether airpower could do anything besides provide support. Just as Mitchell argued for a more appropriate application of airpower, this monograph attempts to encourage a similar discussion that challenges U.S. civilian and military leaders' notion of conventional conflicts with regard to the cyber domain.
Osterholz questioned why the United States should ever risk attacking with physical assets when an attack with cyber capabilities can produce similar results. As discussed earlier, contemporary U.S. leaders have relegated cyber related activities to primarily a support role rather than an active or direct tool. Similarly, when Brigadier General Mitchell advocated the use of airpower to achieve national objectives, critics questioned whether airpower could do anything besides provide support. Just as Mitchell argued for a more appropriate application of airpower, this monograph attempts to encourage a similar discussion that challenges U.S. civilian and military leaders' notion of conventional conflicts with regard to the cyber domain.
Owen Davies, Stephen Steele, Cynthia Ayers and Marvin Cetron, "World War  
3.0: Ten Critical Trends for Cybersecurity," The Futurist (September 2009): 40. 3 Quadrennial Defense Review 2006 (Washington D.C.: Secretary of Defense, 2006), 32. 4 Ibid, 37.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, translated and edited by Michael Howard and Peter Paret(West  Sussex: Princeton University Press, 1976), 151.   
Merriam-Webster Online, s.v. "Merriam-Webster Online," http://www.merriam-webster.com  (accessed March 22, 2010).
Introduction to the Principles of War and Operations (University of California Military Science, 2009), 172.
Michael Howard, Clausewitz: A Very Short Introduction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 11.
Jomini, The Art of War, 71.   
Howard, Clausewitz: A Very Short Introduction, 33.   
Carl Von Clausewitz, The Principles of War, trans. Hans W. Gatzke, http://www.clausewitz.com/readings/Principles (accessed 14 January 2010).
Joint Publication 5-0 Joint Operating Planning (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, December 26, 2006).
Joint Publication 6-0, I-11.
Joint Publication 3-13, I-7.
The National Security Strategy of the United States of America(Washington D.C.: The White  House, 2006).
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace(Washington D.C.: White House, February 2003).
"DoD Dictionary of Military Terms," DoD Dictionary of Military Terms, http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/dod_dictionary/index.html(accessed November 18, 2009).
National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, December 2006), IX.
Gordon England, The Definition of Cyberspace: Deputy SECDEF Memorandum to Secretaries of Military Departments (May 12, 2008).
Joint Publication 3-13, GL-6.
Air Force Doctrine Document 2-X: Cyberspace Operations (Draft) (Washington D.C.: Department of the Air Force, 2009), 16. Computer network defense does not just apply to networks, but also to the physical and environmental pieces needed to execute cyberspace operations. Defensive activities typically have two major components: active and reactive. Active defenses are the continuous monitoring and analyzing of all activity and identifying anomalous behavior. Reactive defenses are the measures taken to
Ibid, 16.   
Ibid, 17.   
Joint Publication 3-13, GL-5.
Joint Publication 3-13, GL-6.
Air Force Doctrine Document 2-X: Cyberspace Operations (Draft), 17.
Gates: Cyber Attacks a Constant Threat, CBS News, April 21, 2009. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2009/04/21/tech/main4959079.shtml (accessed January 14, 2010).
Gates: Cyber Attacks a Constant Threat, CBS News, April 21, 2009. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2009/04/21/tech/main4959079.shtml (accessed January 14, 2010).
Adkins, 26.   
Grant, 5.   
Joint Publication 3-0, A-1.
Joint Publication 3-0, A-1.
Donna Miles, "Gates Establishes New Cyber Subcommand," American Forces Press Service (June 24 2009).
Joint Publication 3-0, A-2.
Clausewitz, On War, 213.   
Joint Publication 3-0, A-2.
Leonhard, 53.   
"Internet Usage Statistics," Internet Usage Statistics, http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm (accessed March 15, 2010).
Donna Miles, "Gates Establishes New Cyber Subcommand," American Forces Press Service (June 24 2009).
Joint Publication 3-30 Command and Control for Joint Air Operations (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, January 12, 2010).
Joint Publication 3-31 Command and Control for Joint Land Operations (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, March 23, 2004).
Joint Publication 3-32 Command and Control for Joint Maritime Operations: Incorporating Change 1 27 May 2008 (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, August 8, 2006).
Donna Miles, "Gates Establishes New Cyber Subcommand," American Forces Press Service  (June 24 2009).Despite elements of cyber terrorism, cyber espionage and a general cyber war directed against the United States, coordination between DHS and DoD is not as robust as the relationship between DHS and law enforcement agencies. Adding to an already disparate relationship with respect to unity of command, current intelligence oversight laws hinder the use
Unified Command Plan 2008 (Washington D.C.: Secretary of Defense, 2008).
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace.
Leonhard, 194.   
Admiral James Holloway, Special Operations Review Group: Iran Hostage Rescue(Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, August 23, 1980), 50.
Joint Publication 3-0, A-2.
Clausewitz, The Principles of War.
Joint Publication 3-0, A-3.
Joint Publication 3-0, A-3.
Clausewitz, On War, 119.   
Joint Publication 3-0, A-3.
Joint Publication 3-0, A-4.
Clausewitz, On War, 644.   
Ibid, 193.   
Colin S. Gray, The American Way of War (Reading: University of Reading, 2005).
Opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied within are solely those of the author, and do not represent the views
"While it has been more than 55 years since the last American service member came under attack by enemy air-to-surface fires … the last time an American service member came under cyber attack was the beginning of this sentence."
Secretary of the Air Force Michael B. Donley 136
The Principles of War not only apply to the cyber domain, but also lend insight into the very nature of cyber war. Cyber brings new operational capabilities that joint force commanders can leverage to achieve mission success. To better integrate cyber into their operations, joint force commanders need a better understanding of these capabilities and their limitations.
This monograph has described the Principles of War and shown how these concepts developed over time. The Principles of War have proven resilient enough to survive through history but their perceived meaning depends upon their historical context. Just as the original nine
Principles of War have helped shape the U.S. military for success through the 20 th century, these same principles should stay as the foundation for military operations into the 21 st
In the epigraph above, Secretary Donley highlighted the critical need for discussions concerning cyber war. The threat posed by cyber operations to the security of the United States requires the joint community to develop a force that no longer considers cyber as a support function, but recognizes the direct operational potential of the nation's cyber force. Current U.S.
century. The joint force must not, however, limit their application to the traditional understanding of these principles. The joint force commander must continually rediscover and reapply the essential truths of the Principles of War. By considering the principles on the virtual battlefield, U.S.
military and civilian personnel can extract the same insight and meaning responsible for the durability of the principles over the years.
136 TSgt Amaani Lyle, "SecAF Delivers 'State of the Air Force' speech at AFA," Secretary of the Air Force Public Affairs, September 14, 2009.
Finally, just as in the years past, the Principles of War remind joint force commanders that they must use restraint to take advantage of opportunities presented by the enemy and to avoid the degradation of friendly capacity and always ensure cyber operations are conducted with the same legitimacy expected of all operations conducted on behalf of the United States. These principles do in fact apply to cyber operations and can increase our understanding of cyber war.
BOTNET: A collection of software agents, or robots that run autonomously and automatically. Information Operations: The integrated employment of the core capabilities of electronic warfare, computer network operations, psychological operations, military deception, and operations security, in concert with specified supporting and related capabilities, to influence, disrupt, corrupt or usurp adversarial human and automated decision making while protecting our own. (AFDD 2-5)
Intrusion Detection: The process of monitoring the events occurring in a computer system or network and analyzing them for signs of possible incidents, which are violations or imminent threats of violation of computer security policies, acceptable use policies, or standard security practice.
A device (or application) that monitors network and/or system activities for malicious activities or policy violations and produces reports to a Management Station.
The process of performing intrusion detection and attempting to stop detected possible incidents.
Malicious Code: Software designed to infiltrate a computer system without the owner's informed consent.
Military Revolution: A radical military innovation that fundamentally changes the framework of war that renders former systems and methods obsolete or irreverent. These changes are cataclysmic events that occur infrequently that affect the social, political and military cultures and organizations. (Knox 2001) Revolution in Military Affairs: RMAs can occur either separately or within the context of a larger military revolution. These "lesser transformations . . . appear susceptible to human direction, and in fostering them, military institutions that are intellectually alert can gain significant advantage". These changes typically affect only the military aspect of war. (Knox 2001)   Virus: A fragment of code that attaches itself to other computer instructions including software application code, the code used to boot a computer or macro instructions place in documents. When activated a virus may then execute a -payload" which can do anything from displaying an amusing message to wiping out files on the hard drive. (Adkins April 2001)  APPENDIX B: U.S. PRINCIPLES OF WAR DEFINED
Objective: The purpose of objective is to direct every military operation toward a clearly defined, decisive, and achievable goal. Changes to military objectives may occur because political and military leaders gain a better understanding of the situation, or they may occur because the situation itself changes.
Offensive: The purpose of offensive action is to seize, retain, and exploit the initiative. Offensive action is the most effective and decisive way to achieve a clearly defined objective. Offensive operations are the means by which a military force seizes and holds the initiative while maintaining freedom of action and achieving decisive results. The importance of offensive action is fundamentally true across all levels of war: tactical, operational, and strategic.
The purpose of mass is to concentrate the effects of combat power at the most advantageous place and time to produce decisive results. Mass often needs to be sustained to have the desired effect. Massing effects, rather than concentrating forces, can enable even numerically inferior forces to produce decisive results, minimizing human losses and waste of resources.
The purpose of economy of force is to allocate minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts. Economy of force is the judicious employment and distribution of forces. It is the measured allocation of available combat power to such tasks as limited attacks, defense, delays, deception, or even retrograde operations to achieve mass elsewhere at the decisive point and time.
The purpose of maneuver is to place the enemy in a position of disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power. Maneuver is the movement of forces in relation to the enemy to secure or retain positional advantage, usually in order to deliver -or threaten delivery of -the direct and indirect fires of the maneuvering force. Effective maneuver keeps the enemy off balance and thus protects the friendly force. It contributes materially to exploiting successes, preserving freedom of action, and reducing vulnerability by continually posing new problems for the enemy.
The purpose of unity of command is to ensure unity of effort under one responsible commander for every objective. Unity of command means that all forces operate under a single commander with the requisite authority to direct employed combat power in pursuit of a common purpose.
The purpose of security is to never permit the enemy to acquire unexpected advantage. Security enhances freedom of action by reducing friendly vulnerability to hostile acts, influence, or surprise. Security results from the measures taken by commanders to protect their forces. Risk is inherent in military operations. Protecting the force increases friendly combat power and preserves freedom of action.
The purpose of surprise is to strike at a time or place or in a manner for which the enemy is unprepared. Surprise can help the commander shift the balance of combat power and thus achieve success well out of proportion to the effort expended. Factors contributing to surprise include speed in decision-making, information sharing, and force movement; effective