# ID: 4573e4f2c3434f95bea1d91aa60f00f0
# Title: Afghanistan in the Balance: Air Politik
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
to Lt Col (sel) Jeff Donnithorne. Most importantly, the thesis is dedicated to my immediate family and my parents
The balance-of-power dynamics of the nineteenth century Great Game in Afghanistan between Britain and Russia reveal timeless patterns of realist behavior. The record of airpower's use (and misuse) in the twentieth century informs the failures of Britain and the Soviet Union and instructs the employment of airpower by the United States today. Because Afghanistan will continue to be strategically important to its neighbors, strategists must understand the motivations of internal actors, regional states, and the great powers, all of whom influence the strategy of intervening powers. Fortunately, America does not stand alone in waging counterinsurgency. A 60-nation partnership aims to transform Afghanistan. Airpower can help provide the time and space necessary to effect a positive transformation.
To harness the potential of modern airpower, strategists and policy-makers can gain significant insights from Afghanistan's turbulent history, especially from the airpower period beginning in 1919. These narratives reveal that the key to success or failure of either a foreign intervention or a viable Afghan central government depends upon an historic force of nature-the unconquered and perhaps unconquerable Afghan tribes. The use of force at any scale has always rallied tribal groups against a foreign presence. Force incites them to act on an ancient tribal code to avenge wrongs and inspires Jihad-a perfectly suited ideological weapon to unify the tribes against a foreign presence. Historical record shows that when used as a coercive weapon, airpower sacrifices strategic success for tactical gains. Instead of pouring gasoline on a tribal fire, kinetic airpower should be-and has been-sensibly constrained. This thesis evaluates the new strategy implemented by General Stanley McChrystal, in which airpower's destructive potential has been minimized, and offers additional suggestions for how airpower's advantages in mobility and transportation, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, and integrated strategic planning can be maximized.
America and its allies continue to spend significant resources and effort to stabilize Afghanistan-an historically dysfunctional tribal confederation that has resisted external occupation for millennia. After nine years of war, a resurgent Taliban and a degraded, yet unbeaten al-Qaeda threaten both the Afghan Central government and the stability of a nuclear-armed Pakistan. The International Security Assistance Force Commander, General Stanley
McChrystal, provided a sobering assessment of Taliban progress in Afghanistan and proposed a new military strategy that relies heavily on counterinsurgency methods. 
1
2
3 and an estimated $227 billion in aggregate war costs. 
4
The shift in balance of power is driven by a number of factors. Economic aid can increase Afghanistan's capacity to provide services to its people.
Bilateral and multilateral agreements establish new trade routes, create plans for potential oil pipelines, and develop access to Afghanistan's strategic minerals and water resources. In combination with aid, economic agreements, and other means, airpower influences the balance of power in ways that both negatively and positively affect America's strategy.
In the context of Afghanistan, airpower makes distinct contributions to the shifting balance. Use of the air is a major reason that the United States can project itself into balance of power interactions from approximately 7,000 miles away. In other words, it is airpower that enables America to be a major player at the table. But the balance of power determines whether or not the United States has the ability to fully use this form of power. For example, America depends upon surrounding nations and other interested parties for overflight permissions and bases at intermediate locations en route to Afghanistan. As a result, a structure emerges that is reflective of-and at the same time interactively constructing-the shifting regional balance of power.
In other words, airpower changes the regional balance of power, but balance of power changes the emphasis of and responsible use of airpower as prescribed by America's way of war. 
7
7
of the puppet regime. 
8
Adversaries exploited these events using information operations to contest the air. By relating these events to broader themes about the danger of foreign presence, adversaries attacked America's strategy; a strategy reliant upon and inextricable from its asymmetric advantage through airpower.
Twenty years later, American airpower enabled the assault that decisively removed the Taliban government from power. Since 2001, ground forces have counted on airpower to provide the necessary edge to allow small teams to overwhelm superior numbers of insurgent forces.
Tactically, only airpower has allowed twelve-man special operations teams consistently to defeat hundreds-strong collections of indigenous fighters.
Mobility airpower supplied America's army units stationed throughout the country. Intelligence, Surveillance, & Reconnaissance (ISR) from the air delivered hundreds of thousands of hours of video used to monitor government elections, track high value individuals, and protect civilian projects.
This risk to an air-centric strategy becomes more meaningful in the context of Afghanistan where indigenous tribal people adhere to an ancient code, called Pashtunwali, which requires the avenging of wrongs. 9
8 Edgar O'Ballance, Afghan Wars, 1839-1992: What Britain Gave up and the Soviet Union Lost,  1st English ed. (London; New York: Brassey's, 1993).
If used irresponsibly, airpower may provoke a historically powerful force, the tribes, to rally against the central government and foreign presence. Indeed, the tribes 9 Hilton Isabel, "The Pashtun Code," The New Yorker 77, no. 38 (2001).
have been a major reason that foreign interventions and Afghan central governments failed or succeeded in the past. When the tribes were sufficiently provoked, the balance of power between the central government and the tribes tipped in favor of greater instability. If the current Afghan state falters, the region may relapse to previous balance of power games that make Afghanistan an unproductive, poor, unstable buffer state and a Mecca for extremists.
Worse, instability may spread further, into Pakistan and out to other Central Asian states.
On the other hand, airpower employed responsibly has the potential for high payoff. If it were to become a significant state capability, Afghanistan's central government could use airpower to strengthen connections with its population along security, economic, and governance lines of operation. If America and the coalition were to accelerate Afghan capacity, then they could confidently reduce their presence in country. If surrounding nations and other stakeholders continue to allow America's airpower to reach Afghanistan, then conflict and reconstruction could progress in a manner that builds economic relationships. A responsible use of airpower within the overall strategy can help Afghanistan become, once again, the geostrategic bastion that connects Middle Eastern, Asian, and Indian markets and stabilizes border state relations. Furthermore, America may be able to create a balance of power within and external to Afghanistan favorable to its own pragmatic security interests.
Carl von Clausewitz asserted that the outcome of war is never final. The vigor of war slackens while an apparently defeated adversary waits for future political conditions to change in its favor before stepping up and renewing the conflict.  Adding to and perhaps playing into the Taliban and al Qaeda strategy, America did not significantly change its approach until a new Presidential administration came to power.
Most importantly, and in the face of pessimistic opinions, the President reconfirmed that operations in Afghanistan remain a significant national security interest of the United States. To implement the new strategy effectively, Congress and the American people must also believe that the war in Afghanistan is a national security interest. Without such support, the political will necessary to prosecute the war will inevitably wane, and the effort will be perceived as a failure from the start.
In addition to political will, American strategy relies on another essential feature of America's so-called Way of War.
12
In the context of Afghanistan, the United States remains the major player in the region, precisely because airpower allows it to project power through air lines of communication that cross over 7,000 miles into the South and Central Asian regions. Indeed, its ability to project and sustain power to any location on earth is unrivaled, and at the strategic level all but defines America's modern Way of War. To support it, US military bases span the globe. 
13
14
Though ground forces are vital to America's strategy in Afghanistan, those forces have zero staying power without comprehensive lines of communication to deliver massive quantities of necessary resources.
In international relations, behaviors originate in competing interests. For example, Russia's concern about permanent presence of the United States in Central Asia resulted in pressure on the Kyrgyzstan government to close a key US base for air transport to Afghanistan. Other times, the domestic issues of regional actors can adversely affect America's ability to project power. Take for 
13
14
instance the internal turmoil in Kyrgyzstan during April 2010. The collapse of the government caused interruption of flights at Manas air base-a key location along the coalition's supply chain to Afghanistan. This interruption stalled the flow of thirteen thousand American troops into the war zone. 
15
Kyrghiz government must determine its policy regarding continued American use of this base through its own rational calculation in the context of competing Russian and US diplomatic efforts. This example is one of many as to how nation-state behaviors can influence American strategy in Afghanistan.
The stunning 2002 apparent victory in Afghanistan allowed military strategists to ignore the gradually changing perceptions of airpower value in theater. Success rarely encourages change, and so it was not until the resurgence of opposition power after 2005 that significant changes in military and regional operations were triggered. First, there was a shift in primary focus to a counter-insurgency strategy. To curtail the negative consequences and reduce the risk to the civilian population, General McChrystal issued a tactical directive that severely restricts the use of force-in particular 
15
16
Other activities demonstrate that the attention of airpower is focused on the security and military lines of operation. While useful in mitigating the negative perceptions and consequences of heavyhanded airpower use, this approach misses the positive strategic potential of airpower along governmental and economic lines of operation.
Chapter 1 consists of a brief theoretical framework, and includes common terms and limitations of the study. Chapter 2 comprises a short historical survey of the balance-of-power dynamics of Great Britain and Russia and its relation to the emergence of Afghanistan as a nation state. These interactions reveal important observations about the timeless nature of international politics in the context of Afghanistan. In pursuing state interests, external powers attempted to dominate conditions inside Afghanistan. Using force, threats of force, and diplomacy, powers challenged each other for influence over Afghanistan's territory. By highlighting key wars, the survey reveals the evolution of Afghanistan's strategic value over time and provides observations about Afghanistan's human and geographic character. 
16
Chapter 3 expands the context through an analysis of the strategic interests of key regional actors, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and the United State within the context of Afghanistan. Not only do these interests shape the strategies of the states involved in Afghanistan, multiple competing political objectives influence the execution of those strategies. The inherent tension between stakeholders prevents and promotes cooperation depending upon state interests. Without an understanding of what motivates these key players, America's strategy may require more resources than it needs.
Moreover, American airpower is a critical state capability that allows the United States to actively shape the regional balance of power.
Chapter 4 consists of an examination of airpower use in Afghanistan.
Starting with the age of flight, the narrative highlights how Britain used airpower in its strategy to deal with challenges in Afghanistan and the Northwest Frontier Province between 1919 and 1947, the year India and Pakistan gained independence. This historical period provides a glimpse of how airpower on a small scale influenced the balance of power in the region as well as within Afghanistan. Next, the chapter culls from the Soviet Union's experience with airpower during its occupation of Afghanistan between 1979   and 1989. During this timeframe, the Soviets prosecuted an air war to support a failing government. Once its adversary could contest the air, the Soviets lost.
Like previous nations, the United States attempted to achieve political objectives in Afghanistan using airpower. The historical experiences inform an assessment of the strategies for use of airpower that were considered by the Obama administration.
Chapter 5 discusses the responsible use of airpower in the context of Afghanistan. Given the influence of balance-of-power considerations in the region, and the importance of airpower in altering the perceptions of balance, this chapter explains what is being done and could be done to positively affect balance of power relations in the region. These include resurrecting civilian aviation, building Afghan state capacity to provide military airpower, and using the American and coalition capacity in a fashion that supports, rather than degrades, stability. In addition to functional improvements in airpower, command and control could be enhanced by elevating the rank of the senior airman in USCENTCOM and delegating authority to the senior airman in country.
This paper covers wide-ranging historical, political, military, and technological concepts and ideas, so a common set of term definitions will help clarify the narrative and its underlying logic. US national security is the ability of national institutions to prevent adversaries from using force against American interests. 
17
18
Afghanistan is a vital interest.
19 
17
18
19
20
This research effort benefited from a wide range of sources. To construct America's political objectives, primary sources included presidential papers, presidential speeches, and articles that described US policy. Interests, behaviors, and actions of regional actors were derived from the international press, think tank reports, and interviews of regional experts. Historical books and articles revealed patterns of regional behavior that helped explain contemporary actions. Valuable primary sources consist of war-time statements, digital video footage, and testimonies of key civilian and military leaders, to include interviews of general officers serving in Afghanistan, those who returned from the combat zone, and military personnel still engaged in the fight. Academic journals and secondary historical sources provided the foundation for analysis. Analysis has further drawn on ideas from theoretical works about balance of power theory, realism, irregular warfare, and airpower in small wars.
example, or to remove Sadaam Hussein from Kuwait as in Operation Desert Storm. When the objective is met, the coalition dissolves. 
20
Countries have no eternal friends, only eternal interests.
This study is significant for several reasons. In the short run, it helps explain why Afghanistan is important to the United States and how airpower can help achieve a balance of power favorable to its interests. No claim is made to solve the many problems inherent in Coalition efforts in Afghanistan, though this study may help mitigate those problems while enhancing US and regional security. This includes resurrecting a body of historical information not widely thought about today that offers insights about the effectiveness of future force structure. In the long-term, the study fits directly into Secretary Gates' call for a balanced strategy "institutionalizing capabilities such as counterinsurgency and foreign military assistance." 
1
Several theories underpin this thesis. Each delineates processes that happen simultaneously in the context of Afghanistan. External to the state, Balance of Power Theory describes the interaction of states as they order Balance of Power Theory describes several phenomena in international relations. The theory posits that states join forces with other states to maintain their security and pursue their interests. 
5
6
Waltz, Theory of International Politics, 1st ed. (Boston, Mass.: McGraw-Hill, 1979), 119-23. 3
4
5
6
Afghanistan is critical for the United States' withdrawal from the region.
Exploiting air power's capabilities will enable the Afghan central government to build connections to its local population as well as ensure its security.
Before venturing into detailed descriptions, it is important to acknowledge a limitation in any analysis of actors. Realists tend to treat actors as a black box with no need to investigate the internal workings of the state to understand behaviors. Due to the lack of transparency, either by lack of intelligence or state policy, the black box assumption may serve as the only available starting point for the strategist. However, one must acknowledge that alternative explanations exist.
In their study of the Cuban Missile Crisis, Graham T. Allison and Philip   Zelikow argue that different explanations of state behaviors can co-exist, and then examine those behaviors from the perspective of three different models. 
7
Model II revealed that institutional norms and procedures, specifically Soviet conventional military basing and construction practices, explain why the missiles were obvious. The Soviet's intent was not for the United States to see the missiles so early; rather it was a mistake revealed through an understanding of standard operating procedures.
Developing, changing, or executing strategy begins with understanding the ends that means and ways are implemented to achieve. The ends consist of the political objectives or policies that drive a nation's activity. These ends trace to motivations. Strategy begins with a simple question. Why does a nation engage? One generic answer derives from the classical realist Thucydides, who explained the reasons why Athens pursued its ends during the Peloponnesian wars.
The hierarchy of fear, honor, and interest is presented by Thucydides in the classic Greek form, where the middle case of three is accorded highest status. 9 Machiavelli reiterated the hierarchy in Latin as fear, interest, and honor. Much like an individual who satisfies Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs, a nation attempts to satisfy its lower level needs such as survival before concerning itself with high order concerns.
10
These same motivations apply to modern times. In the crudest form, a nation seeks to keep or maintain any power that it may have accrued as its most vital national interest. When the fear of losing power is overcome, the state has an interest in gaining more power. When its power needs are substantial, and its existence is not seriously threatened, the state seeks honor for its actions; it justifies what it does and expects others to see the correctness of its use of power. To fully comprehend the nuances of a situation, it is important to understand the motivations of the significant actors who are involved directly and indirectly in conflict.
In a contemporary framework, fear may manifest specifically in the form of the security dilemma. This phenomenon arises when, in response to an outside threat, a nation tries to improve its security by increasing its military capabilities. However, the nation may become less secure because such an increase in military power-even if motivated purely by defensive needs-may be perceived as a threat, in turn provoking an escalatory response from other nations. 
11
Even though an absolute gain in power is achieved, the relative power of the state in comparison to its neighbors is diminished. The Cold War offers an excellent example. The Soviet Union and the United States both increased their nuclear capabilities in response to increases by the other.
When one invested in newer technologies and expanded its arsenal, the other did so to counteract the new capabilities. The countermeasure became justification for the original increase, proof that the other state had designs on nuclear supremacy all along.
Honor may factor significantly into the calculus of a nation when it decides to act. Describing one form of honor, Robert Gilpin refers to prestige as the currency of power.
12
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union and the United States entered a space race for pragmatic security reasons as well as for prestige reasons. For example, the United States strove for and reached the moon. America gained by impressing other nations around the world with its technological prowess, thereby attracting new agreements with other nations. Added prestige gave the United States a foundation to pursue partnerships with nations around the globe and institute international regimes that aligned with its interests.
Modern examples abound. For example, China may implement policies directed at gaining regional influence as suggested by its 2020 plan. 
13
Though its commercial presence in Africa, South America, and the Pacific tie to economic interests, these also trace to China's desire for greater global standing. Similarly, al Qaeda may base its actions upon religious ideology; the central group has expressed that defeating America in Iraq would elevate its world-wide prestige. 
14
Non-state actors, too, desire increased power and authority. The Taliban aspires to retake control of Afghanistan. The core leadership of al Qaeda wrote that creating a global caliphate is its primary interest. 
15
16
Non-state actors, such as al Qaeda and the Taliban, can be categorized as insurgents that attempt to collapse the central government and reassert their power. They adopt guerrilla tactics similar to those employed by T. E.
Lawrence during the Arab revolt against the Ottoman Empire. 
17
Lebanon in 2006. 18
19
1
16 Clausewitz,
On War,
88. "
Denying or disrupting sanctuary is a best practice in counterinsurgency. In the case of Pakistan, the Federally Administered Tribal Area has served as an obvious and important sanctuary for the Taliban and al 
17
18
19
Qaeda. 
21
Bordering nations may lack the capability or the will to cut-off supplies that flow into the conflict country. With respect to Afghanistan, the ability to diminish outside support will depend upon regional diplomacy with the surrounding nations. Failing to cut off supplies may not be a matter of will, but rather a lack of capability to overcome certain conditions. For example, rugged geography may favor the insurgent, especially when it complicates attacks on the insurgents' lines of communication. The strategist cares about the source of this support as much as the mechanisms of support. Key In summary, several theoretical constructs will guide the examination of history, contemporary regional actors, and historical use of airpower in the context of Afghanistan. Balance-of-Power Theory explains how and why nation states compete for power. Counterinsurgency best and worst practices channel observation to specific state behaviors that can influence American strategy In the next chapter, the unique nature of Afghanistan is revealed from an historical analysis of balance-of-power behaviors in Afghanistan. A study of Britain, Russia, and Afghanistan in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries reveals patterns of interests, behaviors, and use of force.
Instead of imposing our plan upon the world, we could rely on the potential inherent in the situation.
Carl von Clausewitz described conflict as a contest between two competing wills. Increasingly apparent in today's conflicts, the interests and wills of a great number of actors interrelate, though not all engage on the physical battle field. They influence the conflict by introducing money, materiel, and information. Through such contributions, state and non-state actors gain significant influence on the morale of the physical combatants.
Contemporary Afghanistan is such a place in which several wills cooperate and compete in the pursuit of power. For example, The United States and its allies supply the government of Afghanistan with diplomatic support, training, funding, materiel, and armed forces to help eradicate the Taliban and Al Qaeda to bolster Afghan security and sovereignty. Conversely, Iran and other states supply men, materiel, money, arms, and sanctuary to the Taliban and Al Qaeda to help overturn the Afghan government and establish a radical Islamic state. The entwined wills of state and non state actors and combatants produce a complex pattern framing the context of conflict. Understanding the present conflict of wills, however, requires a deeper understanding of the past.
To better inform a contemporary analysis, a strategist must understand context. From the womb of context, strategy is born. Therefore, this chapter describes Afghanistan's strategic importance within an historical framework.
Given its current potential to connect big world markets, a brief discussion addresses Afghanistan's historical relationship to economic trade. Historical narrative also reveals an Afghanistan caught within a regional balance of power moderated by two predominant states. The country's strategic value is also revealed by the strategic choices made by regional powers during Afghanistan's early modern history. Key interactions between Russia and Great Britain negotiated a balance of power during eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries that illuminated Afghanistan's unique nature. During this period, Afghanistan emerged for the first time as a nation-state with defined, yet ever evolving geopolitical borders.
A strategist must understand the forces that shape regional and internal balance of power given Afghanistan's unique nature. At the intra-state level of analysis, historical narrative informs the relationship between Afghan central authority and tribes in the state's capacity to wield power. It is vitally important to understand the conditions when Afghanistan's central authority was most effective and when the tribes have been most threatening. This is significant given the emphasis on governance objectives in the current strategy for Afghanistan.
Situated at an historically strategic crossroads, Afghanistan has been fought over for millennia. The country sits within the Central Eurasian land mass that connects the continents of Europe and Asia, linking the Middle East, Central Asia, and Southeast Asia. Approximately the size of Texas, Afghanistan links Iran, Central Asia, and the Indian subcontinent. A number of reasons make this geostrategic position uniquely valuable to surrounding states. The strategic gateways to the Indian subcontinent pass through Afghanistan's Hindu Kush mountain range. In the Hindu Kush, a number of famed mountain passes served as key communication routes. Through the Khyber Pass, Alexander the Great, Tamerlane, Genghis Khan, and various Persian and Afghan forces descended upon India.
Afghanistan has five strategic cities. Historically, these urban centers existed on important trade routes. Mazie-a-Sharif sits north of the Hindu Kush on transit routes to Central Asia. On the east, Jalalabad exists on the border of Pakistan with roads that lead to the city of Peshawar in Pakistan. To the west, the famed city of Herāt has always been situated on strategic trade routes on the gateway to Iran and the pathway to Turkmenistan. Numerous conquerors owned it. Genghis Kahn razed it to the ground leaving a wake of carnage. Persia made multiple successful and unsuccessful attempts to capture and hold the city. In the southwest, the city of Kandahar, originally build by Alexander the Great, sits on the communication routes to Pakistan, to Herat, and Kabul. Kabul contributed the same value, as it is importantly placed for commerce.
Afghanistan supplies a vast amount of water to the entire region. Snow melts from the mountains feed rivers that flow into surrounding nations.
During periods of heavy drought, water rights have become a strategic concern for Afghanistan's neighbors. Historically, Afghanistan lacked the technology and capacity to use more of its own water for agriculture. Beyond geography, invasion routes, and water resource, the strategic value of the country has varied in other ways.
Important trade routes have always passed through Afghanistan.
Afghanistan's modern condition is tied to its relationship to one of the most famous trade routes in history through Central Asia. At one time, significant overland trade occurred through Central Asia along what is known as the Silk Road (see Figure 
2
1
3 But sea routes had co-existed well before the eventual demise of the Silk Road. In fact, these routes served as a useful auxiliary Asian Littoral System, comprised of sea routes and ports, which complemented the land routes. 
4
2 Alfred Thayer Mahan proposed a similar argument for the United States to build and develop a powerful Navy. Similarly, Gen Billy Mitchell and Giulio Douhet provide arguments for the creation of air capabilities and their important contributions. See: A. T.  Through the 1800s, Great Britain continued to expand into North India and Persia reinforced its position along Afghanistan's western border. As the four regional powers converged and stabilized, the entire Central Asian geographic area, including Afghanistan, once valued as the strategic crossroads for trade, was effectively sealed off from the world. Consequently, Central Asia plummeted into one of the longest economic depressions in history with major consequences for the people of the region, especially for Afghanistan. 
5
By the early 1700's the expansion of Russia and Great Britain, and the stabilization of Persia and China, constricted the area down to one final unconquered country-Afghanistan.
Before the time great powers interacted with Afghanistan, a window of time existed when the seeds of an Afghan nation-state sprouted. Instead of nation-states, smaller political units engaged in balance of power dynamics.
During this time, the relative power of Afghanistan influenced the strategic calculation of its neighbors.
Regional states had reason to fear the relative power of Afghanistan.
Relying on the country's geography, the people of Afghanistan rejected foreign attempts to subjugate them completely. The mountain tribes have never really been conquered. During every foreign intervention since Alexander the Great, these tribes have brewed rebellion. The connection of an indigenous central authority to the tribes has been a major determinant of Afghanistan's power vis-à-vis its neighbors.
An indigenous central authority in Afghanistan is a relatively new phenomenon. Central governments in Afghanistan have varied in type and success. The most successful indigenous Afghan organization arose in the eighteenth century amidst a decline of the Persian and Mongolian Empires through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
6
In this period, conditions favored the rise of two powerful Afghan clans called the Abdalis and the Ghilzais. Both have shaped the Afghan political landscape for centuries. The first Afghan central authority would emerge from the Sedozai family within the Abdalis clan. The Sedozai's had a solid relationship with the Persian royal court that gave resources to form a strong political entity within Afghanistan.
When central authority improved, Afghanistan's power increased, thereby giving it a place to shape the regional balance of power. This was the only time an Afghan central authority acted from a position of relative strength as compared to other regional players. 
7
9
The new Afghan political unit possessed higher relative power than its  Afghanistan had reached the height of its relative power (see Figure 
3
In the context of regional balance, Afghanistan's rise depended upon several factors. At the intra-state level of analysis, the legitimacy of central authority was a key requirement. Ahmad Shah gained legitimacy from the inception of his reign. Major domestic political groups, namely most of the Afghan tribal chiefs, participated in the decision to elect him. The decision was made according to well established inter-tribal norms and rules, specifically the Loya Jirga. Second, the central authority forged a solid relationship with the tribes. The King established a common purpose. Early state formation relied upon war-making and conquest. 
12
13
14
12 Christopher Cramer and Jonathan Goodhand, Try Again, Fail Again, Fail Better? War, the  State, and the 'Post-Conflict' Challenge in Afghanistan, ed. Jennifer Milliken, State Failure,  Collapse, & Reconstruction (2003), 138. 
13
14
Converging around Afghanistan, the British and Russian empires pursued policies to expand or protect their interests through the application of diplomacy, force, and the threat of force. These Balance of Power interactions changed the geopolitical landscape by affecting the shape of Afghanistan's borders.
Empires used Afghanistan to separate each other. Additionally, surrounding states attempted to shape conditions inside Afghanistan.
Methods involved use of force to take land. Or, they used diplomacy at influencing the internal policies of Afghanistan favorable to themselves and against their adversaries. Each wanted conditions inside Afghanistan to favor their individual interests. At times, regional powers attempted forays into Afghanistan with the hope of gaining continued advantage through a strategy of diplomacy, positioning forces-in-being inside or proximal to Afghanistan, or brute force. 
16
17
16
17
Basically, the purpose of British policy was to prevent Russia from threatening India by securing a foothold in Afghanistan.
During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the Russian Empire expanded its territory into Central Asia. In the early 1700s, Peter the Great "commissioned his heirs to possess India and Constantinople as the keys to world domination." 
19
20
21
Throughout the centuries, Great Britain understood Russian and French designs on India, as well as the strategic importance of Afghanistan. Britain viewed Afghanistan as critical to securing and maintaining economic interests 18 Sir Frank Noyce, England, India, and Afghanistan: An Essay Upon the Relations Past, Present, and Future between Afghanistan and the British Empire in India (London: CJ Clay & Sons, 1902). 
19
20
Mohamed requested British military help to offset the Indian Sikh menace that threatened his southern flank. British leaders perceived Dost Mohamed's willingness to deal alone with the Russians as a threat. The potential shift in the balance of power threatened India as well as challenged British control in the region.
24 
22
23
16. 24
25
26
27
From 1838-1840, it appeared the British force succeeded. Dost Mohamed fled and lived in exile.
Deposed King Shah Shuja returned to the throne. The British gained an agreement to represent Afghanistan in external foreign policy matters. Most British forces withdrew leaving behind the Army of the Indus, a small force to assist the central government maintain control. Additionally, the Afghans, especially the tribes, received subsidies from the British crown.
The consequence of violating tribal and Islamic norms proved horrific.
The tribes hacked, shot, and ambushed Britain's Army of the Indus from Kabul through snowy mountain passes. Only one soldier of over 15,000 that began the retreat survived. 
28
29
Defeat by the Afghan's blotted an otherwise spectacular British record of battles around its Empire. In result, military accomplishments were reversed and Amir Dost Mohamed returned to power in Afghanistan. However, the Afghan central authority adopted isolationist policies by attempting not to favor either the British or the Russians. 
30
31
32
Though Russia recalled the mission, Britain decided to use force to permanently alter conditions in Afghanistan. 
28
Reform and
Modernization, 1880-1946., 101. 29
Wars 1839
-1919
, 36. 30 O'Ballance, Afghan Wars, 1839
-1992 : What Britain Gave up and the Soviet Union Lost, 36. 31
Wars 1839
Wars -1919, 51. 32 , 51. 32
Despite a successful invasion, occupation proved too difficult. The tribes rose against the British throughout the entire theater of operations. Over the course of two years, thousands to tens of thousands rallied against foreign presence and attacked British positions. Similar to the first war, issues with the subsidy caused consternation. Tribal leaders perceived that the British controlled the purse rather than the central authority. Lack of timely payment aggravated tribal leaders. Furthermore, the call for Jihad obligated tribal members to unify against the British. Like the first war, the British used reprisal to punish the population. In one case, British authorities hung perpetrators and destroyed a bazaar. 
33
34
Their system called for the payment of subsidy to foreign government in exchange for favorable policy. By reducing the subsidy, the British lost favor 
33
Wars 1839
Wars -1919, 66-7. 34 , 66-7. 34
with the tribes. By engaging in practices that offended tribal sensibilities, the British force became a foreign antibody that must be rejected. The system called for violent reprisals to punish and subjugate indigenous peoples when they were not compliant. Though strategies of force generally worked throughout its empire, it failed in Afghanistan as a solution for permanent peace. Using the strategic advantage of geography, these tribes could engage in attrition warfare against better equipped and trained imperial forces. These two wars educated the British on better plans for Afghanistan.
The regional, if not international, political environment drove Britain to interfere with the domestic politics of Afghanistan. The nation attempted to compel Afghanistan's central government to adopt policies favorable to Britain's primary security interest. Their modus operandi mixed primarily force and finance to achieve political ends. Force succeeded initially, but attempts to keep a force-in-being within Afghanistan failed. In both cases, the implementation of subsidy created issues. Reducing the amount broke a commitment to the tribal powers. The British learned that the best way to achieve their interests was to rely on an Afghan central authority and minimize its own physical presence inside the country. With respect to the second Afghan War, the government concluded that no affordable military solution existed. Only a political solution resolved the crisis.
The solution showed up like a gift basket in 1880 when Abdur Rahman returned from exile in Russia to claim dominion over Afghanistan. The British seized the opportunity to negotiate with Rahman about an assumption of power. In line with its interests to divide power within the buffer state, the British refused the Amir's request to place Kandahar under his authority, instead allowing another tribal chief to retain power there. 35
35 Sultan Mahomed Khan, The Life of Abdur Rahman, Amir of Afghanistan ed. Mir Munshi (London: John Murray, 1900).
To gain the approval of Britain, the Amir honored previous agreements. In exchange for money and military supplies, he permitted the British to manage Afghanistan's foreign policy. The parties agreed. In 1880, the installation of Abdur Rahman set conditions for complete evacuation of British forces from Afghanistan with the exception of Kandahar. After solidifying these arrangements, Abdhul Rahman steadily brought order to a chaotic country.
During his rule from 1880-1901, Abduhl Rahman Khan created a strong central government backed by standing army that was sufficient enough to stabilize the country. As a descendant of Dost Mohamed, the Amir possessed a foundation of legitimacy. Enough of the population did not view him as a puppet of a foreign power. In public, he purposefully distanced himself from the British, never appearing too close. His first actions included: reestablishing a central treasury, building a national army, and expanding a human intelligence network. 
36
37
36
37
To address security interests, Russia, Britain, and Afghanistan, made a number of joint decisions aimed at stabilizing the region. The objective was to preserve the interests of the two empires. The most important decisions focused on defining Afghanistan's boundaries (see Figure 
4
38
39
40
41
42
43
39
40
41
42
Reform and
Modernization, 1880-1946., 158. 43
44
The intent was to transfer responsibility for the Wakhan corridor to the Afghans. Per agreement, Afghanistan incorporated the sliver into its sovereign. However, the Amir recognized the distance between his capital and this land acquisition, and so arranged it as a British protectorate. 
45
46
47
Britain had major interests to protect: sea lines of communication and colonies. Russia's interests and actions competed with these interests. In The convention also removed ambiguity that can be characteristic of anarchic systems. 
44
45
Prior to the convention, the parties addressed issues narrowly rather than within a global context or used various strategies of force. After the convention, many fundamental fears dispersed. For instance, the written record committed Russia to keeping Afghanistan outside its sphere of influence. The commitment bound them to not send political agents to Afghanistan, an important distinction since the two Anglo-Afghan Wars started because of Russian envoys in Kabul. Such new rules diminished British fears about Russia's intentions regarding its vital interests.
The convention reflected a fundamental transition in power relationships.
In essence it established a regional regime with a system of rules to govern state interactions. In an anarchic international system, however, rules only impose a degree of order on these interactions rather than complete control. 
48
For example, the Convention of 1907 established rules governing interactions over economic trade, political influence, and military endeavors. During the years of imperial expansion, the interactions occurred in an environment with a higher degree of anarchy. 
49
48
49
Afghanistan territory continues to be at the strategic crossroads of Central Asia. Given the strategic position, great powers recognized that whoever had greater influence in Afghanistan could protect their holdings and advance their movement into strategic locations while preventing the movement of others. Each power attempted to use Afghanistan to either gain advantage or maintain the status quo. These balance of power dynamics persisted for centuries and are based predominantly on the geostrategic position of Afghanistan. Historically, access to trade routes and a position as a buffer state constituted Afghanistan's strategic value.
why states act. The regional, if not international, political environment drove Britain, predominantly, and Russia to interfere with the internal order of Afghanistan. Fear and interest motivated Britain in the nineteenth century.
For Britain, the protection of India-"the brightest jewel of the British crown"was the predominate consideration. 
50
When Russia contested that influence, it generated fear in Britain. The fear was not unfounded. In Central Asia, the bear's territorial expansion encroached on India as it closed in on Afghanistan. Numerous Russian actions placed British interests at risk. Diplomatic presence in Kabul impinged on Britain's sphere of influence. Russia had encouraged Persia to attack Herat.
Aggressive Russian behavior in the Caucuses alarmed western powers. To the British, the presence of large Russian military forces in Central Asia also challenged their supremacy in India. 
51
Furthermore Russia used fear to bait Britain. It sent a diplomatic mission to Kabul in retaliation for Britain's diplomatic and military pressure during the end of the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-1878. Britain took the bait and engaged in two costly wars.
Afghanistan also had a role in the external balance of power. When
Afghanistan had a stable central government and its relative power was significant, it adopted expansionist policies. In the presence of great powers, Afghanistan adopted isolationist policies to protect itself. These policies were based on relative capabilities, namely military capacity, between Afghanistan and the outside states. Furthermore, central authorities adopted a strategic defensive strategy based on impregnable mountain geography and an historic force of nature-the tribes. Indeed, the tribes appear to be one constant in Afghanistan's history that determines success or failure of a foreign presence, and the success or failure of the central authority.
The survey also reveals interesting historical patterns about success or failure of an Afghan central authority. Classically, the two primary actors in 
51
Afghanistan consist of an Afghan central government and the tribes.
Afghanistan was strongest when the central authority held sway over the tribes. Though Afghanistan has many different clans and tribes, it is possible to generalize these into one category as a necessary political element in Afghanistan's internal balance of power.
The relationship between these two actors often determines the level of stability resident in the country. When the central authority and the tribes are united, the collective has been successful as in the case of Ahmad Shah Durrani. When these entities are in tension, the central government remains weak and lapses into intrigue and in-fighting, as in the period immediately after Ahmad Shah Durrani. When the central authority possesses strong military capacity and adheres to behaviors consistent with Islamic principles and tribal values, then a central government has been strong, as in the case of Abdur Raham. In general, Jihad was a useful way to unify the tribes against a threat. The stronger rulers had the credibility, or legitimacy, to apply Jihad.
Jihad, like any powerful idea, propels mass social movements in action.
Based on these findings, a strategist should align some instruments of national power to basic historical patterns. Airpower can be used to strengthen the bonds between the Afghan central authority and the tribes. To do so, airpower must become a significant capability for use by the Afghan central authority for domestic security, governance, and economic conditions. At the same time, airpower must not create pretext for expanded Jihad. On this last point, a strategist must identify a way to re-focus Jihad away from foreign presence and towards something else more in line with Afghan, Pakistan, and US interests. If there's a way for the Afghan central authority to harness Jihad under these conditions, then it should be pursued. History shows how important it can be to the success of the central authority.
Understanding the interests of states is vital to strategy. To protect or achieve interests; states make decisions based on their perceptions of others' behaviors. During the nineteenth century, Russia, Britain, Afghanistan, and others existed in a relatively higher level of anarchy. Afghanistan did not have defined geopolitical borders. Diplomatic exchanges were not formal. Forums for cooperative discussion did not exist. The degree of anarchy decreased when Afghanistan's borders were defined and when Russia and Britain concluded the Convention of 1907. The transition from a highly competitive environment to a cooperative one depends upon diplomatic engagement.
Though the names and types of surrounding powers changed, Afghanistan's strategic value within balance of power interactions persisted through the twentieth century. Some regional powers viewed Afghanistan as a classic buffer state to separate themselves from competing powers. Others approved of a strong Afghanistan along as it posed no threat. Some regional actors used Afghanistan to balance out the actions of others. To make Afghanistan more useful, some states intervened to change its politics or to degrade or enhance its military capacity.
Military theorist Sun Tzu suggested that one should know thyself and one's adversary. Given the factors that shape Afghanistan, the meaning of those words expands to know these plus the bordering nations. The assessment begins with America's strategic interests.
One ignorant of the plans of neighboring states cannot prepare alliances in good time.
Instead of imposing our plan upon the world, we could rely on the potential inherent in the situation.
The historical record describing British and Russian interaction with regard to Afghanistan is typical of the many conflicts that have occurred there over millennia, and is particularly valuable when discussing the current situation. History provides lessons that strategists fail to learn at their peril.
To analyze and develop strategy properly, it is also fundamentally necessary to understand the interests and interactions of the actors involved in today's conflict. As with those in history, today's external and internal actors contribute to both the regional and internal balance of power. The strategist must account not only for patterns of interaction across time, but also for Afghanistan's unique nature when attempting to reach strategic goals.
An assessment of contemporary actors helps to reveal an inherent potential about the environment that a strategist can harness. Instead of forcing an ideal upon the world, the potential energy of the situation can be exploited to gain an advantage. Such an holistic approach informs the development of courses of action, including elements of cooperation, coercion, and force to help resolve the conflict.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, changed the political landscape of Afghanistan. With the world's implicit approval, the United States and Afghan opposition groups toppled the Taliban regime and began an extended process of stabilizing the new government and uniting the country's politically fractured tribes. With tangible support of a broad base of nonfighting nation-state partners, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the USled NATO coalition continue a war against a resilient insurgency. Complicating matters, non-governmental organizations have proliferated within Afghanistan while regional states work to influence the operating environment. The challenge is to identify which actors are most important.
The following brief synopsis narrows the range of actors to the most influential regional nation-states, summarizes their strategic interests, and examines how their behaviors shape outcomes in contemporary Afghanistan.
2
5
Why does America remain involved in Afghanistan? As the nation expends greater levels of blood and treasure, the need for an answer grows. It heightens when time passes without evidence of favorable resolution. When discussing the United States' policy for Afghanistan, Americans debate whether security, prestige, regional influence, or economics compel sustained engagement. 
3
4
5
6
The latest encapsulation of American policy towards Afghanistan is discerned in President Barack Obama's speech at West Point during December 2009.
Those assertions challenge the military strategy-or the approach-to shaping an Afghanistan in the best interests of the United States. They also challenge the existence of the threat and the capability of that threat to harm America.
The speech described the threat, national goals, and a strategy to achieve them. First, the President asserted that "US security was at stake in Afghanistan and Pakistan." 7 These locations were described as the "epicenter The policy prescribes actions to prevent the re-emergence of Al Qaeda safe havens in Afghanistan and to defeat them in Pakistan. President Obama linked the Taliban insurgency directly to Al Qaeda's ability to re-establish itself, and called Afghanistan and Pakistan the places where ideological inspiration can flourish. 
12
Recommendations about airpower's responsible use will treat these political objectives and the strategy as givens. Before doing so, the strategist must understand American interests, past strategies to achieve those interests, and American resolve. in the ideological battles of the Cold War. Every year on the anniversary of the invasion, both Presidents called for the Soviets to end their occupation and expressed support for the Afghan people.
Support was not always rhetorical, however. Toward the latter part of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, for example, President Reagan met personally with the Afghan Resistance. These overt displays paralleled growing covert US support through Pakistan to mujahedeen fighters. As part of a successful policy of containment, in which Soviet expansions into peripheral areas around the world were checked by American support to opposition governments and insurgencies, the US supplied arms and financial support to guerrilla groups fighting the puppet government in Afghanistan. 
13
14
13
14
15
16
Organizations in Afghanistan were linked to terrorist attacks against US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed twelve Americans and three hundred citizens of the African countries, and injured five thousand.
No longer a Cold War battlefield Afghanistan had become a safe haven for organizations to train individuals in terrorist tactics, promote extremist Islamic ideologies, and generate plans to harm Western interests. 
17
18
The United States objectives were to destroy training camps, administer punishment, and deter future attacks. 
19
20
16
18
19
20
To meet objectives, the United States relied upon precision weapons and its ability to project power using air and sea forces. However, military force did not beat the Taliban by itself. Afghanistan and supports a whole-of-government approach which applies a broad spectrum of national power in Afghanistan.
Under the Obama administration, the purpose of America's military force is to create time and space to build Afghan government capacity to meet America's pragmatic security goals. Military force also complements a comprehensive civilian strategy aimed at economic, political, and security objectives. According to Secretary Robert Gates, "This goal cannot be completed on its own, but must be accompanied by political, economic, and diplomatic efforts outlined" in the State Department's regional stabilization plan. No doubt that the cost of the new strategy is likely greater than previous administrations. To cover the cost of the latest Afghanistan surge, the United States will spend $30 billion in FY10. 
37
37
Now the longest American War in history, Afghanistan continues to test America's resolve. 
38
Afghanistan is at a crossroads in history with a fresh chance at becoming a modern state. Though the path taken depends upon many variables, significant internal factors and external factors affect the choices of human political and social organizations. A modern nation cannot be realized without a secure, stable central authority in Afghanistan that also has legitimate ties with a loose confederation of tribes. A stable central government is vital to America's current strategy in Afghanistan. -Security -Good Governance -Economic Development -Regional Cooperation -Foreign Policy Affairs Afghanistan's interest includes but spans beyond America's narrowly focused interest in dismantling Al Qaeda in the region. However by helping Afghanistan accomplish its interests, the United States can meet its own interests. The speech provides insight that can later be used to recommend proper use of airpower.
An important Afghan policy is to pursue a strategy of reconciliation, rather concentrating on killing or capturing its enemies. The first approach is a proven successful counterinsurgency practice, while the second is a proven way to fail in a counterinsurgency (See Figure 
1
46
These statements align well with the historically important observation that force's efficacy has limits in Afghanistan. Often, foreign use of force has rallied tribes rather than coerced them. The most effective use of force will be the force wielded by the central authority rather than by the Coalition. Sensibly constraining force, especially airpower, helps comply with this policy objective.
Several important factors can erode the legitimacy of the central government of Afghanistan. International criticism of the last election compelled the United States to pressure the Karzai government for greater reforms, a pressure Karzai has publicly rejected. Senator John Kerry travelled to Afghanistan to meet with President Karzai after the most recent national election. He explained the importance that Karzai not overstate victory in an election that had been perceived to be fraudulent. Increasingly, the international press has attacked Karzai's legitimacy. He is further accused of nepotism exacerbated by alleged corruption. Once the favorite of US policymakers, Karzai appears willing to reject US support if it may threaten his political base. At the same time, the Taliban want to return to power in 
46
To survive, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan needs a substantial revenue stream to supplement and eventually replace some foreign aid. The government will need its own money to sustain the Afghan National Army, Afghan National Police Force, and other key organizations inside Afghanistan. This does not mean that foreign aid to Afghanistan should completely dry-up.
Afghanistan does not have to be completely self-sustaining. In fact, the United States should budget for some permanent level of funding, similar to as done with Egypt and other nations to maintain favorable relations over a long period of time. 
47
During the 1800s, Afghanistan exported horses, dried fruits, madder, wool, and silk.
Fortunately, Afghanistan has a great deal of strategic value that could drive its economy. 
48
49
50
47
Strong regional cooperation is a major contributor to social, economic and cultural growth of countries. With the cooperation of our neighbors and the rest of the world, we intend to expand regional solidarity through practical measures in regional trade and transit, aiming to position Afghanistan as a bridge between the countries of Central Asia, South-East Asia, and the Middle East. Afghanistan has the potential to become a transit corridor for goods and energy between north and south Asia. Connecting Afghanistan to the region's railway networks, and linking the countries of the region through Afghanistan to regional roads and http://www.globalresearch.ca/index.php?context=viewArticle&code=20100201&articleId=1732 2 (accessed 29 May 2010) sea ports, present some of the real opportunities that can bring the countries of our region together.
Those words reflect the dreams of Amir Abdur Rahman, Afghan ruler during the late 1800s, who adopted an isolationist stance because his neighbors had too much power. In the modern age, Afghanistan's survival depends upon railways, airports, and roads to bring it out of depression into prosperity. Regional cooperation is the path.
Afghanistan's interest includes combating the cultivation and trafficking of illicit drugs. 90% of the world's illicit supply of opium comes from Afghanistan. 
52
53
54
54
Trade, minerals, and counter-narcotics present new opportunities for regional cooperation on common interests. Though this potential exists, realizing the benefits is not guaranteed. Although conditions exist for significant cooperation between states, balancing behaviors by several regional states could easily derail the modernization of Afghanistan. How development occurs and who among the various interested parties will benefit first and most are enormous concerns. Airpower can have a significant role in supporting these economic lines of operation and will be addressed in a later chapter.
Regional actors will continue to have significant influence on what happens inside Afghanistan. If the regional states are helpful, then the coalition has a greater chance to succeed. Currently, some regional states provide transit routes for NATO's supplies. Others provide significant reconstruction aid to Afghanistan. If the regional states are not helpful or seek to disrupt coalition efforts, then the strategy can come apart. Indeed, in counterinsurgency war outside sponsorship to an insurgency can be a decisive element for an insurgent victory.
During the 1990s, outside state sponsors competed with each other for influence in Afghanistan. In the past, regional states contributed primarily to proxy wars inside Afghanistan. During the 1990s, Afghanistan was embroiled in a violent civil war pitting the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, formed by the Taliban, against the Islamic State of Afghanistan, headed by the United Front or later the Northern Alliance. 57 Through these two opponents, regional actors engaged in a proxy war, and both sides received significant outside sponsorship. Russia, Iran, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Kyrgyzstan supplied arms, training, equipment, and logistical support to the Northern alliance. 
58
59
Pakistan fared better in the contest as the Taliban almost won the entire Afghan country by 2001. During this period, regional actors attempted to shape the internal make-up of Afghanistan in line with its self-interest. The primary driver was to create conditions best for their particular nation's security.
57 "Fueling Afghanistan's War: Press Backgrounder," The Institute for Afghan Studies, http://www.institute-for-afghanstudies.org/UNITED%20NATIONS/SANCTIONS/hrw_report.htm#Military%20Support%20to%2 0the%20Taliban. 
58
59
Historically, Pakistan's interest in Afghanistan is organized around a military doctrine of strategic depth. The concept refers to a defensive strategy of denying an adversary access to geographic locations from which to attack. 
63
64
These groups made it problematic for Pakistan's adversaries to establish friendly relationships with Afghanistan. By denying enemy influence in Afghanistan, Pakistan created a favorable environment for its own purposes.
Of utmost importance, a friendly relationship with Afghanistan allows Pakistan to concentrate most of its military forces along the Indian-Pakistan border.
Because its sovereign territory is not wide, Pakistan creates an effective strategic depth by influencing the internal make-up of Afghanistan.
However, Pakistan's alliance with the United States to counter terrorism has jeopardized its relationship with the very strategic weapon that it created.
Recently, Jihad groups have focused in towards the Pakistan government. In 2007, a suicide bomber exploded a bomb outside the general headquarters building of the Pakistan Army. 
65
66
Indian companies are involved in road construction, electrical power projects, Camps in Afghanistan and FATA have also Somewhere in between is the current practice of remaining inactive in disrupting sanctuary and support.
Iran has significant connections to Afghanistan. A six hundred-mile border fuels ongoing tensions over Afghan refugees, border insecurity, and illicit narcotics trafficking. Iran's geopolitical position in Central Asia may account for its policy. Several natural barriers form a formidable, protective boundary around the country. To the north, the Caspian Sea separates it from Russia. To the south, the Persian Gulf isolates Iran from its classic regional competitor, Saudi Arabia. Its borders with Afghanistan and Iraq consist of rugged mountainous terrain. While these geographic features offer strategic protection from regional competitors, they also pose challenges. and equipped. 
84
Illicit narcotics pose a significant security concern to Iran. Iran has nearly 1 million people addicted to heroin and opium. 
85
86
America's strategy fundamentally depends upon regional actors adjacent to and in close proximity to Afghanistan. When America's strategy reaches full military strength, Afghanistan will contain 100,000 US military personnel, tens of thousands of Coalition partner personnel, and American citizens serving in non-governmental organizations. Significantly, all lines of communication to support this force and other personnel go through or above the territories of regional states (see Figure 
8
87 http://www.zawya.com/story.cfm/sidZAWYA20060516035604/First%20Iran-Afghanistan%20fiber-optic%20project%20on%20line%20  The insurgent groups can threaten NATO supply routes that transect the length of Pakistan. A key line of communication originates in the port city Karachi and terminated in Kabul (see rightmost blue line in Figure 
9
90
91
92
93
94
The story speaks to the potential consequences when a military force is cut off from its supplies through enemy action as well as the actions of regional actors.
The analysis of the contemporary situation reveals a highly interconnected, complex system in which the United States wages a counterinsurgency war. The situation has every characteristic of a wicked problem. 
95
There is no right answer. Every action tried may result in undesired second-and third-order effects. For instance, the inherent goodness of building hydroelectric dams can cause consternation in Afghanistan's surrounding neighbors over reduced water flow. However, it is clear from the general practice of warfare that strategy should aim to deny sanctuary, sever outside sponsorship, and diminish financial resources of an opponent. The situation in Afghanistan calls for a higher order of strategy based on the interests of many actors.
Today's context presents a strategist with more options. As opposed to the 1980s and 1990s, regional actors have common interests other than competitively supporting proxy war. Instead, a potentially cooperative environment exists that the United States can leverage to meet its own pragmatic security objectives. Regional cooperation offers the United States more options to create an Afghanistan favorable to meeting its security interests. Combating narcotics trafficking interests all the regional actors who have significant numbers of people addicted to Afghanistan poppy products. Trade offers another area of cooperation. The two most populous countries on the earth would benefit from new trade routes through Afghanistan. The nations in Central Asia and Iran could move oil and gas to these markets.
Additionally, Afghanistan possesses natural resources that regional states desire. Much like the British and the Russians did in the Convention of 1907 to end the Great Game, the regional actors, the United States, and other coalition members can seek new levels of cooperation to resolve Afghanistan.
The United States can use its military, political, and economic power to create time and space for regional cooperation to emerge and unleash fundamental changes in Afghan society. The United States and the regional states should go big by setting conditions to remake the social order in Afghanistan. Technology can drive change in human social organization.
Trade routes, mining industry, civil aviation can remake a significant portion of Afghanistan. 
96
Describing how is beyond the scope here. However, the role of force is. 
96
Airpower in Pursuit of Interests I am utterly convinced that the outstanding and vital lesson is that airpower is the dominant factor in this modern world and that, though the methods of exercising it will change, it will remain the dominant factor, so long as power determines the fate of nations.
The previous chapters isolated historic internal and balancing variables crucial to understanding the challenges of creating regional stability and cooperation that are consistent with America's interests. It is not too much to assert that the extent to which the US is able to influence events in Afghanistan is heavily dependent on its capacity to use airpower. The rest of this thesis is focused on what could reasonably be called a responsible airpower strategy in theater.
Unfortunately, airpower is being de-emphasized precisely at a crossroads in American policy where it can most effectively be employed. This is due in part because of a poorly articulated understanding of airpower that changes the context of relations in the region. As with most technologies, airpower can help or hurt in Afghanistan through its interaction with the population. Successful strategy hinges on its responsible use. This chapter provides a brief historical account of airpower strategies used in Afghanistan, and then presents an examination of strategies considered by the United States. Within this framework, effects and limitations of these strategies are presented, including pervasive opinions on the limitations of airpower in Afghanistan and COIN, culminating in General McChrystal's 2009 statement concerning the efficacy of airpower.
Afghanistan's unique geography has shaped its history and culture. The country is completely landlocked. Mountains separate the main cities. Harsh geographic and weather conditions have always complicated ground travel.
Hundreds of tribes still control virtually autonomous regions of the country, making it difficult for outsiders to traverse the land without permission or hassle. Through the centuries, the rugged terrain has offered sanctuary for indigenous warriors when they have contended with outside powers or, just as often, with their own central government. Since 1979, the widespread existence of landmines has threatened movement by foot through mountain passes. All this has conspired to economically and technologically isolate Afghanistan, to curtail unification, and limit its tremendous potential.
But today, because of the capacity of airpower to mitigate and even overcome these obstacles, solutions are within reach. Though not sufficient to Rankling under the terms of that treaty and subsequent agreement, the new Afghan King Amanullah desired complete independence of Afghanistan from British influence and reclamation of disputed territory in the British India.
Facing a potential domestic challenge to his power, the King also wanted to focus his countrymen's attention on an external threat. In 1919, conditions appeared advantageous for the King's plans. 
1
The King viewed this as an opportunity to exploit the British situation. His plan was to invade India, retake territorial possessions, and compel the British to free Afghanistan from the foreign policy arrangement.
2
Historically, Afghanistan's military is comprised of a combination of a standing army and, most importantly, tribal militias. To prepare for battle, the King needed these forces ready and in position. Therefore, the King ordered the state's national army to position troops near the Durand line. The army established a camp at Dakka, an Afghan outpost close to the border, near the Khyber Pass. Additional troops camped in Jalalabad and Kandahar. Given ongoing unrest on the British side of the border, the King believed the British would see these troop positions as a responsible protective state action, rather than as an invasion force. To ready the second component of force, the King met with tribal chiefs to discuss the plan and invoked Jihad to form the tribal militias into a capability for the state's use. To ensure a combined effort, the King was adamant that no one take action until he gave word.
Intending a surprise invasion, the King quietly prepared the state's instrument of force.
The militias assembled, but no order to attack came. With forces arrayed on both sides of the border, however, a series of small actions took on a life of their own.
4
5
On May 9, 1919, the British bombed Dakka, an Afghan outpost close to the Afghan-British Indian border, near the Khyber Pass. 
6
7
The second air operation targeted the city of Jalalabad. The Royal Air Force bombed the city for three days; on 17, 20, and 24 May. 12 The effects were immediate. One formation of the Afghan army dispersed in surprise. The bombardment drove scores of people away from the city, leaving it in chaos.
Their exodus blocked the roads, hampering military ground movement, supply, and command and control. 
13
14
15
16
10 Omissi, Air Power and
Colonial Control: The Royal Air Force, 1919-1939, 10. 11
12 Omissi, Air Power and
Colonial Control: The Royal Air Force, 1919-1939, 9
13
14 Omissi, Air Power and
Colonial Control: The Royal Air Force, 1919-1939, 9. 15
16
17
18
After the Kabul bombing, the incensed King held a Jirga with the Mullahs who subsequently issued legal statements justifying Jihad against the British. 
19
The message promulgated throughout the tribal network and gave fanatical moral support to the deployed Afghan army as it faced the British. 
20
21
On August   19, 1919, the Afghans and the British signed the Treaty of Rawalpindi as the official armistice between the two nations. The treaty gave the Afghan's full independence. 
18
19
21
The Third Afghan War had a significant downside for both Britain and the fledging Afghan central government. Incipient nationalism prompted Afghan tribes on the British side of the frontier region to challenge colonial control. On their side of the border, desertions in the Afghan army made large numbers of new weapons available to the tribes, who would in turn eventually challenge the central government. Ultimately, the British had to expend time and resources attempting to quell rebellious tribes in India's Northwest region-though these regions were not lost to King Amanullah.
The Third Afghan War illustrated both a positive and negative influence of airpower. The bombing of Jalalabad caused the central Afghan government to question the efficacy of continuing the conflict and it certainly demoralized parts of the organized army. On the other hand, airplanes seemed to incite the government and tribes. It stimulated Islamic clerics to issue Fatwā calling for Jihad against the British.
22
23
These forces were a constant physical presence in close proximity to and within tribal locations. Foot and vehicle patrols and civil works projects such as building roads further incentivized cooperation. 
25
26
Force proposals to substitute more airpower for ground forces in the North-West Frontier. Aircraft were used sparingly to punish small pockets of tribesmen who opposed government policies. Learning lessons from the Third Afghan War, aircraft dropped leaflets on villages to give advanced notice of forthcoming bombings and gave the reasons why the bombings were being conducted and who were the intended recipients of aerial punishment. In other cases, aircraft were used to create an air blockade, such as to keep farmers from herding animals to pastures claimed by competing tribes or to prevent concentrations of logistical support for tribal raids into British India.
Of course, airpower quickly became preeminent in gathering vital intelligence.
At times, the use of airpower was sufficient to deter or gain compliance from a wayward tribe. 28 
25 Omissi, Air Power and
Colonial Control: The Royal Air Force, 1919-1939, 94.
29
30
32
33
32
33
airpower affected human will. However, when used against the tribes, coercive airpower proved inconsistent. In some cases, the tribes sued for peace; in others, it hardened resolve. In the short-run, airpower appeared decisive tactically and operationally. But when one takes a longer, strategic view, destructive airpower did not make for a permanent peace. Throughout Britain's history on the subcontinent, the tribes continuously pursued their own interests, even when faced with threat from the skies. These lessons expose a relationship between force and the tribes that may be unique to Afghanistan and the border region. If the assumption holds that today's tribes differ little from those of the early 1900s, these stories are useful in assessing airpower in the modern context.
The British experience in Afghanistan sits at the extreme low end of the airpower scale. The relative numbers of aircraft involved and the extent of their use pale in comparison to the scale experienced later in the twentieth and now, twenty-first centuries. Within Afghanistan, small numbers of airplanes focused on specific ground targets were able to compel changes in the Afghan government and its military forces. In the frontiers, however, the British constrained airpower's destructive capacity, limiting it to localized punishment.
Before most bombing, the Royal Air Force dropped leaflets. The British used these relatively small scale reprisals to deter future transgressions. Decades passed before Afghanistan experienced war with another nation-state.
On the other end of the airpower scale, seventy-one years after the successful British non-combatant occupation, the Soviet Union unleashed a scale and mode of airpower unseen in Afghanistan's history.
The Soviet Union's occupation of Afghanistan (1979-1989)  Afghan military personnel to train at Soviet military schools. 
36
37
38
39
40
Central Asia, the Soviet approach was to "rapidly inflict massive collateral damage on the civilian infrastructure in order to erode popular support for the enemy." 
41
In line with 
40
41
The Afghan insurgency met nearly all the criteria identified by Carl Von Clausewitz for an effective general uprising. In Book Six, Clausewitz offered two conditions especially relevant: "The national character must be suited to that type of war," and, "The country must be rough and inaccessible, because of mountains or forests, marshes, or the local methods of cultivation." 
52
Consequently, a conventionally trained Soviet force existed in a state of tension with a fierce collective of warrior tribes. As Clausewitz stated "This tension will either gradually relax, if the insurgency is suppressed in some places and slowly burns itself out in other, or else it will build up to a crisis: a general conflagration closes in on the enemy, driving him out of the country before he is faced with total destruction." 
53
54
They left behind a power vacuum. 
52 Clausewitz,
On War,
480. 53
54
Limiting air strikes will also diminish the amount of new material available for use in insurgent propaganda. Bruce Hoffman explains that terrorist organizations use propaganda to recruit new members, develop sympathy and support, and undermine the legitimacy of their adversary. 
3
4
5
American airpower alters the balance of power in the region. Its global reach makes it possible for the United States to project power to Afghanistan.
No other nation has been able to deliver this degree of massed power over such distance. Air mobility assets, such as the C-17, C-5, the C-130, and commercial lift capabilities provide the means to move personnel and material to a landlocked nation. Between 2001 and 2010, this strategic capability has moved 1.65 million people and 2.4 billion pounds of logistical support. 9
To enhance the responsible use of airpower, an air-centric strategy would place greater emphasis on air mobility in logistics. Airpower helps supply 100,000 American troops stationed in a landlocked country, 7,000 miles away, behind enemy lines. This contribution is significant, because overland supply Airpower can have a role in each of these.
A responsible use of airpower involves using airpower to solve major retention issues in the Afghan National Army. Morale issues stem from an inefficient leave program and dangerous movement by roads. 
14
15
16
17
The Army might mitigate this problem through expanded use of its aviation assets, fixed wing and helicopters, to rotate personnel to and from their home districts for leave. Air mobility in this manner can help the Afghan Army with morale and retention issues.
Because reliable, quick transportation does not exist, the soldiers refuse to wait, and they desert. The problem is then compounded by a confusion of cause and effect. Some Afghan soldiers have not taken leave in over three years because their commanders fear they would desert after returning home. 
18
A serious complication is the rugged terrain and threat from insurgents. These make ground transportation impractical in the implementation of leave. It It notes that the number one demand of the mutineers was for regular leave, but also points out that the main trigger for the munities was the French Army's persistent launching of futile offensive operations. Alastair Horne's The Price of Glory (which you read in 601) talks a little about leave in the French army on page 64. He states that the French had no organized leave policy at all until 1915, and it was very sporadic thereafter.
The US and coalition forces should accomplish this shift and expansion of the use of airpower with a complementing information campaign to highlight how airpower helps the Afghan people. The AF can support this shift in focus along four lines of operation: This same mobility lift could also be used for support missions that require quick reaction times. For example, it could be used to decrease the medical response time from injury to treatment in Afghanistan, as was done in Iraq, and decrease the time to respond to Troops-in-Contact anywhere in the country. Similar metrics such as movement of supplies and personnel would show trends towards meeting objectives. As with the Army Air Corps' support of the island-hopping Pacific Campaign during WWII, the US and Afghan government may have to rapidly build infrastructure (i.e., small landing strips, roads) to aid the air mobility mission. In the PRT convoy example above, it was the quality of the road that made the trip last 6 hours. 
22
Three others are in the pipeline.
The AF should also provide rotary and fixed wing mentors that are language trained, culturally aware, and experts on the counterinsurgency fight raging in Afghanistan. Deploying US airmen for this mission, assisting their Afghan partners to more effectively apply airpower capabilities to meet irregular challenges, is the key to success. The US needs to put the appropriate level of effort into this decisive operation and institutionalize this approach rather than continue an ad-hoc arrangement. The Afghan Air Corps needs its own close air support capabilities to support their ground security forces. The US should surge efforts to get their pilots up to speed, facilitate the purchase of "righttech" light attack aircraft, and assist them with the employment of these capabilities. The timeline to make Afghan strike missions a reality must be accelerated.
Senior Airmen: From the Boardroom and onto the Battlefield World events and the significance of airpower demand bold changes in how America employs its top Air Force generals. Almost all three-and fourstar Air Force generals serve in "organize, train, and equip" jobs rather than in the combat zone where they can provide critical air-minded expertise. Oneand two-star generals do one-year tours in Afghanistan, get credit for overseas experience, and then report to positions where their experience no longer directly shapes war efforts. Instead, the senior-most and best experienced Airmen build budgets, oversee weapon systems procurement, and organize staffs in the Pentagon and at major command headquarters. Though seasoned generals prove useful navigating complex stateside bureaucracies, America could better use them as leaders in combat. Current wartime commitments require glass-breaking measures to turn the institution on its head. To give the United States the best chance of success in Afghanistan, three changes in Air Force general officer assignments are required. 
In line with the second recommendation, above, to put this proposed air strategy into action in Afghanistan the USAF should implement an approach that has proven successful in the past by identifying a senior three-star Airman air campaign for both Iraq and Afghanistan. The USAF does provide one or two Air Force generals who serve in country to coordinate between the CFACC and the Army commanding general, but this is not enough to increase the perception and result in the same relationship that can occur between more senior generals. In contrast, the US Army has a four-star and several threestars running the Iraq war, a four-star commander of US Forces in Afghanistan, a four-star CDRCENTCOM providing oversight and strategic vision for CENTCOM, and a number of three-stars on the battlefield. Placing the right AF three-star in Afghanistan, with the right background and experience, alongside the new Army commander will affirm that an Airman is engaged on the front lines working directly with that commander in a dynamic way.
To further enhance continuity, the United States should consider executing the same methodology envisioned by Secretary Gates where a cadre of military officers cycle to and from Afghanistan and Washington DC, where in both locations they work issues related to success in Afghanistan. From a selfcritical assessment, the USAF might review the follow-on assignments of those general officers who served in Afghanistan for one year or longer. The Service may learn that these leaders end up in positions where their battlefield experience and relationships are not exploited for the current fight. Cycling leaders between jobs in Washington and Afghanistan would provide muchneeded continuity and would give the Nation a better chance to achieve its strategic objectives.
War calls for bold actions, not the status quo. America should put more of its seasoned general officers closer to the combat zone. The United States needs its talented senior airmen out of the boardroom and onto the battlefield.
This paper does not attempt a solution to all the problems in Afghanistan or anywhere else. Its recommendations are specific to the region and the current context and more specifically to the proper role of airpower at this time and in this place. Nonetheless, lessons can be learned that should translate to broader responsible uses of airpower.
In international relations, order is distributed based on capability and influenced by international regimes. Airpower gives the United States a seat at the table in Central Asia. The guests at this table include several countries important to United States' interests and to the world's future. Airpower enables the United States to participate in the regional balance of power, and, hopefully, to tip the balance in favor of US interests. 
1 Robert M. Gates, "A Balanced Strategy: Reprogramming the Pentagon for a New Age," Foreign Affairs (January/February 2009), http://www.foreignaffairs.org/20090101faessay88103/robert-m-gates/a-balanced-strategy. themselves
28  
28  
See two sources: Weigley, The American Way of War : A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy. and Boot, "The New American Way of War."
Abraham H.Maslow, "A Theory of Human Motivation," Psychology Review 50, no. 4 (1954). According to Abraham Maslow, an individual acts according to a prioritized hierarchy consisting of: first satisfying basic physiological needs, such as food and water; then safety; love and belonging, esteem, and self-actualization.
Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge  University Press, 1981).
"China Sets 2020 Growth Goal," China Daily (17 May 2005), http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2005-05/17/content_443098.htm. Understanding the ends may illuminate the possible ways and means by which a non-state actor will engage.
Steven Woehrel, "Russian Energy Policy toward Neighboring Countries," (Congressional  Research Service, 2008), 4-5.   
Christopher M. Blanchard, "Al Qaeda: Statements and Evolving Ideology," (Congressional Research Service, 2005), 7.
K. Krist Herst, "Along the Silk Road: Connecting West and East in Prehistory," http://archaeology.about.com/cs/asia/a/silkroad.htm. (Accessed 10 May
2010).
Ibid., 262.   
Prior to the Durrani Empire, Pashtuns of the Ghilzai tribe rebelled against Persian occupiers in Kandahar and invaded Persia. Between 1709 -1738, this group became known as the Hotaki dynasty which ruled Persia until 1929. In 1738, Ahmad Shah Durrani led forces that defeated the last Hotaki ruler.
In an address in London, ex-Pakistani President Mussharaf explained the significance of this historical fact. He emphasized the importance of understanding how this occurred.
The King replaced Abdahli with Durrani to become King Ahmad Shah Durrani.
Afghanistan a Country Study, ed. Richard Nystrop and Donald Seekins (Washington: Library of Congress, 1986),13,14.   
Several Afghan rulers used Jihad as a mechanism to bond the tribes to a central authority. By using Jihad to create common purpose, a central authority transformed the tribes into strategic weapon. Alternatively, Jihad has also been used against the central government.
Cynthia Smith, "A Selection of Historical Maps of Afghanistan," Library of Congress, http://www.loc.gov/rr/geogmap/pub/afghanistan.html.
J. B.Kelly, Britain and the Persian Gulf. 1795-1880 (Oxford,: Clarendon P., 1968).
It is debatable whether it was the Royal Navy parked off the coast of Persia or the realization that it could not win Herat that drove Persia's decision to end its siege. If the former, the use of gunboat diplomacy is an example of Schelling's compellence. In this case, a rational actor applied the threat of force in order to get an adversary to halt an action by calculating the costs and benefits of continuing an action.
Several good histories are available to describe the actual events of the Afghan Wars at several levels of analysis. See H. W. Carless Davis, The Great Game in Asia (1800-1844) (London,: Pub. for the British Academy byH. Milford, 1927).
Afghanistan: A Country Study, ed. Peter R. Blood (Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress, 2001).
As described in the theoretical framework, the assumption herein is that actions, statements by leaders, and behaviors reflect the intentions of the state as a unitary rational actor. A rational actor makes cost-benefit calculations according to an internal value system. Furthermore, the research assumes realist motivations by states.
Nathaniel C. Fick et al., "Tell Me Why We're There: Enduring Interests in Afghanistan (and Pakistan)," (Center for a New American Society, 2009). See also: Lee Hudson Teslik, Updated: March 11, 2008,, "Backgrounder: Iraq, Afghanistan, and the U.S. Economy," Council on Foreign Relations (2008), http://www.cfr.org/publication/15404.
Tony Capaccio, "Kyrgyzstan Air Base Is Back to Normal Operations, U.S. Says," Boomberg, http://businessweek.com/news/2010-04-09/kyrgyzstan-air-base-is-back-to-normaloperations-u-s-says.html.
  89  Reuters, "Central Asia Spat Disrupts Nato Supplies," The Moscow Times, http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/central-asia-spat-disrupts-natosupplies/406895.html.
See Thucydides, The Landmark Thucydides : A Comprehensive Guide to the Peloponnesian War.
Rhea Talley Steward, Fire in Afghanistan (Garden City: Doubleday & Company, Inc, 1973).
Alfred L. P. Dennis, The Foreign Policies of Soviet Russia (New York,: E.P.Dutton & company,  1924), 254.
Steward, Fire in Afghanistan,  
Allison and Zelikow, Essence of Decision:  Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 241. The book quotes John F. Kennedy when inquiring whether his order got to all the airborne strategic air command bomber pilots: "There is always some son-of-a-bitch who doesn't get the word."
According to Freedictionary.com, a Fatwā is a legal opinion issued by an Islamic scholar.
Stewart, Fire in Afghanistan, 72.   
Omissi, Air Power and Colonial Control: The Royal Air Force, 1919-1939, 12. For the casualty static, see "Raf Timeline 1918-1929," Royal Air Force, http://www.raf.mod.uk/history/raftimeline19181929.cfm.
David Kilcullen, The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small  Wars in the Midst of a Big One (Oxford: New York: Oxford University Press,
2009).
Bruce Hoffman, Inside Terrorism (Columbia Univeristy Press, 2006).
Arkin, Divining Victory : Airpower in the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah War.   
Jason Motlagh, "Why the Taliban Is Winning the Propaganda War," Time (May 3, 2009), http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1895496,00.html.
Thomas Elkjer Nissen, "The Taliban's Information Warfare: A Comparative Analysis of Nato Information Operations (Info Ops) and Taliban Information Activities," (Royal Danish Defense College, 2007).
Kronstadt, "Pakitan-U.S. Relations,"(Congressional Research Service, 2009).
"10,000 Urge Paksitan to Cut Us-Nato Supply Line," Associated Press, December 18 2008.
Bob Roggio, "Taliban Attack Nato Supply Lines in Northwest Pakistan",  The Long War Journal (2009).
The PRT reports that up-armored vehicles are often not able to drive well on these roads either.
"Airmen train Afghan National Army Air Corps' first C-27 pilot "http://www.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123192066
Global Research, "Afghan Geological Reserves Worth a Trillion Dollars," Global Research.ca, http://www.globalresearch.ca/index.php?context=viewArticle&code=20100201&articleId=1732
Corps, 
University of Cincinnati
Maj Lyons
University of Cincinnati
United States. Subsequently
Air Force's Big Safari organization
Air Force's Plans & Programs directorate
9/11
Key Facts
In a democracy, the strength of the nation's willpower may determine success or failure. 
39
40
41
42
43
39
These votes showed widespread support for the administration's strategy. Presidential policies, congressional votes, and rhetoric provide an indication of America's staying power. Furthermore, America's commitment significantly influences regional players. 
40
Pakistan is vital to any strategy to secure Afghanistan. After Great Britain withdrew from India in 1947, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the Republic of India emerged as new regional actors. Fierce enmity existed and continues to exist between the two nations, originating from disputes over the location of the 1947 partition and control over the territory of Kashmir. India and Pakistan fought three major wars against each other. Increasing the stakes, both now possess nuclear weapons. Given their mutual history, Pakistan's primary strategic concern has been and remains India. 
60
These forces put at risk a majority of Pakistan's commercial industries, air bases, nuclear facilities, and other key strategic nodes. Furthermore, India has placed a sizeable number of military forces along its border with Pakistan.
Depending upon world events or poor relations with Pakistan, these forces go on alert. For instance, when a suicide bomber attacked the Indian parliament in December 2001, India surged troops on its western border.   The United 73 This is the largest population in the world not to have its own sovereign state. 
74
The North-West Frontier border region has always been integral to the security of Afghanistan, as well as to the territory known as Pakistan today. In the early twentieth century, the Durand Line demarcated the boundary between the independent state of Afghanistan and colonial British India. This line bisected an area containing an ethnically homogenous, yet politically differentiated tribal system. Along this line, both Afghanistan and Britain would face frequent uprisings.
During the Third Afghan War, the Afghan King had successfully incited the tribal people in the North-West Frontier region to join the fight against the British. Though the war officially ended in May 1919, once incited, the tribes along the border region remained hostile. From November to December 1919, the British used aircraft in daily bombings against a Pashtun tribe called Meshud. Dozens of airplanes dropped between two and seven tons of munitions daily. But independent air action was not enough to subdue the tribes. Only the combined presence of ground troops supported by air finally compelled the tribes to terms; but it was costly. The battle that finally brought a tenuous peace resulted in thousands of killed and injured on both sides, with the British alone losing 1,539 lives. 
24
Soviet doctrine, airpower served as a brutal weapon of terror against the Afghan population. Essentially, it became the primary weapon in support of Soviet policy to depopulate rural Afghanistan. Bombers, fighter-bombers, and helicopters carried out massive bombardment against populated areas.
Helicopter gunships mowed down villages and strafed tribesmen in the mountains. Helicopters dropped butter-fly mines to destroy farmland, interdict movements in valleys, and to surround villages being ravaged by aerial bombardment. 43 Reprisals were commonplace. 
44
45
46
47
48
The once self-sustaining country has yet to recover. 
42
43
64-65. 44
46
47
48
51
49
50
Ground forces often found themselves in situations that required closeair-support. In 2008, coalition aircraft flew 13,802 close-air-support missions and dropped 2,983 bombs, nearly a 30% increase over 2007 numbers. 
56
57
insurgent propaganda which the Taliban used to alienate the coalition from the Afghan population and to undermine the Afghan central government.
Collateral damage caused by airpower strikes transformed reluctant tribal members into mortal enemies of America. 
58
59
60
Military commanders proposed more boots on the ground and an emphasis on Collateral damage, Taliban momentum, and the continuing cost of the war compelled major debate over the national strategy. 
Airpower as a destructive tool is problematic in the context of Afghanistan. At the tactical and operational levels, kinetic airpower has enabled small numbers of personnel to keep insurgents from overrunning their positions. At the strategic level, the destructive form of airpower has complicated strategy. In the British case, coercive airpower worked against fielded conventional forces and a central authority, but it did not deter the tribes from active rebellion. On the contrary, its indiscriminate use may have helped provoke opposition. In the frontiers, the British used non-kinetic airpower as part of a wider civilian effort to build relationships with the tribes.
When airpower was used to punish the tribes, the British attempted to limit the killing of people. In the Soviet case, the use of airpower was brutally efficient in the early stages of operations, but ineffective in producing a favorable strategic outcome. The Soviet use of destructive airpower did not diminish the willpower of the tribes-to the contrary, it hardened. Airpower is a symbolic and real source of a national power. In the context of Afghanistan, historical lessons support Gen Stanley McChrystal's powerful statement: "Airpower contains the seeds of our own destruction if we do not use it responsibly-we can lose this fight." 
64
64