# ID: 45cdac1c37944165b52e9e4e2b66d54b
# Title: Developing Agents of Change
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph discusses the challenges of maintaining the Army?s effectiveness through the process of change. As conditions of warfare change, the methods and techniques of our doctrine must evolve with them. Knowing what to change will be more difficult and risk-laden as the rapid rate of technology and the relative brevity of future operations across the spectrum of conflict combine to create a situation where the consequences of peacetime choices become irretrievable in war. This study addresses the role of professional military education in creating cultural change within the military. The tendency of an overburdened American military emphasizes action, not thoughtful reflection; yet never was thinking more necessary. The infusion of the Army with officers from SAMS with a common cultural base with similar mental references serves as a collective that can institutionalize military excellence and cope with complex problems at an educated level. The self-regenerating nature of SAMS removes any reliance upon the appearance of one or more military geniuses in the force because it consistently produces outstanding, competent officers. Over time, the common cultural bias established through advanced education can affect changes in service culture. 15.
Knowing why, when and how to change is key to maintaining an Army's effectiveness. 
1
The Armed Services of the United States are currently conducting major operations in the country of Iraq as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom. Undoubtedly, many graduates of the School for Advanced Military Studies (SAMS) are playing an integral role in developing plans for the employment of our forces, while others may be leading formations of soldiers in combat as commanders. These men and women are beneficiaries of a unique educational experience that has served a select group of officers and the military well for almost twenty years. The formation of SAMS was due in large part to the vision of several prominent and determined officers who identified the need for strong institutional leadership as well as individual leadership in the Army.   In 1981, on a boat on the Yangtze River in China, Lieutenant Colonel Huba Wass de Czege's proposed concept of establishing a second year of study for select Army Command and Staff College (CGSC) graduates was evolving into reality. 2 Wass de Czege, an infantryman, veteran of multiple combat tours in Vietnam, Harvard trained political scientist, and recently appointed project chair of the effort to revise FM 100-5 outlined the concept to General William R. Richardson, the Army Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Plans. 
3
The Army in the early 1980s experienced a flourish of intellectual growth actuated by the negative experiences of many of its young officers during the Vietnam War and their dissatisfaction with the standards in professional military education. The focus of the Army at this time was planning and training the force to counter the Cold War military threat of the Warsaw Pact. An environment of increasing complexity was evolving as concurrent efforts to improve recruiting, reform training and doctrine, and field a new generation of major weapon systems forced Army leaders to seek better ways to bring all of these advancements together.
Wass de Czege's proposed second year of study following CGSC would be utilized to study large unit operations and to explore the Army's evolving doctrinal understanding of the Operational Level of War. 
4
5
6
Advanced Military Studies Department with Wass de Czege as director. 
7
October 1984. 8
10
12
According to Wass de Czege, the Army emerging in the wake of Vietnam and the Cold War required an educational system that developed a common cultural perspective on problem solving and war fighting that would facilitate the rapid adaptation to these types of realities. 
13
War is the greatest auditor of military institutions. 
15
The importance of advanced military education is demonstrated by the role it has played in military innovation and effectiveness in war throughout the twentieth century. To a large extent advanced military education has been the major factor in determining how military institutions adapt to the actual conditions of war. Those military institutions that took professional military education seriously performed well on the battlefield. When the concept of SAMS was being developed, CGSSC was devoted primarily to producing Army Majors who were well-rounded practitioners of tactics, only familiar with the broader aspects of strategy. 
16
1
22
The SAMS program of instruction rests on four primary curriculum pillars: theory, history, campaign planning and exercises, and support taskings. 
23
24
25
26
The increasingly complex environment and the time to logically think through tough military problems and to develop logical thought patterns have been greatly reduced. 27 SAMS equips its students to learn to view problems holistically in terms of nonlinear, complex-adaptive thinking. The first step in problem solving, which is often a point of failure, is framing the problem correctly. Far too often, much more time is spent by military organizations developing solutions without a proper diagnosis of a problem. Once the problem is defined, a plan of action for a positive aim rather than a negative aim can be formulated, employing methods to seek an advantage over an opponent. Similar to an athlete who has prepared for a race, the SAMS student has trained mentally and possesses a greater capacity to define the problem sets and the possible solution sets that face the armed forces in the coming years.
SAMS students are coached intensively to improve communication skills by using their knowledge of history, theory, and practice to structure and win a debate. The use of storytelling to communicate values, philosophy, competencies, or to share ideas is emphasized. Articulating critical issues to those in power who make decisions is a fundamental skill for the SAMS student to master.
A characteristic of Army culture should be the commitment of its leaders to lifelong learning. There is a need for lifelong learning because the world is in a constant state of change and because the military art requires lifelong study to become truly proficient. All professional officers need to continue their education and develop their intellectual capacity throughout their careers. We should renew ourselves constantly. For many, attendance at SAMS is an intellectual reawakening that is carried with them and transmitted to their gaining organizations. Continuous learning by successful adults is difficult but essential to modern organizations. In describing his intent for educating SAMS students, Huba Was de Czege articulated his goal "to develop expert learners who think like commanders and who understand what goes on in those goose eggs and attack arrows on the graphics on the map." 28 If operational art entails a feel for the troops, a human touch, and a psychological connection between leaders and led, then the way to accomplish this is for a significant personal commitment to the study of military art and science. 
29
The mission statement of SAMS is to "educate officers at the graduate level in military art and science in order to produce leaders with the flexibility to solve complex problems in peace, conflict, and war." 
30
There must be a great destruction, both in the physical and in the intellectual world, of old buildings and old boundaries and old monuments and, furthermore, of customs and ideas, systems of thoughts and methods of education. 
31
32
33
35
In the military, segments of the services often work at cross-purposes. There is no common cultural perspective across the services. 
36
37
38
Leading up to the war, the French army trained, organized and equipped essentially for another World War I. This was derived from their past experiences with emphasis on the destructiveness of firepower, the strength of the defense, the ascendancy of the methodical battle, and the unifying power of the commander. 
39
40
41
Anti-intellectualism in the American military and the belief that the only effective school of war is the battlefield itself is a negative influence on Army culture. 
43
There are no short-term solutions to problems in military culture. 
45
51
52
53
54
55
57
58
60
61
62
63
A unique trait of the German Army was its systematic efforts to make first-rate soldiers as well as independent-minded scholars out of any man who gave evidence that he could combine these characteristics. The officers of the German General Staff were the elite of the Army, carefully selected through a process far more rigorous and deliberate than any other army. The German General Staff operated with focus on the following tenets: 64 The Kriegsakademie and the General Staff became the world's model for advanced military learning and staff organization. For military and social reasons, armed forces such as France, Britain, Russia, and even the United States were never as single-minded in adopting the German system and consequently never replicated the high standards and results. 
66
68
As the SAMS program nears its twentieth year of existence, there are several new conditions that its graduates will encounter. The first condition is the rapidly changing operational environment. The second condition involves the military service's attempts to transform to adapt to the new realities of the evolving operational environment. The third condition relates to the foreseeable future when the force will demand staff officers who are increasingly well versed in Joint operations, because operational maneuver is a joint activity and the current PME structure is not meeting the needs of the force. The American military today faces challenges certainly more complex, if in some respects less daunting, than those of the Cold War. To understand the politics of obscure corners of the world, to integrate new technologies, and to create new systems of organization and discipline, the military will require the first-rate thinkers developed in the seminar rooms of SAMS. programs are being reviewed and changed quickly to become relevant. The Panel found significant evidence that current programs and resourcing are not working. 
74
75
-Become aware of the need for new competencies in rapidly changing environments.
-Know how to develop those new competencies.
-Transfer that learning and associated competencies to other leaders and units.
-Institutionalize learning in the Army's culture and systems to increase self-awareness and adaptability. The Panel concluded that given the ambiguous nature of the Objective asymmetric threats. 
78
79
80
Current and foreseeable conditions demand joint staff officers who are more knowledgeable and innovative, and more joint force commanders who are better prepared for their expanding duties and responsibilities. 
82
If ever again we should be involved in war, we will fight it in all elements, with all services, as one single concentrated effort." 
83
84
85
Although Army officers graduating from JPME II and serving in joint billets agree the education assisted in preparing them for joint and multinational assignments, the throughput at the Armed Forces Staff College limits the numbers that can attend. Officers who had to wait one or more years, or who did not attend JPME II while assigned in a joint billet felt strongly that JPME II would have significantly improved their initial performance. JCS J7 Military Education Division indicates there is a JPME II training backlog of 2,500 officers for 9,066 joint positions because the Armed Forces Staff College only conducts three courses per year with 300 students each session. 
86
87
88
90
The other formative period is associated with the officer's selection for promotion to major, when educational institutions prepare them for field-grade responsibilities. The Army is currently adapting OES structure, focus and curricula to prepare for a new operating environment characterized by regional threats, full spectrum operations, and Information Age technology. The Army also recognized that the curricula for lieutenants', captains' and majors' professional military education had to be rejuvenated to reflect how adults learn in today's environment and Perhaps the Army's reassessment of its educational institutions signals an opportunity for SAMS to do the same. The changing character of war requires institutions to adapt. Over time, education is the means of making adaptation. Future applicants to SAMS will arrive with a different knowledge base than current students as a result of OES transformation. The relationship of SAMS to OES is mutual and therefore should be examined.
This monograph has examined history to determine the root causes for the formation of SAMS, its role in shaping the culture of the officer corps, and possible indicators for changes to improve the school in reflecting the needs of the force in the current operational environment.
There are two possible courses of action concerning review and potential reform of SAMS: maintain the status quo by investing in existing systems, models and procedures, or establish new systems, models, and procedures from the best of existing programs to develop who the school describes as the Army's change agents. The latter course of action is the better way, but it will take leader resolve, focus, and resources to implement. The history of military innovation and effectiveness in the last century suggests a correlation between battlefield performance and how seriously military institutions regarded officer education. 
92
The criteria used to assess the SAMS program and its undertaking to develop agents of change are as follows:
(1) Is the institution subject to mechanisms to assist in identifying the need for and implementation of change in curriculum, faculty, or educational technology to support the director's vision? (3) Does the level of commitment to joint professional military education in the SAMS curriculum reflect the guidance articulated in the Skelton Report? (4) Does SAMS adhere to standards of rigor similar to that of the successful German model in the selection and evaluation of students?
(5) Are formal forums for collaboration between SAMS graduates and students established to facilitate learning and mentoring? (6) Are students educated about the process of change and its effect on military culture?
Based upon my analysis utilizing these evaluation criteria, the following recommendations are offered as potential areas for further examination and improvement of the program:
The first priority is an external review of the SAMS program. A review panel should be constructed as a mechanism to identify the need for change, consisting of a mix of Active Duty and retired Army officers, as well as adult educators who possess an understanding of the history, spirit and intent of the program. A successful historical model for this panel could be the Haines Board, named for its president, Lieutenant General Ralph E. Haines, Jr.. Following Vietnam, Haines advocated revision of CGSC's mission and curriculum so that graduates would be conversant with staff procedures and operational concepts far beyond brigade and corps levels.
Accordingly, college authorities initiated a professional electives program that consisted of courses designed to broaden the officers' understanding of defense policies, domestic politics, and international affairs.
Panel members should be considered for selection based upon their operational and educational experience. Fundamental to maintaining objectivity of the review is the lack of vested interest from the panel members in the outcome of the observations. A chairperson with the credibility of experience and professional reputation would serve as the spokesman for change, building consensus for new ideas and articulating the need to the senior leadership of the Army to adopt them. The current curriculum should be examined closely to ascertain its effectiveness in developing competent planners as well as self-aware and adaptive leaders.
Curriculum review facilitates adherence to the vision of the Director of SAMS, demonstrates commitment to continuous improvement, and displays willingness to challenge past practice.
Feedback from Division and Corps Commanders on the observed performance and quality of SAMS graduates in the field should be considered. Graduates of SAMS who can measure the worth of the education as it relates to their personal experiences in the current operational environment can be queried for feedback as well. Input to the review panel from the student body about the curriculum and learning environment could also be considered. Students generally understand what their strengths and weaknesses are at this point in their education and have strong opinions about how well they feel the school is meeting their needs.
Academic standards of rigor may be the most important issue in maintaining the overall quality of the program. Many nations failed to replicate the excellence of the Kriegsakadamie as a result of the lack of attentiveness to firm academic standards and nebulous student selection criteria. A review committee should re-examine the standards of rigor as it relates to selection and evaluation of students, and the curriculum required to challenge critical thinkers. The legacy of the extremely demanding German entrance examinations continues today at the German Staff Colleges where attendance hinges on their results. One might not want to be as selective as the inter-war Germans were in determining who attends SAMS, but despite the calls for larger classes of graduates, SAMS could resist that effort and maintain a selection rate and class size that in effect, creates a strong distinction amongst the officers on active duty. The course has been expanding over time from 52 students in academic year 1988-1989 to 79 in AY 2002-2003.   Educating a smaller percentage of the officer corps would allow more attention to individual students, improve faculty quality, and raise educational standards. Although the German Army maintains a general staff system, the U.S. Army can still reap the benefits of a well-educated elite operating within our current command and staff constructs.
SAMS should seriously address joint education. As operational maneuver remains a joint activity, the depth and breadth of the joint instruction received in SAMS should be reviewed to support the needs of future operational planners. The school experience should be broadened far beyond the attendance of officers from the other services. Standards in joint education as outlined by the Skelton panel should be analyzed to determine if the school is achieving the standards set forth. An initiative to form a joint school similar in character and structure to SAMS should be considered. Despite the significant improvements that have already been made, steps can be taken to improve the quality of JPME. The J7, Joint Staff is currently contemplating such a school, which may be designated as the Joint Advanced Warfare School (JAWS) 
93
Through early support of this initiative, the Army could have significant developmental input into the design of the course. Most especially, faculty and students in the school could develop special expertise in the theory and practice of joint operations, and students could be prepared and slated for positions as war planners in joint commands. The establishment of JAWS would provide the joint community greater expertise than the services in the theory and practice of joint operations. Volunteer graduates of SAMS could compete for selection based on merit for an even more rigorous follow-on course of study at JAWS. Those who attend, graduate from, or teach at JAWS would develop joint warfighting skills to their highest levels and could become the premier war planners in joint commands. 93 Robert A. Doughty, "Reforming Joint Doctrine," Parameters, vol. 22, no. 3 (autumn  1992): 45.
Efforts to facilitate collaboration and cross talk between SAMS students and graduates in the field should be implemented as a powerful learning tool. Options may be as simple as the establishment of formal SAMS web-based bulletin boards or message forums to showcase experiences in solving complex, real-world problems. Such an effort at inclusion would engender an awareness and feeling of connection among SAMS students and graduates, foster close interaction and teamwork, and create a climate of respect among these officers. Collaboration opportunities set the conditions for mentoring. Personal mentorship between students and experienced graduates and military planners is essential in filling information gaps, and mentorship provides another avenue to help motivate, educate and guide quality people to higher levels of performance and responsibility. Mentoring may be the critical missing element in helping compress a student's learning curve. With so much to know and so little time to apply to in-depth study, mentoring may be the most effective way to ensure professional development.
The mentor can help students sort through information to identify the things that are really important. One of the most beneficial effects of mentoring is that it is self-perpetuating.
The quality of the SAMS civilian, adjunct, and military faculty has been heralded for years, beginning with public acknowledgements by military leaders following successes in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. This quality and professionalism can and should be bolstered. The quality of any academic faculty determines the overall quality of the institution it serves. All too often, the Army OES has been limited by the failure of the personnel system to resource its academic institutions with the best and the brightest instructors. This is an intolerable condition that does not bode well for any military that takes professional military education seriously. The services were provided substantial authority by the Skelton Committee to hire the most outstanding civilian academics available in the areas of strategy, strategic history, national defense economics, war studies, and national security studies. SAMS should be resourced to attract such talent, even if it involves the establishment of visiting professorships. This would ensure the continuous flow of new ideas into and out of the school. If SAMS is to retain its reputation for excellence in the future, it must engender faculty stability without stagnation. A mixed tenure long-term and short-term faculty would be the best approach to keep the institution fresh. This faculty mix would facilitate continuity while simultaneously leveraging the new perspectives, experiences, and instructional techniques of new staff members.
There is a role for technology in the schoolhouse. Modeling change is an essential element of the change process. Available off-the-shelf technology can help in modeling change while improving the learning experience of the SAMS student. Students should be issued personal data assistants or personal laptop computers with advanced software to improve productivity and facilitate simulations. This would also provide tangible evidence that SAMS graduates as agents of change, are forward thinking about technology and are not lagging behind society in its everyday use. There are cautions about technology, however. Although recent educational trends reflect heavy emphasis on distance and computer-centric learning, the business of soldiering will always be about people, requiring a SAMS experience heavy on personal interface with peers as a critical element for studying military art and science.
The Army's Officer Personnel Management System (OPMS) has changed substantially since the inception of SAMS. A thorough analysis on its effects on SAMS and the school's ability to attract a field of high-quality candidates is integral in perpetuating excellence. After five years of implementing the OPMS XXI study, the Army has transitioned to OPMS III, the third generation of the officer personnel management system. 
94
If an effect of OPMS III is to dissuade potential candidates from attendance because of officer personnel management realities and negative effects on career timelines, then the school will never attract officers with the highest aptitudes and talents. It should not be a career risk for an officer to attend an institution like SAMS. If the Army is truly a learning organization committed to a long-term development of its officer corps, it will find a way to make allowances for students to attend SAMS without being subject to penalty by centralized promotion or selection boards because of a lack of compliance with the conveyor-belt-like nature of present career timelines. directed learning occurs when the learner chooses to assume the primary responsibility for planning, carrying out, and evaluating the learning experience. 
96
As Dr. Schneider, Professor of Theory at SAMS has articulated, "Today and in the future leadership will depend on its educational and intellectual foundation more than ever before." 
97
On the eve of its twentieth anniversary, SAMS should also conduct a review of its systems and practices to ensure the year of expanded study remains well suited to the demands of the Army, the joint environment, and the students who graduate to positions of significant influence and responsibility. Graduates must be competent in planning and conducting joint and combined operations, bonded to the improvement of the Armed Forces. They must be cohesive as agents of change, be self-aware and adaptive, and remain committed to lifelong learning. A 96 Sharan B. Merriam and Rosemary Caffarella, Learning in Adulthood: A Comprehensive Guide, 2d ed. (California: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1999): 288-307. review of SAMS can ensure the maintenance of the highest standards and the programs adherence to the spirit and mission for which it was created.
Has SAMS achieved the purpose of establishing a common cultural bias within the United States officer corps that allows the ability to adapt rapidly to our increasingly complex world? The measure of effectiveness is difficult to quantify. It took the Prussians about sixty years to realize the full fruit of reform of its advanced educational institution and the implementation of the General Staff system. American military success on the battlefield, which in part can be attributed to the contributions of SAMS graduates, began in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm and continues to this day. Graduates have infused the services with the same type of intellectual capital and professional commitment that the German General Staff accomplished in their army. There is little doubt that with the compression of time due to technological developments, military forces without a strong organization and a cadre of competent problem-solvers will fall victim to opponents who can adapt quickly and dominate their decision cycle. SAMS produces officers who can facilitate this adaptation and shape the culture of the military to achieve such effects. The regenerative nature of the program produces cascading effects that will inculcate the culture and perpetuate institutionalized excellence for years to come. However, the product of SAMS will only be as good as it has been educated and resourced. The prestige of any institution attracts quality. It is incumbent on the Army to ensure that the program which produces its organizational change agents look inward to continually reassess its status to seek renewal while deterring obsolescence.
Ibid.
James J. Schneider, Ph.D., "What if we Fight Tonight? Advanced Military Education for the XXIst Century," Army Magazine (November 1996): 10.
Ibid.
United States Army, Field Manual 101-5-1, Operational Terms and Graphics, 1-55.
United States Army, The Army Training and Leader Development Panel Officer Study Report to the Army, Fort Leavenworth, KS (May 2001): OS-7.
General Donn A. Starry, "To Change an Army,"Military Review (March 1983): 7-28.
Murray, "Does Military Culture Matter?" Orbis (winter 1999): 134.
United States Army, The Army Training and Leader Development Panel Officer Study Report to the Army, (Fort Leavenworth, KS: 2001): OS-8.
Murray, "Does Military Culture Matter?" Orbis (Winter 1999): 144-145.
Eliot A.Cohen and John Gooch, Military Misfortunes:  The Anatomy of Failure in War (New York: The Free Press, 1990):1-23.
Robert Allan Doughty, The Seeds of Disaster (Connecticut: The Shoe String Press, 1985): 186.
Murray, "Does Military Culture Matter?" Orbis (winter 1999): 135.
collection of information is estibated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burder to Department
The U.S. Army lacked that great strength of the German system-the intellectual prowess and staff brilliance of its general staff officer corps. U.S. Army officers lacked the cultural commonality that was brought to bear through the process of the German General Staff system, and that was the most effective catalyst in making it possible for them to change quickly--even under the pressures of wartime. 
48
49
50
SAMS must continually emphasize the graduate's role and responsibility as change agents for the Army and its culture. The network of SAMS graduates form an institutionalized framework which must continually assess and examine the need for changes in doctrine, training, leader development, organization, materiel, and soldier support (DTLOMS). Through course electives such as Leading Change or through a guest lecture program, substantive opportunities for students should be available to interface with subject matter experts, military or non-military that have experience in successfully effecting positive cultural change within complex organizations. The heart of a learning organization is the willingness to allow its people to suspend and question the assumptions within which they operate, then create and examine new ways of solving organizational problems and means of operating. Exposure to the fresh ideas and unique experiences of guest speakers can greatly enhance the learning experience and produce mental models to approach change. Faculty must assist in influencing student perceptions and attitudes of becoming co-creators of the military culture, rather than only being shaped by it. This is a key component in the cognitive development of the learner.
The student body should be exposed to supplemental learning opportunities outside the seminar room. Currently, students are afforded the chance to serve on support taskings that may range from a Battle Command Training Program (BCTP) Warfighter exercise to an operational contingency planning trip. These experiences provide valuable insights about their future role as planners. A weeklong Civil War Staff ride to Vicksburg, Mississippi has also been a longtime staple of the curriculum. In addition to these occasions, travel opportunities involving selfdirected learning would also be useful to enrich the entire educational experience of SAMS. Self-