# ID: 467cac072a1845f1b03d190d64739848
# Title: Breaking the Bathsheba Syndrome: Building a Performance Evaluation System that Promotes Mission Command
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The United States Army War College educates and develops leaders for service at the strategic level while advancing knowledge in the global application of Landpower.
The purpose of the United States Army War College is to produce graduates who are skilled critical thinkers and complex problem solvers. Concurrently, it is our duty to the U.S. Army to also act as a "think factory" for commanders and civilian leaders at the strategic level worldwide and routinely engage in discourse and debate concerning the role of ground forces in achieving national security objectives.
The Strategic Studies Institute publishes national security and strategic research and analysis to influence policy debate and bridge the gap between military and academia.
The Center for Strategic Leadership and Development contributes to the education of world class senior leaders, develops expert knowledge, and provides solutions to strategic Army issues affecting the national security community.
The Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute provides subject matter expertise, technical review, and writing expertise to agencies that develop stability operations concepts and doctrines.
The Senior Leader Development and Resiliency program supports the United States Army War College's lines of effort to educate strategic leaders and provide well-being education and support by developing self-awareness through leader feedback and leader resiliency.
The School of Strategic Landpower develops strategic leaders by providing a strong foundation of wisdom grounded in mastery of the profession of arms, and by serving as a crucible for educating future leaders in the analysis, evaluation, and refinement of professional expertise in war, strategy, operations, national security, resource management, and responsible command.
The U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center acquires, conserves, and exhibits historical materials for use to support the U.S. Army, educate an international audience, and honor Soldiers-past and present. 
The Strategic Studies Institute (SSI) is part of the U.S. Army War College and is the strategic-level study agent for issues related to national security and military strategy with emphasis on geostrategic analysis.
The mission of SSI is to use independent analysis to conduct strategic studies that develop policy recommendations on:
• Strategy, planning, and policy for joint and combined employment of military forces;
• Regional strategic appraisals;
• The nature of land warfare;
• Matters affecting the Army's future;
• The concepts, philosophy, and theory of strategy; and,
• Other issues of importance to the leadership of the Army.
Studies produced by civilian and military analysts concern topics having strategic implications for the Army, the Department of Defense, and the larger national security community.
In addition to its studies, SSI publishes special reports on topics of special or immediate interest. These include edited proceedings of conferences and topically oriented roundtables, expanded trip reports, and quick-reaction responses to senior Army leaders.
The Strategic Studies Institute and U.S. Army War College Press publishes a monthly email newsletter to update the national security community on the research of our analysts, recent and forthcoming publications, and upcoming conferences sponsored by the Institute. Each newsletter also provides a strategic commentary by one of our research analysts. If you are interested in receiving this newsletter, please subscribe on the SSI website at www.StrategicStudiesInstitute.army.mil/newsletter. ISBN 1-58487-708-1   vii FOREWORD Survey after survey across the U.S. Army continue to reveal broad concern about the Army's top-down performance evaluation system. Many claim that it drives behavior in organizations that not only inhibits the exercise of mission command, but also rewards image management over organizational leadership.
Colonel Curtis Taylor takes a hard look at this system, its benefits and its cultural incentives. More importantly, he asks if the current system promotes or impedes the exercise of mission command. After examining the history of the Army's performance evaluation system and alternative models outside the military, Colonel Taylor concludes that a more holistic system that combines top-down evaluations, peer and subordinate evaluation, and objective testing might be a better approach.
The Strategic Studies Institute offers this monograph to enable its readers to assess whether the recommended system may balance incentives more carefully, ensuring that the very best organizational leaders are easier to identify, assign, and promote. 
In 2014, the National Defense Authorization Act directed the Department of Defense to reconsider the way the Army evaluates and selects leaders. This call for reform came after repeated surveys from the Center for Army Leadership suggested widespread dissatisfaction with the current approach. The U.S. Army today is seeking to inculcate a philosophy of mission command across the force based on a culture of mutual trust, clear intent, and decentralized initiative. It is, therefore, reasonable to ask if our current performance evaluation system contributes or detracts from such a culture.
This monograph seeks to answer this question by considering the essential leader attributes required for the exercise of mission command and then considering practical methods for evaluating this behavior. It then reviews the history of the existing Army performance evaluation system and analyzes how well this system conforms to the attributes of mission command. Finally, it examines other methods of performance evaluation outside of the Army to determine if those methods could provide a better model. This examination included a variety of best practice models in private business and the public sector and identified alternative approaches to performance evaluation. Three alternative models were chosen for scrutiny because they demonstrated an ability to specifically identify and select for the leader attributes essential to mission command.
The monograph concludes that the U.S. Army's current officer evaluation system is ill-suited to evaluate mission command attributes. The author's findings suggest that our current system is not wrong, but rather is incomplete. The research suggests that a combination of top-down evaluations, peer and subordinate reviews, and objective testing of critical skills might equip U.S. Army boards to identify better the best practitioners of the mission command philosophy. Two specific proposals are suggested for further research in the appendix. The first proposes to conduct background investigations for command select positions modelled after the single scope background investigation security clearance interviews. The second proposes the creation of assessment centers within the U.S. Army to evaluate potential to perform in future assignments.
xii
[The] greatest challenge facing your Army and my main worry [is]: How can the Army break up the institutional concrete, its bureaucratic rigidity in its assignments and promotion processes, in order to retain, challenge, and inspire its best, brightest, and most battle-tested young officers to lead the service in the future?
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, February 2011, Address to U.S. Military Academy Cadets A recent series of press reports describing senior officer misconduct have tarnished the image of the Army profession in the eyes of the American public. These incidents caused Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel to speculate in a press conference on February 5, 2014, that the military may suffer from systemic problems in the way it selects and promotes leaders. 
1
2
3
Because of the Budget Control Act of 2011, the Army faces a 20 percent reduction in forces over the next 5 years. 
4
The Army currently evaluates leadership potential primarily through an annual Officer Efficiency Report (OER) prepared by the officer's immediate supervisor and a senior officer. The OER has evolved over time, and the 10th version is slated to go into effect this year. 
5
Re-evaluating the Army's approach to performance evaluation requires an understanding of the leader attributes and behaviors that the Army seeks within its future force. In June 2013, the Chief of Staff of the Army directed that the philosophy of mission command would serve as the cornerstone of the Army leader development strategy. Mission command has been used as a formal military concept at least since the Prussian Army reforms in the early-19th century following the Napoleonic wars. The Prussians used the term Auftragstaktik, literally "mission tactics," to define a philosophy of command that emphasized intent-based orders and subordinate officer initiative. 
6
7
Answering this research question required six steps. First, it was necessary to understand the essential leader attributes and behaviors necessary for the exercise of mission command. These attributes were well-documented in relevant Army doctrinal publications. It was also useful to consider the history of the mission command concept itself and how this concept influenced the evolution of performance evaluation in the military profession. Second, having established the types of leader behavior most valuable to the exercise of mission command, it became necessary to consider methods for evaluating this behavior. Doing so requires a review of the research in the field of talent management to identify appropriate evaluation methods. These two steps established the outline of a performance evaluation system optimized to measure mission command attributes.
The third step required a review of the history and design of the existing Army performance evaluation system. Understanding how the existing system evolved into its present form clarified the leader attributes it was originally intended to assess. In the fourth step, it was necessary to evaluate how well the existing system conformed to the attributes established earlier. This required a review of the extensive research done by the Army into the effectiveness of its existing performance evaluation model. A careful examination of the existing structure of this system and its cultural effects revealed that the current system, as it stands, detracts from the exercise of mission command.
Fifth, having established that the existing system failed to assess critical elements of mission command, it was necessary to investigate other methods of performance evaluation outside of the Army to determine if those methods could provide a better model. The research examined a variety of best practice models in private business and the public sector and identified alternative approaches to performance evaluation. Three alternative models were chosen for scrutiny because they demonstrated an ability specifically to identify and select for the leader attributes essential to mission command. These leader behaviors were poorly evaluated under the Army's existing single-source performance appraisal system. A cursory examination of alternate approaches did not conclusively prove that the Army would benefit by adopting any particular model. It did suggest, however, that other models or a combination of models might improve the Army's proficiency in assessing the attributes it believes are most important.
Finally, any change to the performance evaluation system in a large government bureaucracy like the military will face both legal and cultural obstacles. It was necessary to evaluate these obstacles and consider the potential pitfalls associated with reforming the existing system. Judging the feasibility of such reform required a review of the statutory framework under which the Army promotes its officers. In addition, it was useful to consider the lessons learned from other organizations that have attempted similar reforms to assess if any of those lessons are appropriate to the Army.
The research ultimately showed that the current evaluation system, centered on the OER, cannot fully assess the fitness of officers for mission command. Furthermore, the alternative models examined in this research provide insight into methods already prevalent in the civilian world that may improve the Army's ability to assess mission command oriented leadership. Talent management models that combine the top-down, senior leader evaluation with subordinate evaluations and objective testing appear to provide a more holistic view of performance and potential. A broader approach to performance evalua-tion eliminates blind spots inherent in a single-source evaluation system and can assess a leader's impact on internal organizational climate better than the current system. This evidence suggests that the Army must carefully investigate alternative evaluation processes if it is to consciously identify and select officers that meet the requirements of mission command. Finally, as an appendix to this monograph, two specific proposals are offered for further research that seek to operationalize this broader approach in a coherent and prudent manner.
Mission command is defined as the "the exercise of authority and direction by the commander using mission orders to enable disciplined initiative within the commander's intent to empower agile and adaptive leaders." 
8
Army doctrine identifies the first principle of mission command as "the building of cohesive teams through mutual trust." 
9
Likewise, organizations with low-trust cultures pay a "trust tax" that drains profits through costly regulation and high personnel turnover rates. 
10
11
12
The research by Mayer and others goes on to identify three factors most important in influencing the perceived trustworthiness of a potential trustee. These factors are ability, benevolence, and integrity. 
13
14
Simply being trustworthy, however, is not sufficient. An effective practitioner of mission command must likewise possess the capacity to trust others. Colonel Tom Guthrie, when Director of the Center for Army Leadership, pointed out the all-too-common phenomenon of leaders demanding trust from their superiors and then denying it to their subordinates. "If leaders only want mission command to exist above their level, then we will be limiting its intended and desired effect." 
15
Before turning to the literature on performance evaluation methods and practices, it is useful first to look closer at the historical antecedent for the modern concept of mission command. This review is helpful because it shows how previous attempts to inculcate mission command into organizational culture demanded both increased professionalism and a broader approach to performance appraisal.
The modern concept of mission command first emerged in Prussia following the Prussian Army's rapid defeats at the battles of Jena and Auerstadt in 1806. Prussian leaders recognized that the only plausible response to Napoleon's genius was to develop a warfighting organization that could out-think and out-maneuver its opponent by radically decentralizing battlefield decisionmaking. As the Prussian leadership sought to formalize this new decentralized approach, its detractors gave it the pejorative moniker "Auftragstaktik" to distinguish it from traditional methods of command known as "Normaltaktik." 
16
18
The shift from rote execution of orders to a culture of subordinate initiative led to changes in the way the Prussian War College known as the Kriegsacademie trained and prepared its officers. The Kriegsacademie, established in 1810, the Prussian Army's nadir, had emerged by 1860 to become the premier military educational institution in Europe if not the world. 
19
As Prussian and subsequent German military traditions were subsumed by Nazi ideology in the 1930s, the role of Auftragstaktik in German doctrine and praxis waned. 
21
22
23
24
Research in the field of talent management has shown that an effective performance evaluation system must provide both the means and the metrics to measure the attributes deemed most valuable to the organization. This process is described in the literature as the alignment of business strategy to talent management strategy. 
25
Research by Gregory Kesler, among others, has examined the relationships between appraisal systems and organizational culture and concluded that top-down, single-source evaluation methods tend to promote a results-oriented culture in which output is valued over process. 
26
In my former company, we paid lip service to decentralized, rapid decision-making but never rewarded the people who did it best. Top-down evaluations simply aren't perceptive. The 360 degree system highlights the truly independent thinkers, and we're a better company because we identify and reward them. 
27
28
29
30
Recent scholarship on single-source performance evaluation systems, such as the infamous "rank and yank" system promoted by General Electric under Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Jack Welch has sug-gested that forced distribution based solely on leader impressions promotes dysfunctional behavior in an organization. Most significantly, it encourages a culture in which mid-level leaders seek foremost to cultivate the loyalty of their superiors, often to the detriment of loyalty among their subordinates and within creative teams. 
31
32
33
34
Another undesirable artifact of a single-source evaluation system is its tendency to promote functional anonymity in organizations. In 1993, Clinton Longenecker and Dean Ludwig published a study in the Journal of Business Ethics on prominent leadership failures. 
35
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
This brief survey of the research in performance evaluation has shown that top-down, single-source evaluation methods have a distinct disadvantage in measuring the internal dynamics of an organization. In situations where internal climate and culture are a critical component of organizational success, the literature suggests that a more holistic and resource intensive approach is necessary. With this in mind, it is useful to consider the history of the Army's performance evaluation system. This investigation will reveal what the existing system was originally designed to assess as it first evolved in the interwar period.
The Army leadership development model in use today emerged from the late-19th century Army reforms and proposals made by Major General Emory Upton. In the 1870s, he conducted an exhaustive survey of military organization and doctrine in the armies of France, Germany, England, Persia, China, and India. Upton identified the primary challenge facing the U.S. Army as the need to create and foster a profession of arms in a society that had long valued the citizen soldier as the centerpiece of its national security. Borrowing heavily from the models he found in Prussia, Upton proposed the creation of a standing general staff, a formal process for officer examination and promotion, and the creation of a number of professional schools to teach military science. One of the most important reforms that Upton proposed was the concept of lineal promotion. 
45
46
47
48
Unfortunately, Major General Upton underestimated the power of the military bureaus. The bureaus had held, for almost a century, near exclusive control over the promotion and selection of officers within their respective areas of specialty. Many of his other reforms eventually were adopted by Secretary of War Elihu Root, following the Army's disappointing performance in the Spanish-American War. However, his recommendations regarding a rigorous promotion board based on both leader and peer evaluation and formal examination were largely ignored. 
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
The centralized promotion board process that emerged from the Defense Act of 1920 was designed primarily to examine officer records to identify any disqualifying trait rather than identify the very best qualified officer. Those early boards generally consisted of three officers chosen from different bureaus, along with two medical officers. While the bureau officers did apply some judgment to the review process, their primary purpose on the board was to represent the parochial interests of their bureau. 
57
Herein lies the crux of so much frustration among junior officers today. The Army has sought to incorporate some element of Auftragstaktik into its warfighting doctrine at least since the publication of Field Manual (FM) 100-5 in 1941. 
58
The evidence of our discussion thus far has established three compelling conclusions: First, a philosophy of mission command demands an increased emphasis on a unique set of organizational dynamics centered on the concept of mutual trust. Second, research across the field of performance management has shown that single-source evaluation methods are poorly suited to assess a leader's ability to create the unique environment necessary for mission command. Third, the Army performance evaluation system, along with its personnel system, emerged as derivatives of a corporate management philosophy that sought to maximize efficiency by regarding small unit leaders as interchangeable parts of the military machine. These three conclusions strongly suggest that the Army performance evaluation system will struggle to assess leaders on their exercise of mission command. The next step, then, is to evaluate the Army's own recent research into the effectiveness of its performance evaluation to look for symptoms of the difficulties predicted by these conclusions.
In June 2013, the Army Leader Development Task Force published its most exhaustive study yet of leadership attitudes across the Army. The study based its findings on detailed interviews with over 550 officers ranking from lieutenant to colonel and over 12,000 responses to an Army-wide survey. One of the study's most surprising findings was that only about half of Army leaders believe personnel evaluations and promotion decisions are accurate. 
59
60
61
The net effect has been to discourage talented officers from pursuing truly broadening assignments in the joint community or unique staff positions where the population of peer Army officers is necessarily limited. For example, the most common broadening assignment for infantry battalion command selectees in 2012 was the position of aide-de-camp to a General officer. 
62
Empirical evidence also suggests that the writing skill of the rater on an OER often carries nearly equal weight to the merit of the officer being rated. A 2013 study of over 4,000 Army officers revealed a surprising correlation between rater and rated officer promotion rates. The study showed that company commanders stood a 29 percent greater likelihood of promotion below the zone to major if they served under a battalion commander who was likewise promoted below the zone to major. 
63
In addition, surveys within and outside the Army repeatedly have suggested that the single-source approach to performance evaluation is a leading cause for talented junior officers to depart the military. 
64
65
66
In 2010, the Navy conducted an exhaustive investigation into all 80 incidents in which a field grade level commander was relieved for cause in the preceding 5-year period. Only 11 of these incidents were attributed directly to a toxic or dysfunctional command climate in the organization. In all but one of these cases, however, the relief came because of pressure from an external agent such as the Navy Inspector General or Congress. The commander's direct supervisor identified and took action in only a single incident. The study concluded that in 10 of 11 cases, the toxic behaviors that led to the relief were invisible to the superior officer charged with evaluating the leader. 
68
69
70
Fredendall. History provides a powerful example of the limited ability of any leader to accurately assess the internal dynamics of subordinate formations. In 1943, Major General Lloyd Fredendall, then Commander of U.S. II Corps, was assigned to lead his Corps into the Army's first major battle in the European theater. In an Army so focused on leader development and so full of promising officers at the time, Fredendall proved a curious choice to lead such an important command. Kicked out of West Point twice for poor grades and possessing very limited World War I combat experience, Fredendall had a terrible reputation as a harsh disciplinarian, a detached leader, and an uncooperative partner. General George Marshall, however, was impressed by Fredendall when Fredendall was an instructor at the Infantry School at Ft. Benning, GA. As a result, Marshall encouraged General Dwight Eisenhower to place him in command. 
71
72
In 1943 the U.S. Army was brimming with talented leaders. Both George Patton and Omar Bradley waited patiently in Casablanca for their shot at command. The Operations Field Manual 100-5 published 2 years earlier borrowed heavily from the Prussian Auftragstaktik concept and emphasized decentralized mission type orders based on trust between commanders. 
75
Fredendall's unfortunate story suggests that even the very best senior leaders struggle to gain an accurate assessment of their subordinates as leaders. It also suggests that a leader, widely regarded as incompetent by those in his organization, is still able to stage-manage his interactions with senior leaders in such a way as to create and maintain an illusion of competence. While history largely has forgotten Fredendall, his tragic story provides a powerful lesson for a military that must continue to prepare for the unexpected and identify talented leaders to command our formations under conditions of incredible stress and uncertainty. Unfortunately, this Fredendall syndrome continues to plague the Army today because we have not adequately addressed its root cause. Specifically, the Army has failed to provide a systematic means for a senior leader to augment his own subjective judgment about his subordinates with a more objective evaluation of their individual abilities. Army leaders are asked to make tremendously important leadership selection decisions based on very limited subjective information gathered from infrequent interactions with subordinates. Not only does this fact lead to suboptimal leader selection decisions, but also more importantly fosters an environment where external measures of performance outweigh effective organizational leadership. This environment directly threatens the creation of a culture of mission command across the force.
Having examined the shortcomings in the Army's approach, it is useful now to consider alternatives from the business community and the public sector that may better serve the goal of identifying and selecting mission command behaviors. In 1990, Lex Wexner was one of the most successful business leaders in America. As the founder of the retail chain The Limited, he had witnessed his business grow from nothing in 1963 to over 3,800 stores and $5 billion in sales. In the early-1990s, The Limited's stock price plummeted. Puzzled by this sudden turn of events, Wexner sought the advice of some of the brightest CEOs in business, specifically Steven Spielberg and Jack Welch. What he observed in both of these leaders was a detachment from the day-to-day dramas of the business cycle and an obsession with the identification, selection, and development of the best and brightest leaders in their organization. Both leaders had multiple overlapping systems for assessing and evaluating their best talent and invested a large percentage of their personal and organizational capital into their hiring and promotion processes. Wexner returned to his company and immediately set out transforming his talent management system. He hired outside consultants to evaluate his leaders and instituted a process requiring each division to track its top 50 employees. Wexner began chairing his own talent review process. Over time, his stock slide arrested, and then rebounded. Wexner observed, "I used to pick sweaters; now I pick people." 
76
In 2011, Fortune magazine conducted a detailed review of 470 global companies to determine which ones best recruited, developed, and retained talent. Fortune ranked International Business Machines (IBM) as the top corporation out of all 470 in this list. 
77
78
79
We couldn't get good business results without good leadership. We employ a heavily data-driven talent review process using a leadership talent database that has dozens of metrics on leaders. We use it heavily all year long to access detailed facts on people, experiences, potential, development scores, assessment center, performance, etc. We look at empirically based business results and review feedback on leadership approaches and facts about their leadership approaches (e.g., number of mentees, talent they've exported, talent audits, and climate). 
80
A much smaller corporation, CEMEX UK, is notable in the field of performance evaluation for being one of the early adopters of formalized 360-degree performance evaluations for use in succession management decisions. CEMEX UK is the British subsidiary of a large building materials company headquartered in Mexico City, Mexico. With just over 4,000 employees CEMEX UK is 1 1/100th the size of IBM. Each year, every staff member is required to select up to six persons to complete their evaluations. At a minimum, this must include one peer, one internal supplier, and one external supplier. The rated individual's supervisor must approve the pool prior to the start of the assessment. What is notable in this method is the design of the assessment tool. The peer and customer evaluations are narrowly focused on those behaviors and dynamics assumed to be invisible to the supervisor, such as group dynamics and customer relations. 
81
Like most large corporations, salary at CEMEX UK is based largely on organizational output while the results of the 360-degree reviews serve primarily to inform succession management decisions. 82 This is a second important insight. Focusing the 360-degree reviews on succession management decisions rather than salary minimizes the temptation by peers to overinflate reports but ensures that senior manage-ment has a three dimensional view of those leaders that have otherwise shown a potential for greater responsibility in the company. The CEMEX UK experience offers two insights that should inform the search for alternate models in the Army. The first is that peer and subordinate feedback should remain focused on behaviors considered invisible to the primary evaluator. The second insight is that 360-degree assessments appear more useful for informing succession management decisions than those related to promotion or retention. The CEMEX UK model demonstrates that top-down performance reviews and peer evaluations can work together if they are carefully designed to serve complementary rather than redundant roles.
The two examples thus far have examined alternative ways to assess organizational dynamics through broader inputs. In contrast, the final example illustrates a second important component of mission command defined earlier. A culture of trust can best exist in an environment where technical competence is assured through a rigorous certification process. Trusting untrained amateurs to execute complex tasks is a formula for disaster rather than excellence. Most professions have, therefore, sought to protect their autonomy by imposing rigorous certification standards for each successive level of the profession. These standards serve as gate keepers to prevent amateur practitioners from undermining public or organizational trust in the certified members of the profession.
Assessment centers serve the same certification role by providing an objective outsider an opportunity to thoroughly validate a candidate's potential to demon-strate the skills and abilities needed at the next level of the profession. The concept of the modern assessment center emerged in the 1950s with the AT&T Management Study. The AT&T study assessed the ability of 137 college graduate applicants to Bell subsidiaries to perform a series of oral, written and situational exercises. The study then used applicant performance to predict the likelihood they would achieve different levels of leadership within the company's seventiered hierarchy. Without revealing any information to the applicants or management, the research team then followed these employees for the next 20 years as they progressed through the company. The results of the assessment proved surprisingly accurate with a moderate correlation (p= 0.37) between predicted and observed results. 
83
Because of their need for sound decisionmaking in complex and ambiguous situations, many fire departments across the country increasingly have relied on the assessment center as a form of performance evaluation both for initial entry candidates and for positions up to and including senior management. Since assessment centers are designed to measure future potential more than current competence, they are most often used at career inflection points. For example, a senior firefighter seeking the position of station fire chief must undergo testing at an assessment center. The testing includes a number of tests such as an "in-box" exercise where candidates must rapidly prioritize a number of simultaneous tasks. Other testing includes mock tactical scenarios and written tests on legal procedures. Two independent evaluators score each exam. Results are normalized and then forwarded to the fire chief selection board. 
84
85
86
It is interesting to note that a large cottage industry has developed around helping firemen to prepare for and to pass these challenging exercises. Numerous businesses offer study guides and practical exercises to help candidates prepare. Thus, the effect of the move toward assessment centers in the fire prevention industry is the gradual professionalization of the field.
The examination of the three civilian personnel evaluation practices here indicate that alternate performance evaluation systems may be better suited to evaluating leadership in a mission command environ-ment than the system currently in place in the Army. The examples also suggest that the Army's search for an alternative performance evaluation system should begin by considering a mix of these practices. These may include 360-degree evaluations from peers and subordinates, objective testing at career inflection points, and a broader database on individual performance metrics beyond the OER.
An Army Times article published in October 2013 suggested that, while the Army might want to adopt a 360-degree performance appraisal system, current legal roadblocks rule this out. 
87
88
Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 1320.14 is the regulatory guideline that governs the conduct of centralized Army promotion boards and summarizes the statutory parameters established by DOPMA and other sources. The instructions exhort board members to ensure the sanctity of the process by considering "all eligible officers without prejudice or partiality." 
89
90
Allan Mohrman, Susan Resnick-West, and Edward Lawler conducted a detailed review of legal considerations in the civilian world for the implementation of 360-degree performance evaluation tools. As a result of their research, they developed four guidelines to help companies avoid legal challenges to this method of evaluation: First, companies should carefully define the behaviors that the tool is intended to measure and then ensure that the tool's design strictly follows that intent. Second, the evaluation process should remain confined to those behaviors that the rater population is qualified to evaluate. For example, it would be inappropriate for entry-level employees to evaluate a manager on business strategy if they have no formal training in this area. On the contrary, the tool should evaluate the leader on those behaviors that the rater can directly observe and reasonably judge. Third, to eliminate discrimination, the process should include an objective audit by an outside party to ensure that evaluations remain oriented specifically on work related behaviors. Finally, the data should be open to the rated employee and provide a mechanism for appeal. 
91
The examination of both DoD policy and relevant experience above indicates that the legal challenges to implementing a multisource assessment tool are not insurmountable. Instead, current policy allows for centralized promotion boards to consider substantiated performance data from sources other than supervisors so long as similar data is available on all candidates. The challenge, then, is designing a methodology that provides the candidate officer free access to the data but preserves the anonymity of the source in order to prevent both retribution and inflation.
In addition to legal obstacles, research on multisource assessment methods provides many cautions on the often unanticipated cultural hazards of using an assessment tool designed for employee self-development for evaluation. 
92
In 1998, research by Clive Fletcher of the Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths College, University of London, UK, noted a growing trend in the 1990s among organizations to graft 360-degree development programs onto their existing performance evaluation systems in order to combat perceived bias in top-down appraisal systems. He also noted that, while these programs often were effective in providing access to subordinate behaviors that were otherwise invisible to senior management, there were risks. Most notably, he observed that the candor of 360-degreeevaluations was often diminished as existing developmental tools were adapted for appraisal purposes. Specifically, his research indicated that 35 percent of respondents would change their assessment of a peer if they believed the information would be used for evaluation rather than self-development. 
93
94
Tracey Mallett has demonstrated that the overwhelming weight of scholarship on the subject suggests that the mixing of multi-source tools for development and performance evaluation can lead to difficulty in practical implementation. 
95
96
Both the U.S. Congress and the Secretary of Defense are seeking a change to the way the Army selects leaders. Exhaustive survey data from the force suggests that such a change is long overdue. The research here demonstrates that the Army performance evaluation system, as it is currently designed, is ill-suited to evaluate and select leaders best adapted to mission command. This does not mean that leaders selected under the current system are incapable of effective mission command. It merely implies that the system is not optimized to find those leaders who execute the style of command most prized by the Army.
Because mission command requires a culture of trust, effective practitioners must possess the competence to deliver what is expected of them and the moral capacity to be both worthy of trust and willing to trust in others. Evaluating a leader's ability to trust his subordinates requires more than just an OER. Many other researchers have come to this same conclusion. For example, Colonel Tim Reese observed in a paper in 2002 that "the OER simply does not provide the Army an evaluation of an officer's ability to lead a unit or organization in a way that fosters cohesion, teamwork and long-term health of the unit." 
97
The review of the history of the centralized promotion system showed how Upton's early attempts to bring Auftragstaktik into the U.S. military were sidetracked by a corporate managerial philosophy that optimized efficiency above all. This philosophy saw leaders as interchangeable cogs producing measurable outputs rather than the architects of a subjective unit climate conducive to bold initiative. While Auftragstaktik has slowly entered Army doctrine, the vestiges of Taylorism remain in the personnel and promotion system. This system evaluates officer potential based on an extremely narrow slice of overall performance in an effort to mass-produce promotion decisions across a large formation with minimal investment.
The example of Fredendall and the more recent data presented earlier cautions that the current system of top-down evaluation does not detect and, therefore, cannot screen for toxicity within subordinate organizations. This evidence suggests that, absent a fundamental change to the way officers are evaluated and selected, toxic leaders will continue to make their way into positions of tremendous influence where they will do great harm to the soldiers they lead. A true commitment to the mission command philosophy requires more than just a change in doctrine. Colonel Tom Guthrie posed this challenge in an article in Army Magazine:
If we intend to truly embrace mission command, then we should do it to the fullest, and that will require commitment to changing a culture from one of control and process to one of decentralization and trust. We cannot afford to preach one thing and do another. 
98
Furthermore, research has demonstrated that performance evaluation systems have a profound effect on organizational culture. To move from a results oriented culture to a process oriented one requires a change to the way the Army evaluates its leaders. Augmenting the supervisor-centric evaluation process with input from peers and subordinates may help to eliminate the functional anonymity that has allowed a few leaders to develop destructive Bathsheba Syndrome behaviors that have so damaged the Army's prestige. It will also promote greater trust in the system by providing another venue for professional accountability.
Professional athletes, real estate agents, doctors, and lawyers all must undergo a rigorous and objective assessment of their abilities in order to enter and then continue in their careers. This accreditation process is foundational to the very idea of professionalism as the life-long pursuit and exercise of a body of expert knowledge. 
99
The research presented in this monograph has shown that the current Army top-down performance evaluation system lacks the capacity to evaluate effectively the practice of mission command embodied in Army doctrine. Research across the field of performance assessment has shown that multisource ratings remain the most effective means for providing a nuanced three-dimensional view of the performance necessary for effective succession management decisions. 100 This is supported by the examination of best practices in the field of talent management. The research indicates that expanding the Army perfor-mance evaluation system to include alternate perspectives of leader performance may improve internal organization dynamics. The data also suggests that a multisource approach will specifically target two contemporary problems facing the Army: First is the growing lack of faith in the fairness of the performance evaluation process. Second is the functional anonymity of small unit leaders that has been shown to contribute to the "Bathsheba Syndrome" effects described earlier. This evidence provides a compelling argument for a significant change in the way the Army evaluates the performance of its leaders.
When future historians study the Army of the early-21st century, they will no doubt take considerable interest in the way the Army transformed itself in the post-war period following the conclusion of wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Parallels will abound between this period and a similar one a century earlier when the Army withdrew from its expeditionary stance and downsized in the face of extreme financial austerity. How the Army manages this transition will have a decisive impact on the future conflicts of the 21st century that are sure to come. While the outline of those conflicts is difficult to discern, we do know that war in the information age demands a highly skilled and professional force officered by a very talented cadre of agile and adaptive leaders. These leaders must be able to exercise initiative based on a culture of trust that runs up and down the chain of command. The challenge is not predicting the exact shape of future conflicts but ensuring that we have the right talent on board and ready to adapt when that shape emerges. Retaining and promoting the very best demands that the Army abandon the industrial age procedures of performance appraisal and embrace a new level of organizational investment in its people. If people are the centerpiece of the Army, then the Army must study them in great detail. Promoting a culture of mission command demands that the Army as an institution focus its energies on the exhaustive study of the quality and character of its men and women, not merely on the outputs of their labor.
The research has established that the Army model of performance evaluation was not designed to assess a leader's mission command attributes and cannot easily be adapted to make that assessment. It has also established that alternative models in use in the civilian world hold the potential to address this shortcoming but only if they are carefully implemented. Dramatic change to the performance evaluation system in an organization can often do more harm than good. While any change to the promotion and selection board process should involve careful evaluation and pilot testing, the research suggests that two specific proposals may hold promise as a basis for a future study.
The uneven performance of peer reviews warns the Army to move cautiously if it seeks to include 360-degree subjective reviews in Army selection board files. The evidence shown earlier has established that effective 360-degree appraisal should adhere to four guidelines: First, it should be separate and distinct from any developmental tools such as the Multi-Source Assessment and Feedback (MSAF). Second, it should be focused narrowly on the behaviors that subordinates are qualified to assess. Third, it should protect the privacy of the evaluator while respecting the rights of the evaluated officer. Fourth, an effective 360-degree performance appraisal is best used as a tool for succession management rather than routine promotion.
An implementation strategy that respects these guidelines and yet provides an effective tool for selection boards will not be easy or inexpensive to design.
In 2013, the Chief of Staff's Leader Development Task Force recommended examining 360-degree feedback already compiled in the existing MSAF database for use in the selection of Brigade Commanders. 
1
Any attempt to open that database to wider scrutiny, no matter how carefully done, has the potential to appear as a breach of trust.
The Center for Army Leadership is currently exploring a program called "Commander 360" that will require subordinates to appraise battalion and brigade commanders during their first and last six months of command. 
2
3
4
While Commander 360 will remain wholly separate from the MSAF program, the experience of the Navy provides cautionary insight. The Commander 360 concept runs the risk of confusing assessment and development as the Navy did in their SMARTS360 program. 
5
A better way is possible. The Department of Defense already has in place a large peer evaluation system that may serve as a useful model for a truly effective performance evaluation tool. The Single Scope Background Investigation program investigates over 90,000 servicemen and women each year to determine if they qualify for access to information classified Top-Secret. 
6
A peer and subordinate investigation might follow a similar approach. Under this concept an investigator, potentially a retired military officer, would select a handful of officer and noncommissioned officer efficiency reports (OERs and NCOERs) written by the officer in question. These reports could be chosen to reflect a balance of above average (ACOM) and aver-age reports (COM). The investigator would then contact the recipient of each report and arrange an interview. After signing a strict confidentiality agreement, the interviewee would be asked to comment on the investigated officer's leadership style and impact on the organization during the rated period. Since subordinates are not qualified to assess all aspects of their leader's performance, the questioning would focus narrowly on the climate created by their leadership and their effect on organizational dynamics. While ethical issues would certainly be appropriate to discuss in this forum, any specific accusation of misconduct should be directed to the appropriate Inspector General for investigation.
After concluding the interviews and reviewing the quality of some number of OERs and NCOERs written by the candidate, the interviewer would then draft an investigation summary. This summary would omit any specific information attributable to the interviewees but would provide a broad assessment. This assessment would address the officer's professional reputation as determined from the interviews and his stewardship of the profession as shown by the quality of his written reports. For example, a pattern of reports from the officer that were consistently over-inflated would not reflect effective stewardship. The summary would then be filed in the officer's restricted Office of Military Personnel File for consideration by the appropriate command selection board. Since the written report reflects only the interviewer's impressions and not the assessments of individual subordinates, the anonymity of those subordinates is protected. As an additional protection, candidate officers could be given the right to view the investigation summary and request a re-investigation if they could demonstrate bias in the report.
The legal challenges to using peer feedback for evaluation purposes have centered on concerns about the proper balance between rater anonymity and the right of the rated officer to see his own report. Replacing the online written survey commonly used in the civilian world with a face-to-face interview by an experienced leader changes this dynamic considerably. Interviewers would be free to ask follow-up questions as required or to disregard unfounded or baseless allegations.
Wide-spread use of interviews for every promotion board is both cost prohibitive and unnecessary. Instead, officers choosing to compete for centrally selected command billets at the lieutenant colonel and colonel level could deliberately opt-in for this level of scrutiny. If this population set was still too large, the Human Resources Command could consider a nomination process of highly competitive files that would then undergo the full investigation. To comply with the legal constraints identified earlier, this nomination board would require the regulatory authority to serve as an independent selection board itself since it would serve the function of reducing the number of officers eligible for consideration.
In addition to improving the accuracy of command selection decisions, a second important effect of this process would be the impact it might have on organizational politics within units. Since leaders cannot predict who among their rated population will be selected for the investigation at some point in the future, it eliminates the functional anonymity that so often leads to Bathsheba Syndrome behaviors. Additionally, it provides a tangible incentive to encourage leaders to invest in the development of their rated subordinates. Consider the impact on counseling programs Army-wide, if it were widely known that the first question of the subordinate interview was, "Were you effectively counseled by this officer?" This question, combined with an in-depth review of efficiency reports written by the candidate would provide the interviewer with a perspective on the candidate's stewardship of the Army profession.
Asking those officers who wish to compete for command to submit to additional scrutiny follows a long established tradition of investigating candidates for major offices throughout the Federal government. Such a process has three clear effects: It reduces the chances of bad leader decisions and the resultant cost to the institution and its soldiers. It promotes the credibility of those who ultimately are selected. Finally, it encourages and incentivizes ambitious officers to create the organizational climate that the Army is looking for within their formations.
Proposal #2: Including Objective Performance Data in Academic Efficiency Reports.
The 2013 Army Leader Development Task Force study recommended adopting assessment center practices in the Army. 
7
8
The Officer Education System (OES) was designed originally to develop leaders at these same inflection points. For this reason, it provides the ideal periods in an officer's career to perform assessments. Under the current OES, officers leave their field assignments four times in their career to receive training to prepare them for leadership at the next level. If the Army were to apply the civilian world's practices, then the Army would inject rigorous and detailed assessment activities into the culminating exercises of these four training periods. Officers preparing to graduate from the Basic course, Captain's course, Staff College, or War College would undergo a comprehensive evaluation, using a number of the techniques described earlier. These might include tactical scenarios or in-box exercises presented before a panel, and oral and written exams. These assessment exercises would employ the best practices of the field but would be uniquely tailored to the skill sets required in likely assignments following graduation. The officer's Academic Efficiency Report (AER) would reflect their performance in the comprehensive exam, along with their relative class rank. This AER would then accompany the officer to his next duty station where his new commander would use it to inform assignment decisions in the organization. This would allow commanders to identify those officers who are prepared to immediately take on tough assignments and those who require more development.
petitive set of exercises and exams that tested an officer's tactical skills, intuition, and judgment. General George Marshall and other senior officers considered class rank and performance at CGSC to be a critical determinant of command potential. 
11
Both of the proposals listed here will require further research to validate rigorously their feasibility. However, the research has shown that aligning Army performance evaluation and the Army's mission command philosophy will require an approach to talent management that falls along these lines. Implementing a rigorous and objective certification program modeled after an assessment center will create the presumption of professional competence necessary to build organizational trust. Likewise, a process of peer evaluations that makes leaders directly accountable for the climate they create in their organization will enable future boards to select those officers best suited to the exercise of mission command.
ix
ix
The views expressed in this report are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of the Army
Department of Defense
U.S. Government. Authors of Strategic Studies Institute (SSI)
U.S. Army War College (USAWC
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
on two isolated hilltops near a potential axis of enemy advance.
The night before the German attack, Eisenhower toured the front lines with the 1st Armored Division commander, Major General Orlando Ward. Ward was deeply concerned with the defensive dispositions directed by Fredendall but declined to express his reservations directly to Eisenhower. Eisenhower left believing all was well. That evening, only hours before the disastrous battle, Eisenhower sent a note to Marshall that he was impressed with Fredendall's "thorough knowledge of his battlefront," adding that, "he seems keen and fit and I am placing a lot of confidence in him." 
73
74
To maintain consistent standards across the force, the Training and Doctrine Command could then maintain an accreditation board to assist the various branch schools in the development of their comprehensive assessment process. Full implementation across all the schools in the OES program may take many years given cost constraints. However, a pilot program at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth using the assessment center already standing up there would provide a feasible first step. Additionally, adopting the Leader Development Task Force recommendation to administer the Graduate Record Exam at the Captain's Career Course is another low-cost, first step in this direction. 
9
10
When Major Dwight Eisenhower graduated first in his class from the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College (CGSC) in Ft. Leavenworth, KS, in 1926, one of the most important pieces of information in an officer's personnel file was his Staff College class rank. This rank was based on a rigorous and highly com-• • .. -.
9 781584 877080
This Publication SSI Website USAWC Website