# ID: 473a234d93d0455f8945e7b0e239dca9
# Title: Technology and the Nature of War: Four Vignettes
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
Technology and the Nature of War: Four Vignettes Military forces throughout history have pursued and embraced new technology for the combat edge it seems to portend. Superior surveillance platforms, weapons systems, communications equipment, and transportation methods can be decisive "combat multipliers." The hope and promise that high technology will offer asymmetrical advantages is what imbues it with allure and appeal. It also helps explain why technology is heralded as a sterling example of American ingenuity, scientific research, and engineering prowess harnessed to serve national defense.
To claim that America's affinity for military technology is baked into its DNA is no exaggeration. As Thomas Mahnken noted, "Reliance on advanced technology has been a central pillar of the American Way of War, at least since WWII. No nation in recent history has placed greater emphasis upon the role of technology in planning and waging war than the United States." 
1
2
The novelty of a technology has never ensured success in its own right-it is the integration of innovation into effective methods and means that gives a strategic or tactical edge." 
3
4
1
Vignette 1: WWII Wonder Weapons and Technological Determinism By 1943, the tide had turned against Adolf Hitler's Nazi Germany after earlier military successes. The advantages that Germany had enjoyed in marrying new military capabilities with innovative employment methods-such as blitzkrieg combined arms warfare in 1939-and superior maneuver and battlefield initiative had been steadily nullified and reversed. This reversal was due partially to the Allied powers superior materiel and manpower resources, but also to Germany's loss of its first-mover advantage with regard to adopting military technology. Moreover, Allied adaptation after their early defeats made them more proficient in combined arms tactics and operational art. 
11
12
The historical literature offers multiple reasons for the Wunderwaffen failure to manifest the potential that Hitler and his regime had envisioned: political and military interference in force development matters, industrial shortcomings, and effective Allied bombing raids on Germany's infrastructure, among others. However, Todd Schollars argues that the primary reason for the failures was Germany's lack of strategic vision-a failure not unique to Wunderwaffen programs but endemic throughout Nazi leadership and planning. This was nowhere more manifest than with in Herman Goering's short-sighted leadership of the Luftwaffe-especially as the war worsened for Germany and the search for miracle weapons intensified-Goering forsook pre-war, long-term plans for training, staffing, and industrial and technological development, in order to focus more on quick, short-term strategic goals. 
13
14
Jones characterizes the Nazi approach as "a special, superficial kind of technological determinism, a confidence in the power of technology to prevail over the country's strategic, operational, and doctrinal shortcomings." 
15
16
Vignette 2: The 1950s, the Pentomic Division, and Misjudging Future War After World War II, the United States Army embarked on its own ill-fated attempt to harness burgeoning technology in the 1950s with the design of the Pentomic Division. Born out of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's "New Look" defense policy that embraced the concept of Massive Retaliation-whereby the United States would respond to any attack on its interests 13 Todd J. Schollars, "German Wonder Weapons: Degraded Production and Effectiveness," Air Force Journal of Logistics 34, 3/4 (2010): 30. 14 Schollars, "German Wonder Weapons:…," 30. 
15
16
with nuclear weapons-the Pentomic Division was an attempt to figure out how to most effectively design and organize U.S. ground forces to fight in a nuclear conflict.
The Pentomic Division's primary operational goals were to be more survivable on the nuclear battlefield and to be able to effectively employ its own organic tactical nuclear weapons by focusing on dispersion, mobility, and flexibility. Units would disperse both laterally and in depth to avoid massing and presenting the enemy with lucrative targets. Mobility-by way of mechanization-would ensure that the division could disperse and re-mass quickly, even across an extended battlefield. Finally, a flexible command structure would ensure that even if the division's leadership were destroyed, sub-units could continue fighting effectively. 
17
18
19
20
21
23
24
25
24
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
During the Vietnam War, numerous other emerging technologies were employed across a diverse spectrum: night vision devices, ground sensors, early generation unmanned aerial vehicles, laser-guided munitions, airborne gunships, air-to-air missiles, jamming pods, and radar homing and warning equipment that alerted pilots when enemy surface-to-air missiles were launched. Collectively, the list of technological innovations was impressive.
One of the sad ironies of the war occurred during the 1968 Tet Offensive when U.S. and South Vietnamese forces tactically defeated the enemy. Both NVA forces and VC guerillas suffered 
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
Emerging at the dawn of the new millennium, FCS was the Army's primary modernization program going into the 21 st century. Described as "the Army's most ambitious and far-reaching modernization since World War II," FCS aimed to replace much of the Army's Cold War-era arsenal of ground platforms to fundamentally change the way that it fought. 
43
44
45
First, FCS was envisioned to be a "system of systems": lightweight and linked into an extensive sensor network for greater situational awareness and fire support. The main goals for this system of systems were to enable the Army of the future to deploy more quickly and then to rapidly locate, outmaneuver, and destroy the enemy. 
46
47
Intelligence Fusion model-seen as key to its ability to find and destroy the enemy first, thus compensating for FCS vehicles' lack of armor. This requirement to gain decision advantage over the enemy depended on the automated fusion of intelligence directly from FCS' vast network of sensors. However, such automation required aggregation, deconfliction, and other data management tasks that were technically infeasible above an elementary level. This setback meant that FCS could not reach the level of situational awareness for its units upon which the entire concept depended for success. 
48
Today's war in Ukraine is a sober reminder that while technology and the correlation of opposing forces may be important, the better-trained army endowed with the more effective logistics pipeline typically has the advantage. Yet, all of these attributes are secondary to the intangible and unquantifiable human factors-fear, self-sacrifice, courage-that influence soldierly performance on the battlefield. As historian John Keegan has observed, human factors are the ultimate arbiters in war: "What battles have in common is human: the behaviour of men struggling to reconcile their instinct for self-preservation, their sense of honour and the achievement of some aim over which other men are ready to kill them…above all, it is always a study of solidarity and usually also of disintegration-for it is towards the disintegration of human groups that battle is directed." 
54
In his military analysis of the 2020 Second Nagorno-Karabakh War between Armenia and Azerbaijan, historian John Antal noted that while "drones set the conditions for Azerbaijan's success, it took well-trained and aggressive ground forces to seize decisive terrain and secure 
52
2 Colin S. Gray, Weapons Don't Make War: Policy, Strategy and Military Technology, (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1993), 176. 3 Robert A. Johnson, "Predicting Future War," Parameters 44, 1 (Spring 2014): 69. 4 Ivo H. Daalder and Michael E. O'Hanlon, Winning Ugly: NATO's War to Save Kosovo, (Washington: Brookings University Press, 2000), 117, 209. destroy Today's geostrategic challenge of trying to deter both China and Russia-nuclear armed states threatening U.S. global supremacy-coupled with the advent of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) and emerging technologies, has accelerated America's quest to regain and maintain its previous high-tech military dominance. The growing confluence of a diverse array of technologies is unprecedented both in their scope and potential impact on society. 7 Yet the synergy that may result from connecting so many technologies is likely to be more important than any one capability. 8 This could significantly transform the character of war (i.e., the ways and means armies use to fight), but not the nature of war as Carl von Clausewitz defined years ago as the realm of uncertainty, chance, suffering, confusion, exhaustion, and fear-all factors that create friction. 9 Echoing Clausewitz more recently, historian Margaret MacMillan contends that war will remain a violent, bloody, and destructive affair organized by humans who are fueled by "greed, fear and ideology." 10 New weapons and equipment require new tactical approaches, doctrinal changes, and most importantly, coherent overarching strategies before armies can reap their benefits. The 4IR is unlikely to alter this truism or necessarily make the world a more peaceful place. The diffusion of technology continues to erode the nation-state's long-held monopoly over violence and enables hyper-empowered global citizens to expediently leverage commercially available technologies toward destructive ends. Thus, as technology marches inexorably forward, military 7 Peter Layton, "Prototype Warfare, Innovation and the Fourth Industrial Age," (Canberra, Australia: Air Power Development Center, 2018), 1-10. 8 David Barno and Nora Bensahel, "War in the Fourth Industrial Revolution," War on the Rocks, 19 June 2018. 9 Michael Howard, Clausewitz, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), 25. 10 Margaret MacMillan, War: How Conflict Shaped Us, (New York: Random House, 2020), 267.
33  
33  
51
50
tion).
49
tion).
Pernin et al., Lessons from the Army's Future Combat Systems Program, 92, 104-05. 53 Feikert, The Army's Future Combat System (FCS):…, 10 54 John Keegan, The Face of Battle, (New York: Vintage Books, 1977), 297-98. the Tom Greenwood, U.S. Marine Corps (Ret.), is a research staff member in the Joint Advanced Warfighting Division at the Institute for Defense Analyses in Alexandria, VA. He was an infantryman with subsequent assignments in the Pentagon and the National Security Council staff. 55 John Antal, Seven Seconds to Die: A Military Analysis of the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War and the Future of Warfighting, (Philadelphia, PA: Casemate, 2022), 143.
Williamson Murray and Allan R. Millett, A War to Be Won, (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2001), 298-303, 388-92.
Marcus O. Jones, "Innovation for Its Own Sake: The Type XXI U-boat," Naval War College Review 67, 2 (2014): 117. T.D. Dungan, V-2: A Combat History of the First Ballistic Missile, (Yardley, PA: Westholme Publishing, 2005), 6-8.
This work was conducted by the 
Institute for Defense Analyses
C8307
Technology
Nature of War
Department of Defense