# ID: 473a234d93d0455f8945e7b0e239dca9
# Title: Technology and the Nature of War: Four Vignettes
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
2 Colin S. Gray, Weapons Don't Make War: Policy, Strategy and Military Technology, (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1993), 176.
3 Robert A. Johnson, "Predicting Future War," Parameters 44, 1 (Spring 2014): 69.
4 Ivo H. Daalder and Michael E. O'Hanlon, Winning Ugly: NATO's War to Save Kosovo, (Washington: Brookings University Press, 2000), 117, 209.
destroy Today's geostrategic challenge of trying to deter both China and Russia-nuclear armed states threatening U.S. global supremacy-coupled with the advent of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) and emerging technologies, has accelerated America's quest to regain and maintain its previous high-tech military dominance.
The growing confluence of a diverse array of technologies is unprecedented both in their scope and potential impact on society.
7 Yet the synergy that may result from connecting so many technologies is likely to be more important than any one capability.
8 This could significantly transform the character of war (i.e., the ways and means armies use to fight), but not the nature of war as Carl von Clausewitz defined years ago as the realm of uncertainty, chance, suffering, confusion, exhaustion, and fear-all factors that create friction.
9 Echoing Clausewitz more recently, historian Margaret MacMillan contends that war will remain a violent, bloody, and destructive affair organized by humans who are fueled by "greed, fear and ideology."
10 New weapons and equipment require new tactical approaches, doctrinal changes, and most importantly, coherent overarching strategies before armies can reap their benefits.
The 4IR is unlikely to alter this truism or necessarily make the world a more peaceful place.
The diffusion of technology continues to erode the nation-state's long-held monopoly over violence and enables hyper-empowered global citizens to expediently leverage commercially available technologies toward destructive ends.
Thus, as technology marches inexorably forward, military 7 Peter Layton, "Prototype Warfare, Innovation and the Fourth Industrial Age," (Canberra, Australia: Air Power Development Center, 2018), 1-10.
8 David Barno and Nora Bensahel, "War in the Fourth Industrial Revolution," War on the Rocks, 19 June 2018.
9 Michael Howard, Clausewitz, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), 25.
10 Margaret MacMillan, War: How Conflict Shaped Us, (New York: Random House, 2020), 267.