# ID: 478af024cb93433197c2292cd2a114f7
# Title: Implications of the Absence of Field Press Censorship in Vietnam
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1984.0
# Fulltext:
PAM.MnM D.IS M, 8coverage, how the Battle of Tet was misreported in the press, and the role of the press in a free society. The conclusions reached is that censorship was ""
not imposed initially because it was not considered necessary and later " . because it was not considered politically feasible. The effect of the decisio was that the press misreported some aspects of the war, particularly during the later years. If the U.S. government is to fight a successful was in the future, it first needs popular support, then more control of the media than it had in Vietnam. Better accreditation of reporters and some form of press censorship are the keys to accurate reporting by the press on future U.S. military conflicts.
The US military activity in Vietnam ended a full decade ago but the controversy over how the war was reported in newspapers and on TV continues today. In November 1983 a former Assistant Defense Secretary for Public Affairs, Henry E. Catto, said a feeling remains deep in the psyche of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff that the press cost lives, reputations, and indeed victory by its access and reporting. 
1
Peter Braestrup, former Saigon bureau chief for the Washington Post and now editor of the Smithsonian Institute's Wilson Quarterly magazine, is also extremely critical of the performance of the press in Vietnam.
In a massive, six-year study of the way the Battle of Tet in 1968 was reported, he concludes, "Rarely has contemporary . . .journalism . veered so widely from reality." 
3
"They Ithe media] brought the issue of the war to the people . . . and forced the withdrawal of American power from Vietnam." 
5
8
The effect of the media on public opinion is significant, particularly during wartime. This will be especially true in the next war because the mini-camera and communications satellite enable the war correspondent to quickly report information from the battlefield.
For these reasons the US military must develop plans nov on how the next war will be reported. One of the tools available to control information from the battlefield is field press censorship. We need to know why this tool was ignored in Vietnam.
Understanding World War II reporting gives us something against which we can compare the performance of the press in Vietnam. In initially reviewing World War II war coverage one is struck by how much better relations between the military and the media were in World War II than in Vietnam. With few exceptions war correspondents in World War II accepted censorship as being in the national interest. One can argue they really had no choice--that without agreeing in writing in advance to submit all copy to military censors before dispatch, reporters were not accredited and without accreditation a correspondent could not see the war. But the fact remains World War 11 was a popular crusade with the American people and the vast majority of the US war correspondents. Also, considerable trust developed between senior commanders and members of the media during World War II as a result of censorship.
Drew Middleton, senior military analyst for the New York Times, believes censorship in World War II allowed reporters to be much better informed about the war than their counterparts were about the Vietnam conflict. 
9
Rationale for censorship in World War II was basic: the outcome of the war was a matter of vital concern to Americans and security of the armed forces would be weakened by the disclosure of information of assistance to the enemy. Byron Price, director of the US Office of Censorship during the war, said censorship was an instrument of war, that its only function was to contribute to success on the battlefield by denying [to the enemy] military secrets and other information that would provide aid and comfort. 
I0
If I were the enemy, would .
President Franklin D. Roosevelt, in announcing press censorship in December 1941, said:
All Americans abhor censorship, just as they abhor war. But the experience of this and of all other nations has demonstrated that some degree of censorship is essential in wartime, and we are at war.
It is necessary to the national security that military information which might be of aid to the enemy be scrupulously withheld at the source.
It is necessary that a watch be set upon our borders, so that no such information may reach the enemy, inadvertently or otherwise, through the medium of the mails, radio or cable transmission, or by other means.
It is necessary that prohibitions against the domestic publication of some types of information, contained in long existing statues, be rigidly enforced.
Finally the government has called upon a patriotic press and radio to abstain voluntarily from the dissemination or detailed information of certain kinds, such as the reports of the movement of vessels and troops. There were some complaints about how the program was administered.
The most common ones were favoritism shown some reporters, inconsistency, and unqualified censors. Correspondents also took exception when censors deleted such materiel as the "horrific" aspects of fighting, critical comments on weapons and equipment, and critical comments on US defeats which were usually minimized. Also, when allied forces began their push into France and Germany, censors found it hard to approve all information the same way at the same time. The reason was units were spread out and communications were difficult. Reporters also found  would have been hard on them. 
1 8
1 9
Only after the battle of Tet in 1968 did reporting become quite negative. Phillip Knightley emphasizes that early critics of the war did not criticize the intervention of Americans in Vietnam, only the effectiveness of the policy being pursued. He said, "What the correspondents questioned was . . . the tactics used to implement the policy." 
' 2 3
24
2 5
But the policy to gain understanding and support through the media proved to be self defeating. By making so much of the war so accessible, would have chosen the military dictatorship. At the very least, there would havfibeen a little more balance in their reporting.
Robert Elegant, another critic of US war reporting, treats US war correspondents even less kindly. He says the war was badly reported, with facts often misstated and emotions deliberately inflamed. In his opinion standards suffered because the majority of reporters wrote not to be objective but to win the acceptance of their superiors and peers.
He also felt strongly reporting was detached from political and military realities because most correspondents were isolated by ignorance of language and culture. "Few were given [or took] time to develop the intellectual instincts necessary to report the war in the round," he pointed out. It is clear that the attack forces-particularly the indigenous Vietcong, who did most of the fighting and dying--suffered a grievous military setback. Tens of thousands of the most dedicated and experienced fighters emerged from the jungles and forests of the countryside only to meet a deadly rain of fire and steel within the cities. The Vietcong lost the best of a generation of resistance fighters, and after Tet increasing numbers of North Vietnamese had to be sent south to fill the ranks. The war became increasingly a conventional battle and less an insurgency. Because the people of the cities did not rise up against the foreigners and puppets at Tet-indeed, they gave little support to the attack forces--the communist claim to a moral and political authority in South Vietnam suffered a serious blow.
Under the stress of the Tet offensive, the South Vietnamese government faltered but did not fold, and after the battle it became more of a working institution than it had ever been before. After Tet, the Saigon regime nearly doubled its military strength, from 670,000 men to roughly 1,100,000 men. This process of general mobilization, though supported by massive American economic and military aid, required more political will than the South Vietnamese had ever been able to muster before. 
2
The questions Braestrup pursued in this study were: What were the ascertainable facts available to the press? How were they reported and processed? How adequate was the media manned, structured, and oriented for surprise, complexity, and undramatic change?
Tet was an ideal media case study to analyze for three reasons:
One, the events were limited in time, havALng a clear beginning and end.
-.
Two, the events occurred in a clearly delimited area and were accessible * to reporters. Three, the events were highly significant, coming at a
.critical stage in the war and involving a US presidential election. 
3
Listed below is a summary of Braestrup's conclusions of the extent to which the media misreported the Battle of Tet: 3 2. That a "psychological defeat" had been dealt the South Vietnamese was widely reported after Tet began. Not an exact science by thosewho knew the people and their language, the conclusion by US newsmen whose knowledge of Vietnam was limited was even less credible.
After the initial attacks by the North Vietnamese and Vietcong,it was soon possible to interview US intelligence specialists and visit US and South Vietnamese units in the field to secure hard facts of enemy tactical performance, but few journalists took advantage of the oppor-* tunity.
Media coverage suggested all of Saigon and much of South Vietnam was permanently destroyed. In fact, severe destruction was relatively * limited.
The hardest hit areas of South Vietnam, mostly cities, were * described not in context but as a microcosm of the entire country. 8. Despite heavy losses and some mediocre generals, South Vietnam troops did not buckle. That was not apparent in the American news media.
The description of the effect of Tet on the US pacification program was extremely flawed because of "journalistic laziness." News reports wrote the programs off as a "shambles" with no part of South Vietnam under Saigon's "control." In fact Tet was not a "Red tide" but a series of marches bypassing most villages and district towns.
Westmoreland's request for 206,000 more soldiers--which appeared just before the New Hampshire presidential primary and was one of the most memorable stories of the war-was "seriously misleading" and never corrected. The strong implication was Westmoreland was in dire straights militarily when he was not. Also reporters knew but did not report the request had been urged by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff for manpower needs in Europe and Korea as well as Vietnam and that the troop request was largely seen as a dead issue by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the White House.
Why were Tet press reports so distorted in Braestruprs estimations?
He believes it was primarily because senior editors in New York and Washington, DC failed to insist on balanced reporting, professional discipline, imagination, and common sense. Senior editors allowed the lines between news feature stories and editorials to blur in Braestrup's opinion. He also says the difference between the "dramatic"
and "significant" should have received more emphasis, editors should have discouraged the instant analysis that occurred, reporters should have questioned participants better than they did, and less use of "themes" and "story lines" to simplify the events of Tet should have been made."
The latter is a journalism technique used extensively since the early 1960s to make events more intelligible to audiences. Lost in the process, however, are subtleties, inuendos, and events that don't fit the mold. Much of Tet not fitting preconceptions went unreported. 
3 6
When the trinity isn't formed and a clear political objective is not set, the strategy for the conflict is fundamentally flawed.
In Vietnam our national survival was obviously not at stake to the extent it was in World War II. Still, Summers argues we could have -"
fought a successful limited war in Vietnam if we had mobilized national will and better defined our political objective (not "nation building"
or "pacification" but something like "building a military barrier to North Vietnam expansion"). 4 0 We did neither. We didn't call up the reserves and Phil G. Goulding, former assistant secretary of defense for Ipublic affairs declares efforts to mobilize public opinion to support the war were sadly lacking. Says Goulding:
In my four year tour [July 1965 to January 19691 there was not once a significant organized effort by the executive branch of the federal government to put across its side of a major policy issue or a major controversy to the American people. Not once was there f public affairs program . . • worthy of the name.
The conclusion we can draw about the role of the media in Vietnam is that they performed poorly at times but they didn't cause the collapse of public support. The media admittedly plays a key role in generating public opinion but so do other agencies and institutions, not the least of which is the President. When the government makes no real effort to mobilize national will, it is hard to blame the media for "collapsing" it.
This does not mean that censorship could not have been imposed and been very effective in Vietnam under different circumstances. Nor does it mean the press is blameless in how it reported the war to the American people. It does mean, however, that many ambiguities, uncertainties, and confusion existed in Vietnam and poor press reporting was only one of the many factors affecting public opinion at that time.
As we develop press policies for future wars, we have to keep this perspective in mind.
No discussion of US war reporters would be complete without a look at the special role of the media in US society. The writers of the US constitution felt strongly a free press was the best safeguard against political tyranny. They wanted people to have a truthful, comprehensive, and intelligent account of the day's events. They wanted a public forum for the exchange of comment and criticism and also a means of projecting opinions and attitudes. They wanted a method for presenting  
4 3
In attempting to answer that question, one must note it isn't easy to report on big organizations. Daniel Cater, author of the Fourth-Branch of Government, writes on the difficulties of journalists covering government and big business:
The work habits of journalists are not so fixed as most, less adaptable to the time clock, more susceptible to peak and slack periods. The pay scale starts higher but advances more slowly than in comparable occupations. Those at the top--bureau chiefs, columnists, and certain well-known special correspondents--are paid very well, though not nearly so well as the elite in such roughly comparable activities as advertising and public relations. For the rank and file, the wage scale is by no means a major incentive. The reporter in Washington finds in journalism a career that becomes no less physically demanding and 4 4ittle more remunerative as he reaches middle age.
But Cater also points out reporters have an acute sense of involvement in the churning process that is government:
The reporter is the recorder of government but he is also the participant. He operates in a system in which power is divided. He as much as anyone, and more than a great many, helps to shape the course of government. He is the indispensable broker and middleman among the subgovernments of Washington.
He can choose from among the myriad events that seethe beneath the surface of government which to describe and which to ignore. He can illuminate policy and notably assist in giving it sharpness and clarity; just as easily, he can prematurely expose policy and, as with an undeveloped film, cause its destruction. At his worst, operating with arbitrary and faulty standards, he can be an agent of disorder and confusion. At his best, he can exert a creative influence on Washington politics. 
4 5
In fulfilling its responsibilities in US society, the press performs six generally acknowledged functions: 1. Serves the political system of providing information, discussion, and debate; 2. Enlightens the public so as to make it capable of self-government; 3. Safeguards the rights of the individual by serving as a watchdog against government; 4. Services the economic system, primarily by bringing together the buyers and sellers of goods and services through the medium of advertising; 5. Provides entertainment; and 6. Maintains its own financial self sufficiency so as to be free from the pressures of apecial interests. The media today is pervasive in the lives of Americans. Not only do we receive much of our news from the media but also much of our entertainment.
On a typical evening more than 100 million Americans watch TV between 8 and 9 p.m. High School graduates spend more time in front of the TV set than they do in school. The media is the chief source of many of our views of the world and also the fastest.
It is not only a watchdog on government and an interpreter of events but also an indirect provider of values. 
4 7
Those who aspire to public office must play the "nev politics" which is "media politics." With the advent of television, public opinion polling, and computers, the power and influence of reporters and analysts on elections has increased significantly.
Along with this new power and influence in the twentieth century has come the need for the media to be more responsible. This is an incredibly complex subject beyond the scope of our concern here. But the major criticisms of the press today are: 4 8 .
The press has wielded its enormous power for its own ends, propagating its own opinions, especially in matters of politics and economics, at the expense of opposing views. 9
2. The press has been subservient to big business and at times let advertisers control content and editorial policies.
-.
The press has resisted social change.
-4. The press has often paid more attention to the superficial and sensational than to the significant, and its entertainment often lacks substance.
The press has endangered public morals. I. .
The press is controlled by the "business class," which makes access to the industry difficult for the newcomer and endangers the free and open marketplace of ideas.
A number of solutions have been propagated to make the press more responsible. They include a stronger code of ethics, press councils, newspaper ombudsmen, declaratory judgements for liable, anti-trust legislation, limitations on the number of newspapers and radio/TV stations one individual or corporation can own, prohibitition on one individual .
or corporation owning both radio/TV stations and newspapers, and changing tax laws to provide incentive for estates not to sell to newspaper chains. 
4 9
Despite the clamor for the media to be more balanced and objective, the press remains critical today to the free exchange of ideas envisioned by the founding fathers. Were it not for the free marketplace of ideas, our constitutional form government would not operate.
William Howard Russell was not right when he said the first war correspondent was a "miserable parent of a luckless tribe." The war correspondent may periodically be criticized and controversial. He may be posted a long way from home on occasion (since the war in the Crimean in 1854 US war reporters have covered such conflicts as the US Civil War, France-Prussian War, Turkey's invasion of Bulgaria, Turko-Serbian War, Spanish-American War, Boxer Rebellion, Russo-Japanese War, Boer War, World War I, Russian Revolution, Japan's invasion of China, Italy's invasion of Abyssinia, Spanish Civil War, World War II, Korea, Algerian War, and Vietnam conflict). But the war correspondent remains essential to checking on government and determining which version of the facts reach the public. We may not always like him but a democracy cannot do without him either.
WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
What Should Be Reported From The Battlefield?
In And as technology produces small handheld TV cameras and communications satellites, finding an answer to the question takes on an added element of urgency.
Ben Wattenburg, syndicated columnist and coeditor of Public Opinion magazine, states democracies will be at a decided disadvantage on battlefields of the future if they allow TV cameras from their free press to film the "blood and guts" of war but the other side doesn't. along with the little girl running down the street in Vietnam? 
54
The hunger of TV editors for combat footage in Vietnam was intense and increased as the war progressed. "Before they were satisfied with a corpse," said Richard Lindley, a British television reporter. 55 "Then they had to have people dying in action." Michael Herr, a US reporter, described a truck carrying a dying South Vietnamese soldier that stopped near a group of correspondents:
The soldier, who was nineteen or twenty, had been shot in the chest. A television cameraman leaned over the Vietnamese and began filming. The other correspondents watched. He opened his eyes briefly a few times and looked back at us. The first time he tried to smile then it left him. I am sure he didn't even see us the last time he looked but we all knew what it was that he had seen just before that--a 16mm converted Auricon sound cam 5 a capturing his last moments of life on film.
Forty-eight hours later the scene was probably viewed in American living It is doubtful that live TV will be found soon on the battlefield.
John Martin, ABC news analyst, says few nations would want their people to see directly a battlefield defeat, horrible accident, or atrocity. 
5 9
[in Vietnam], on the other hand, made up for his lack of 'things' by expending men instead of machines, and he suffered enormous casualties. The Army saw this happen in Korea, and we should have made the realities of war obvious to the American people before they witnessed it on their television screens. The Army must make the price of involvement clear before we get involved, so that America can weigh the probable costs of involvement against the dangers of noninvoIement . for there are worse things than war."L It is interesting to contemplate the results of past wars if the % media had been present on the battlefields. In 1851 English author Sir Edward S. Creasy published his classic The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World. The criteria he used to select the battle in the book was not the number of combatants nor battle deaths but the outcome of the battle on the kind of world that period of history produced. 
6
6
Panel The panel made its intentions very clear at the beginning.
In a statement released at the end of the panel's public sessions, it said
The American people must be informed about US military operations and this information can best be provided through both the news media and the government. ... The US media should cover US military operations to the maximum degree possible consisteg with mission security and the safety of US forces. Hopefully, policies that will preclude Vietnam-type problems from occurring in the future will emerge from the Seidle commission report.
One of the ideas discussed during the panel's public hearings was the concept of selecting a pool of correspondents from those who wish to go on military operations. The pool members would then be required to share notes, observations, and photographs with those unable to go.
Veteran New York Times military correspondent Richare Halloran [not a Seidle commission panel member] says what is needed for future military operations are agreements beforehand between the department of defense and news organ izat ions. 6 5 These agreements would spell out fundamental rules for covering military operations, including those in which surprise is a factor. Halloran says news organizations would honor those agreements, pointing out they have done so for many years on such subjects as the annual release of federal budgets, speeches, congressional reports, and news briefings.
If such agreements between the military and the media become a reality, one of the big hurdles to restoring trust and confidence between soldiers and journalists would be cleared.
It would not be a return to World War II where all copy from the overseas theater was reviewed before dispatch. But it should enable correspondents to show they can be trusted--that not all journalists are driven by the number of newspapers they can sell. Soldiers in turn would be more willing to share insights with reporters about the military. The end result would be a better informed American citizen.
The media did not lose the war in Vietnam. A flawed national strategy that sent American soldiers to war without adequate public support did. Nonetheless, the performance of the press in Vietnam left much to be desired. In planning for media coverage of future wars, the military needs to heed the lessons of Vietnam. Should access to future battlefields be limited? We think so. Should some field press censorship be implemented? We think this should occur also. Hopefully, policies that come out of the Seidle commission report to the secretary of defense will incorporate these ideas.
The US military also needs to continue its efforts to understand and make use of the press in America. Soldiers need to recognize the media is a US institution that is not going to go away. Hopefully, forces at work within the communications industry will make the press more responsible in the future. The White House reporter for Nevseek magazine, Tom DeFrank, said at the Army War College in May 1984 he felt this would occur in the future. 
66
The Vietnam War left many members of the military with a deep resentment of the press. An Army War College instructor said after a three year assignment at the school that he was amazed at the depth of the feeling against the media by student officers. It will take time to heal the wounds. Part of that healing process rests with the media. It must listen to its critics, to include some of its own members. Part of that process also rests with the military. We need to set policies that will preclude press excesses that occurred in Vietnam from occurring on future battlefields. We also need to be willing to respond to legitimate inquiries from the media.
Despite the slow pace at which large institutions change, they do reform themselves. And there is evidence the media is willing to accept the realities of reporting on future battlefields. Said ABC news analyst Ted Koppell in October 1982:
As the King of Siam used to say when confronted by what passes for logic in the West. 'It is a puzzlement.' And it is likely to remain a puzzlement for as long as we try to reconcile the irreconcilable.
War, after all, represents the breakdown of reasonable and orderly behavior between nations It constitutes the attempt by one power to impose on another, by force, solutions which were not acceptable within a more civilized framework. It legitimizes massive destruction of property, widespread slaughter and maiming of humanity. To expect, within that context, that nations, even democracies, will long continue to permit the unrestrained practice of journalism is, I would submit, a form of self delusion.  What happened in Vietnam, uncensored and unrestrained reporting by the American press, was probably an aberration that will never happen again. That's not a wish, but it is a prediction.
The challenge for the US military is to remain optimistic. World
War II is behind us. Vietnam is behind us. Minicameras and communications satellites will be found on the battlefields of the future. We need to go forward, developing press policies in advance that will enable Americans to receive balanced, truthful accounts of how their soldiers are doing in battle. A blue ribbon government panel is attempting to take the first step of that process now. The effort must continue. The task of getting responsible reports from the war zone is not an easy one. But it's not an impossible one either. 
6 7
mance in another crisis appears likely. 3 7 14".-.,-.-.*.. . Harry Summers, author of On Strategy: The Vietnam War In Context, says the reason Americans find it hard to understand the defeat in Vietnam is because we have still not yet sorted out what war is all about. 3 8 In his view Americans continue to think of war as something conducted by the military rather than by the entire nation. Quoting Carl von Clausewitz, noted Prussian strategist, Summers states a nation has to involve the people, government, and military in a "trinity" and 39 .-.
. • • in World War I, fighting would have been called off sometime before the Battle of t Marne, and we would all now be speaking German.
.w .. -. . . . . . . .
o • • °-
~~~. . . . . . . . .o ,"-"-.' '
"
"-'" *-'" " " "" 4" ' " " " '"" *"
"
"' """." " ' " "" "'" ' "" " " " " " " ""*'' ""'"""-"'' " " 4 "" "
r n" "-,'.--7
"-.---$ , ---"-" -----. " . "