# ID: 480bc6fe655e4e68ac4c254531de21ef
# Title: Kaliningrad Trap: Reconciling Airpower Theory with Peer Competitors
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Can the United States employ traditional airpower methods against Russia to defend the Baltic region without Russia escalating the conflict up to and including nuclear retaliation?
In heralding a new era of great power competition, there is a great deal of enmity between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Russia.
Russia does not believe that NATO has a right to exist and therefore will not willingly limit its violence towards the alliance.
1 The 2017 U.S. National Security Strategy (NSS) confirms this belief by declaring Russia an existential threat to the United States.
It warns that "Russia aims to weaken U.S. influence in the world and divide us from our allies and partners" and that Russia views NATO, and European Union (EU), as "threats."
2 Russia's view of NATO as a threat is matched with revisionist intentions.
In a statement pre-dating this NSS, Russian President Vladimir Putin's former top economic adviser, Andrey Illarionov, confirmed that "Putin has his eyes on eventually reclaiming Estonia."
3 Following Moscow's invasion of Ukraine, the Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania feared they would be next.
The United States and its allies face the real prospect, unthinkable a few years ago, of open conflict with Russia.
The United States and NATO have yet to face such a peer competitor in war.
Further, America's traditional application of airpower-involving at the outset the establishment of air superiority through offensive actions-risks escalating the level of violence in a future conflict with Russia.