# ID: 480bc6fe655e4e68ac4c254531de21ef
# Title: Kaliningrad Trap: Reconciling Airpower Theory with Peer Competitors
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
He entered active duty and shortly after became a
Can the United States employ traditional airpower methods against Russia to defend the Baltic region without Russia escalating the conflict up to and including nuclear retaliation? In heralding a new era of great power competition, there is a great deal of enmity between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Russia. Russia does not believe that NATO has a right to exist and therefore will not willingly limit its violence towards the alliance. 1 The 2017 U.S. National Security Strategy (NSS) confirms this belief by declaring Russia an existential threat to the United States. It warns that "Russia aims to weaken U.S. influence in the world and divide us from our allies and partners" and that Russia views NATO, and European Union (EU), as "threats." 2 Russia's view of NATO as a threat is matched with revisionist intentions. In a statement pre-dating this NSS, Russian President Vladimir Putin's former top economic adviser, Andrey Illarionov, confirmed that "Putin has his eyes on eventually reclaiming Estonia." 3 Following Moscow's invasion of Ukraine, the Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania feared they would be next. The United States and its allies face the real prospect, unthinkable a few years ago, of open conflict with Russia. The United States and NATO have yet to face such a peer competitor in war. Further, America's traditional application of airpower-involving at the outset the establishment of air superiority through offensive actions-risks escalating the level of violence in a future conflict with Russia.
Establishing air superiority is fundamental to traditional U.S.
airpower doctrine; such actions also explain airpower's inherently offensive nature. The problem with applying this doctrine stringently in the Baltic region is that the establishment of air superiority would require that NATO strike Russia's integrated air defense system (IADS) which operates from sovereign Russian territory, including Kaliningrad.
The Kaliningrad Oblast currently contains some of the most lethal IADS in the world, which presents a formidable challenge to NATO air planners. Although Kaliningrad is geographically an exclave of the Russian Federation, it is as vital to Russia as any other location, including St. Petersburg and Moscow. So then, when Kaliningrad Oblast is understood as representing part of "mainland Russia", this means that the theory of Type I deterrence applies to the exclave. Simply put, an attack against Kaliningrad is an attack against Russia. Herman Kahn describes Type I deterrence as the deterrence of a direct attack against a country such as the United States and Russia. 
4
5
If escalation is neither impossible nor certain, deterrence by denial at lower levels of violence is neither necessary nor terribly helpful. That a limited war might -but might notspread seems like mere common sense. The situations under consideration are unprecedented and it is difficult to see how certainty could be possible. But the implications are extremely important: the fact that escalation is possible enhances deterrence, permits the use of risky bargaining tactics, and undercuts the importance of military advantage (emphasis added). 
6
The scope of this exploratory research involves a hypothetical scenario wherein Russia attempts to take control of any of the Baltic republics. First, this paper will examine the history and geopolitical background of the region to assess Russia's interests and how these interests could lead Moscow to invade one or more of the Baltic states.
The research considers whether current Russian actions justify NATO's perception of Russia as a likely security threat to the region. Second, if this perception is justified, this paper makes a broad assessment on airpower tenets based on historical applications. Lastly, if Russia were to invade the Baltic region, what would the war look like? A bold attempt to describe how NATO and the U.S. would react to this hypothetical, but quite possible situation, is made in Chapter 4 followed by an assessment about whether current airpower approaches would be appropriate against Russia is provided.
In 1991, the Soviet Union and Russian authorities recognized the independence of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia. Estonia lead the independent movement, with admission into the United Nations 11 days later; within two months, all three Baltic republics were UN members and all three held aspirations to someday join NATO. 
7
8
Article 5 is significant because it binds the collective power of the 29 state signatories to act in response to a violation of any member state's sovereignty. The United States is the leading member of NATO.
With respect to protecting the Baltic states, American air strategists in particular would face the burden of denying Russia's strategy, compelling it to return to its current borders. Current airpower doctrine and employment against a peer competitor such as Russia would risk escalating such a war up to and including nuclear retaliation. This thesis will examine the risks inherent in considering Russia as just another target state for the application of U.S. and NATO airpower, employed in the same manner that we have seen in places like Serbia, Iraq, and Libya.
Chapter Two provides the political context between Russia and NATO. The chapter shows how the relatively peaceful demise of the Soviet Union gave disaffected, newly-independent states the opportunity to join the Western liberal order, promising them an opportunity for greater security, together with democracy and prosperity. Meanwhile, even with the disorder in the Kremlin generated by the Soviet collapse, Kaliningrad remained a part of Russia, but became geographically isolated from the rest of the country because of the newly independent Baltic states. The Baltic states' accession to NATO heightened Kaliningrad's sense of isolation. Kaliningrad today serves as Russia's western front, a bastion and potential springboard for future Russian actions in the region and a constant reminder of a fragmented previous empire.
Chapter Three describes contemporary and recent accepted views of the appropriate use of airpower through three principal tenets: 1) offense is the best defense; 2) air superiority is fundamental to airpower; and 3) following the rules of proportionality, airpower must be used with overwhelming force against appropriate objectives, otherwise known as, "go big or go home." U.S. doctrine, theory, and principles of coercion best describe the habitual patterns of air strategists when implementing airpower in war. The chapter analyzes the influence of airpower strategists such as John Warden and Phillip Meilinger on contemporary airpower doctrine. Warden advocated for an offensive concept of parallel targeting, a rapid and simultaneous set of strikes against so-called enemy centers of gravity such as leadership, essential production of war material, infrastructure, the population, and military forces in order to achieve strategic paralysis. Meilinger maintained that "airpower is primarily an offensive weapon" citing the application of air power during the Arab-Israeli Wars and Operations Desert Storm and Allied Force.
9
Theorists Daniel Byman and Matthew Waxman state that one of the U.S. Air Force's greatest strategic advantages in coercing its competition is its ability to "deploy rapidly and bring to bear quickly tremendous striking While restraint and offense are both principles of war, the offensive underpins airpower application. Further research is necessary for considering how traditional airpower methods might counter the IADS on 12 Dave Majumdar, "This Is What a NATO vs. Russia War over the Baltics Would Look Like," The National Interest, accessed December 11, 2017, http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/what-nato-vsrussia-war-over-the-baltics-would-look-22885. 
13
14
the soil of a peer competitor while still exploiting the advantages of being on the offensive. Russia would be racing against the clock if it were to invade the Baltic states; any impediment that might be injected to interfere and delay its efforts-without violating the concept of Type I deterrence-may make the difference between containing an already undesirable situation or forcing it out of control.
Know the enemy and know yourself; in a hundred battles you will never be in peril.
-Sun Tzu  Additionally, Putin emphasized the importance of Russia recapitalizing its nuclear arsenal for providing deterrence against existential threats to the state and its sovereignty, arguing that "We should not tempt anybody with our weakness … Therefore, we will under no conditions give up our strategic deterrent capability.  one is an attack on all. So, if in such a moment, you ever ask again, who will come to help, you will know the answer -the NATO Alliance, including the Armed Forces of the United States of America, right here,
[at] present, now! We will be here for Estonia. We will be here for Latvia. We will be here for Lithuania.  Putin's frustration in the above quote demonstrates that he sees no reason for NATO to exist, let alone expand, but since it has expanded, NATO is Russia's enemy. 
23
Estonia has already felt the brunt of a revisionist Russia's anger.
In   [ERI] is one of our nation's commitments to Europe, and it demonstrates our strong dedication to the trans-Atlantic bond and the defense of our allies." 36 His main points on ERI include:
1. Increased presence: "We're proposing a more robust U.S. military rotational presence throughout the theater that is capable of deterring and, if required, responding to any regional threats."
2. Exercises and training: "EUCOM is increasing the training tempo to improve overall readiness and interoperability with U.S. allies and partners."
3. Enhanced pre-positioning: "This is a strategic placement of equipment throughout the theater that supports our steadystate activities while also enabling us to rapidly deploy forces into theater if required."
4. Improving infrastructure.
"This strengthens the ability of allies and partners to defend themselves and enables their full participation with U.S. operational forces." 37
The U.S. recognition of the severity of Russia's recent actions and the inherent threat it poses to NATO and U.S. interests is evident through ERI expenditures. In 2015, ERI was slated for $985 million. In 2016, the amount was reduced slightly to $789 million, followed by a significant increase to $3.4 billion in 2017. 
38
40
41
if the enemy has it, that in many circumstances it alone can win a war, and that its possession is needed before other actions on the ground or in the air can be undertaken." 
23
The soldier trained to revere offensive spirit does not feel comfortable with the argument that the defensive is obviously the stronger form of war, and he especially does not like being told that the military aim must always be subordinated to the political objectives laid down by the civilian leaders.
The belief that airpower should be used with overwhelming force when nations decide to go to war is the third of three airpower tendencies presented in this paper. Theories on coercion, political doctrine, and airpower application during Allied Force encompass Lieutenant General Short and Bernard Brodie's thoughts above on airpower application and codify its forceful potential. 
35
Adherence to theories of coercion suggests that proper use of airpower demands overwhelming force. Byman, Waxman, and Larson define coercion as the "use of threatened force, including the limited purpose of actual force to back up the threat, to induce an adversary to behave differently than it otherwise would." 36 They believe that the success of coercive operations is primarily a product of escalation dominance, escalation dominance being the "ability to escalate credibly against an adversary." 
37
38
Benjamin Lambeth criticized political elites during Allied Force for restricting airpower's inherent lethality: "U.S. air power has become a more capable instrument of force employment than ever. Even in the best of circumstances, however, it [airpower] can never be more effective than the strategy it is intended to support."
48
airpower will not be appropriate if the goal is to prevent escalation, especially against an opponent like Russia.
The approaches airpower will take against any opponent are likely to abide by Cohen's recommendation that "When presidents use it
[airpower], they should either hurl it with devastating lethality against a few targets, (say, a full-scale meeting of an enemy war cabinet or seniorlevel military staff) or extensively enough to cause sharp and lasting pain to a military and a society."
49
Airpower will likely take the following methods to achieve these effects: First, those who wield airpower's capabilities will attempt to take an offensive approach as being on the offensive seizes the initiative.  Kaliningrad's air defense network, and especially its surface-to-air missiles, meets three requirements: First, the effectiveness of the system relies on its ability to detect hostile aircraft, including missiles. Second, accurate coordination between command, control, communications, and intelligence assets will allow for the sensors to tell the defending missiles which targets to destroy. Lastly, rapid deployment, mobility, and hardening enable both sensors and weapon systems to survive.
10
13
14
15
16
17
It is pretty clear we're going to have to go back and start exercising some of the same stuff we used to do in the Cold War.
-General Frank Gorenc
A key assumption and concern addressed in this thesis is that if One U.S. Armored Brigade Combat Team (ABCT) currently located in Poland on a heal-to-toe rotational presence would flow North to protect
35 "Mass" is a principle of war. 
36
Russia is compelled to come to the negotiating table.
While it will take some time, likely longer than the 60 hours RAND 37 "Heal-to-toe" describes a continuous rotational presence in the Baltic region without any gaps. 
38
and NATO air campaign, while incurring losses rarely seen in several generations, can likely turn the tide against the Russians.
This optimistic assessment overlooks one essential fact-Russia there will be little time to think, leaving only time to react. The military is a highly organized institution accustomed to crisis planning, probably more prepared than any other organization in the country. Therefore, policymakers will be looking for answers and the Air Force will be one of the few who has any.
Unfortunately, in a crisis, it is easy to imagine the tail wagging the dog. In other words, the spectrum of options across the range of war will be vast and should be used only with a cool head. This is the reason Phillip Meilinger wrote the 10 Propositions Regarding Airpower. It is hard to react rationally without allowing emotions to take over during a crisis.
Airpower advocates will default instinctively to current-traditional-airpower doctrine. Thus, an offensive full-throttle approach to establishing air superiority, among other things, against Russia will result in a strategic and political disaster.
Emergency conditioning for this situation must be at the forefront Further research must be done to find ways to improve airpower's methods while still retaining the initiative seizing the offensive offers.
This may mean developing capabilities to degrade Russian IADS through the cyber or information domains, or even launching TLAMs against Russian fielded forces rather than wasting time to "burst the bubble."
14    
14    
17    
17    
43  
43  
31  
31  
Alexander Wendt, Social Theory of International Politics, Cambridge Studies in International Relations 67 (Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
This passage describes the social construction of individuals through a Hobbesian lens. 2 United States. 2017. The national security strategy of the United States of America. [Washington]: President of the U.S., 25 3 Cody Zilhaver, Thestrategybridge, June 16, 2017, https://thestrategybridge.org/thebridge/2017/6/16/russians-in-estonia-a-case-study-in-offensive-structural-realism.
Herman Kahn and Evan Jones, On Thermonuclear War, Transaction ed (New Brunswick (U.S.A.): Transaction Publishers, 2007). 126
Robert Jervis, The Meaning of the Nuclear Revolution: Statecraft and the Prospect of Armageddon, Cornell Studies in Security Affairs (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989). 80
Jervis. 80   
David J.Smith, ed., The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, Postcommunist States and Nations  (London: Routledge, 2002). Estonia chronology, ix; Lithuania chronology, xi
Arthur Collins, "Kaliningrad and Baltic  Security" (Naval Post-Graduate School Monterey CA, June 2001), http://www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA390532. 26
Col Phillip S Meilinger, "Ten Propositions Emerging Airpower," Air University Maxwell AFBAL  Airpower Journal, 1996, 18.   
Daniel Byman, Matthew C. Waxman, and Eric V. Larson, Air Power as a Coercive Instrument (Santa  Monica, CA: Rand, 1999). 10
Byman, Waxman, and Larson. 31   
"Ethnic Russians in the Baltics," Stratfor, accessed May 29, 2018, https://worldview.stratfor.com/article/ethnic-russians-baltics.
David Shlapak and Michael Johnson, Reinforcing Deterrence on NATO's Eastern Flank: Wargaming the Defense of the Baltics (RAND Corporation, 2016), https://doi.org/10.7249/RR1253. 3
Michael Stuermer, Putin and the Rise of Russia (New York: Pegasus Books : Distributed by W.W. Norton, 2009). 43
S. J Main and Conflict Studies Research Centre (Great Britain), Kaliningrad 2001 (Camberley, Surrey: Conflict Studies Research Centre, Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, 2001). 2
Main and Conflict Studies Research Centre (Great Britain). 3   
Mary N.Hampton and Marion Donald Hancock, eds., The Baltic Security Puzzle: Regional Patterns ofDemocratization, Integration, and Authoritarianism (Lanham, Maryland Boulder New York London:  Rowman & Littlefield, 2015). 219
"Putin Is Playing with Fire and We All May Get Burned," Bloomberg.Com, May 8, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2018-05-08/putin-is-playing-with-fire-and-we-all-may-getburned.
13 "Putin Is Playing With Fire and We All May Get Burned."
https://www.nato.int/cps/ic/natohq/official_texts_17120.htm
Barack Obama, "Remarks by President Obama to the People of Estonia," Tallinn, Estonia, September 3, 2014. As of November 24, 2015: https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-pressoffice/2014/09/03/remarks-president-obama-people-estonia
Wendt, Social Theory of International Politics. 260  Referring to Dr. Wendt's discussion on the social construction of international politics.
"Russians in Estonia: A Case Study in Offensive Structural Realism," The Bridge, accessed October 27, 2017, https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge/2017/6/16/russians-in-estonia-a-case-study-in-offensivestructural-realism.
25 "Russians in
Estonia." 26 "Russians in Estonia."
Giulio Douhet, The Command of the Air, USAF Warrior Studies (Washington, D.C: Office of Air Force History, 1983). 14
Douhet. 14   
Douhet, 14   
John A. Warden, The Air Campaign: Planning for Combat, Rev. ed (San Jose: toExcel, 1998). 33   
Phillip S Meilinger and RAAF Air Power Studies Centre, Critical Factors in the Air Superiority Campaign (Fairbairn Base, Australia: Air Power Studies Centre, Royal Australian Air Force, 1994). 2
Clausewitz, Howard, and Paret, On War. 370   
Clausewitz, Howard, and Paret. 370, 392   
Henriksen, NATO's Gamble. 19   
Lambeth, The Transformation of American Air Power. 219   
Lambeth, The Transformation of American Air Power. 232   
Eliot A. Cohen, "The Mystique of U.S. Air Power," Foreign Affairs 73, no. 1 (1994): 109-24, https://doi.org/10.2307/20045895. 10
Shlapak and Johnson. 5   
Stephan Frühling and Guillaume Lasconjarias, "NATO, A2/AD and the Kaliningrad Challenge," Survival
58, no. 2 (March 3, 2016): 95-116, https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2016.1161906. 100 5 Frühling and Lasconjarias. 100 6 "Assessing Joint Strike Fighter Defence Penetration Capabilities," accessed December 6, 2017, http://www.ausairpower.net/APA-2009-01.html.
"Russians 'Closed The Gap' For A2/AD: Air Force Gen. Gorenc," Breaking Defense (blog), accessed May 12, 2018, https://breakingdefense.com/2015/09/russians-closed-the-gap-for-a2ad-air-force-gengorenc/.
8 "New Russia Missiles in Kaliningrad Are Answer to U.S. Shield: Lawmaker," Reuters, November 21, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-missiles-kaliningrad/russia-to-deploy-s-400-and-iskandermissiles-in-kaliningrad-ria-cites-senator-
idUSKBN13G0W9. 9 James C O'Halloran, Jane'sLand-Based Air Defence: 2011-2012 (Couldson; Alexandria: Jane's   
Information Group, 2011). 100
Frank Heilenday, Principles of Air Defense and Air Vehicle Penetration (Washington, D.C: CEEPress Books, 1988). 1-5
Frühling and Lasconjarias, "NATO, A2/AD and the Kaliningrad Challenge." 100
See https://www.naval-technology.com/projects/agm-88e-advanced-anti-radiation-guided-missile-aargm/ for a more detailed description of HARM capabilities.
O'Halloran, 
O'Halloran. Russian Federation section 580
Colby and Solomon, "Facing Russia." 26   
"Order-of-Battle | Russian Defense Policy," accessed May 16, 2018, https://russiandefpolicy.blog/category/order-of-battle/.
Olsen, Strategic Air Power in Desert Storm. 245   
Keaney and Cohen, Revolution in Warfare? 108   
Main and Conflict Studies Research Centre (Great Britain), Kaliningrad
2220  Main., 2021 Main., 20   
Main., 20   
Main., 21   
Frühling and Lasconjarias, "NATO, A2/AD and the Kaliningrad Challenge." 108
Frühling and Lasconjarias. 110   
"Gdansk, Poland: Key to Defending Baltic from Putin, Russia | National Review," accessed May 12, 2018, https://www.nationalreview.com/2017/12/gdansk-poland-defending-baltic-putin-russia/.
"Russians 'Closed The Gap' For A2/AD." Spoken when asked about the risk of the A2/AD bubble over the Baltic region.
"JP 3-0; Joint Publications 3-0" (United States. Joint Chiefs of Staff, January 17, 2017), https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=798700. V-13
"JP 3-0 Joint Operations." xxiii
"The Need for SEAD Part I: The Nature of SEAD," War on the Rocks, May 17, 2016, https://warontherocks.com/2016/05/the-need-for-sead-part-i-the-nature-of-sead/. For a great discussion on the short supply of SEAD platforms.
Taken from interviews with Air Superiority experts (F-15C Evaluator Pilot)
"TASS: Military & Defense -Russia to Shell out $46 Bln on Defense Spending in 2018," accessed May 9, 2018, http://tass.com/defense/982575.
Neil MacFarquhar, "Putin Says He Weighed Nuclear Alert Over Crimea," The New York Times, December 21, 2017, sec. World, https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/16/world/europe/putin-says-heweighed-nuclear-alert-over-crimea.html.
pilot flying HC-130s. for both maintenance and operations.
Kaliningrad Oblast to be successful in either defending or liberating the Baltic states. Kaliningrad Oblast, however, is not just a small piece of land buttressed by Lithuania, Poland, and the Baltic sea, but sovereign Russian territory. A researcher for the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defense, Dr. Steven Main, claims that as a "direct result of the collapse of the USSR and the re-found independence of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, the importance of Kaliningrad Oblast' increased significantly, not least from the military." 
19
NATO has yet to face a peer competitor in war and against a weaker opponent, such as Serbia's President Slobodan Milosevic, time was wasted matching political objectives to military application.
Fortunately for NATO, Milosevic did not have the opportunity to exploit NATO's indecision and afforded the alliance the luxury to form a consensus.
The US Air Force exceeds at developing capabilities-based strategies in order to provide diplomats with options for the use of the military instrument of power and to be able to negotiate in a position of strength. What the military must understand, however, is that while policy should shape military capabilities, often military capabilities become overly relied upon to shape policy. In a crisis against Russia, Sending a quick message that the price of proceeding forward is higher than the cost of turning around may be Russia's center of gravity. These alternatives are essential to research since current airpower approaches are likely not to compel Russia, but instead provoke an escalation up to and including nuclear retaliation while failing to guarantee air superiority at a reasonable cost as well.