# ID: 4928eb7e4bd14ef6b778d5db5fad01bb
# Title: Maxwell Paper Anthology. Award-Winning Papers AY 2010
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2011.0
# Fulltext:
Several of our papers address the influence of emerging technology and trends on US security strategy.
Lt Col Kevin Coyne examines the US European Command's intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) strategy and suggests a road ahead for ISR integration.
Col Rebecca Keller analyzes the intersection of influence operations (IO) and cyberspace operations.
She identifies current operational and legal constraints on the execution of IO using cyber technology and offers remedial actions to enhance the use of the Internet as a military IO tool in today's cyber world.
Another international fellow, Lt Col Lars Helmrich of the Swedish air force, critiques US Arctic policy and argues for an increased leadership role for the United States.
Lt Col David Baylor analyzes the strategic implications of a reduction in nuclear weapons and asks the important question "Are there different negotiation considerations and dynamics in play when Russia and the United States go below 1,000 strategic warheads?"
These papers all tackle the influence of change on the strategic environment while another batch addresses how change should influence the Department of Defense (DOD).
Col Carl Schaefer assesses the DOD's procurement system and concludes that the services could learn from the Special Operations Command's streamlined acquisition system.
Lt Col James Michael Doolin evaluates technologies to meet the US Transportation Command's need for a situational aware-ness tool.
And Lt Col Matthew Smitham argues that the time is ripe for a US-led space traffic control system.