# ID: 49649391c108438f98356eccd06234e9
# Title: Raising CANE*: The Army Needs to Reintroduce Concepts, Doctrine, and Training for Operating in a Post-nuclear Detonation Environment
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The Large Blast/Thermal Simulator (LBTS) Thermal Radiation Source (TRS). Capable of generating thermal fluxes up to 60 cal/cm 2 -sec, the TRS is undergoing restoration after being dormant since 2009. When complete, the LBTS will be able to qualify Army combat vehicles to combined blast and thermal environments representative of nuclear weapon detonations. White Sands Missile Range is conducting the restoration with Defense Threat Reduction Agency support.
For more than 25 years, our military has been focused on conventional warfighting and counterinsurgency operations. Furthermore, nearly 95 percent of today's military personnel entered service after September 11, 2001. Consequently, they did not spend years studying how to fight a near-peer adversary and assessing how to prevent a nuclear exchange or massive chemical attack as a possible outcome of the conventional operations they were planning or executing. During that same time, Russia, China and other potential adversaries have modernized their strategic forces, expanded their CBRN capabilities, honed their tactics, and pursued asymmetric means to counter our conventional dominance. They are openly challenging the international order through aggression, coercion, subversion, and deception. Concurrently, regional and global actors seem to have established an acceptance for limited use of chemical weapons and openly threatening nuclear use against the United States.
In considering how to respond to this trend, the United States must appreciate that 21st Century deterrence involves more than just possession of a particular capability, to include nuclear weapons, for two important reasons.
First, with each potential adversary comes a different set of perceptions, interests and dynamics. Our challenges and interests vis-a-vis Russia are not going to be the same as our challenges vis-a-vis China or North Korea or Iran. Deterrence today is far more complex than it was in a bipolar world, and the "one size fits all" containment approach used against the Soviet Union will no longer work. Operations countering one adversary have potential unintended consequences 
face the challenge of deterring, and if necessary fighting, a regional conflict with one or more nuclear-armed adversaries. 
1
-a first defensive and counter-offensive phase, followed by transition to a second offensive phase." 
2
How did we get here?
The CANE experiments were conducted at the end of the Cold War, but subsequent shifting priorities for the Army resulted in a rapid loss of institutional knowledge for dealing with this type of threat. This series of experiments were done to gauge the impacts of Mission Oriented Protective Posture (MOPP) level 4 on platoon/ company and battalion level combined arms operations. 
3
As noted above, the challenge of replicating a realistic post-detonation environment, or postchemical agent use environment seems daunting.
Yet, the need to reintroduce these hazards and    However, this has come at the expense of highintensity warfare, to include nuclear planning, doctrine, and operations a generation of officers 
Theory is foundational to explaining the phenomenon of war and useful in anticipating The complete data set from the search is stored on-board the system and is available for post-mission analysis by the operator. LAMP provides sub-meter localization of both point and distributed radiation This system maximizes standoff for the operator while providing the greatest amount of situational awareness of the terrain and any radiological activity-be that contamination or other forms.
The hexacopter design allows the operator to get the system significantly closer to the target area, interrogate objects or buildings for longer than a fixed wing UAS, and maximizes operator control over the UAS. Figure 
3
The UGV system provides access to enclosed spaces where the deployment of the UAS is not possible and where the deployment of an operator into the environment is not desired.
When tested in a subterranean tunnel system,   
In the decades following the Second World War, the gas centrifuge emerged as one of the most efficient methods to enrich uranium. In addition to defense applications, commercial power demand created a large market for enriched uranium, and numerous corporations constructed plants to enrich uranium to serve as fuel for reactors. Abdul Qadeer Khan, a nuclear scientist and metallurgical engineer, infamously stole proprietary and sensitive centrifuge and cascade design information from his Dutch employer, Physical Dynamics Research Laboratory (FDO), a subsidiary of the enrichment conglomerate URENCO, before returning to his native Pakistan to lead their weapons program. In the years since his return to Pakistan, evidence of continued proliferation of this critical information to countries with nuclear ambitions continues to mount.
The current geopolitical landscape includes several small nuclear-power-equipped states with declared or suspected nuclear weapon ambitions. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is responsible for monitoring these emerging capabilities and preventing the spread of weapons while encouraging the peaceful proliferation of energy technology. The toolkit for limiting and monitoring the usage of peaceful or dual-use technologies is relatively limited and often requires the collaboration of the state under scrutiny. 
1
Southeast Asia is a region that has experienced a range of adversities including colonial rule, interstate war, internal violence, terrorism, organized crime, environmental disaster and financial collapse. It is also a region advancing forward with resurging economic growth, increasing populations and a greater importance in global trade. The adversities mentioned, however, continue to complicate these advancements. Southeast Asia's importance on the world stage tends to focus on its strategic position as a shipping and transit corridor. The threat of terrorism and rise of extremism in the region often overshadows the advantages of this strategic position. Few associate Southeast Asia with Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD). While it may seem unlikely for any countries within the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to consider developing WMD, the threat associated with WMD exists. While there are conditions where countries would choose to develop WMD, the threat is more likely associated with proliferation risks. This is especially true as ASEAN countries develop alternate nuclear fuel sources to support their growing economies. This influx of nuclear technology into a region experiencing the adversities mentioned should cause concern for world leaders. This article will explore some conditions associated with ASEAN countries developing WMD and highlight potential risks associated with nuclear technology. industries in countries such as Brunei. 
3
The interest in nuclear power in most ASEAN countries reflects a growing demand for energy and the concern over the economic cost and environmental impact of other fuel sources.
For example, coal is dirty, hydropower dams upset fragile ecologies and displace communities, and transporting natural gas is expensive. Even with these fuel sources, Indonesia has never generated enough power for its country. Adding to the energy demand problems, since 2003 Indonesia has been a net importer of oil and is no longer a member of Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). The energy problem is so serious that nearly 10,000 companies maintain their own power generation capacity. This is unconnected to public power grids and produces nearly a third of the electricity consumed in the country. 
4
5
Systems such as submarines, missile boats and supersonic combat aircraft are instruments of conventional interstate warfare, not internal conflicts, which ASEAN states tend to identify as threats that are more significant. 
8
As discussed, the proliferation of dual-use materials associated with nuclear technology remains the greatest risk in the region. The proliferation risk associated with Southeast Asia stems in part to the "ASEAN way" of noninterference and a resentment of export controls, viewing them as barriers to economic development. Asia in the nuclear black market and in Al Qaeda's attempts to acquire WMD materials and expertise from Southeast Asia. 
13
ASEAN nations have generally failed to keep pace with regional crime developments due the absence of strong bilateral and regional lawenforcement cooperation. 
14
Something that isn't always obvious is that NATO is both a political and a military Alliance.
To the layperson, the role of NATO is likely only seen as a military organization, with its most wellknown highlight being Article 5 -Collective Defence: that an " armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against them all…" As important as its contribution to peace as a military alliance dedicated to the common defense of its members, the Alliance is also known for its contribution to democracy and democratic ideals. First, it projects unity to the rest of the world.
Any mission that NATO takes on comes with the knowledge that it has the backing of every member of the Alliance. This fact is something that no adversary should disregard. In total, the Alliance's 29 members have more than six million personnel under arms in their active and reserve military forces. 
1
The largest member of the Alliance, Canada, has a land mass more than 3800 times the size of the smallest. In terms of gross domestic product (GDP), the United States, with a nearly 21 trillion dollar GDP, is more than five times larger than that of the next member, Germany, at 3.4 trillion dollars. There are many other metrics that can be used to describe how each member of NATO is uniquely large at something or small at something else. Yet, despite these disparities, each member knows that their voice will be heard and must be considered when it comes to implementing the will of the Alliance.
And finally, it commits the members to shared risks, responsibilities, and benefits. There is likely no more sober a thought for members of the Alliance than knowing that their decisions will  With the past and present security challenges that NATO has faced, it is remarkable to recognize how successful the Alliance has been at guaranteeing the freedom and security of its members. And when Europe and North America are faced with challenges in the future, it is reassuring to know that NATO, through the commitment of its member states, will be ready to respond to them.
Given the variety of experiences for FA52s, it's possible that career advice from an FA52 is applicable to only a small number of people. So, I make no attempt to offer this as advice, just sharing my doctorate education experience in the hopes that some part of it is helpful to anyone seeking alternatives to earning a degree outside of the ACS route.
It was difficult, but rewarding in completing the individual requirements and ultimately earning a Doctor of Engineering (D.Eng.) in Engineering Management from The George Washington University (GW). Only time will tell whether the effort was truly worth it. Regardless, I am glad I did it, but acknowledge that the timing, program, and motivation were just right for me.
While I was investigating further professional credential options, I had two assumptions in the back of my mind for a career after the military. First, I assumed that I would continue to work in a nuclear enterprise-or a CWMD-related field after retirement. Second, although several factors will ultimately play a part, I assumed my work after retirement would not be with DoD (or at least I wanted to position myself that way), so I personally placed value on something-other-than-military education and a desire to differentiate myself from other military officers retiring at 20+ years
One of my first motivations to start looking more seriously into some type of further professional development (e.g., PMP, PE, online degree program) was a sense that I wasn't doing enough to prepare for a career after retirement. There was only so much Netflix I could handle during the  Nevertheless, these latter essays shine light on several ways in which nuclear weapons could be used -by the U.S., an adversary, or another nation -that might not lead to total nuclear war.
The final challenge this book faces is one that it mostly fails to address. If nuclear weapons are a "red line" and their use is only permitted for an existential national crisis, then there is no such thing as limited nuclear use, and enforcing counter-proliferation efforts worldwide should readily gain international support, as have efforts against chemical and biological weapons. If, on the other hand, one chooses to argue that there are limited uses for nuclear weapons, in effect placing them on the same level as more conventional weapons, this casts doubt on the sincerity and motives of counter-proliferation efforts. While the rationale for use of the weapons is much more nuanced than this, international perceptions are of massive importance when it comes to nuclear weapons, and most nations are understandably wary of any use of nuclear capabilities when the sole use of nuclear weapons in warfare was the culmination of a total war. Despite its shortcomings, OLNW is a valuable addition to any CWMD library. It is particularly intriguing to read this book in the post-2018 Nuclear Posture Review era, coupled with the recent declaration by both the U.S. and Russia to withdraw from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. One hopes to never have to apply the lessons of this book, but one would be remiss not to be aware of them.
,
Issue 18
This material is based upon work supported by the 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
10027-21370
United States Government
Countering WMD Journal is published semi-annually by the 
United States Army Nuclear and Countering WMD Agency (US-ANCA)
Department of Defense (DOD)
Army Walker
COL Dirk Plante
In addition to the opportunities McMahon has had to work with such exceptional leaders, subordinates, and peers, he's also been given many opportunities to sharpen his expertise in nuclear engineering and radiobiology -areas that he says are necessary and in high demand.
In 1996, McMahon was awarded the Army's Green to Gold Scholarship, allowing him to commission as an officer after earning his Bachelor of Science degree in Biochemistry. As a biochemist, he was commissioned in the Army's Chemical Corps. This led to the opportunity for him to serve in the Army's Technical Escort Unit, and deploy in support of the Iraq Survey Group during Operation Iraqi Freedom. After gaining that experience, and with the help of great mentors, he was selected for Functional Designation in FA 52 -Nuclear and Counterproliferation, where he was able to focus his research on nuclear weapons effects. 
On Limited Nuclear War in the 21st Century (hereafter referred to as OLNW), published in 2014, purports to be a holistic look at limited nuclear as a concept and argues that the U.S. is unprepared to engage in such a conflict. The collected essays span the scope of the U.S. nuclear experience, divided into three sections -Assessing the History of Limited Nuclear War, Managing the Risk of Nuclear War in the 21st Century, and Confronting the Challenges of Nuclear War in the 21st Century. As with any collection of essays from various authors, the quality is uneven, and some authors' assertions directly contradict others, which weakens the overall thesis of the collection.
Given the broad scope of the book and limited space, this may have been unavoidable, although conversely, the scattershot presentation is valuable in permitting the reader to ponder these issues on their own with a multifaceted approach. As such, it is a worthwhile volume for anyone with interest in the CWMD community, though with the caveat that the book offers the reader far more questions than answers.
The primary weakness of this volume is the inability to come to a solid conclusion on how to define limited nuclear war -a question that, to be fair, has plagued U.S. policymakers for decades.
Thomas Schelling notes in the forward that, aside from zero nuclear use, there is no easy answer for countries to agree on what would constitute acceptable use in war, and authors such as Bruce Bennett note in "On US Preparedness for Limited Nuclear War," whatever we may consider a "limited" nuclear war, "it is not clear that an adversary would perceive such attacks as limited," which immensely complicates matters. The U.S., with thousands of warheads, may consider the expenditure of say, a dozen weapons to be limited, an emergent nuclear nation such as North Korea would consider that an attack equivalent to the majority of its stockpile, and could respond accordingly.
Many authors cite Henry Kissinger's 1956 tome "Force and Diplomacy in the Nuclear Age," which has valid arguments for its time, although most authors fail to note Kissinger himself discredited that particular work later in life.  The text is below.
The US Army Nuclear and Chemical Agency (USANCA) is a relatively small organization with a myriad of responsibilities. The potential effects on the US Army of the manner in which we carry out these responsibilities and the results we achieve are far reaching. The individual officer assigned to the Agency, therefore, must carry out his duties as a competent member of a dedicated and respected team.
A newly assigned officer will be charged with a specific area of interest in which he is expected to become the expert in the US Army. The acquisition of this degree of proficiency requires voluminous reading, dedicated study, an inquisitive mind and an acceptance of the fact that there is always more to be learned. This learning process must include, however, subject matter not necessarily related to defined and assigned responsibilities. It is incumbent upon the USANCA officer to seek and absorb any and all information that may be made available concerning his military profession. He is an officer first; a nuclear or chemical specialist second.
Duties in all areas require continuous interaction with personnel, of more extensive experience and higher grade, representing the Army, the DOD, the DOE and civilian industry.
The more qualified and knowledgeable they are, the more they will defer to the judgment of the Lastly, the USANCA officer must direct his efforts toward mission accomplishment with the full knowledge that he is solely responsible for the way in which he expends time and energy resources. It is accepted that he will err; however, it is expected that he will thereby profit.
Within the Agency, there is always a ready and interested audience to serve as a sounding board for an idea or concept. Support and assistance are readily available. The USANCA officer will receive in direct proportion to his giving.
His satisfaction will be derived from his participation in a dynamic, militarily important field. His rewards will flow from the successful completion of assigned tasks.
The 