# ID: 4dac9bd913ef4d0c81883d64501395e5
# Title: The Evolution of US Military Policy from the Constitution to the Present, Volume III
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The Draft, the Army National Guard, and the Army Reserve Johnson decided early on not to activate reserve forces for the American engagement in Vietnam.
Although he would eventually authorize a very limited partial mobilization after the Tet Offensive in early 1968, in his memoirs he articulated his concerns that a call-up would impose too much of a burden on the American public, financially and otherwise.
He also recalled the Berlin Crisis and was wary that a call-up might communicate too much aggression to Russia and China and risk a wider war, as had occurred in Korea.
Historians have also made the valid argument that the President resisted activating the reserves primarily out of political concerns.
Johnson hoped to avoid a public debate on whether the nation should intervene in Southeast Asia at all.
The decision was politically selfish, but astute, given that some congressmen were reporting heavy pressure from families potentially affected by reserve activation.
5 Johnson informed the JCS that, if he were to characterize Vietnam as a dire situation or declare a national emergency, it would lead to antagonism at home that would make him a "lonely man."
As such, the military was to limit the "political noise level" of the war's escalation.
Johnson instead relied on a limited draft and large numbers of volunteers to expand the Army to fight the war.