# ID: 4e7ac18778ca46c8a0103e6061c567c5
# Title: Auftragstaktik: The Basis for Modern Military Command
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Gen. Helmuth von Moltke, the Chief of the Prussian General Staff during the Franco-Prussian War, defined Auftragstaktik as the actions a subordinate took in the absence of orders that
Gen. Helmuth von Moltke, Chief of the German General Staff 1 from 1857 until his retirement in 1888, often related a story to junior members of his staff that described the essence of the German system of command. Following a battle, Prince Frederick Karl took a major aside and proceeded to reprimand the young officer for a tactical mistake. The major responded that he was following an order issued to him from a superior officer, which constituted the word of the king himself. The prince responded in kind, "'His Majesty made you a major because he believed you would know when not to obey his orders.'" 
2
2 Quoted in Trevor N. Dupuy, A Genius for War: The German Army and General Staff, 1807-1945  (Garden City, NY: Military Book Club, 1977), 116.   3   This paper is written from the German perspective; whenever possible the German names and translations are preserved. During the Franco-Prussian War, both the French and Prussian armies used their own names for battles, towns, and geographic locations. Wherever possible, the locations are identified using the name and spelling used by the German General Staff used in the official history, The Franco-Prussian War 1870-71. Lastly in the German language nouns, like Auftragstaktik and Junker, are always capitalized.
The Prussians, and later the Germans, developed this system of command during the midnineteenth century Wars of German Unification. In August 1870, the Prussians defeated Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte's Army of the Rhine in a series of battles that eventually contributed to the fall of the French Second Empire. Although French units had several material advantages over the Prussians, their commanders failed to notice a fundamental change in how the Prussians commanded and controlled their units after the 1866 Austro-Prussian War. Prussian commanders had instituted decentralized command and control in the pursuit of a singular military objective. This method of command often resulted in units entering the battle in a haphazard method during the war's early campaigns; however, they ultimately won the battles.
Although the modern German Bundeswehr continues to use Moltke's system of command, other armies have been reluctant to adopt a decentralized approach. The Germans used this method of task-oriented, decentralized command through the first half of World War II;
German doctrine used the term Auftragstaktik to describe it. 
4
5
As one of the foundations of unified land operations, mission command specifically emphasizes individual initiative within the commander's intent for an operation. 
6
7
8
Despite the common belief in modern US military doctrine, Auftragstaktik and mission command are not synonymous terms. Most modern authors ignore the historical environment in which the Prussian army operated during the Franco-Prussian War. Military commanders belonged to the nobility or Junker 9 class because the king sought to link those classes with the national government. In other words, the monarch believed that he could trust these officers because they had the most to lose if the government collapsed in a revolution or war. However, their chiefs of staff and primary advisors rarely came from the same privileged background.
Indeed, because of their status, commanders had the right to act independently of Moltke's instructions while on campaign. Further highlighting the social differences within the Prussian army, individual soldiers came almost exclusively from the lower classes because they were subject to universal service. Generally, they lacked upward mobility through promotion to the officer ranks. In theory, every soldier in the US Army has the potential to move into the officer ranks, command units, and make attain the rank of general. Another important contextual 9 At the onset of the Franco-Prussian War, Prussian society consisted of four general orders. The nobility formed the top tier of society and the Junker class the tier immediately below it. The Junkers typically were a form of lesser nobility, although they wielded enormous influence as the primary landowners in Prussia.
difference between the Prussian army and the modern US Army is the amount of information instantly available to the commander on the battlefield through the use of radios, computers, drones, and satellite imagery. It is much more difficult for a modern subordinate commander to act independently of his higher commander by taking advantage of the time to transmit information between headquarters.
The philosophy of Auftragstaktik did not originate with Moltke. In fact, it predates the general's service in the Prussian Army. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Prussian Army still resembled Frederick the Great's army from fifty years earlier. Frederick believed that to maintain Prussia's economic strength, he could not mobilize more than three-percent of the total male population except in the direst of situations. As a result, he relied on foreigners, prisoners of war, and volunteers from occupied territories like Silesia. 
10
11
12
13
14
More importantly, the commission recommended sweeping changes to the officer corps.
Although the king did not surrender his right to appoint commanders, the commission recommended the opening of the officer ranks to the bourgeois class again, making education, not social position, the deciding factor for obtaining a commission. 
15
14 Frieherr vom Stein, Briefwechsel, Denkschriften und Aufzeichnungen (Berlin: C. Heymanns  Verlag, 1937), ii-iv. 
15
Kriegsakademie, with its associated Selekta, which served as training ground for the new General Staff. 
16
17
Auftragstaktik is an artificial word comprised of two German terms, which has led to some misunderstandings in its application to military theory. Auftrag translates into English as task, and taktik refers to military tactics. Military theorists have thereafter used the two words together to describe a system of command and control characterized by "mission-oriented tactics," or simply "mission orders." The word Auftragstaktik first appeared in German doctrine during the Second World War, although the concept is usually attributed to Moltke's writings as Chief of the Prussian General Staff. 
18
20
21
Thus, Moltke believed that the higher the commander's position, the less prescriptive his orders should be to his subordinates. He argued that a large numbers of orders, or verbose orders, could confuse leaders on the commander's true intent. This problem could compound itself through every echelon of command making it difficult for a division, or even a brigade commander, to decipher the reason for the mission. 22
Following the successful Austro-Prussian War of 1866, Gen. Helmuth von Moltke ordered the General Staff to study the campaign, identify ways that the army could improve its conduct of operations, and make recommendations for organizational changes. The study took nearly two years to complete. On 25 July 1868, Moltke presented the General Staff's findings to Wilhelm I. 
23
Instructions is an important document for understanding Prussian, and later German, military theory and doctrine. Moltke used it to explain his comprehensive approach to war, explaining not only the command and control of large units in battle but also the purpose for going to war, the role of politics in war, and other large concepts. Moltke's work, like 
21
The book survived as a doctrinal manual until the onset of World War II with only minor changes.
24
Two sections of the 1869 version of the Instructions specifically address the idea of mission orders. The first, and shorter, entry appeared early in the first section of the work. Moltke wrote that each commander must act in accordance with his own judgment or instinct rather than wait for orders. He added the caveat that the subordinate's actions should support the higher commander's vision when possible. 
25
'" 26
27
Moltke expanded on these ideas and fully explained the intent of mission orders in the second section "Communications between Commands and Units." The Chief of the Prussian Staff wrote that detailed orders beyond the immediate tactical situation were usually of little value.
Each battle, movement, and deployment changed the situation, which required the commander to reexamine the battlefield conditions. He later suggested that this would cause higher commanders to issue too many orders, confusing their subordinates. 
28
29
Therefore, orders should start with general directives at the highest levels, with subordinate commanders adding detail to the initial order based on their understanding of the battlefield. This system was intended to ensure that subordinate commanders would have freedom of action within the intent of their commander's directive. Finally, Moltke acknowledged even in this manual that occasionally subordinate commanders needed the ability to act in a manner that contradicted the letter of the order as long as the subordinate met the intent of the order. 
30
28 Moltke,
Instructions,
30
When in doubt, commanders should seize the initiative rather than wait for orders. Finally, Moltke believed that commanders could never have complete and timely understanding of the battlefield. Subordinates were responsible for timely and accurate reporting to their commander; however, delays in reporting, incorrect reports, and an ever-changing situation affected the higher commander's visualization of the battlefield. The senior commander's primary means of influencing the battlefield was through the employment of his reserve forces.
31
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Unified Land Operations, is the US Army's capstone manual on the conduct of today's military operations. The most recent version of this manual, approved in October 2011, is significantly different from the field manuals that preceded it. The new manual is less than thirty pages, and only broadly introduces a number of subjects covered in subsequent manuals. In theory, all other doctrinal manuals must link to the ideas put forth in ADP 3-0. It is important to note that ADP 3-0 is actually a revision of the previous Operations manuals FM 3-0 and FM 100-5, and therefore it is not entirely new. One of the terms carried forward from the previous editions and featured prominently throughout the new manual is mission command. The manual's capstone concept, unified action, is new to the US doctrinal lexicon; however, it incorporated the older concept of mission command. In fact, mission command is the guiding principle of unified land operations, which are conducted through decisive action using the Army's core competencies (Figure 
1
Moltke's writings, the Prussian army's experience in 1870, and modern US Army doctrine. For instance, the principle of mission orders harkens back to Moltke's Instructions. ADP 6-0, Mission Command, defines mission orders as directives that convey the commander's desired end state, but not the method by which to achieve them. In other words, these orders are not prescriptive in nature. 
33
33
Commanders, supported by their staffs, execute mission command to balance the art of command with the science of control by using the operations process. The model contains a linear process by which the commander understands the operational environment, visualizes an operational end state, describes the synchronization of time, space, resources, purpose, and action, and finally directs the action (Figure 
3
34
35
34
35
The Prussian Army just prior to the Franco-Prussian War remains an excellent case study for military theorists and historians attempting to understand the US Army's strategic environment. Political, economic, and military realities heavily influenced both armies' conduct of war. Prussia's ruling class was very concerned with the financial cost of war and the effect of having a significant portion of the male population mobilized had on the economy. 36 In Moltke's Instructions, he defined Prussia's operating environment and the achievement of a rapid, decisive 
36
38
1
Similar to the US today, Prussia could not unilaterally declare war because of political and military realities in a Europe ruled by five major powers (Great Britain, France, Prussia, Russia, and Austria) following the Treaty of Vienna in 1815. Every decision these countries made attempted to maintain the status quo, since nearly any action by the one affected the least one of the other states. 
39
In 1866, the Austro-Prussian War marked a turning point in the consolidation of Prussia's power and the unification of Germany. Ministerpräsident (Prime Minister) Otto von Bismarck used the victory at the Battle of Königgrätz over the Austrian army as an excuse to annex several 
37
38 ADP 3-0, 5. 
39
small German states that had sided with the Hapsburgs. The consolidation of states into the North German Confederation, controlled by the Berlin government, added significantly to Prussia's population and its economic and military resources, putting it on par with France. 
40
41
42
43
44
The Franco-Prussian War marked the first time that the Prussian Army conducted military operations using the doctrine of directives rather than direct orders. Although some historians consider the culminating battle of the Austro-Prussian War, Königgrätz, as the defining achievement of mission orders, the fact is simply that Moltke had not fully developed and disseminated the idea until the publication of his Instructions in 1869. 
48
In May 1870, the three Prussian army commanders and their chiefs of staff met with Moltke and the king in Berlin to rehearse the opening mobilization and initial maneuvers in a possible war with France. Even with these preparations, and the fact the French had not deviated from their anticipated actions, it seems that none of the three Army commanders were initially comfortable communications still moved across the battlefield by courier, generally between members of the General Staff, because they shared a common education and drilled together annually. The Prussians also used the telegraph for some routine communications between headquarters, but these communications were limited to. routine reports, supply requests, and personnel statuses.
Since it was possible to tap an unguarded telegraph line the Prussians used a cipher for sending coded messages over the telegraph. Moltke preferred sending coded messages and orders using couriers, although he used the telegraph to alert the army headquarters to expect the message.
During the invasion of France, the Prussian army spent a great deal of time building and securing telegraph lines. Their efforts allowed communications between the king and the government in The commanders of the Second and Third Armies received similar orders that conveyed the king's intent that all three Prussian armies would move in concert against the French. The order is typical of Moltke's directives style. He did not order any of the armies to attack the enemy. Instead, he oriented the commanders in a certain direction and allowed them the freedom to develop the situation. The General Staff referenced the enemy advance because they had not determined if the French offensive at Saarbrücken had already culminated on the afternoon of 2 August. They also speculated that Gen. Abel Douay's 2nd Division, I Corps might cross the Rhine south of Third Army's planned advance and move north through the Black Forest to threaten Prussian lines of communication. 
53
54
55
53
54
55
56
Moltke had nearly sent a stern telegram back to the Crown Prince's headquarters in the days preceding the attack, because he felt that Third Army was moving too slow. In effect, Moltke nearly resorted to giving a direct order for the army to attack on the original timeline. This telegram could have derailed Moltke's new system of command before it ever got used in a battle. Another member of the staff, Gen. Julius von Verdy, cautioned Moltke that he risked straining the relations with Crown Prince and his Chief of Staff, Gen. Leonhard von Blumenthal, for the entirety of the war if he sent the telegram. In the end, Moltke decided not to interfere, pocketed the telegram, and allowed the Crown Prince more time to prepare for the assault. 
57
58
56
57
Headquarters,
[46]
[47]
59
At a critical point in the battle no one assumed overall command of the French forces for an hour and half. Finally, none of Gen. Patrice MacMahon's three divisions from I Corps moved to reinforce the 2nd Division. Douay had failed to send out couriers to apprise MacMahon or the other division commanders after his initial report that the Bavarians were conducting a small raid was proved false. This, combined with the fact that MacMahon deployed his divisions in positions that were not mutually supportive because of the distance required to march to the sound of battle, Douay's soldiers never stood a chance. 60 59 Ibid., 124-128. 
60
61
62
63
64
However, the piecemeal deployment of the Prussian forces did have one disadvantage; the Prussian units suffered casualties disproportionate to their enemy. The combined Prussian and Bavarian forces lost 91 officers and 1,460 soldiers. 65 61 Wawro, Franco-Prussian War, 59. The German General Staff further explained these principles and the benefits of using artillery in this manner following the Battle of Gravelotte. See German General  Staff, The Franco-German War, 1870-1871, vol 2, trans. F. C. H. Clarke (1874; repr., Nashville: Battery  Press, 1995), 168. 
62 Moltke, The Franco-Prussian War of 1870
-1871, 25;
German General Staff, Franco-German War, 1870
-1871, 1:128. 63
64 Michael Howard, The Franco-Prussian War (New York: Routledge, 1989), 102. 
65
After the Third Army crossed the frontier into France, the other two armies in Moltke's plan started to move slowly toward the border. The five-day delay to start operations had not sat well with some of the commanders, including Steinmetz. Impatient, Steinmetz advanced. At the north end of the Prussian line, his First Army became hopelessly entangled with Prince Frederick Karl's Second Army. Steinmetz, a hero of the Austro-Prussian War, did not understand his role in Moltke's plan, and while he sought to clarify it over the course of three days with the Royal Headquarters, and with the king himself, his army started to move for the Saar crossings at Saarloius and Saarbrücken. The old hero felt it imperative that the Prussian armies maintain contact with the French, which got harder after Napoleon III ordered the French forces in Saarbrücken to withdraw. 66 Steinmetz's Army moved south using the Saarbrucken Road to try to maintain contact with enemy, even though it was designated for Second Army's use. As it advanced, Second Army's lead elements moved in between Prince Frederick Karl's army and his cavalry. 
67
68
66 Moltke,
Correspondence,
66.
The battles of the first week, Weissenburg and Spicheren gained the Prussians an enormous tactical advantage, albeit at a cost of nearly 50,000 casualties. Moltke realized that even by mobilizing units still in Prussia, the kingdom would not be able to sustain comparable casualties for long. 
71
72
73
When the French started their retreat towards Paris, only one Prussian unit was in position to gain and maintain contact with the enemy. Gen. Konstantin von Alvensleben's III Corps, the vanguard of Second Army, had already crossed the Moselle River; his reconnaissance elements had identified that the French were moving west out of Metz. 
75
76
As on the 15th, so again the entire strategic aspect of the campaign came before my eyes in full clearness and I was certain that the situation justified me in inserting my entire army corps. Of the X Corps, I thought only insofar as offering me a supporting point to 
74
75
76 German General Staff, Headquarters, Third Army Corps, at the Battle of Vionville -Mars la Tour, trans. Harry Bell (1895; repr., Fort Leavenworth: CGSC, 1912), 28-30.  fall back on, if I hazarded a battle with superior hostile forces and that with an inverted front. I did not know if the X Corps could or would give me any support, but I knew that, considering the direction of the retreat, it was immaterial to us if our object should be attained eight miles further to the front or rear; and I also knew that with each step backward I gained the time and power the enemy lost. The hazard, viewed in more detail, was consequently not too large or too dangerous. It would have been very, very unfortunate and bitter, to leave the battlefield with our wounded to the enemy, but this was of no influence at all on the objective of our day's task. 
77
Once Alvensleben ordered his units into action against the French, the Battle of Mars-la-Tour on 16 August followed the pattern set at Weissenburg and Spicheren with one exception. At Mars-la-Tour, the Prussian III Corps was too small to find the French flank and turn it, as the Prussians had done at Weissenburg and Spicheren. The Prussians initially committed a small number of forces to the battle, only the 5th Infantry Division, and then allowed the situation to develop. Amazingly, the soldiers of III Corps, with only two reinforcement divisions from X Corps, fought the entire French Army to a draw over the course of the day. The Prussians equalized the fight by using their artillery, as they eventually massed over 130 pieces to support their infantry attacks. 
77
78
79
The Prussians won a significant, albeit costly, victory, at Mars-la-Tour. Symbolically, the Prussians possessed the battlefield after the French finished their withdrawal back in the direction of Metz. The true victory, however, was not immediately apparent. Strategically the battle was clearly a Prussian victory because Alvensleben had delayed the French withdrawal long enough for the Prussians to block the road to Verdun. The casualties on both sides were nearly equal, 15,590 Prussians, including nearly 7,000 soldier's from Alvensleben's III Corps, to 16,128
French. 
80
81
82
79
80
81
82 Howard,
167.
As a result, Moltke and the entire Prussian army entered the Battle of Gravelotte blind.
The Prussian orders of the day followed the pattern set in the earlier battles. Moltke's original orders called for the First and Second Armies to identify the French flanks and to attack once they were identified. Prince Frederick Karl's orders to his army simply read, "Set out tomorrow morning towards the north to locate the enemy and fight him." 
83
88
Ultimately, the Battle of Gravelotte was a great Prussian victory, although Moltke and the king were not aware of it until the next morning when the Prussian scouted of the French positions. They confirmed that the Army of the Rhine had withdrawn in the direction of Metz.
Tactically, the battle was a draw at best. The combined German forces lost 20,163 soldiers killed, 87 Philip S. Sheridan, Personal Memoirs of P. H. 
Sheridan, vol. 2 (New York: Charles L. Webster and Company, 1888), 373. 88
91
92
After the Battle of Gravelotte, Marshal Bazaine's French forces retreated into the defensive lines at the fortress town of Metz. The Prussian Second Army laid siege to the city, while the Third Army intercepted and defeated Marshal MacMahon's Army of Châlons at the Battle of Sedan. The Prussians captured Napoleon III at Sedan, which lead to the collapse of the Second Empire on 4 September. With no chance of relief or escape, Bazaine's Army of the Rhine surrendered on 27 October 1870. The war managed to drag on for another five months, but 
91
92
Ultimately, Steinmetz lost his command shortly after the Battle of Gravelotte when Moltke reorganized the army to facilitate the siege of Bazaine's Army and to intercept MacMahon's new army. However, neither his tactical ineptitude nor his blind initiative cost him his command. Instead, he refused to subordinate himself and his command to the Crown Prince, a younger officer, after Moltke's reorganization of the army during the siege of Metz. The king viewed this as a slight against the royal family. Steinmetz was relieved, forced to sing the national anthem as a sign of allegiance, and sent home to serve as the governor-general of the V and VI Army Corps districts in Posen. 
93
94
98
99
incorporation of Auftragstaktik within their commands. 100 These commanders even accepted the idea that subordinates could fail at tactical level. Gen. Hermann Balck, an army group commander and veteran of both world wars, stated that "Generally the German higher commander rarely or never reproached their subordinate unless they made a terrible blunder. DePuy believed that soldiers lacked initiative, discipline, and education, and the Army's new doctrine needed to reflect that assumption. In fairness to DePuy, his experiences in Vietnam as division commander and staff officer probably confirmed his belief. Moreover, the post-Vietnam army had problems with drugs, desertion, and a lack of professionally trained noncommissioned officers. The army still had worldwide commitments to fulfill as part of the larger containment of communism, but it had to meet these requirements without the draft. DePuy believed that soldiers and junior leaders needed to be told what to think, not how to think, and that reliance on doctrine and battle drills could produce a force that could win in Europe. 
102
The 1976 edition of Operations mentioned "mission-type" orders briefly in Chapter Three, "How We Fight." The mission-type orders could allow flexibility within a plan for a subordinate to accomplish the mission within the commander's intent. Under the subheading of "Leadership," DePuy even wrote that "decentralization of responsibility and authority" was strength of the current force. However, it also seems that he envisioned this system of command to take over when communications between headquarters failed. 103 Despite this nod to idea of Auftragstaktik, the rest of manual does little to suggest that DePuy actually believed in these concepts. The manual focused primarily on the technical aspects of weapons systems, not soldiers' and commanders' management of those weapons systems. The manual's content suggested that the commander who masters the employment of tanks, infantry, and artillery pieces better than his opponent would win the battle. In the defense, brigade commanders should expect to move company-teams from individual battle positions to maximize lethality. 
104
Chapter Three also listed four prerequisites for victory on the battlefield, adequate forces and weapons concentrated at the decisive point, control and direction to mass weapons effects, the use of cover, concealment, suppression, and combined arms, and crews trained to use their weapons systems. 
105
110
In 1986, the US Army adopted mission orders in FM 100-5 and maintained several of Moltke's original Auftragstaktik tenets for AirLand Battle. The "Command and Control" section of the manual called for commanders to give subordinates the maximum amount of flexibility on the battlefield. Commanders gave subordinates an initial plan for an operation, but they had to expect subordinates to deviate from the original plan once battlefield conditions started to change.
In some aspects, the 1986 edition improved on Moltke's Instructions and at other times reflected the strict training focus of DePuy's time. It stressed the importance standard operating procedures, warning orders, and maximum cooperation between units. At the same time, DePuy's influence is seen in the call for war gaming, rehearsals, and standardized, realistic training. 
111
112
Junior commanders could exert initiative and original thinking to solve complex problems on the 110 The dissenting voices during this period argued primarily that the German system had baggage from Wehrmacht abuses World War II that would meet institutional resistance. Roger A. Beaumont, "On the Wehrmacht Mystique," Military Review 66, no. 7 (July 1986): 48; Daniel Hughes, "Abuses of German Military History," Military Review 66, no. 12 (December 1986): 66-76.
The Prussian concept of the Auftragstaktik is incorporated throughout the US Army's mission command model. The Army expects leaders to give their subordinates maximum freedom for execution, and in return, leaders expect their subordinates execute the mission within their intent. Moltke's influence from his Instructions is evident throughout the mission command model. The six guiding principles of mission command contained with ADP 6-0 acknowledge the essence of the German system. The doctrine illustrates that mission command is a balance between science of control and the art of command, as well as a balance between the subordinate's initiative and operational risk. Alvensleben's analysis before committing his division to the Battle of Mars-la-Tour showed an appreciation for this balance. The current doctrine stresses the importance of commanders talking among themselves and the commander to build a common understanding. The Prussian soldiers entering the battle of Weissenburg understood where the Bavarians perceived that they were weak and effectively reinforced the units fighting the French. When this system is working well the senior commander hardly needs to interfere in the conduct of the battle, as was the case with the Crown Prince. Finally, the US Army's doctrine suggests the use of mission orders. Although the Prussian use of mission orders did not always work, the frontier battles of the Franco-Prussian War demonstrated their potential of overwhelming an enemy cognitively and physically.
The US Army ignored or was ignorant of some of the cultural nuances that uniquely applied to the Prussia and Germany in the last half of the nineteenth-century as it pursued the concept during the early 1980s. The Prussian leaders belonged to a culture that accepted blind followership. The Junker class officers knew that the king could not maintain his power in Prussia without their support. Although revolution never seemed an imminent threat, a precarious balance existed since before Frederick the Great's time. German soldiers, unlike their French counterparts, did not question being ordered to attack against overwhelming odds. The German soldier had only recently gained the rights that could have allowed him to do it.
Despite arguments to the contrary, the increased reliance on instantaneous and redundant communications technology, real-time video, and precision munitions have not significantly changed the mission command environment. The Prussians commanders had more latitude to demonstrate initiative than their American counterparts during the second-half of the twentiethcentury. Even now as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have demonstrated, commanders are given freedom to execute the intent rather than the letter of the orders in pursuit of a common objective.
With the publication of the 2012 edition of ADP 6-0, Mission Command, the German concept of the Auftragstaktik is incorporated throughout the US Army's mission command model. At least on paper, the Army expects leaders to give their subordinates maximum freedom for execution, and in return, leaders expect their subordinates execute the mission within their intent. The new doctrine captures the essence of Moltke's system better than any previous version, since the Army adopted mission orders in 1986. Mission command's six guiding principles provide the best logical bridge between Moltke's doctrine at the onset of the Franco-Prussian War and the current US Army's mission command doctrine.
102
102
Erwin Dette, Friedrichs der Große und sein Heer (Göttingen: Bandenhoed and Ruprecht, 1914), 8-19.
Karl Demeter, Das deutsche Heer und siene Offiziere (Berlin: Verlag von Reimar Hobbing, 1935), 8-9.
Gordon Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army, 1640-1945 (New York: Oxford University  Press, 1955), 16-17.   
Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army, 1640-1945, 45.    
Richard Simpkin, Race to the Swift (London: Brassey's Defence, 1986), 227.
John T. Nelsen II, "Auftragstaktik: A Case for Decentralized Battle", Parameters 17: no. 3 (Spetember
1987): 21-22. 19 German General Staff, Der deutsch-französische Krieg, 1870-71, vol. 1 (Berlin: E. S. Mittler, 1874-81), 155. 20 Helmuth Karl Bernhard von Moltke, "Thoughts on Command" in Daniel Hughes, ed. Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings (Novato, CA: Presidio, 1993), 79.
Ibid.,[171][172] 
Moltke, Instructions, 171.    
Quoted in Geoffrey Wawro, The Franco-Prussian War: The German Conquest of France in 1870-1871 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 168.
German General Staff, The Franco-German War 1870-1871, 1:252-54.   
MMW, vol. 4, no. 3, 103.   
German General Staff. The Franco-German War 1870-1871. 1:100, 110.; Moltke, The Franco- Prussian War of 1870-1871, 9-10.   
François Achille Bazaine, Épisodes de la Guerre de 1870 et le Blocus de Metz (Madrid: Gaspar, 1883), 18.
German General Staff, Franco-German War 1870-1871, 1:100.   
German General Staff, The Franco-German War 1870-1871, 1:205;
Wolfgang Foerster, Prinz
German General Staff, Franco-German War 1870-1871, 1:208-09.   
Ibid., 63. Detailed accounting using the numbers provided in the German official records puts the number closer to 22,000. It seems that Moltke might have included the casualties from Mars-la-Tour and Gravelotte battles when he wrote this entry.
Howard, 
Moltke, Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871, 26-29.   
Wolfgang Foerster, Prinz Friedrich Karl von  Preussen: Denkwürdigkeiten aus seinemLeben,  vol. 2 (Stuttgart: Dt. Verlag-Anst , 1910), 225.    
German General Staff, Franco-German War 1870-1871, 2:19; Howard, The Franco-Prussian  War, 170.   
Howard, Steinberg, Bismarck, 291; Wawro, 194.   
 94  The Steinmetz family papers were published at the beginning of the twentieth century; however, they contain no details on Steinmetz's point of view regarding his relief and reassignment.
Ibid., 3-9 -3-10.
Ibid., 3-3.
FM100-5 (1986), 21-22.    
FM100-5 (1993), 2-6.
NAME(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) U.S. Army Command and General Staff College
66027-2301 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
his failure at the Mance Ravine. Steinmetz fed his units into the battle piecemeal as they arrived on the battlefield in the hope of gaining the initiative. At one point, command and control broke down to the point that an ad hoc organization of 43 intermixed companies from seven different regiments stood ready to attack the French strongpoint at St. Hubert, but the subordinate commanders could not coordinate their movement effectively as they had in previous battles. 
85
Eduard Friedrich Karl von Fransecky's II Corps from Second Army. Steinmetz convinced the king that the battle at the Mance Ravine could be won with these soldiers. Poor reports coming back from the front lines had led Steinmetz to believe this was the case. The attack failed terribly until the arrival of II Corps' 4th Infantry Division at 2000 could stabilize the Prussian flank. 
86
Steinmetz's performance during the battle nearly led to his dismissal. The reports from his portion of the line were so confusing that no one really understood the tactical situation. The king moved the Royal Headquarters into Gravelotte during the battle so that he and Moltke could gain a better understanding of the battle by shortening the time it took to receive reports. Gen. Philip Sheridan, a US observer attached to the Royal Headquarters, described Steinmetz's meeting with the king at the headquarters in Gravelotte during the battle. The king summoned Steinmetz to explain his actions during the first few hours of the battle. Sheridan believed that Wilhelm would relieve Steinmetz on the spot for incompetence. The two commanders spoke for a while, during which the king's demeanor softened, and Steinmetz returned to command his army 85 Fritz Hönig, 24 Hours of Moltke's Strategy (1891; repr., Woolwich: The Royal Artillery Institution, 1895), 127. 
86
Despite the mixed successes of directive command in the first few weeks of August 1870, the Prussians continued to use it throughout the rest of the war. Moltke continued to refine his Direktiven doctrine after the war. Not everyone agreed that it worked. The US Army saw no use for German system of command and control. General Sheridan submitted a report to President Ulysses S. Grant stating: I saw no new military principles developed, whether of strategy or grand tactics, the movements of different armies and corps being dictated and governed by the same general laws that have so long obtained simplicity of combination and maneuver, and the concentration of a numerically superior force at the vital point. 
95
96
97
Bigelow and Wagner did not believe that the US Army could learn from Prussian wars of unification. They wrote extensively about the tactical errors committed by Prussian commanders in the Austro-Prussian War and the Franco-Prussian War. In both 1866 and 1870-1871, the German armies suffered more casualties than their enemy. Even Moltke and the German General 
95
96
97
In the early 1980s, the US Army seemed poised to make a major change in how it commanded and controlled large units. Many of the DePuy's critics argued that his restrictive methods no longer applied to a post-Vietnam War army striving for professionalism. Junior leaders resented a capstone manual written on the premise that they lacked the ability to think on the battlefield. In 1984, West Point conducted a survey of 23,000 company-and field-grade officers to determine their current perceptions of the organization's leadership. Nearly 49 percent of the surveyed officers responded that, "the bold, original, creative officer cannot survive in today's Army." 106 Gen. Donald Starry, DePuy's successor at TRADOC, concurred with these leaders and started to rollback DePuy's mechanical approach to the training and employment of the forces that emphasized firepower over maneuverability. 
107
108
109
The modern battlefield could limit the influence of Auftragstaktik on military operations.
Historian Robert Citino has argued in The German Way of War that no modern army could claim Auftragstaktik as the basis for its method of command and control for this very reason. To illustrate his point, he proposed a hypothetical situation during Operation Desert Storm that mirrored Steinmetz's maneuver into the flank of the Second Army prior to Battle of Spicheren.
Citino argued that scenario is nearly impossible because of modern command, control, and communications equipment. Even if a technology blackout had allowed the scenario to occur, under no circumstances could the corps commander explain away his division commander's flanking maneuver into a friendly unit the way Moltke explained away Steinmetz's maneuver. 
113
Arguably, the problem of commanders exerting too much oversight of their subordinate commanders is not unique to 21st century battlefield. During the Battle of Champion Hill during the 1863 Vicksburg campaign, Brig. Gen. John M. Logan had both the corps commander and the army commander immediately behind his brigade during its attack. 
114