# ID: 4eb724538c924bca850025584bd28b2a
# Title: General William C. Westmoreland: symbol of America to war, 1964-1968: symbol of war to America, 1982-1985: a study of three news magazines
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1988.0
# Fulltext:
This study examines how three major news magazines,
The Vietnam War was viewed by the American public as the most important problem facing the United States from 1963 to 1971, according to Gallup opinion polls, 
1
This study examines how the major news magazines that covered the war, Time, Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report characterized the general during his tour of command in Vietnam (1964-1968), and how they characterized him during his confrontation in the courtroom (1984-1985), to determine if the characterizations reflected public opinion about the military and the Vietnam War over time. Its purpose will also be to provide an insight into one facet of the quality of reporting during the Vietnam War. Supplemental articles from other magazines are also examined to flesh out the scope of the study. The study will not provide a content analysis of the articles but will approach them from a historical standpoint. This chapter briefly explains the nature of our The inal chapters examine characterizations of the general to address the thesis question.
Supremacy of civilian control of our government in war as well as in peace is fundamental to the institution of American democracy. The Armed Forces look to a civilian, the President of the United States, as their commander-in-chief. It is the president who sets the tone for the size and scope of the nation's defenses and the level of militarism supported by society.
Historically, Americans have rejected militarism exutpt when raced witn a nationally declared war. Since World War II, however, the notion of only supporting a strong national defense establishment during times of hostility has faded. The Cold War and an expanding world economy forced America to maintain defenses beyond the imperatives of isolationism. "A national security state has evolved since the National Security Act of 1947 created the three separate armed services, the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, and the Atomic Energy Commission. 
" 3
Fear became a justification for maintaining a strong national defense because Americans felt forced to choose between peace without arms against a Communist nuclear threat or a constant state of military preparedness. The United Nations, which was established to act as a world organization for peace, brought little comfort to the leaders of the United States, who eventually concluded that a strong military was necessary for deterrence.
Instead of its traditional reputation for being a peace-loving nation, the United States of the last three dscades has taken on the image --to some --of aggressor, with its "arsenal of democracy." 
4
In the Korean case, what opposition there was seems to have come from the Right. It was the conservative senator from Ohio, Robert Taft, after all, who called the Korean action "an utterly useless war."
By contrast, vocal opposition to the war in Vietnam seems to have come predominantly from the intellectual, nonunion Left, a group that has been called the journalistic-academic complex. 5   Mueller's "intellectual Left" accepted the Korean War and opposed the Vietnam War because of differences inthe Cold War atmosphere for each conflict. To the Left, the Korean War, although unpleasant, was necessary as a deterrent to Stalinist Russia. By the early 1960s, however, especially after the Cuban missile crisis, the Cold War threat posed by the Soviet Union diminished considerably, and the Left looked for modifications in American foreign policy when President Johnson committed American forces to Vietnam. According to Mueller:   In 1965, tle Johnson administration's position (more or less) was that, while Russia may have become less of a threat than previously, China still posed a significant challenge ... [t]hus, the standard cold war policy of containment was applicable there. Some of the cold war types within the intellectual Left may have been willing, in 1965, to grant this position. Within a year, however, this point was weakened by two events. The first was the abortive Communist coup attempt in Indonesia that led to Sukarno's downfall and to a sharp reversal of the country's pro-Chinese political trends. The second was the beginning of the highly diverting Red Guard movement within China. Therefore, for the cold warriors of the Left, the rationale for the Vietnam venture was no longer valid, and they could turn to opposition.6 Public opinion and support, therefore, became an increasingly important factor in the conduct of the Vietnam War -perhaps more than in any other war.
It was difficult for Americans to understand a war that never officially began or ended. For practical purposes, most students of the war would agree that the closest thing to an American declaration of war was President
Johnson's Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, and the closest thing to an end to the war was the final withdrawal of fighting troops in 1973 under President Nixon's "peace with honor" program. It was with such fuzziness the public --and press -- had to contend.
No comprehensive study of the Vietnam conflict has failed to mention public opinion as a measure of its success or failure, particularly after the 1968 Tet Offensive. 
7
President Johnson called Westmoreland home twice in the year prior to Tet to give Congress and the American public progress reports on the war. In April 1967, Westmoreland addressed a joint session of Congress.
According to an article in Time shortly after his speech:
"No other military commander had ever addressed a joint meeting of Congress in the midst of a conflict that he was still directing. 
' 8
' 9
1 1
In April of '67 I wasn't asked, I was ordered back then. I wasn't given an option: I was just told to come back. He did not warn that heavy fighting was ahead. He cited no problems. He concluded: "We are making progress. We know you want an honorable and early transition to the fourth and last phase [when U.S. units can begin to phase down]. So do your sons and so do I. It lies within our grasp --the enemy's hopes are bankrupt. With your support we will give you a success that will impact not only on South Vietnam but on every emerging nation in the world." 
1 4
And then I was asked to come back that year, and I talked to the National Press Club and I emphasized that I had been trying to improve the military ° I 10 capabilities of the South Vietnamese army because I hoped that some day that they could take over battle. I was thinking in terms of two years or less that we would start that process, but it would be progressive and it would be consistent with their ability to take over certain segments of the battlefield. Well the press blew that all out of perspective ... of course that's (his plans to bring troops home) since been portrayed as being overly optimistic. A commander isn't going to espouse gloom and doom. He's going to be honest, but unless his army is about to crumble ... he's not going to take a pessimistic attitude .... They (the press) can make a statement such as ours --which was a confidence statement --but they played it up as really upbeat. And the American people then were given the impression we were about to end the war.15 But the war did not end. On January 31, 1968, at 3:00 a.m., the Viet Cong, under the direction of the North Vietnamese army, launched the Tet Offensive or the "Monkey Offensive," because it was initiated during the Tet holiday --on the first day of the "Year of the Monkey." For two months, the commandos conducted a series of "go for broke" attacks against almost every major city and town in South Vietnam, including the American embassy in Saigon. The American news media seized the opportunity to make the offensive the "big story" of the Vietnam War, even though the scale of American losses was small. 
1 6
----------------------
1 9
In his autobiography, Westmoreland said: "The fact that the enemy had decided to change his strategy 'to make a maximum effort on all fronts (political and military) in order to achieve victory in a short period of time,' did nothing to alter my estimates of progress. In the prior months of fighting, I had learned conclusively that it was when the enemy came out of hiding to make some major attack that American firepower could be brought to bear with tremendous effect.. .it would be the beginning, as I had told Neil Sheehan, of 'a great defeat for the enemy.
, ,2 0
In a recent interview, Westmoreland lamented: "I told them (the press] the day [after the offensive] that this was the beginning of a big defeat of the enemy --
and they laughed at me, they ridiculed me. Well I was right and they know it now. But when they realized I was right they never did have the integrity to admit [later] P that they had misjudged it." 
2 1
2 2
that if these figures had not neen suppressed that the Tet Offensive would not have been such a military surprise. 
2 4
2 5
2
Almost every war in American history, with the
V'W .
w exception of World War II, has been unpopular with a sizable segment of the population. In the War of Independence, Tory Americans by the tens of thousands were hostile to the rebels and supported the redcoats by providing them with food and shelter.  opposition may be tolerated. "If the war is not for self preservation, does not involve the vital interests of the country, but is fought to extend or maintain exterior domination, men may openly disagree about the propriety of war as they do about questions of domestic policy that excite strong feelings. In such a case there may be no attempt to suppress opposition to the war by a force (such as action against treason). ' 8 Such is the challenge of winning public opinion.
The Vietnam War --Battle of the "Mindfield"
According to an article ir Army magazine, "The true arena of modern war is not the battlefield, but the For the first time in modern history, the outcome of a war was determined not on the battlefield but on the printed page and, above all, on the television screen. Looking back coolly, I believe it can be said ... that South Vietnamese and American forces actually won the limited military struggle. ... Nonetheless, the war was finally lost to the invaders after the U.S. disengagement because the political pressure built up by the media made it quite impossible for Washington to maintain even the minimal material and moral support that would have enabled the Saigon regime to continue effective resistance.11 Zs. j 5 .
.~ heavy American investment in lives, money and prestige in Viet-Nam, more than one in three Americans (35 per cent) confess that they simply haven't followed the situation there." 
1 3
' 1 4
In the early days of the war, of those people who had opinions about the Vietnam involvement, however, but also with no clear alternative.' 
1 6
1 8
Harris polled approved of the bombing (in another "rally round the flag" phenomenon), and 61 percent of the public said it would support sending more troops to the war. 
1 9
2 0
In January 1966, according to Gallup opinion data, 56 percent of the American people still supported the U.S. policies in Vietnam, even though they could not "fix" when the war would end. rating from the American public on the way he was handling his post, while Westmoreland earned a 68 percent positive rating on the way he carried out his assignment as commanding general in Vietnam. 
2 2
It is clear from the results that the American people are not particularly concerned at this juncture over keeping a strong civilian authority over the Pentagon. ... By 52 to 34 per cent the public feels that in wartime "civilian government leaders should let the military take over running the war." ... By a heavy 65 to 10 per cent the people feel that "in Vietnam the military has been handicapped by civilians who won't let them go all out." ...
The ratings accorded McNamara and Westmoreland suggest a public inclination to take out policy disagreements on the civilians vested with defense responsibilities and to give immunity to military leaders in the field ...
In the case of Westmoreland, a majority accord him a favorable rating regardless of their position on the war. However, the general received his highest marks from hawks and his lowest from doves. offensive, according to another Harris survey, support for the war had dropped to 54 percent --still a majority, but a drop of 20 percentage points in one month. 
2 5
Perhaps even more interesting is the second assessment by the American public of the job Westmoreland was doing. In the same one-month-post-Tet survey, the polls indicated that Westmoreland's popularity had dropped from a 68 percent positive response to a 52 percent positive response. This indicated, if Harris' earlier observations were true, that after Tet, the American public started to view military leadership as linked to the presidential administration.
Gallup opinion data from the same period reflected similar results (with the exception of a Westmoreland question), but Gallup went one step further with his observations, He noticed that after Tet the proportion of "hawks" to "doves" in the country had changed. Gallup a,-%0 reported: "Up until the time of the offensive, 'hawks' in this country had outnumbered 'doves' by 2-to-l. The Tet offensive, which initially increased the number of 'hawks' who wanted to 'strike back,' later contributed to a massive swing to the 'dove' side." 
2 7
2 8
By way of explanation, according to John Mueller, a "hawk" is someone who approves of the use of force to solve international problems, while a "dove" is someone who advocates peaceful resistance instead. 
2 9
The "Inevitable General"
Almost every characterization of Westmoreland makes the observation that he was the kind of person who was "born to be a general.  Airborne Division. He seized the opportunity. 
3
Ironically, however, while he was commanding the regiment of infantrymen (with an average age of about 20 What is a Combat Leader? Successful leaders were firmly in control of their units and were recognized as such by all concerned. They were almost always physically fit, in the sense of being conditioned for strenuous exertion. This fitness enhanced their image of being "the man in charge." The successful leader somehow had the ability always to be at the decisive point on the ground he was most needed to influence the action .
The successful leader had a particular facility for planning in detail, Westmoreland was no longer "back-page news" after he was selected as Time's "Man of the Year" for 1966. In the January 7, 1966, article  As commander of all U.S. forces in South Viet Nam, General William Childs Westmoreland, 51, directed the historic buildup, drew up the battle plans, and infused the 190,000 men under him with his own idealistic view of U.S. aims and responsibilities. He was the sinewy personification of the American fighting man of 1965 who, through the monsoon mud of nameless hamlets, amidst the swirling sand of seagirt enclaves, atop the jungled mountains of the Annamese Cordillera, served as the instrument of U.S. policy, quietly enduring the terror and discomfort of a conflict that was not yet a war, on a battlefield that was all no man's land. ...
There is an almost machinelike singlemindedness about him. His most vehement cuss words are "darn" and "dad-gum." A jut-jawed six footer, he never smokes, drinks little, swims and plays tennis to remain at a flat-bellied 180 lbs --only 10 lbs over his cadet weight. At his desk by 7:30, he rarely leaves it before nightfall, even then lugs home a fat briefcase. ...
to meet as many of his men as he possibly can.
A 1966 Newsweek article written eleven months later provided similar descriptions of the Vietnam conflict and the man in charge. In fact, it actually characterized him as a redeemer who brought South Vietnam out of a chaotic state following the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem --an assassination which officials in the Kennedy administration may have "allowed." 
1 2
The man who succeeded in transforming this impending tragedy into a now-conceivable triumph is Gen. William Childs Westmoreland ...
A courtly Carolinian whose ruggedly handsome features belie his 52 years, Westmoreland now leads a bigger expeditionary force than the U.S. had in Korea: 360,000 men. And though he operates at the end of a long chain of command that extends all the way back to the White House, "Westy" Westmoreland is unquestionably the major architect of American strategy in South Vietnam. Indeed, he was chosen for his post precisely because he was widely acclaimed by his colleagues to be one of the four or five outstanding officers in the U.S. Army.
For Westmoreland stands squarely in the greatest and most enduring U.S. military tradition. Like Winfield Scott, Ulysses Grant and Dwight Eisenhower before him, he eschews the romantic, hell-forleather approach to war and, instead sees it essentially a problem of -1
engineering, a task of patiently massing overwhelmingly superior resources against a stated objective.
(In a description of a specific military operation): During all this time, General Westmoreland seemed to be everywhere at once. Dressed in smartly starched jungle fatigues and a peaked baseball cap emblazoned with four stars, he has made it a point to inspect his troops in the field at least three times a week. On these trips, he arrives in a swirl of drama as soldiers from privates to majors push aside whatever they may be doing and throw out their chests to receive their commanding general. And commanding he is. Before making his pep talk, he plants himself firmly in front of his men, cocks his hands on his hips, arches his neck so that his firm jaw seems even firmer -and looks for all the world like the personification of the belligerent 13 American eagle.
For comparison purposes, Look and Life magazines ran very similar articles in 1966. It was a very good year for Westmoreland in the popular magazines. The Look article said: He commuted to the action, some 125,000 miles a year inside Vietnam alone. He spends four days a week in the field with his troops, making a circuit of all his major units every two weeks. Even privates are used to seeing him bound in almost anywhere.
As United States commander and senior military adviser in South Vietnam, he directs more than 300,000 Americans and influences virtually everybody else there. Such responsibility would erode someone who was softer, fatter or weaker. He tackles it by working all day, every day . ..
He is too dignified for a real *.
nickname. His men call him "Westy," but not often. Like Caeser in a far corner of Gaul, he has bound their isolation into a spirit of elite brotherhood. Any compliments he gets he accepts absently as really meant for those who serve under him. ...
Privates have a knack for cutting through the glitter and ribbons of rank to see if anybody's really there. "Most generals are just generals," a youngster in the 101st once noted. "But General Westmoreland, he's a commanding general." 
1 4
Before seeing him at work, one's first impression of General William Childs Westmoreland, code name Antelope, commander of all U.S. forces in Vietnam and chief architect of our strategy there, is that he somehow got immersed in the wrong war. In this modern and political conflict, Westmoreland is so strikingly uncontemporary that meeting him is a little like stumbling across a live dinosaur. His manners are courtly. He speaks in a Carolinian drawl and often with an archaic formality of phrasing. He is methodical rather than clever, organized rather than For all his personal conservatism and go-by-the-book appearance, Westmoreland despises military doctrine, and as a combat commander he has the instincts of a riverboat card shark.
Always Westmoreland drives himself and quietly but firmly prods everyone around him. Taking over in Vietnam, he quickly inaugurated for the whole command what weary subordinates call the Westmoreland Week --they're on the job seven days and put in a minimum of sixty hours. ...
At another camp he gets involved in an abstruse discussion with a baker over the composition of his dough, talking about it so knowledgeably that one would think he'd spent the .,.
best years of his life up co his elbows in bread mix. He has the capacity for remembering every trivial bit of information that might come in handy, and one suspects that if challenged to dredge up skills from his Boy Scout days, he could still toss off a bowline on a bight or stir up a pitcher of pink lemonade from a mess of staghorn sumac. 
1 5
In The Best and the Brightest he said: "The face was strong and sharp and finally clean, Westy was something clean. It was not surprising that as the war dragged on and became messier and messier, the Administration and the prowar media turned more and more to Westmoreland as a symbol of the U.S. presence, something clean in a very messy war. 
' ' 16
He will never be treated as a demigod, as was the charismatic MacArthur, and he is not yet a hero, as was Ike when he returned from Europe in 1945. Yet (from the momenL he was introduced), the tall, tanned soldier held Congress in thrall. He was the paradigm of the professional military man -dark hair fringed with grey, jaw square and trim, brown eyes alert under thick brown brows. His tunic was ablaze with the trophies of three wars --six tiers of campaign ribbons and medals from battles in North Africa and Sicily, France and Germany, Korea and Viet Nam, as well as the silver emblem of the master parachutist and the combat infantryman's badge. His very presence in the House was unprecedented. ...
As straightforward as he is straightbacked, he delivered a speech that was strong but not strident, emphatic without being emotional ...
(When he was finished speaking), [H]e turned to Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Speaker John McCormack on the dias behind him and saluted. Turning back toward the semicircular rows of seats, he saluted three times more -to those on his left, to those in front of him, and tothose on his right.
It was a gesture that came instinctively to him after 31 years as an officer, but as a symbol of deference by a military man to the civilian representatives, it was also politically astute.
Westmoreland's tribute to the Negro G.I. before an audience of Deep South legislators was very characteristic of him --and of the traits that have won him Lyndon Johnson's respect.
Johnson considers Westmoreland "the very best man" for the job in Viet Nam and believes he will one day be rated as a truly great general. 
1 7
Never before had an American military commander been summoned from the bat,..efront in the midst of the war to make a personal report for the people ... And so, with Lyndon Johnson stagemanaging from the wings, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, resplendent in an immaculately pressed uniform, his chest ablaze with six decks of combat ribbons and citations, stood at the speaker's rostrum ... to address a joint session of Congress.
There was no ambiguity and little eloquence in Westmoreland's report on the war. In marked contrast to the theatrics of Douglas MacArthur in the same chamber sixteen years before, he spoke with the unpolished simplicity of a battlefield leader who had come not to challenge his Commander in Chief's policy, but to drum up backing for it. (This is the article quoted in chapter one that said critics thought Johnson was exploiting his war hero for public relations purposes).
To the President's way of thinking, William Childs Westmoreland was just the man to help buttress the home-front war that Walter Lippmann last week flatly termed "the most unpopular war" in American history.
Westmoreland's rugged good looks and courtly military manner, it was felt, would dramatize the quality of the American fighting men in Vietnam; his very appearance would evoke a sense of loyalty and patriotism, and his position would give added authority to the reasons why the White House believes this war is being won.
Uncomfortable as he was in the limelight, Westmoreland did all he could to accomplish his mission ... General Westmoreland carries in his pocket a card listing seven reasons why the U.S. will eventually lose the war --as set forth by North Vietnam's Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap. The American commander feels he has coped with all but two of these: U.S. opinion and world opinion. The field commander has come home to convert the doubters and firm up the convictions of the Administration's supporters. 18   Westmoreland's second trip home in November 1967 to speak to the Press Club did not receive any immediate coverage by the news magazines, but the optimism he displayed was mentioned in the magazines' assessments of his role in the Tet Offensive. Once again, a significant event produced a series of similar articles. This time, the articles characterized and criticized the general. William C. Westmoreland that, more and more, is seen as hanging in the balance. Up to now, General Westmoreland has been almost untouchable as a target of criticism.
As the hero of Vietnam, he has been marked as a future Chief of Staff of the Army. In the tradition of an Eisenhower or a MacArthur, he has played the role of "field marshal" on a major battleground.
Now, with the war getting rough... military events, without reflecting Administration displeasure with the General. Boiled down, the controversy is not over a personality. Rather it is between two opposing strategies to win the limited objectives of the U.S. in Vietnam. But it is the strategy of the commander on the spot -- General Westmoreland --that is the more likely to have the acid test of success or failure on the field of battle. 
1 9
Despite the undercuzrent of criticism directed at Westmoreland, Johnson retains a strong faith in his abilities .... Westmoreland's peers, too, give him high marks for certain aspects of his performance in Viet Nam. (Here the article discussed positive aspects of his strategies and praised him for his logistical genius).
Westmoreland is most often faulted on two counts: 1) over-optimistic statements, and 2) faulty intelligence about the enemy. (The article discussed the optimism Westoreland displayed just after the offensive) ... But the White House found his optimism in the midst of carnage a trifle embarrassing. Privately, Johnson last week ordered the general to tone it down.
. To some experts, Westmoreland's prime weakness as a commander ... is the opposite of the late Douglas MacArthur's. He is too willing to accept orders from Washington without fighting for his own views. ... "This emphatically is not 'Westmoreland's War,' observes Time Washington Bureau Chief John Steele. "In years past it has been quite properly referred to as 'McNamara's War,' and currently it can be referred to as 'Johnson's War.' "From no source is there real criticism yet of Westy's military activities." ... Undoubtedly, history's judgment of Westmoreland's generalship will depend in large measure on the outcome of the expected Khe Sanh battle. 
2 1
particularly in terms of TV film, still photographs, and 'news analysis,' than the NVA's [North Vietnamese Army) 77-day seige of the U.S. Marine Combat Base at Khe Sanh, in the mountainous northwest corner of South Vietnam.
Khe Sanh was the most important continuing story during
Tet." 
2 3
The "story" of Khe Sanh, however, was how much it resembled the disaster suffered by the French garrison of Dienbienphu in 1954.24 The facts were that although the Marines did suffer losses, they were only a small fraction of those suffered by other U.S. units during the Tet period. Also, no disaster occurred -as had happened at Dienbienphu --and the Marines pulled out. 
2 5
The Newsweek article after the Tet Offensive said:
As they contemplated this savage combat in cities that they had been told were impregnably defended, many Americans had a sense of having been hoodwinked. And in an upsurge of national self-doubt, they asked themselves how the U.S. had ever stumbled into such a reverse. Inevitably, some sought a scapegoat on whom to pin the blame. And just as inevitably, the figure most conveniently at hand was the commander on the spot, General William Childs Westmoreland. ...
Westmoreland's initial decision (to bring large numbers of American troops into Vietnam) was no doubt forced on him by events, and probably averted imminent defeat. But it also had some unfortunate consequences.
What's more, while Westmoreland's style of leadership goes down extremely well with U.S. troops, he never seemed really at home with the introspective Vietnamese character. ... For all his background as an airborne commander, in fact, Westmoreland's conception of warfare in Vietnam has proved relatively unconventional. ... This, critics say, has often led to an excessive reliance on technology rather than military ingenuity.
Westmoreland appears, at least for now, to have been placed in a major predicament.
... As a result, he has come under increasing criticism for pursuing a strategy that attempts too many things at once ... Even Westmoreland's severist critics, however, admit that responsibility for the shape of U.S. military policy in Vietnam is by no means his alone. ... Moreover, every influential U.S. official has only the highest praise for Westmoreland himself -even off the record. Says one Washington insider: "There is an absolutely universal feeling among the President, Rusk, McNamara and General Wheeler that Westmoreland is the best military leader this country could put out there." Indeed, when he returns home (probably this summer) it will almost surely be to a promotion to Army Chief of Staff --or even to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. ... But whatever the close-knit fraternity of officials in Washington and Saigon may say, it seems clear that ordinary Americans are likely to grow increasingly skeptical of both Westmoreland and of U.S. strategy in Vietnam. 
2 6
2 7
Successful employment of search-and-destroy missions would require use of American ground forces, thereby giving the primary resonsibility of the war to the U.S.
Army and effectively denying Republic of Vietnam forces participation until the Viet Cong had been seriously crippled.
The criticisms of this strategy centered on % %
' .
I its futility and the conventional wisdom behind it --the enemy forces were able to quickly rebuild their losses and turn to alternate means of supply. 
2 8
Westmoreland was a conventional officer chosen for an unconventional war.
The  It was, after all, the tone of the broadcast that implied that if he had not suppressed the information, the Tet Offensive may have never happened. 
3
When I retired I was sick ... sick and disgusted --disgusted probably a better term --of the way the Vietnam veteran had been treated. I decided that was going to be my number one priority. I vowed to myself that I was going to accept every speech by any group to talk about Vietnam. ... I talked on the most emotionally charged campuses in the country. ... I've been spat upon, I've been booed, I've been hissed. And V, I didn't let it bother me..... It was not pleasant. On the other hand, I think it was a duty. I was a lightning rod at that time and I realized it ... and I wanted to be the lightning rod. I didn't want that little soldier --who did a heck of a job over there --to be the lightning rod. And I vowed to do everything I can to square the record, p .3p
to make known the facts that had been so distorted and to make known that that soldier had done a good job. He had been poorly treated. And of course, I'm not saying I was responsible. I was a factor, probably a relatively small factor, in turning around public opinion. 
4
7
Roche, an editor with National Review said:
Readers ask why I have not commented on Mike Wallace's ninety-minute (broadcast on Westmoreland).
First, I did not watch the program deliberately. I consider Wallace to be the top mugger in a tough field of TV gonzos and knew he would do a number on Westy. General William Westmoreland is an officer who would conduct himself nobly on a battlefield, but he is no match for a bushwhacker like Wallace .
I obtained a transcript of the show and read it with minute care. ... Going over the transcript was a sorrowful task. Poor Westy came out sounding like the village idiot who was unaware his staff was cooking statistics. Or worse, an accomplice, as was suggested by several characters who once lurked in the bowels of the Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) and claimed to have doctored the numbers on order. 
8
1 1
One of the articles gave a fair appraisal of all the factors involved, but paid specific attention to Tet and how the tide of public opinion turned after the offensive. 
1 2
"But what a lawsuit: At one table sits Westmoreland, the former commander of 500,000 American combat troops in Vietnam, as erect at 70 as a West Point cadet, his jaw still Jutting upward like the chassis of an armored halftrack.
... For all his relaxed demeanor, the stakes could hardly be higher: Westmoreland wants $120 million in damages and the CBS corporate eye on his sword." 
1 3
Westmoreland continues to insist that the settlement was in fact a "victory" for him, although he came out of it with no money and no retraction. What Westmoreland won was an eight-sentence "joint statement" conceding that CBS "does not believe that General Westmoreland was unpatriotic or disloyal in performing his duties as he saw them."
Westmoreland said repeatedly last week that if this language had been offered at any earlier point, he would have withdrawn the suit. Still, it is difficult to imagine a former four-star general spending $3.3 million to obtain a validation of his patriotism. ... Westmoreland intends to return home to South Carolina and "try to fade away," as he puts it.
That may well be his fate; the general who bears much of the burden of America's defeat in Vietnam emerged from this last battle as a majestically pitiable man, out of his depth, victimized by bad advice and the exigencies of a situation he never understood. 14   The U.S. News & World Report and Time articles about the dropped lawsuit focused not on Westmoreland, but on the impact of libel trials on the media. All three magazines under study, at some time during the trial, used the opportunity to comment on some of the shortcomings of journalism. For instance, Newsweek ran an article called "The Media in the Dock." 
1 5
1 6
1 7
Similarly, several articles in other contemporary magazines criticized CBS for its lack of ethics in preparing the documentary and faulted the basic logic of the broadcast, which implied that Westmoreland had been successful at withholding information from the president.
Many journalists, liberal and conservative, found this allegation that Westmoreland could be guilty of deceit preposterous. 18 The charge did not seem to fit the man. I mean here I was a man -not povertystricken --but not an exceptionally wealthy person. I did take on one of the wealthiest, most influential institutions in America. And the American people, I gather, discerned this. And based on my mail --it was absolutely amazing the letters I got -- telephone calls, telegrams. I think American people are more sophisticated than many people give them credit for. I think they are inclined to support the little man so to speak as oppposed to the wealthy giants. This helps balance the slate. 
1 9
The question this study sought to answer was did the Conversely, in the 1980s, when the American public was experiencing a renewed interest in the military and was again supporting a "hawkish" presidential administration, the news magazines provided skimpy characterizations of the general. 
the way President Johnson was handling the war. This -in retrospect --was the beginning of a downward trend for the president's popularity with the American people.
the way President Johnson was handling the war. This -in retrospect --was the beginning of a downward trend for the president's popularity with the American people.
" Westmoreland was born on March 26, 1914, in Saxon, South Carolina, to an uppermiddle-class family. His father was businessman and a banker, and his mother had come from a well-known Columbia family. 1 While growing up in Spartanburg, Westmoreland was always athletic and well-liked. As a teenager, he was an Eagle Scout and was Spartanburg's representative to the Boy Scout World Jamboree in Europe. It was while traveling in Europe that Westmoreland decided the military might be a good way for him to see the world. The senator convinced Westmoreland that the Army would offer a better life and instead appointed him to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Once again, Westmoreland excelled, but not so much in academics as leadership. Despite the fact that he finished academically with an average class ranking, he ranked eighth in his class in tactics. He also achieved the rank of "First Captain" of his class, marking him the senior-ranking cadet in the Class of '36. Upon graduation, Westmoreland chose field artillery as his specialty.
it.
it.
-A':
3 Harris did not mention the possible effect Westmoreland's April and November 1967 visits and addresses to Congress and the National Press Club might have had on the outcome of the public's opinion of him. The January-February 1968 Tet Offensive represented a major turning point for public opinion about the war.For a brief time after the offensive Americans supported the war, as they had for the Tonkin and bombing incidents in the past. In fact, a Harris poll conducted just after the offensive indicated that 74 percent of the American public supported the war, up 13 percentage points from a December 1967 survey.2 4  But within one month after the Ie'r
S.•'A
Braestrup found that both of the magazines had turned to negative reporting about the conflict itself. 
3 2
Newsweek remained heavily negative throughout the two-month Tet period., 
'3 3
Newsweek's running a close second, with two to three-page articles. The U.S. News & World Report articles only averaged about one page per article. This disparity in coverage may be somewhat related to the number of reporters each magazine had in the field in Vietnam. Westmoreland had trained and studied and prepared for an entire career for this command, but he would, like so many others, be a victim of his own war; in another time, a simpler war, he would have been the ideal general, decent, intelligent but not brilliant, hard-working, courageous, respectful of civilian authority, liked by the men who served under him, ideally trained to fight a great, wellorganized war on the plains of Germany. Perhaps his name would have ranked with that of Eisenhower, Bradley, Ridgway, the best of our professional soldiers.
But this war would stain him as it stained everything else ... If going by the book could have done it, he would have been a success too, for he was a stickler for the book; it had brought him far. Instead he came home to a country torn apart by the war, and he himself was one more symbol of that division, a painful and bitter reward for a lifetime of service. 
3 5
Even after the Tet Offensive, when one would expect the coverage of Westmoreland's character to change, the news magazines were reporting, not generating criticism of the general. He was able to leave his command in Vietnam relatively unscathed by the media represented by Time, Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report.
And, after his retirement in 1972, Westmoreland disappeared from the front pages -except where he gave speeches -until CBS thrust him there again in 1982, with its program "The Uncounted Enemy."
The documentary relied heavily upon interviews with former generals, a CIA analyst (Sam Adams), and other bureaucrats from the Vietnam War era, who claimed they were ordered --in some cases by Westmoreland --not to exceed a pre-set ceiling when reporting enemy troop strength figures and infiltration rates.
The portions of the interview when Westmoreland was on camera were extremely unflattering to the man who had always been characterized as handsome and immaculate.
In the documentary, he looked confused and nervous, and was constantly licking his lips. This combination of unfavorable verbal and visual portrayals of the general made the broadcast devastatingly believable.
To some it had the same kind of prisoner-in-the-dock quality we saw at the Nazi trials in Nuremberg --the high brought low. But, if so, the question was: Did General Westmoreland "deserve" this treatment or had CBS ambushed him? 2
Honor at Stake Perhaps Westmoreland wanted to put an end to what 1-e K perceived as unfavorable opinions the American public had concerning his role and the actions of his soldiers in Vietnam, or perhaps he was fed up with the media, or a q consumate professional --the ultimate soldier. As a commander, he displayed all the attributes of a model combat leader.
He was a symbol of the United States presence in Vietnam, both in his stature and in his outlook. The big man was there to help the "little people." As is the habit of the United States government when it intervenes in the affairs of third-world nations, it tried to Americanize the Vietnamese. Westmoreland, the all-American "boy," even at 50, was a good candidate for that task, and a good subject for symbolic representations in the media. 
IRay G.        Westview Press, 1977), p. 319.
3 Ibid. 
3