# ID: 4eb724538c924bca850025584bd28b2a
# Title: General William C. Westmoreland: symbol of America to war, 1964-1968: symbol of war to America, 1982-1985: a study of three news magazines
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1988.0
# Fulltext:
By contrast, vocal opposition to the war in Vietnam seems to have come predominantly from the intellectual, nonunion Left, a group that has been called the journalistic-academic complex.
5   Mueller's "intellectual Left" accepted the Korean War and opposed the Vietnam War because of differences inthe Cold War atmosphere for each conflict.
To the Left, the Korean War, although unpleasant, was necessary as a deterrent to Stalinist Russia.
By the early 1960s, however, especially after the Cuban missile crisis, the Cold War threat posed by the Soviet Union diminished considerably, and the Left looked for modifications in American foreign policy when President Johnson committed American forces to Vietnam.
According to Mueller:   In 1965, tle Johnson administration's position (more or less) was that, while Russia may have become less of a threat than previously, China still posed a significant challenge ... [t]hus, the standard cold war policy of containment was applicable there.
Some of the cold war types within the intellectual Left may have been willing, in 1965, to grant this position.
Within a year, however, this point was weakened by two events.
The first was the abortive Communist coup attempt in Indonesia that led to Sukarno's downfall and to a sharp reversal of the country's pro-Chinese political trends.
The second was the beginning of the highly diverting Red Guard movement within China.
Therefore, for the cold warriors of the Left, the rationale for the Vietnam venture was no longer valid, and they could turn to opposition.6 Public opinion and support, therefore, became an increasingly important factor in the conduct of the Vietnam War -perhaps more than in any other war.