# ID: 4f8b45adfc87467da11a8dac2f37bf72
# Title: Rethinking Special Operations Armed Overwatch
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The 2017 ambush of four US special operations soldiers in Niger prompted United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) to
The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the student author and do not necessarily represent the views of the US Army Command and General Staff College or any other government agency. (References to this study should include the foregoing statement.) Fair use determination or copyright permission has been obtained for the inclusion of pictures, maps, graphics, and any other works incorporated into this manuscript. A work of the US government is not subject to copyright, however further publication or sale of copyrighted images is not permissible.
Airplanes engaged in reconnaissance missions will be prepared to attack hostile ground forces, in order that emergency combat support may be rendered [to] friendly ground units without delay.
-United States Marine Corps, Small Wars Manual, 1940
On October 4, 2017, armed Islamic State militants ambushed a United States Special Forces (SF) team near Tongo Tongo, Niger.0 F0F 1 Four American SF and five allied Nigerien troops died during the attack.1 F1F 2 The incident represented the most significant combat loss of American lives in Africa since the Battle of Mogadishu in 1993.2 F2F 3 Subsequent concern over US special operations military activities in Africa led to formal congressional and United States Africa Command (AFRICOM) investigations.
The roles of airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), command and control (C2), and close air support (CAS) were significant factors in the review of the Tongo Tongo incident. First, an airborne ISR asset that initially supported the SF team during their mission was re-tasked to support another military objective before the team returned to their base.3 F3F 4 After friendly troops encountered enemy fire, it took ninety-one minutes for a US aircraft to arrive overhead.4 F4F
5
1 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, "An Operation in Niger Went Fatally Awry. Who Is the Army Punishing?," The New York Times, November 3, 2018, accessed August 10, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/03/world/middleeast/army-niger-members-punished.html.
2 Ibid. 
3
4
The AFRICOM investigation found that ISR "was hindered by limited operational planning and procedures, and a lack of coordination and synchronization with US forces and partner nations."5 F5F 6
The SF team did not receive dedicated airborne ISR throughout the entirety of the mission.6 F6F 7
Conceivably, uninterrupted ISR coverage, especially from the same platform, would have alerted friendly forces to the advance of potentially hostile forces during critical stages of the mission.
Finally, the inability to provide immediate CAS from a US military aircraft was significant. The only available CAS, two allied French fighter jets, were not airborne when the enemy first attacked the SF team.7 F7F 8 Once the jets arrived overhead to assist, they could not establish contact with the SF team, identify their exact location, or distinguish enemy personnel.8 F8F 9 Outside of providing a show of force, they were combat ineffective for their intended purpose of providing CAS.
These findings point to a resounding conclusion: an airborne platform capable of providing a distinctive arrangement of dedicated ISR, discrete CAS, and C2 would likely have alerted the SF team to hostile forces and prevented the event's tragic outcome. Today, the Tongo Tongo incident represents a watershed event within United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM). The outcome serves as a seminal foundation for the acquisition effort of an entirely new USSOCOM aviation program called "armed overwatch." 6 US Africa Command, "Army Regulation 15-6 Investigation Findings: 4 October 2017 Enemy Contact Event in Tongo Tongo, Niger" (Memorandum for Commander, October 14, 2017), 130, accessed October 26, 2020, https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_document/34-8._exhibit_2.7_3.25.20.pdf, document is now declassified. 
7
4_3.25.20.pdf. 8
9
The armed overwatch program received formal support from stakeholders within USSOCOM.9 F9F
10
11
12
13
14
15
1. What is armed overwatch, and what are its doctrinal roles and characteristics?
2. What does a dual framework of special operations unique missions and historical applications of armed overwatch suggest regarding its validity?
3. What is armed overwatch's role and responsibility in future threat environments amid an era of great power competition, and does this indicate a need to rethink alternatives?
Organizational theorist Karl Weick defines "sensemaking" as the process of "turning circumstances into a situation that is comprehended explicitly in words that serve as a springboard into action."1 5F15F 16 Tongo Tongo's circumstances give meaning to armed overwatch and help give the requirement an identity and a shared narrative. However, as Congress has indicated in the NDAA, more analysis is needed to answer the question of "what is the story of armed overwatch?" Making sense of armed overwatch requires an understanding of clear roles, responsibilities, and characteristics. The first section of this monograph will examine armed overwatch through doctrine to determine its identity. The term armed overwatch is presently used interchangeably as a program, mission, and potential future aircraft. Armed overwatch's lack of exact meaning prevents common understanding and obstructs identity and narrative development crucial to gaining Congressional approval and funding. Doctrine is a helpful framework to develop a clear and shared understanding of armed overwatch and is valuable in determining a succinct identity and forming a crisp narrative.
Second, special operations activities as defined by US Title 10 law, coupled with historical case studies, provide another lens to analyze armed overwatch. Special reconnaissance (SR), direct action, and counter insurgency (COIN) represent three special operations activities that prove armed overwatch is valid because it is a historical aerial mission. Surprising examples from the American Civil War, early 20th century Marine Corps' expeditions, and Korean and Vietnam Wars illustrate a critical point: armed overwatch is not a new idea or unique to special operations but rather an enduring military phenomenon.
Finally, the character of warfare has changed substantially in recent years due to the shifting geopolitical environment. Armed overwatch must have a clearly defined role in the present era of great power competition. Despite the strategic focus and anticipation of potential major combat operations with Russia or China, conflict below the threshold of large-scale combat in non-permissive environments is likely to persist as a national security threat. A Cold War-era theory of warfare illustrates validity for a "low-end" armed overwatch requirement within a paradigm of peer or near-peer competition. Alternatively, in an entirely different scenario, armed overwatch must be mindful of the future threat environment, especially the semi or nonpermissive one. To that end, a manned, fixed-wing armed overwatch platform tied to airfields and dependent on centralized logistics might be doctrinally and materially incompatible with a contested future battlespace.
USSOCOM is unique compared to the military services. It has prescribed express authority by Title 10 US law to pursue the "development and acquisition of special operationspeculiar" equipment and does so through either rapid or deliberate processes.1 6F16F
17
20
An acquisition effort for a novel and potentially costly aircraft program without a joint doctrinal foundation requires a greater degree of explanation because it lacks shared understanding. A lack of doctrinal standardization leaves enormous room for interpretation across the joint force, notwithstanding limitations, integration, tactics, techniques, and procedures.
USSOCOM acknowledges armed overwatch's mission void and submits that it is the unique combination of the missions of CAS, armed ISR, precision strike, and strike coordination and reconnaissance (SCAR).2 0F20F
21
Current US military doctrine provides a minimal reference to armed overwatch. A 2008 military journal article written by current Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategy, Integration, and Requirements, Lieutenant General Clinton "Q" Hinote, defines armed overwatch as "not CAS, but not ISR either."2 1F21F 22 Joint Publication (JP) 3-05, Special Operations, revised and updated in September 2020, makes zero references to the term.2 2F22F 23 The multi-service manual for the joint application of firepower, more commonly known as JFIRE, contains no armed overwatch definition.2 3F23F 24
Because the term armed overwatch lacks definition, we must assign it meaning. Doctrinal gaps and voids offer virtually no foundation for understanding its character and nature and do little to determine its roles and responsibilities of a mission or suggest the program's validity and pursuit of a new aircraft. Therefore, one way of better understanding armed overwatch's identity is through an indirect analysis of its four proposed doctrinal mission characteristics.
One common criticism of armed overwatch is that it is merely the mission of CAS by another name. The DoD Dictionary defines CAS as "Air action by aircraft against hostile targets that are in close proximity to friendly forces and that require detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of those forces."2 4F24F 25 Likewise, joint doctrine defines CAS as the employment of "speed, range, maneuverability to attack targets that other supporting arms might not be able to engage due to limitations such as target type, range, terrain, or ground  
31
The A-10 was explicitly designed for CAS. In 2018, the A-10 fleet size was deemed inadequate to support the National Defense Strategy's (NDS) requirements.3 1F31F
32
33
Even with modern upgrades, the A-10 is nearly fifty years old, and in that span, the total fleet size has slowly eroded. Due in part to this challenge, the Air Force's OA-X Light Attack Aircraft (LAA) initiative was intended to remedy this readiness imbalance by acquiring a new two-seat turboprop airplane designed for CAS operations in COIN operating environments. Since then, the LAA program has stagnated due to fiscal constraints, manpower limitations, and a national strategy shift toward great power competition. LAA and armed overwatch are mutually exclusive, and both programs will likely not be simultaneously funded. This illustrates a fundamental and historical C2 problem with CAS. The Air Force tenet of "centralized control, decentralized execution" is predicated on the philosophy that resourcescarce aircraft offer potentially operational and strategic effects.3 4F34F 
35
36
40
However, this CAS doctrinal terminology does not comprehensively account for the entirety of an armed overwatch requirement.
An important finding from the AFRICOM Tongo Tongo investigation found that aircraft response time was hindered by "limited operational planning and procedures, and a lack of coordination and synchronization with US forces and partner nations."4 2F42F 43 This finding signals the heart of USSOCOM's request for CAS from an armed overwatch platform: the ability to assign perpetually dedicated CAS independent of centralized C2. XCAS, as a centrally controlled 37 US Air Force, Volume 1, Basic Doctrine, 67. function, cannot assure complete and comprehensive CAS coverage for special operations forces (SOF). Furthermore, XCAS and GCAS cannot guarantee direct support for SOF missions.
Therefore, armed overwatch requires a distinctive type of dedicated CAS that is not wholly defined or articulated by the present Air Force CAS C2 doctrine and missions (Appendix C). In particular, the Air Force's CAS integration model is theoretically too centralized and not flexible enough to support SF teams like those operated in Niger. Geographically isolated SOF requires organic and dedicated CAS that provides direct support due to the unique geographical demand of operating in austere environments.
Present CAS doctrine is relatively incompatible with one of the chief requirements of armed overwatch: "direct support of small, geographically isolated SOF units."4 3F43F 44 If one imagines Air Force CAS doctrine and the various requests, missions, and methods as a Venn diagram, then armed overwatch is analogous to the center of this diagram in which present CAS doctrine converges, but no cumulative or independent criteria exist (see Appendix C and Appendix D).
Alternatively, resourcing limitations will always persist due to the unique operational environments of SOF. The unique CAS requirement of tactical SOF echelons in the austere environments among unique SOF resourcing requirements illustrates two essential ideas. First, armed overwatch needs to be understood as a mission before a program. Second, a requirement for this type of mission can be filled by CAS capable aircraft but is limited by current CAS inventory, such as the A-10.
Armed Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance also lacks a common joint doctrinal definition. JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations, defines ISR as: 44 USSOCOM, U.S. Special Operations Validation of Special Operations Rapid Requirements Document for Special Operations Forces Armed Overwatch, 1.
1. An integrated operations and intelligence activity that synchronizes and integrates the planning and operation of sensors, assets, and processing, exploitation, and dissemination systems in direct support of current and future operations. 2. The organizations or assets conducting such activities.4 4F44F 45 CAS and ISR's relationship is critical to understanding armed overwatch because they represent its two primary missions. Joint doctrine addresses the overlap of the two to a limited degree. JP 3-09.3 lists ISR as a consideration in troop support but not a primary role for CAS.4 5F45F 
46
48
The MQ-9 is an armed, multi-mission asset with an intelligence collection mission that can also perform limited CAS.4 9F49F 50 The special operations variants primarily conduct ISR in direct support of current and future SOF operations. To be sure, the MQ-9 does not match the CAS capabilities of the A-10. It lacks armament because it is primarily an ISR mission with robust electro-optical sensors, advanced radio-communications suites, data-link capabilities, and the ability to transmit and deliver secure voice communications full-motion video. A multi-mission platform that combines CAS characteristics with the advanced suite of ISR sensors is a blend of functions that armed overwatch requires overhead the battlefield, and the present doctrine fails to account for entirely.
The A-10 lacks the multiple advanced ISR capabilities that a multi-mission MQ-9 can employ, while the MQ-9 lacks the considerable weapons complement of ordnance, forward-firing cannon, and CAS the A-10 delivers. Army assets, such as the MQ-1C Gray Eagle, the RQ-7B Shadow, and AH-64 Apache, provide varying degrees of organic ISR and CAS to support a ground force commander's objective.5 0F50F 51 However, even in these direct support roles, aircraft, by being a limited resource, face similar C2 challenges at the division and corps echelons as that of the centralized Air Force construct.
C2 issues that operationally limit CAS for USSOCOM under an Air Force system also affect ISR. USSOCOM has a military department's distinctive role, such as the Army or Air Force, and a geographic combatant command, assigned with "unique functions, responsibilities, and authorities" prescribed by US law.5 1F51F 52 ISR is a significant military demand for all combatant commands and exacerbated by the limited number of airborne ISR platforms and missions allocated to accomplish their intelligence-gathering demands. The cumulative requirement for global ISR demand exceeds capability by a wide margin and is a common geographic combatant 51 US Department of the Army, FM 3-04, Army Aviation (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2017). Presently, the Air Force utilizes most of its ISR platforms to prosecute national-level objectives and meet mission requirements.5 3F 54 These objectives usually are strategically oriented and generally do not prioritize special operations tactical mission requirements or goals. Air Force doctrine states, "timely detailed and global integrated ISR support is vital to special operations."5 4F 55 However, it is illogical to assume dedicated ISR allocated under the global ISR management planning process would receive prioritization, allocation, and decentralization under the purview of SOF, as joint doctrine suggests.5 5F55F 56
A doctrinal gap exists between ISR and CAS that is not accounted for by current joint doctrine. This void justifies a new mission that more fully blends the doctrinal characteristics of both ISR and CAS. The full potential of both missions is not accounted for by doctrine nor a current multi-mission aircraft. This exclusion highlights the need for a new armed overwatch doctrinal mission and, ultimately, the program.
In a now common theme, precision strike also has no DoD or joint publication definition.
However, it is defined in Air Force Annex 3-05, Special Operations:
Precision strike provides the joint force commander and the SOF operator with specialized capabilities to find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess (F2T2EA) targets. F2T2EA can use a single weapon system or a combination of systems to complete the kill chain. Precision strike missions include close air support, air interdiction, and armed reconnaissance. Attributes associated with precision strike include persistence, robust communications, high situational awareness, precise target identification, lethality, and survivability, as required.5 6F56F 57 US military UAVs' usage to conduct counterterrorism (CT) operations and hunt highvalue targets utilizing precision strikes as part of the F2T2EA process had become widely synonymous with the Global War on Terror. Despite the well-publicized effects of precision strike across mainstream media, however, the term remains remarkably ill-defined. The absence within current US doctrine is even starker. The precision strike concept dates to the mid-1980s when Soviet military authors first characterized it as "a new family of highly accurate, precisionguided deliver systems for non-nuclear munitions."5 7F 58 Despite nearly forty years of theory, amidst the employment of drone strikes in US CT operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, an approved joint doctrinal definition for precision strike remains remarkably non-existent.
Former Air Force pilot and author Barry Watt provides a rich study of the evolution of precision strike and makes an essential observation of why the diffusion of precision strike doctrine has been relatively slow. Watt suggests that precision strikes, or what he also refers to as "reconnaissance strike," have not achieved a greater diffusion among allies and adversaries due to complexity and other nations' adoption.5 8F58F 59
Air Force doctrine defines precision strike as capabilities to conduct F2T2EA via missions that include "close air support, air interdiction, and armed reconnaissance."5 9F59F 60 However, the absence of a formal precision strike definition from joint doctrine is puzzling but does not suggest that armed overwatch is an illegitimate requirement. Though poorly defined in joint doctrine, precision strike has a tremendous identity and shared understanding through its 57 US Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Annex 3-05, Special Operations (Maxwell  AFB, AL: Government Publishing Office, 2020) execution and application (not to mention its ubiquity across media like television shows). Absent clear joint doctrine, the Air Force doctrinal definition of a precision strike as a framework to understand precision strike suggests validity and legitimacy for armed overwatch. It is critical, though, that the precision strike doctrinal "knot" be untangled for the nature of armed overwatch to gain greater comprehensive meaning and clear understanding. CAS, it is a mission that numerous aircraft can conduct, rather than a dedicated platform-centric concept.
The "Franken-doctrine" approach to creating a new doctrinal mission for armed overwatch from four separate doctrinal missions comes up short. An analysis of present doctrine shows that armed overwatch presently lacks identity because a clear and explicit doctrine of its subordinate characteristics does not exist. An attempt to doctrinally isolate armed overwatch and characterize it is confusing because the components that form its whole are either likewise not defined or too similar. Additionally, CAS and ISR do not account for the unique requirements of C2 requirements suggested by armed overwatch. Armed ISR and precision strike are themselves doctrinally ill-defined and, although they have relative levels of shared understanding via their significant application in the previous two decades. However, using them as foundational reasoning for an entirely new doctrinal mission misses the mark. As the least well-known mission, SCAR prescribes the best doctrinal foundation and an independent model for how armed overwatch could be codified within the doctrine.
A doctrinal analysis proves that a new type of armed overwatch mission is both justified and legitimate, lending validity to the program's ambitions. However, there is considerable ambiguity surrounding the meaning of armed overwatch through the lens of doctrine. Meaning cannot be assigned to armed overwatch until it is better defined and develops a better identity through doctrine. Likewise, the arrangement of its four characteristics within one another is opaque. Complete doctrinal clarity is not a precursor to the fielding or justification of a new requirement. However, for armed overwatch to mature from its present ambiguous state, it must be codified in joint doctrine as a mission. Within the framework of present joint doctrine, armed overwatch makes the most sense as a subordinate mission of CAS. Doctrine is just one way to form an identity and create a shared understanding.
Fortunately, doctrine is relatively easy to create or modify to assign meaning. Historical examples and case studies provide another way to examine armed overwatch to inform its present identity.
If the enemy is to be struck while he is most vulnerable, he must be attacked immediately by the air patrol, which discovers him. 
The DoD dictionary of military terms defines SR as: "Reconnaissance and surveillance actions conducted as a special operation in hostile, denied, or diplomatically and/or politically sensitive environments to collect or verify information of strategic or operational significance, 
68
71
Reconnaissance is not just implied in the definition of SR; it is part of its name. JP 3-05 makes no distinction between ground-based or airborne SR, only mentioning that ISR is not confused with SR.7 8F78F 79 An Air and Space Power Journal essay acknowledges this inconsistency and submits that SR requires a formal distinction between air and ground domains. 
The DoD dictionary defines direct action as: "Short duration strikes and other small-scale offensive actions conducted as a special operation in hostile, denied, or diplomatically sensitive environments and which employ specialized military capabilities to seize, destroy, capture, exploit, recover, or damage designated targets."8 1F 82 CAS is direct action from the air. The Korean War and the airborne Forward Air Controller (FAC(A)) exemplify direct action as a historical function of CAS and ultimately armed overwatch. Although informally executed during World War I and World War II through liaison and observation planes such as the L-5 Sentinel, the concept of FAC(A) gained significant traction during the Korean War due to ground controllers' inability to move far enough forward to control air strikes effectively.
As a result, the technique of "having a slower plane spot a target and call a jet in to attack" was developed and utilized to find enemy targets, control airstrikes, and enhance CAS due to a lack of artillery and direct army ground movement.8 2F82F 
83
It was simple, durable, could average between five and six hours in the air per day, and its low stall speed enabled it to loiter and provide better observation of the ground.8 3F83F 
84
Counterinsurgency JP 3-24, Counterinsurgency, prescribes relevant approaches and considerations to counter an insurgency and discusses aspects for conducting missions. DoD dictionary defines COIN as "comprehensive civilian and military efforts designed to simultaneously defeat and contain insurgency and address its root causes."8 4F84F 85 JP 3-24 also details aviation contributions to COIN as "CAS, precision strikes, armed overwatch, ISR" as an alternative to conventional aviation that permits freedom of movement for counterinsurgents in haven and rugged terrain.8 5F85F 86 The explicit mention of armed overwatch in COIN doctrine is crucial because it indicates armed overwatch already exists and has meaning and identity within COIN. Furthermore, COIN doctrine lists direct action and SR as the top two special operations activity considerations for its conduct.8 6F86F 87 The explicit mention of CAS, precision strike, ISR, and armed overwatch is striking and suggests a doctrinal synchronization of armed overwatch together within COIN. The Vietnam War and the OV-10 "Bronco" provide another historical example of armed overwatch and its characteristics in practice.
The OV-10 was conceived by the Marine Corps and developed under a tri-service program and the Air Force and Navy as a twin-turboprop, multipurpose aircraft designed for COIN operations.8 7F87F 
88
89
90
91
92
The armament of the OV-10 enhanced the FAC(A) with a "limited but highly responsive airstrike capability," and subsequently, all OV-10 FAC aircraft were armed to support "immediate strike future threat environment and impacts to concept survivability."9 7F97F 98 Armed overwatch's role in the future operating environment poses an important question, especially amidst warfare's changing character in an era of great power competition. US strategic guidance, a theory of grey zone warfare, a DOTmLPF-P doctrinal concept, and materiel solution alternatives provide a cumulative framework to make sense of armed overwatch's role and responsibility in the future threat environment.9 8F98F 99
According to the 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS), US foreign policy has shifted its focus to compete with Russia and China.9 9F99F 100 For special operations, this change represented an abrupt departure from the paradigm of IW and countering violent extremist organizations (CVEO) since 9/11. Missions like CT, COIN, and foreign internal defense, where US forcescontrolled tempo and timing across, especially in the air, were suddenly no longer the priority.1 00F100F
101
The NDS's Irregular Warfare Annex acknowledged this transition and stated the new strategic priority of great power competition while noting that CVEO remains a persistent threat.1 01F101F
102
Year 2021
, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., 2020
, HR Rep. 116-617, sect. 163, 1536. 99
Thomas Finletter, a former Secretary of the Air Force and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) ambassador, originally described what is referred to as "grey zone" in 1954 as "countries outside of NATO or nearly so with Russia and China."1 05F105F 106 Since then, grey zone warfare has re-emerged as relevant in the contemporary international environment. A 2019 RAND Corporation report stated the United States should expect competition with Russia and China to be "played out primarily below the threshold of armed conflict . . . in the grey zone between peace and war."1 06F106F 107 Furthermore, the 2021 Interim NSS states: "We will maintain the proficiency of special operations forces to focus on crisis response and priority counterterrorism and unconventional warfare missions. Moreover, we will develop capabilities to compete better and deter grey zone actions."1 07F107F 108 Today, grey zone warfare suggests that although competition with Russia or China might occur at or above a threshold of armed conflict, it is far more likely to exist on the conflict continuum below that of large-scale or major combat operations (Appendix E). According to a bi-partisan House Armed Services Committee report on the future of defense, Russia has used private military corporations in Ukraine, Venezuela, Syria, and Libya.1 08F108F
109
While they exist on a spectrum, by definition, competition, conflict, and confrontation are distinct. Also, great power competition does not equate to high-end major combat or large-scale combat operations. Therefore, the military conflict continuum requires "low-end" missions that are arguably more likely to occur in the grey zone than towards the higher end of the conflict continuum involving large-scale combat operations. Armed overwatch conceptually supports great power competition precisely because it is not a "high-end" mission conducted as part of large-scale combat operations but rather one that supports the rest of the military competition continuum. This logic provides clarity for armed overwatch in great power competition.
However, it accounts for only one potential scenario in the future operating threat environment and does not address the dilemma of a contested or denied environment.
The requirement to gain access and then operate in contested domains with degraded systems is a significant military challenge. Senior DoD officials indicated that military conflict with Russia or China, whether it be direct or indirect, would severely challenge and strain the ISR enterprise in a highly contested environment.1 09F109F 110 Since 9/11, SOF aviation has enjoyed relative freedom of access into and within a permissive operating environment. Armed overwatch cannot assume that future conflicts will have unilateral permissive movement and maneuver in the air.
While a requirement for armed overwatch amidst permissive environments may persist, this might not always be the case. Therefore, the permissive maneuver assumption comes at the expense and potential risk of future relevancy in a contested environment.
Across permissive environments such as Africa, armed overwatch underwrites a national strategy of great power competition by accounting for the military conflict continuum below the threshold of major combat operations.1 10F110F 111 Alternatively, the future threat environment is likely to be a "sophisticated, highly contested, A2/AD environment" that will be "won by the side with an information advantage, enabling the ability to outpace, outthink, and outmaneuver adversaries across multiple domains."1 11F111F 112 This question of the contested environment presents two very different future scenarios. Armed overwatch must determine its role in exclusive support of lowend missions in a permissive environment versus an alternative future. This includes potential escalation to a non-permissive or even denied environment amidst Access/Area Denial (A2/AD) threats.
Armed overwatch must overcome the contested environment's dilemma if it is meant to account for joint force integration. An emergent all-domain operations joint warfighting doctrine enhanced by future emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) and autonomous systems provides a doctrinal approach to nest within. incorporate low-earth-orbit satellites to find a ground-based target, sense air targets, and communicate with a ground-based artillery system to destroy the objective.
The preceding scenario is not from the distant future; it occurred in September 2020.
More astonishing, the entire sequence took twenty seconds.1 17F117F
118
"Human-on-the-loop" operations, enabled through JADC2, could potentially leverage a degree of autonomy where rapid observation, orientation, decision, and action deliver much fast and synchronized effects.1 18F118F
119
120
121
The future threat environment requires an operational organization that leverages decision speed to create opportunities and presents multiple dilemmas for the enemy. Expanding decision space is a salient theme of all-domain operations and JADC2, and armed overwatch must nest within this operational logic if it is meant to be relevant in a contested environment.
Armed overwatch within an all-domain warfighting concept connects SOF, through mission command, to enhance decision. Enhanced operational agility across multiple domains, enabled by armed overwatch, has the potential to create more opportunities and options for SOF commanders and their teams against the enemy.
The above section made a case for the validity, necessity, and requirement of a legacy- Scharre states in "human-in-the-loop" autonomy, a machine performs a task before querying a human before taking action.1 22F122F 123 "Human-on-the-loop" empowers a machine with the abilities of sensemaking, decision, and action, with a human supervisor capable of intervening, if necessary.1 23F123F 124 Finally, in "human-out-of-the-loop" operations, a machine is given complete autonomy independent of human action.1 19F124F124F 125 As robotics, machine learning, and AI continue to advance rapidly, armed overwatch must co-evolve within the present and future technological climate to accommodate these trends to be relevant in the future contested threat environment.
For the present and foreseeable future, out-of-the-loop autonomy remains morally and ethically murky at best. However, in the case of armed overwatch, a materiel solution must strike a balance between the requirements of the present versus the anticipated trends of the future battlefield. sUAS offers a 21st-century alternative to the 20th-century aircraft paradigm of a manned, fixedwing, legacy aircraft.
A key finding from a 2019 RAND study on distrusted air operations in a future battlespace was that the current force presentation model is incompatible with the future contested environment.1 25F125F 126 sUAS offer one way to mitigate this risk through an alternative to a manned aircraft. An sUAS armed overwatch capability is not bound by limitations such as austere forward arming and refueling points or airfields like a legacy fixed-wing aircraft. sUAS provides cost-effective, persistent surveillance and reconnaissance capability for collection deep in enemy territory.1 26F126F 127 sUAS can also be transported organically with an SF team, such as the one that operated in Tongo Tongo with a low profile. This is precisely the location on the battlefield where special operations forces are likely to operate: in-depth. sUAS, unlike a legacy fixed-wing aircraft, does not have to fight its way past A2/AD into a non or semipermissive environment like a legacy aircraft. Instead, its portability allows it to be transported, 
124
As previously stated, SOF may not always operate in austere and isolated environments independently of conventional forces as they have in the previous two decades. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, GEN Mark Milley, stated: "In the future, I can say with very high degrees of confidence, the American Army is probably going to be fighting in urban areas."1 29F129F 130 One future scenario offers a much different alternative to the operational environments of deserts in Africa or mountains in Afghanistan. A military conflict in the Southern Caucasus provides an unlikely 128 Jon Harper, "Special Operations Drones Face Obsolescence," National Defense Magazine, May 17, 2020, accessed February 11, 2021, https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2017 /5/17/special-operations-officials-are-worried-that-their-drones-are-becoming-obsolete. 
129
130
The purpose of this monograph was to apply frameworks of doctrine, history, and the future operating environment to make sense of and "rethink" armed overwatch. Armed overwatch means something different to everyone (doctrine, concept, mission, aircraft, program, tactic)   because it lacks shared understanding. Although doctrine cannot (and should not) prohibit the execution of a mission or acquire a new requirement, it is a tool to explain what is likely to work as the best way to accomplish a task.
Armed overwatch is presently a topical subject within both AFSOC, USSOCOM, and Congress. The findings and recommendations are offered as pragmatic recommendations for staff and leaders associated with the armed overwatch program.
Finding/Recommendation 1 -Armed overwatch is a mission and must be codified into doctrine. Doctrine can formally define the roles and responsibilities of armed overwatch and describe its nuances, especially between CAS and ISR. JP 3-05, Special Operations is an ideal doctrinal publication to explain armed overwatch and specify its unique nuances of CAS, C2, ISR, precision strike, and SCAR. Fully accepting armed overwatch as doctrinal is not the primary barrier to validating armed overwatch as a requirement. However, recognizing the voids and nuances between its doctrinal concepts further legitimizes a mission not fully accounted for by present ISR and CAS technology and capabilities.
Finding/Recommendation 2 -Armed overwatch makes the most sense as a subordinate doctrinal mission of CAS. CAS is most effective when equipped with a premier sensing ability.
Integration of armed overwatch into a joint doctrine as an independent doctrinal mission is a challenging approach that requires joint-service support and endorsement. The fastest way to get armed overwatch codified into doctrine is via an annex or appendix to the JFIRE.1 35F13 5F 136 The Air Land Sea Application Center, located at Langley Air Force Base, is "a multi-service (Joint) organization which produces Multi-Service Tactics Techniques and Procedures.1 36F136F
137
Finding/Recommendation 3 -The requirement for armed overwatch is primarily a problem of resourcing. Without armed overwatch, SF teams like in Tongo Tongo are at the mercy of democratizing theater resources that could alert, enable, or protect them. CAS and ISR aircraft are limited resources that are centrally controlled, allocated, and apportioned. As such, they are unlikely to be provided in direct support for SF teams. This is evidenced by the absence of a dedicated US CAS asset at Tongo Tongo. Therefore, the identity and narrative for an armed overwatch requirement at its core is a requirement for a dedicated CAS/ISR hybrid capability for USSOCOM.
Finding/Recommendation 4 -Armed overwatch special operations activities. The special operations activities provide a framework within the mandate of US law to justify armed overwatch. As illustrated, armed overwatch supports SR, direct action, and COIN special operations missions. This list, not all-inclusive, justifies armed overwatch as charged by the 2021 NDAA because it demonstrates to Congress that it supports the very law they had previously passed. However, the lack of standardization of the special operations activities across doctrine is a notable concern outside the monograph's scope and warrants additional attention.
Finding/Recommendation 5 -Armed overwatch is unquestionably a historical function of US military aviation. Rather than illustrate examples of armed overwatch in the eras of USSOCOM and AFSOC, historical examples of armed overwatch that predate these institutions provide richer meaning and prove it is a historical and enduring mission. Indeed, the IW Annex to the current NDS states that "IW is an enduring mission and core competency. It is "a persistent and enduring operational reality employed by non-state actors and increasingly state actors with the United States."1 37F137F
138
Finding/Recommendation 6 -Armed overwatch is a topical issue for Air Force Special Operations Command. According to the AFSOC guidance strategy from 2020, the fielding of a cost-effective multi-role armed overwatch platform is a strategic focus area.1 38F138F 
139
In permissive environments, armed overwatch represents a crucial currency in underwriting great power competition, especially in the gray zone. However, a significant question of identity and roles and responsibilities persists, requiring senior leader and probable congressional discernment. One armed overwatch narrative envisions a future in which armed overwatch exclusively supports SOF across austere and permissive environments as a "low-end" mission. These gray zones represent seams in great power competition that asymmetrically benefit United States strategic interests. This armed overwatch future scenario foresees strategic support of great power competition along the geographical fringes against proxies and in support of missions like CT, COIN, and CVEO. Although China has emerged as the pacing threat for the DoD, the need to compete along the competition continuum below the armed conflict threshold remains necessary and is unlikely to end soon. In this scenario, armed overwatch supports the special operations activities. It underwrites great power competition by fulfilling a persistent requirement across the military conflict continuum to support missions other than major war. This first scenario assumes that armed overwatch will primarily operate in an austere environment that will always remain generally permissive or uncontested. Alternatively, a second future scenario and an essential question for armed overwatch remain its role, if any, in a contested environment. SOF are likely to play a significant role in Africa or similar environments should competition with China or Russia escalates horizontally or vertically. If great power competition does escalate, Russian and Chinese organic or proxy forces in low-end armed conflict across Africa, Middle East, Asia, and South America may rapidly intensify their involvement resulting in a contested environment and present A2/AD challenges that a low-end armed overwatch capability or asset may be unprepared to adapt within. 
Armed overwatch has problems related to policy decisions, resourcing, and technology challenges that require senior military leaders and Congressional resolution. Additionally, current trends on and above the battlefield point toward a new age of warfare characterized by irregular adversaries relying on technology-driven capabilities. Without a nearly constant and locally capable armed overwatch capability, today's SOF cannot survive to build access in permissive, semi-permissive, or non-permissive operational footprints. This scenario jeopardizes the US's ability to develop and deepen alliances with partners and gain or sustain access to environments necessary to compete in great power competition.
It is challenging to assign narrative in the absence of shared understanding. Doctrine, history, and the future threat environment lend legitimacy to armed overwatch by rethinking its identity and nuances. A scenario is one way to promote shared understanding and provide a straightforward narrative for armed overwatch. In one respect, this already exists. Tongo Tongo creates a baseline to understand armed overwatch as a mission in which an airborne capability provides dedicated effects of responsive CAS, ISR, precision strike, and SCAR. Likewise, past and present doctrine, the special operations activities, examples from military aviation, and the future threat environment provide prescriptive insights into armed overwatch to rethink its identity, sharpen its narrative and promote a shared understanding.
59 Barry D. Watts, The Evolution of Precision Strike (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2013), 11. 60 US Air Force, Annex 3-05, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations, 17.
126
Ibid., 13.   
USSOCOM, U.S. Special Operations Validation of Special Operations Rapid Requirements Document for Special Operations Forces Armed Overwatch (Document received by author via email September 2, 2020), 1.
Lt Gen JohnMulholland, Lt Gen Tom Trask, Maj Gen Mark Clark, and Rear Adm Brian  Hendrickson, "The Growing Need for a Modern Aircraft Platform for Special Forces," The Hill (blog), July 2, 2020, accessed July 10, 2020, https://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/politics/505757-the-growing-needfor-a-modern-aircraft-platform-for-special.
12 Rachel S. Cohen, "Congress Questions Need for New Armed Overwatch Planes for SOCOM," Air Force Magazine, July 1, 2020., accessed July 12, 2020, https://www.airforcemag.com/congressquestions-need-for-new-armed-overwatch-planes-for-
socom/.13  Select Committee on Armed Services, Senate, National Defense Authorization Act for FiscalYear 2021, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., January 2020, S. Rep. 116-236, sect
. 176, 19.14 Select Committee on Armed Services, House, National Defense Authorization Act for FiscalYear 2021, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., December 2020, HR Rep. 116-
617, sect. 163, 1535-1536.    15 US Congress, William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for FiscalYear 2021, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., January 2021, Public Law 116-283, sect. 163, 64.   
Karl E. Weick and Kathleen M. Sutcliffe, "Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking," Organization Science 16, no. 4 (August 2005): 409.
A Joint Resolution Making Continuing Appropriations for The Fiscal Year 1987, and for Other Purposes, Public Law 99-500, title X, ยง1783-124, Statutes at Large (1986): 124, Unified combatant command for special operations forces, codified at US Code 10 (2018), ยง167(k).
US Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2017), 27.
US Joint Staff, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 5705.01G, Standardization of Military and Associated Terminology (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office,
2020), 1.
US Joint Staff, DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020).
USSOCOM, U.S. Special Operations Validation of Special Operations Rapid Requirements Document for Special Operations Forces Armed Overwatch, 1.
Lt Col Clint "Q" Hinote, "Military Operations in Urban Terrain: Armed Overwatch: Key to Successful COIN Operations in Urban Terrain," Air Land Sea Bulletin no. 2008-1 (January 2008): 9-11.
US Joint Staff, JP 3-05, Special Operations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020).
US Joint Staff, JP 3-30, Joint Air Operations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2019), 85.
US Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Annex 3-35, Counterland Operations (Maxwell AFB, AL: Government Publishing Office, 2020), 12.
US Air Force, Counterland Operations, 12.    
Dr David M. Neuenswander "El Cid", e-mail message to author, February 4, 2021.
Jeremiah Gertler, Air Force OA-X Light Attack Aircraft Program (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, November 2019), 1, accessed February 9, 2021, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF10954.
US Department of the Air Force, Department of the Air Force FY 2021 Budget Overview (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), 42.
Select Committee on Armed Services, House, National Defense Authorization Act for FiscalYear 2021, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., 2020, HR Rep. 116-617, sect. 163, 1539.    
US Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Volume 1, Basic Doctrine (Maxwell AFB, AL: Government Publishing Office, 2015), 67.
Robert R. Leonhard, Fighting by Minutes: Time and the Art of War (self-pub., CreateSpace, 2017), 165.
John R. Hoehn and Nishawn S. Smagh, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Design for Great Power Competition (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, June 2020), 17, accessed July 16, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46389.
US Department of Defense, Summary of the IW Annex to the National Defense Strategy 2020 (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), 7, accessed October 3, 2020, https://media.defense.gov/2020/Oct/02/2002510472/-1/-1/0/Irregular-Warfare-Annex-to-the-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.PDF.
House, Committee on Armed Service, Future of Defense Task Force Report 2020 (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), 25, accessed September 24, 2020, https://armedservices.house.gov/2020/9/future-of-defense-task-force-releases-final-report.
Andrew Feickert, The Army's Project Convergence (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, October 2020), 1, accessed January 28, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product /pdf/IF/IF11654.
Paul Scharre, Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the Future of War (New York: W. W. Norton, 2018), 29.
US Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Annex 3-99, Department of the Air Force Role in Joint All-Domain Operations (JADO) (Maxwell AFB, AL: Government Publishing Office, 2020), 12.
US Air Force, Annex 3-99, Department of the Air Force Role in Joint All-Domain Operations (JADO), 12.
USSOCOM, "SOF Truths," accessed January 30, 2021, https://www.socom.mil/about/SOFtruths.
  123  Scharre, Army of None, 29.
Air Force Technology, "PC-1 Multipurpose Quadcopter," Projects, accessed February 15, 2021, https://www.airforce-technology.com/projects/pc-1-multipurpose-quadcopter/.
Ibid.   
Lt Col Nathan L. "Booster" Owens, telephone interview with author, February 16, 2021.
Air Land Sea Application Center, "Air Land Sea Application Center Point/White Paper," December 2016, accessed February 10, 2021, https://www.alsa.mil/Portals/9/Documents /alsapoint.pdf?ver=2016-12-02-094123-783.
US Department of Defense, Summary of the IW Annex to the National Defense Strategy 2020, 2.
Air Force Special Operations Command, AFSOC Strategic Guidance, May 26, 2020, 9, accessed March 17, 2021, https://media.defense.gov/2020/May/26/2002305551/-1/-1/1/AFSOC%20STRATEGIC%20GUIDANCE.PDF.
I am very thankful to 
Dr. John Curatola
Jason Alvis
undertake an "armed overwatch" program to provide a dedicated aircraft to support special operations forces (SOF) across austere environments. 
Despite Department of Defense (DoD) support, Congress
Monograph Director John M. Curatola
Seminar Leader Jason M. Alvis
23 APR 21/ BAP//
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL Command (USSOCOM)
Despite Department of Defense (DoD) support, Congress
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Further, this galvanizes a vital point: the "means" that conduct armed overwatch (the aircraft) are a function of the mission.
Armed overwatch case studies from the Civil War, early and mid-twentieth century represent epochs that are not traditionally associated with SOF. However, the functions of ISR, CAS, and C2 from these periods prove that armed overwatch is equally suited for SOF today as it was in the past. ISR, CAS, and C2 may not have been doctrinal terms in the 1860s, but their character emerged, became realized, and their operational importance prized. A 150-year-old military balloon is wholly incapable of conducting armed overwatch over today's battlefield.
Similarly, manned, fixed-wing aircraft employed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq, and Afghanistan might be incompatible with the armed overwatch demands of future warfare. However, these case studies provide a fundamental and historical identity for armed overwatch as a mission.
A broad historical survey of armed overwatch in military aviation illustrates a rich tapestry of forgotten employment lessons, C2, and missions for an armed overwatch concept currently being re-imagined. The past offers numerous examples of concepts and aircraft to justify special operations armed overwatch and its characteristics that recall historical precedent and prove validity. In contrast to the past, however, a look into the future carries its own unique set of trends and challenges to analyze armed overwatch further.
Victory smiles upon those who anticipate the change in the character of war, not upon those who wait to adapt themselves after the changes occur.
- The Jerusalem Post, October 1, 2020, accessed January 30, 2021, https://www.jpost.com/middleeast/israeli-drones-in-azerbaijan-raise-questions-on-use-in-the-battlefied-644161. 
133
helicopter that can carry a variety of payloads, can be configured for multiple ISR sensors, and can be equipped for a variety of missions such as "ISR, detection, and tracking of ground targets, and search and rescue."1 33F133F 134 It can be set-up in two minutes, can operate up to an altitude of about 3,000 ft. to transmit video and telemetry data up to five kilometers, and fits inside a backpack.1 34F134F 135
The downside of this technology comes with certain limitations and is not perfect. Radio and video communications are susceptible to interference such as jamming and are limited by range and line of sight. Although it can only stay airborne for up to thirty-eight minutes, that time is sure to improve as battery technology improves.
US national strategy indicates a new approach to the American way of war in an era of great power competition. For armed overwatch, the future threat environment poses challenges such as the contested operating environment. Simultaneously, a new joint warfighting concept driven by emerging technology aims to synergize military services and capabilities across all battlefield domains. Today's grey zone presents many of the same fundamental missions of the previous two decades, accompanied by technology's emergent challenges. In an era of great power competition, all-domain operations, and sUAS alternatives to warfare, armed overwatch cannot exist in a special operations silo and must account for these hybrid operations alongside conventional forces. Drones such as the PC-1 and others' applications in recent warfare suggest trends in the future operational environment such as AI that cannot be ignored. To be sure, the technology has not yet advanced to the point where it can fully meet the operational demands that can presently satisfy the required characteristics of armed overwatch. However, the technological gap is closing, and this will not always be the case. For this reason, armed overwatch must be conscious of the future threat environment and integrate emerging technology. 