# ID: 50cd159ada344ab58d7476b72782adb3
# Title: Turning Point: Operation Allied Force and the Allure of Air Power
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
In 1999, NATO initiated Operation Allied Force (OAF), a campaign of airstrikes against the Serbian forces of Slobodan Milosevic in Kosovo. NATO intended for the airstrikes to stop Milosevic from carrying out ethnic cleansing against Kosovar Albanians. After seventy-eight days of bombing, Milosevic agreed to withdraw his army from Kosovo. This thesis explores how the U.S. public, policymakers, and military services perceived the use of air power before, during, and after OAF to determine the extent of mainstream belief in a "turning point" related to what air power can accomplish on its own. In addition, the paper examines how well the exclusive use of air power succeeded to determine whether OAF was a divergence from historical trends or a continuity in the necessity for air-ground cooperation to employ air power successfully. In 2011, encouraged by the Libyan rebel movement, NATO commenced Operation Unified Protector, an air campaign with the goal to stop Muammar Gaddafi's violence against civilians and compel him to step down from power. Members of President Barack Obama's national security team made decisions related to the Libya campaign based on their interpretation of air power's role in Kosovo, as both campaigns excluded the use of ground forces. Overlooked evidence regarding the role of counter-battery radars in Kosovo and the use of Twitter in Libya suggests that extensive coordination with ground forces actually brought about the success of air power in both campaigns. Finally, the study concludes on whether there is a growing inclination to use air power for limited interventions.
15.
shaped my approach to this thesis, making things easier the second time around. The Naval Postgraduate School allowed me to dabble in operations research while taking a history-based curriculum, so, as a result, I am always searching for a cog in the war machine and the center of gravity in a war strategy.
I discussed this work with several people via email and in person. Among these, Scott Porter (Department of Command and Leadership at CGSC), who worked on the battle damage assessment team in Kosovo, gave his perspective on the impact of the bombing. He shared old photographs, taken in 1999, of destroyed tanks and decoys that the Serbian army left behind in Kosovo after the air campaign. In addition, Dr. Kuehn put me in touch with Dr. Douglas Macgregor (Colonel, U.S. Army, retired), who served as the J-5 at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) prior to Operation vi Allied Force and as the Director of Joint Operations during the operation. Through email correspondence, Dr. Macgregor answered several of my questions pertaining to the air campaign and NATO's subsequent bombing damage survey. As the lone armor officer in a seminar with four U.S. Army aviators and two from the U.S. Navy, I gained a great deal of insight on air power through daily interaction with my peers. Art of War classmates Doug White and Bob Stone read portions of this work and gave feedback over breakfast and lunch on several occasions. Doug participated in operations over Libya in 2011 and pointed out how the rebels painted the tops of their vehicles pink so that NATO aircraft did not mistakenly bomb them. Also, my longtime friend and workout partner, Paul Stelzer, listened to my discussion of the topic during our daily weightlifting sessions at Gruber Fitness Center.
Finally, I recognize Robert O'Connell. Without knowing it, he planted the genesis of this work in my head during a graduate course discussion in January 2007. In class, he explained the premise of his book, Of Arms and Men, arguing that military professionals favor certain types of weaponry, and, as a consequence, tend to overlook the role of inconspicuous apparatuses. Thus, militaries develop and employ arms along symmetrical lines that shun or ignore deviance. Sometimes, innovative means or mechanisms have a great impact on military campaigns yet remain ignored by military institutions due to their cultural predilections. O'Connell's course inspired me, seven years later, to examine the role of radar and Twitter in recent air campaigns. What follows showcases all of my biases as a person who fights on land, but I hope, in the spirit of joint-mindedness, that it offers a new perspective on air power and the political motivation to employ it.  Nothing comparable to this state of affairs had been known in the previous history of warfare, unless we take such a case as that of a nineteenth century warship attacking some large savage or barbaric settlement, or one of those naval bombardments that disfigure the history of Great Britain in the late eighteenth century.
-H.G. Wells, The War in the Air, 1908   Herbert George Wells coined the phrase "air power" in The War in the Air, a work of science fiction published in 1908. 
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
campaigns proved ineffective-the bombs merely agitated the enemy, stiffening their resolve.
But in the latter part of each campaign, NATO stumbled to victory after inadvertently figuring out how to target the elusive ground forces of Milosevic and   Gaddafi. During the last two weeks of Operation Allied Force, the U.S. Army's counterbattery radars-deliberately positioned near Albania's border with Kosovo-helped air forces destroy more than half of the artillery employed by the Yugoslav 3rd Army. 
16
17
On 24 March 1999 President William J. "Bill" Clinton addressed the nation from the oval office to announce that the United States, along with NATO allies, had initiated airstrikes against the Serbian forces of Slobodan Milosevic in Kosovo. Clinton reasoned that the airstrikes were meant to deter Milosevic from conducting genocide against the minority Kosovar Albanians and to limit the Serbian army's capacity to carry out genocide. 
18
19
20
21
Consequently, the assumptions and perceptions of the U.S. public, policymakers, and military services regarding potential outcomes of the future exclusive use of air power in a campaign solidified after the "turning point" proclaimed by Keegan. Operation Unified Protector, NATO's air campaign over Libya in 2011, magnified this trend-political decision-makers repeated the decision to rule out the use of ground forces.
On 10 August 2013, President Obama gathered his national security team to discuss the situation in Syria. 
22
23
24
At the onset of the air campaign, President Clinton stated three U.S. objectivesfirst, "to demonstrate the seriousness of NATO's purpose," second, "to deter an even bloodier offensive against innocent civilians," and third, "if necessary, to seriously damage the Serbian military's capacity to harm the people of Kosovo." 
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
Operationally, consensus was necessary for the basing of aircraft and clearance of airspace. On 12 April 1999, NATO headquarters in Belgium issued a press release stating that air strikes would continue until President Milosevic complied with the following five demands:
1) a verifiable stop to all military action and the immediate ending of violence and repression; 2) the withdrawal from Kosovo of the military, police and paramilitary forces; 3) the stationing in Kosovo of an international military presence; 4) the unconditional and safe return of all refugees and displaced persons and unhindered access to them by humanitarian aid organisations; 5) the establishment of a political framework agreement for Kosovo on the basis of the Rambouillet Accords, in conformity with international law and the Charter of the United Nations. 
33
34
Despite their disagreements throughout the campaign, the NATO alliance remained cohesive based on the premise that ground forces would not be used.
After the war, German General Klaus Naumann, who served as NATO's Military Committee chairman, reluctantly admitted, "the issue of ground forces was very divisive in the Alliance. Some nations without any necessity to do so ruled it out long before we started the bombing campaign. We knew that we would not get consensus on ground forces, so we backed off in order to maintain consensus." 
35
36
Franchi, Italy's NATO representative, to call for a pause in the bombing due to worries that tourists might cancel plans to vacation in Venice during Easter. 
37
38
39
The main works on Operational Allied Force include government publications, works by political scientists, works by journalists, and documentaries. The biographies, autobiographies, and interviews of key participants in the campaign are also part of the literature, but these sources contain varying levels of bias. For example, in Waging Modern War, GEN Wesley Clark attributes shortcomings of the campaign to political constraints. 
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
Lambeth serves as a senior research associate at RAND and has published extensively on air power topics. As a civilian pilot, he has flying experience on over forty different U.S.
and NATO aircraft, and was the first U.S. citizen to fly the Russian MiG-29 fighter. 
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
The literature on Operation Allied Force focuses on the application of air power within self-imposed constraints. The authors mentioned here agree that air power alone was not effective in damaging the Serbian army. Lambeth, Daalder, and O'Hanlon argue that constraints on the use of the air power caused the campaign to last longer than necessary. GEN Clark and Hosmer argue that the constraints were appropriate because they held together NATO, limited civilian casualties, and fostered further international consensus for the cause. The truth probably lies somewhere in the middle. Regardless, NATO's campaign in Kosovo proved a significant event in the history of limited military interventions. Further interpretation of this event sheds light on the evolving manner in which states attempt to preserve international order.
This thesis differs from the current literature on Operation Allied Force by examining how assumptions and perceptions regarding air power evolved over time. To date, no work focuses exclusively on the views of the American public, policymakers, and military services before, during, and after the Kosovo conflict in regard to the use of air power. This work builds on existing accounts of the conflict by analyzing assumptions made by key actors before the bombing started, examining how these same actors perceived the campaign as it unfolded, and determining whether the campaign changed views regarding the future use of air power. To do this, chapter 2 covers the assumptions made by the public, civilian policy makers, NATO, and each of the military services prior to the commencement of Operation Allied Force. Next, chapter 3 traces the perceptions of these key actors during the three operational phases of the air campaign, closing with a description of how ground forces, though not used in the conflict, jointly integrated their counter-battery radars to help air forces accurately strike Milosevic's artillery. Chapter 4 compares the results of the campaign, as determined by historical inquiry, with the key actors' view of the results. Chapter 5 highlights the use of Twitter for targeting purposes during the 2011 intervention in Libya. This campaign, which also excluded the use of ground forces from the onset, had significant parallels with the Kosovo intervention and occurred after the "turning point" proclaimed by Keegan at the end of Operation Allied Force. Finally, the concluding chapter comments on the implication of the Kosovo and Libya air campaigns toward the proclivity to use air power for future limited military interventions and the degree to which air power is effective on its own. Marshall's ideas became popular in U.S. defense circles in the 1990s due to the lopsided results of the 1991 Gulf War. 
6
Given tight defense budgets, less emphasis should be placed on maintaining force structure over the near-term future and more emphasis accorded to research and development of new military systems, doctrines, and organizations. Assume, for example, that long-range precision strikes will be a dominant military operation in future conflicts. Substantial changes in U.S. defense planning would then be needed. It would make sense for the Army to reduce funding and emphasis on direct-fire and short-range systems (tanks, armored fighting vehicles, and shortrange artillery, for example) as well as the organizations built around them (armored divisions). At the same time the Army would increase its emphasis on long-range, precision-strike systems (satellites, unmanned aerial vehicles, attack helicopters, and extended-range missiles) and attempt to identify the new doctrines and organizations (a deep-strike brigade, for instance) that would employ the new systems in an optimal matter [sic]. This approach would apply to the other services as well. 
7
Those who employ force on land tend to view the adversary's army as the center of gravity during conflict. 
8
15
16
17
artillerymen to detect and "fire back at the Iraqi guns literally before the Iraqi barrage impacted the ground." 
18
During the Gulf War, overhead surveillance systems, such as Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar Systems (JSTARS), U-2s, and reconnaissance satellites all used imaging sensors to find Iraqi ground forces and assess bombing damage from the air campaign. 
19
20
21
23
24
The U.S. Army's capstone doctrinal publication during the time of the Kosovo Conflict was the 1993 FM 100-5, Operations. This series of manual underwent significant revisions in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War, including de-emphasis on the operational level of war. 
25
26
They prefer quick resolution of conflicts and reserve the right to reconsider their support should any of these conditions not be met." 
27
28
29
30
31
The early development of American air power doctrine took place within the U.S.
Army, as the Air Corps was initially a subcomponent of the Army's Signal Corps. 
33
One such role was the newly formed units that flew airplanes. 
35
37
38
LTG Short used the analogy of attacking a snake to describe how he preferred to wage the air campaign. With this analogy, Short implied that the head of the snake was Milosevic's political headquarters in Belgrade, along with critical infrastructure supporting the city, rather than the Serbian army. The problem with the analogy is that a snake's head is both a weapon system and a control center for the body, with the latter being harmless. Following the logic of the analogy, the Serbian army represents the body of the snake. Thus, the U.S. Air Force entered the Kosovo campaign with very old assumptions established at air power's birth by those who first flew past the trenches-Mitchell, Douhet, and Trenchard-believing that the decisive blow could take place somewhere behind the gun lines.
These assumptions evolved through the years by others like Boyd and Warden,
reaching a new pinnacle, with respect to precision bombing, in the late 1990s. According to air power theorist John Warden, if enough "centers of gravity" are precisely struck at the same time, then a "system" will go into paralysis. 41 LTG Short's language, referring to cutting the head off of a snake and bombing specific targets in Belgrade, indicated that he bought into Warden's theories to some degree. Leading up to the intervention in Kosovo, the U.S. Air Force assumed it could strike with an unprecedented level of accuracy, cleanly cutting off the "head of the snake" on the opening blow, like a cavalryman descending unseen from the sky, as the decisive arm in warfare, if not for political constraints.
The United States Navy maintains its own separate air force with carrier aviation.
Aircraft carriers supported U.S. interventions in both Bosnia and Kosovo. The USS Theodore Roosevelt participated in both operations. Additionally, the U.S. Navy provided electronic warfare aircraft such as the EA6-B Prowler in both campaigns because the U.S. Air Force lacks this capability. 
42
Theodore Roosevelt was already in position to contribute sorties alongside the U.S. Air
Force with a second carrier, the USS America, arriving the second week of September. 
43
Force sufficed to handle the situation in Kosovo, provided that a few ships and submarines remained on station in a supporting role with tomahawk cruise missiles. Qaeda. 
47
48
49
50
51
Like the U.S. Navy, the U.S. Marine Corps has an organic air force consisting of both rotary and fixed-wing aircraft. Unlike the Navy, however, Marine pilots specialize in close air support, viewing their air assets as supplemental firepower for vulnerable ground forces. 
52
The U.S. Marines prefer to retain operational control of their air component, as part of the Marine Air Ground Task Force concept. This originates from Marine perpetuation of the institutional memory that they were dropped on the beach during the Battle of Guadalcanal and abandoned by the U.S. Navy without air support. This fear of abandonment has been written into their doctrine in the form of the Marine Air Ground Task Force, which calls for limited commitment of Marine air forces for employment in support of other services (than the Navy) unless there are "excess sorties." 
53
54
55
56
Presidential policy is often informed by public opinion and Congressional influence. Prior to the start of Operation Allied Force, only 46 percent of Americans approved of using military force to intervene in Kosovo. 
57
58
The perceived success of air power during the Gulf War encouraged its future use as a coercive instrument with "awesome potential" that could be employed with "low cost in American lives," according to three analysts working for RAND in 1999. 
59
60
61
62
63
66
The divide in public opinion on U.S. foreign policy concerning Kosovo manifested itself in Congress through chaotic voting on various resolutions. In theory, the legislature of a representative democracy votes in a manner that mirrors the society it represents. By design, the House of Representatives is more fluid than the Senate, where positions move slowly. 
67
Republican-sponsored resolution authorizing the President to deploy U.S. armed forces to Kosovo as part of a NATO peacekeeping force, provided the size of the force did not exceed 15 percent of the combined NATO commitment. 
68
69
70
Congressional positions on Kosovo did not exclusively follow party lines. The majority of Republican leaders were initially reluctant to take a stance on war in the Balkans, purposefully restraining their comments as a political strategy to later saddle blame on the President if the campaign proved unsuccessful. 
71
voiced support for intervention in Kosovo. 
72
73
74
In a more pronounced position against intervention, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-TX) wrote a piece in the Wall Street Journal entitled, "One Balkan Quagmire is Enough." 75 Fellow Texan Senator Phil Gramm (R-TX) asked that Hutchison's article be entered into the Congressional Record, as it encapsulated his position also. 
76
77
90
91
to the complex political situation in Yugoslavia. 
92
112
113
114
138
139
140
141
144
146
147
Congress. 148
We had an advantage of 100-to-1 / 1000-to-1 from the air. If we were forced to go in on the ground in deep summer, it would have been maybe 3-to-1 or 2-to-1.
Milosevic would have been able to be on much more equal grounds with NATO as we came over these mountains, through the caves that Tito had built in Yugoslavia. An equally good school of thought says that Milosevic would have loved to get us into a ground war. 
149
159
160
161
162
Minister Carlo Scognamiglio suggested that Italy would provide troops for a ground war if NATO went that route. 
163
164
Like NATO's other members, Italy made assumptions pertaining to Kosovo based on the 1995 Bosnia intervention. Prime Minister D'Alma stated, "We looked to the Bosnian precedent when limited air raids had brought him [Milosevic] to the negotiating table." 
165
War II, and the German Luftwaffe would bomb some of the same locations that the Nazis had attacked fifty years earlier. 
166
167
168
169
170
Greek Conservative Party Members also expressed concern that U.S. interests in the Balkans stemmed from the area's significance for the flow of oil and gas supplies from the Caucasus since other regions had similar humanitarian problems that the United
States was not as interested in. 
172
The Americans have to seriously consider the consequences of this war; especially the possibility of causing permanent instability in the whole Balkan Peninsula. Perhaps for the United States this is not a major issue, because Americans are thousands of miles away from the conflict. How would they feel if this war was taking place on their own continent? 173
Despite this sentiment, Greek politicians were also concerned with maintaining their long-standing NATO ties and elected to remain somewhat neutral in the conflict rather than diminish their long-term strategic role in the alliance. 
174
176
177
181
In addition to these broad-based foundational assumptions on military interventions, in Waging Modern War, Clark revealed his assumptions pertaining to the advancement of precision strike weapons technology in the 1990s. He wrote that the Gulf War brought public awareness of these types of weapon systems. 
182
183
184
Force in 1995 indicates an overlooked aspect of military technology that proved highly capable-more so than air power-at shorter ranges. In synchronization with NATO artillery and bombing, the Croatian and Bosnian armies launched significant ground offensives against the Serbs. 185 After the United States, Britain and France contributed the most sorties to Operation Deliberate Force, as indicated in table 3: Alongside the air commitment, the British Army provided two batteries of 105mm towed artillery, consisting of twelve guns, combined with one battery of the French Army's 155mm self-propelled artillery, consisting of eight guns. 
189
190
Penneyfeather. 
191
Bosnia and Herzegovina. 192
5 April 1992. 193
194
195
196
197
198
199
Low-tech microphones and high-tech radars lack the glamor of jet aircraft, so it is natural that the role of British and French artillery in Bosnia is forgotten.
Each of the British and French guns could fire at a sustained rate of six rounds per minute in any weather, day or night. Given these rates of fire, the sixteen gun positions at Mount Igman, excluding mortars, were capable of firing 7,200 rounds in just one hourfar more rounds than the 1,026 bombs dropped by aircraft during the entire campaign. 
200
Furthermore, artillery rounds have far less explosive impact than the 2,000 pound GBU- Operation Deliberate Force, from 1-5 September 1995, General George Joulwan had ordered a bombing pause to allow time for negotiations. 
206
207
208
the Serbian military's capacity to harm Kosovars, was the most noteworthy assumption in terms of the operational capability of air forces to find and destroy ground forces. This latter assumption is the primary focus of the next two chapters, with implications resonating beyond Operation Allied Force. Additionally, some Americans believed that Operation Allied Force was meant as a distraction from the Monica Lewinsky scandal and a Wag the Dog political strategy. 
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
179
180
181
182
183 Ibid., 9-10. 
184
185
186
187 Daalder and O'Hanlon, 92.   188 
Tirpak,
39. 68 200
201 Ian Bruce, "UN Comes of Age as an Enforce," The Scotland Herald, 31 August 1995, http://www.heraldscotland.com/sport/spl/aberdeen/un-comes-of-age-as-enforcer-1.664014 (accessed 3 December 2013). 
202
-H.G. Munitions (JDAMs) in their combat debut on the opening night of the operation. 
3
4
6
Operation Allied Force consisted of three phases. Phase I covered the first three days of the air campaign and focused on Serbian air defense systems. Phase II started on day four of the campaign and encompassed strikes against military targets in Kosovo and parts of Serbia below the 44th parallel. NATO transitioned to Phase III on day nine of the campaign. This phase added operations north of the 44th parallel, which included
Belgrade, and incorporated strikes on civilian infrastructure. This latter phase was the most lengthy of the campaign, lasting until 10 June 1999, when the bombing ended.
The perceptions of allied leaders, U.S. policy makers, the American public, the U.S. Congress, and military leaders evolved during the campaign. Initially, these groups shared the common outlook of a short operation-with Milosevic capitulating after a few days of bombing. As the campaign dragged on, however, perceptions were less optimistic and began to diverge. Two days into the campaign, Italy called for a bombing pause in order to renew diplomatic efforts. 
8
9
11
12
15
16
17
19
20
21
22
23
24
and Golobovci (the largest airport in Montenegro). 
25
26
27
28
29
Sentry, an airborne early warning and control (AWACS) aircraft, vectored Dutch F-16s and U.S. Air Force F-15Cs to protect the strike package from the MiG-29s. 
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
foreshadowing an escalation of the attacks on Kosovar Albanians through means air power could not target. 
45
46
47
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
During NATO's daily press conference on 27 March 1999, Mark Laity of the BBC asked, you are talking about the urgency of the crisis in the field in Kosovo, but you are attacking targets that are supporting those forces in the field, not those forces in the field who are able to operate reasonably independently given that they're just doing things like house clearing, so when will you be able to attack those targets in the field and actually get them effectively before it's too late? 
60
61
Both political and military leaders initially expected that the airstrikes would last for three days. On the first day of the campaign, PBS News Hour anchor Jim Lehrer interviewed Madeleine Albright. In his interview, Lehrer asked Albright to give an estimate on the potential duration of the campaign. She bluntly replied, "I don't see this as a long term operation. I think this is something . . . achievable within a relatively short period of time." 
62
63
65
66
67
68
In February 1999, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI), George Tenet, predicted that Serbian forces "might respond" to a bombing campaign by "redoubling their effort" to intimidate ethnic Albanians into leaving Kosovo and to crush the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). 
69
Upon the commencement of NATO's campaign, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Vuk Draskovic said, "All Serbs all over the world are from now in a state of war with our enemies." 71 He went on to explain, "We are not ready to make any difference between the bombs of Adolf Hitler from 1941 and the bombs of NATO." 72 Thus, Serbia viewed NATO's limited war in terms closer to that of a total war, at least in a rhetorical context.
While facing NATO air attacks, Serbia waged a separate war against the KLA and Kosovar Albanians with regular and paramilitary forces. The regular forces, armed with at least 1,000 heavy weapons (tanks, artillery, APCs, and helicopters), used indiscriminate force to intimidate the population. 
73
74
75
76
77
95
97
98
Force added five B-1 bombers to its sorties. 
99
During the first phone conversation, GEN Clark urged LTC Zelko to participate in a scheduled media event celebrating his rescue. 
125
126
132
133
134
135
137
138
To secure their release, the Reverend Jesse Jackson traveled to Belgrade with a religious delegation that met with Milosevic. Prior to Jackson's trip, however, White House spokesman David Leavy cautioned that the members of Jackson's delegation "do not have the authority to negotiate on behalf of the United States government." 150 In addition, national security advisor Sandy Berger met privately with Jackson, urging that he not make the trip. 
151
153
154
155
156
157
After eight hours of arguing, at around 0200 Brussels time on 1 April 1999, the nineteen NATO ambassadors of the North Atlantic Council (NAC), the political governing body of NATO, reluctantly agreed to expand the target list for Operation Allied Force in line with Phase III of the plan. 
158
160
161
216
Chernomyrdin. 242
He's [Ojdani] got to understand that his boss [Milosevic] is hanging on by the thinnest of threads, and one day he is going to carted off and hung for war crimes. I need you to tell him that if he and the rest of his military try to rally around Milosevic, and protect him in any way-then the United States and eighteen other nations would consider them to be vital elements of Milosevic's team, and they will be taken down just as quickly as he will go down. On the other hand, short of those who have committed war crimes, we would consider everybody else to have been honorable soldiers with none of the repercussions the others would most certainly be facing. 
244
NATO purposefully exploited these developments with robust psychological operations.
In addition, Clinton, Gore, Cohen, and Shelton led behind-the-scenes diplomatic efforts to increase the pressure on Milosevic's regime. Meanwhile, from Brussels, General Clark's headquarters orchestrated an intensification of the bombing at the operational level while publicly attempting to garner support for NATO's endeavor by explaining the details of the bombing campaign to an ever-inquisitive media.
In April 1999, NATO Secretary General Javier Solana, sensitive to public affairs from a European perspective, asked GEN  Serb radio and tv is an instrument of propaganda and repression, it has filled the air waves with hate and with lies over the years and especially now. It is therefore a legitimate target in this campaign. If President Milosevic would provide equal time for Western news broadcasts in its programmes without censorship three hours a day between noon and 1800 and three hours a day between 1800 and midnight, then his tv could become an acceptable instrument of public information. 
248
249
250
251
On 13 April 1999, GEN Clark appeared at another press conference and played six cockpit videos from bombing sorties to show the progress of the air campaign. 
252
253
Next, when playing a video of the same aircraft's second bombing pass, Clark said, "Focus intently right at the center of the cross [aimed at opposite end of the same bridge]. He is bringing these two crosses together and suddenly he recognizes at the very last instant that the train that was struck here has moved on across the bridge and so the engine apparently was struck by the second bomb." 254 At the end of the video (and end of the press conference too), the train appeared burning in a large cloud of smoke, though the bridge still supported its weight. 
255
256
279
There was plenty of evidence, however, to generate suspicion of devious machinations within NATO. First, American diplomats had previously visited the embassy, so the United States knew its position, despite claims otherwise. Though plausible, it is highly unlikely that a democratic alliance could maintain the level of operational security necessary to avoid leaking such a stratagem. Furthermore, it made no sense to purposely damage relations with China and strain the fragile NATO alliance for some limited tactical advantage. 
284
285
286
A 1997 National Imaging and Mapping Agency (NIMA) map was first used to display the grid pattern of the streets in New Belgrade. Next, in order to identify locations to use as reference points, they identified and drew on the NIMA map to locate the Hyatt Hotel, the Intercontinental Hotel, and the Serbian Socialist Party Headquarters. Each of these buildings-which were clearly labeled on the maps being used-were approximately one mile east of Bulevar Umetnosti. Using these locations and their street addresses as reference points, parallel lines were drawn that intersected both the known addresses and Bulevar Umetnosti. In what proved to be a fundamental error, those same numbers were then applied to locations on Bulevar Umetnosti, assuming that streets were numbered in the same fashion along parallel streets. The effectiveness of this method depends on the numbering system being the same on parallel streets, that the numbers are odd and even on the same sides of the street and that the street numbers are used in the same parallel sequence even if the street names change. Unfortunately, a number of these assumptions were wrong. 287 110
After this process, the CIA sent the proposed target to NATO. At alliance headquarters, planners checked the target coordinates against the "no strike" database that listed friendly embassies, hospitals and other key locations. 
288
289
290
291
293
294
Serbian reactions to the Chinese embassy bombing varied. For the most part, Serbian residents believed that the United States purposely targeted the Chinese embassy.
One Belgrade resident, Vlade Smiljanic, interviewed by Carlotta Gall of the New York Times said, "Would you believe that with all their sophisticated weapons, they can miss?" 295 Another resident, Zoran Arsic, said, "They did it on purpose to show the whole world that they are the only remaining superpower.  Figure 
2
331
333
335
336
According to U.S. Army Colonel Mike Howell, "They look to see if children are playing or wash is on the clothes lines because that is an indication of whether or not the bad guys are bothering people in that particular village on a given day." 337 Aerial sensors got the counter-battery radars pointed in the right direction. Together, these sensors needed one more element to narrow down the location of Serb artillery-the guns had to actually fire.
After realizing that NATO would not use the Apaches, starting on 25 May, the intelligence analysts (G2 section) of Task Force Hawk passed around 600 targets to the combined air operations center (CAOC). 
338
339
340
341
3
349
In the aftermath of the air campaign, the alliance turned to two other matters. The first was trying to incorporate Russian peacekeepers without having them form a separate peacekeeping sector that turned a blind eye to continued Serbian repression of minorities. Well, I think that there have certainly been an awful lot of armchair strategists, but I've been very interested even in the last 24 hours about some of them. Mr. Keegan, for instance, a leading military expert who just flat out came out and said that he was wrong. I think that that takes a lot of courage, and I would hope that some of the others might do the same thing. 
356
There will have to be a new strategic bombing survey and it will perhaps take years to compile before air forces and governments can understand what was achieved and why the effects of the bombing yielded the results they did. Nevertheless, the air forces have won a triumph, [and] are entitled to every plaudit they will receive and can look forward to enjoying a transformed status in the strategic community, one they have earned by their single-handed efforts. 
357
CHAPTER 4
After the war, different manners of assessing the effectiveness of the bombing emerged. At the operational level, NATO headquarters and the U.S. military services attempted to grasp the significance of Operation Allied Force in terms of whether air power had more of an effect by targeting infrastructure or mobile Serb ground forces.
Insights from the campaign shaped subsequent military modernization programs, particularly in the U.S. Army, which reacted as if the recent operation threatened its continued maintenance of large armored formations organized around a division-centric structure. At the strategic level, President Clinton and key members of his national security team solidified their belief that bombing was a better option than using ground forces to achieve limited war aims such as that of protecting innocents from the onslaught of ground forces. After the bombing, military and civilian leaders, as well as the general public, gained an overly optimistic outlook on the effectiveness of solely employing air power for limited military interventions. This legacy persists today, adding to the United States' propensity to bomb other countries with the faith that such an action will shape the strategic landscape in a favorable manner. In the aftermath of Operation Allied Force, American audiences expect to see precise results and a rapid turn of events when the bombs fall-even without the addition of ground forces. So we have made tremendous strides in our technological advances even since the Gulf War. We have far more precision munitions that are produced at much lower cost. So as we undergo this revolution in military affairs, we will reshape the Army, we will reshape the Air Force in terms of its components, what is going to be required by the Air Force, the Marines, and the Navy. 
3
9
11
12
5
The May 2000 issue of Newsweek featured an article refuting the claims made by General Clark and his staff. In this magazine, journalists John Barry and Evan Thomas said they obtained a "suppressed Air Force report" with lower damage estimates, and referred to an unnamed senior NATO staff officer who said BG Corley's report was all "smoke and mirrors." 
13
6
14
15
Milosevic's "Deep Battle"
In the latter days of the air campaign, the Serbian army suffered considerable
damage, yet it continued to put up air defenses while using camouflage and decoys to mitigate the impact of air power. Moreover, after the bombing started, the Serbian army commenced a campaign of ethnic cleansing that accelerated despite NATO's efforts, generating a significant exodus of refugees to neighboring countries in the region. 
16
7
17
The U.S. Marines proved the most aggressive in bombing targets acquired with counter-battery radar, though it was still challenging to identify camouflaged targets from high altitude despite knowing where to look. After the war, Lieutenant Colonel Philip C.
Tissue, a Marine pilot, described the typical process, in the closing weeks of the campaign, whereby F/A-18s struck Serb artillery spotted by counter-battery radars:
Shortly after we arrived on station, the airborne battlefield command-and-control center (ABCCC) passed us grid coordinates of a Serbian artillery site that was reported to be firing on U.S. troops. Grid coordinates were passed using Have Quick (a frequency-agile net); they had probably been forwarded from U.S. counter-battery radars attached to Task Force Hawk located in Albania.
Obviously, we wanted to destroy this target quickly, but we were frustrated. Minimum altitude restrictions, as well as NVG and F/A18D forward-looking infrared radar (FLIR) limitations, made detection of a camouflaged enemy at night difficult at best. We could see with the naked eye the intermittent muzzle flashes of artillery firing from Kosovo into Albania, but the targets could not be pinpointed with enough accuracy to ensure that we did not mistakenly bomb civilians or even U.S. troops. Ultimately, an Air Force FAC(A) in an A-10 illuminated the area with multiple infrared (IR) flares, detected an artillery site, and ran a section of Marine Hornets on it. The FAC(A) appeared to be conducting reconnaissance by fire, and then figuring that if he received antiaircraft artillery (AAA) in return, the shooters must be bad guys. Two F/A-18Ds dropped two 500pound bombs, and the Serbs were done firing for the night. The target may or may not have been hit or destroyed, but apparently just the knowledge that air was poised to strike shut down every Serb artillery position along the border with Albania. 
24
25
Lieutenant Colonel Chris "Kimos" Haave, the commander of the 81st Fighter Squadron during the conflict, applauded Task Force Hawk in his book, A-10s Over Kosovo. LTC Haave wrote, "when a Serb artillery unit fired on a Kosovar village, the U.S. Army's counterbattery radar could plot the Serb's position." 
26
27
28
In 2002, the U.S. Army commissioned a study by the RAND Corporation's Arroyo Center to determine why Task Force Hawk's assets were not fully integrated into the Kosovo campaign. The result, Disjointed War, determined that Task Force Hawk added a significant capability, in terms of its sensors, despite not employing the Apaches; however, the failure to designate a land component commander, even in an air-only campaign, hindered coordination. 
29
30
6
31
32
Kosovo at the outset of the operation and had to transfer intelligence data manually with higher headquarters due to incompatible systems. 
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
TRADOC cautiously decided to change the doctrine because they deemed it too risky to employ Apaches far ahead of friendly lines when the other side shoots back.
Targeting infrastructure was one of the most divisive issues among NATO members during in the air campaign. Overall, only 30 percent of NATO's strike sorties focused on Serb ground forces. The daily air tasking order (ATO) directed the remainder of efforts against air defenses and infrastructure targets, though the daily breakdown of this ratio indicated a higher proportion of missions against ground forces near the end of the campaign. 
40
June and said, "Just keep bombing. Forget about the targets in Kosovo and go after targets in northern Serbia." 
41
42
President Jacques Chirac bragged that his personal involvement and objections in NATO target selection matters ensured that there were still bridges intact across the Danube River at the end of the campaign. 
43
When I was talking about the 20 percent [of tanks destroyed so far] keep in mind that I always quote SACEUR-a tank is not a tank is not a tank-a tank, even if it is not destroyed, if it is hiding somewhere and it doesn't have any fuel and it doesn't have any ammunition, it just does not have any combat effectiveness so even though you were asking for numbers of the last few days, numbers always have to be related to the kind of operations we are in so if a tank cannot move there is no difference if it is destroyed or if it is out of order or if it has no ammunition, the effectiveness is exactly the same. 
44
Throughout the campaign, NATO spokespersons had a difficult time convincing journalists the reasoning behind targeting infrastructure, since the media's focus remained on tank plinking.
In the final tally of infrastructure damage, NATO assessed that it destroyed eleven railroad bridges, thirty-four highway bridges, 29 percent of all Serb ammo stockpiles, 57 percent of petroleum reserves, all oil refineries, and ten airfields. 
45
In one case, aircraft struck a phony bridge near Djakovica several times, with one munition punching a hole precisely through the center before splashing in the water. 
46
47
48
49
50
Postwar U.S. Army Modernization Efforts On 22 June 1999, in an interview with The Washington Post, retired Air Force
Major General Charles Link said, "As a result of Kosovo, I'd expect there'd be more careful scrutiny of some heavy systems that hardly ever seem to be taken to war these days, and hopefully a little more respect and appreciation for those Air Force capabilities that get there quickly, are easily integrated in coalition operations and provide only fleeting or invisible targets for enemy guns." 51 MG Link's statement highlighted the catalyst for various military modernization programs in the aftermath of the Kosovo intervention. For the U.S. Air Force, operations in Kosovo seemingly validated their "Halt-Phase" concept, which entailed cutting the size of the U.S. Army in order to increase investment in air force capability. 
52
53
61
In 2002, RAND conducted a simulation where the U.S. Army fought the Kosovo scenario with a Brigade Combat Team (BCT) equipped with the Future Combat System in the year 2020. 
62
63
71
72
73
74
Clinton attributed the lack of public knowledge that the air campaign ended to the fact that Milosevic was still in power in the immediate aftermath. 
75
76
Allied Force proved a "win" in public perceptions, though one must consider the marginal level of awareness that Americans displayed with keeping track of current events and world geography.
Before the bombing, only 46 percent of Americans supported military intervention in Kosovo. 
77
78
Allied Force was a risky gamble that ultimately paid dividends-of the kind that continue to tempt American leaders towards military intervention with air power.
National Security Advisor Sandy Berger added the sentence, "I do not intend to put our troops in Kosovo to fight a war," to President Clinton's speech on the eve the Kosovo campaign. 
79
In previous conflicts, American presidents struggled to gain congressional support for their military endeavors. Ironically, during the Kosovo intervention, by ruling out the use of ground forces from the onset, Congress instead pressured the president to escalate the campaign. 
80
81
82
After the bombing, Clinton defended his decision not to employ ground forces at the onset of the intervention, stating: Some people have argued that our position would have been more defensible if we had sent in ground troops. There were two problems with that argument. First, by the time the soldiers were in position, in adequate numbers and with proper support, the Serbs would have done an enormous amount of damage. Second, the civilian casualties of a ground campaign would probably have been greater that the toll from errant bombs. 
83
84
85
Milosevic's military machine-from tanks to fuel supply, to anti-aircraft weapons, to the military and political support." 
86
The United States' participation in Balkan peacekeeping became a recurring issue during the 2000 presidential campaigns of Republican candidate George W. Bush and Democratic candidate Al Gore. In a debate moderated by Jim Lehrer on 12 October 2000, Governor Bush said, "I think it's a triumph. I thought the President [Clinton] made the right decision in joining NATO in bombing Serbia." 88 Later in the debate, however, Bush cautioned, "we can't be all things to all people in the world," attempting to distinguish himself as less interventionist-minded than Al Gore. 
89
90
Clinton's 1998 launch of cruise missiles against suspected Al Qaeda sites in Afghanistan.
the Spanish Civil War. But perhaps, in the minds of those who decided to cover the replication tapestry of Guernica at the UN building, the wars of the future would be clean and precise, with aerial forces as the decisive arm. The use of air power in accordance with Giulio Douhet's ideas was a thing of the past. John Warden and "shock and awe" were the future.  5 Steven Lee Myers, "Damage to Serb Military Less Than Expected," New York Times, 28 June 1999, http://www.nytimes.com/1999/06/28/world/crisis-in-the-balkansthe-toll-damage-to-serb-military-less-than-expected.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm (accessed 4 January 2014). 
6
7 Rebecca Grant, "True Blue: Behind the Kosovo Numbers Game," Air Force Magazine, 83, no. 8 (August 2000): 75. 
8
9
10 Douglas MacGregor, email message to author, 4 February 2014. COL MacGregor (retired) served as the Director of Joint Operations at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) during Operation Allied Force. In an email discussing the challenges of targeting mobile ground forces, he stated, "I assume you know we never degraded the Serb air defenses below 83 percent. AF Leadership warned Clark in Nov 1998 that if we did not hit Serb forces in the motor pool we probably wouldn't hit anything in Kosovo. They were right. Twelve tanks, thirteen SP Guns and ninety assorted trucks and countless decoys are all we hit. I personally discussed this on the ground in Advisor John Owen Brennan, and  Despite this confluence of opinions, President Obama decided to intervene, privately revealing that it was a "51-49 call" based on his assessment of the situation. 
3
Contrasting this, prior to the Libya intervention, Ambassador Rice successfully managed to get China and Russia to abstain from voting on the resolution. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
In a speech on 18 March 2011, the day after deliberations by the NSC, President Obama announced that the United States and its allies would intervene in Libya with military force, stating that the U.S. would "provide the unique capabilities that we can bring to bear to stop the violence against civilians," yet cautiously added, "the United States is not going to deploy ground troops into Libya." 
14
President Barack Obama, British Prime Minister David Cameron, and French President   Nicolas Sarkozy presented a united front, jointly signing a letter that stated, "it is impossible to imagine a future for Libya with Gaddafi in power." 
15
Prior to transitioning to a NATO-led operation, from 19-31 March, the   After 24 March, the focus shifted to interdiction of ground maneuver forces, with the first targets in Adjabiya, south of Benghazi, as depicted in figure 
7
16
In one instance, on 8 April 2011, in open desert terrain, NATO mistakenly bombed a rebel column of around twenty captured T-55 and T-72 tanks. 
17
22
We informed them [NATO] at the time the tanks were leaving Benghazi, and when they arrived at Ajdabiya. We informed them that in the early morning they would be advancing on Brega. We gave them [NATO] all the information concerning their number, and that they would be carried on tank transports, and their direction. 
18
19
Initially, NATO dropped leaflets informing Libyans of a telephone hotline for passing information. 
20
21
22
23
In 2011, Google Earth and Twitter, which were not available during Operation Allied Force, enhanced NATO's synchronization with Libyan rebel forces. During an interview with CNN's Anthony Bourdain on the show Parts Unknown, Libyan rebel fighter Akram Al-Gdery described the methods used to pass on targets from rebel ground forces to NATO air forces. When asked to explain how NATO aircraft were able to strike tanks, artillery, and other vehicles with success, he stated: How did it happen? Easy-Twitter. We sent so much information to NATO via Twitter. I get a phone call from [rebel ground forces in] Tripoli or Benghazi or whatever. We get the coordinates [of the target] via Google Earth. We verify that that is the location there that needs to be hit, send it to NATO-then it is gone. 
24
25
Just as in Operation Allied Force, effective targeting during Operation Unified Protector required accurate target location data passed from ground forces. The use of Twitter and Google Earth, in the hands of tech-savvy rebels who spotted targets, provided NATO the sort of data that Task Force Hawk's sensors added during strike operations in Kosovo. As a point for comparison, near the end of the Kosovo air campaign, on 6 June 1999, counter-battery radars from Task Force Hawk passed more than fifty artillery radar acquisitions to air forces. 
26
27
To filter this information, operational-level headquarters such as that of rebel fighter Al-Gdery sifted through reports from frontline forces and verified locations with imaging software such as Google Earth prior to tweeting them to NATO headquarters.
Additionally, the use of hashtags allowed operations cells to further filter targeting data into various categories, with subsequent messages appearing on pre-defined message threads. To incorporate hashtags, a Twitter user simply puts a pound sign (#) in front of whatever keyword they want to become a category, spelling things out without spaces (for example, #Libyastrike). By doing this, Twitter users tailor the flow of information to suit their specific needs.
Initially, requests for airstrikes via Twitter from ground forces did not include accurate targeting data (although a timestamp and the location of those sending the tweets was available if the Twitter user chose to embed their phone's location data with messages). For example, the following tweet, typical of messages sent early in the campaign, does not contain useful targeting information: "HEY @NATO I SEE TANKS, COME BLOW 'EM UP 4 ME PLZ TY #needbackup #war #gaddafisux #bieberfever." 
28
29
Furthermore, much of the data sent by rebel fighters did not contain hashtags or the addition of "@NATO" (NATO headquarters official Twitter account) to help in filtering the information to NATO headquarters. 
30
The first, Janice Clinch, a fifty-nine year old grandmother, worked from her home in Seeley's Bay, Canada, as a site administrator for the Facebook page: "Libyan Youth Movement." 
31
32
33
34
35
36
We'll get information from open source on the internet, we'll get Twitter, you name any source of media and our fusion centre will deliver all of that into useable intelligence. The Commander will assess what he can use, what he can trust, and the experience of the operators, the intelligence officers, and the trained military personnel and civilian support staff will give him those options. And he will decide 'that's good information, I'm going to act on it.' So where it comes from, again, it's not relevant to the commander. 
37
38
The Washington Post and several other news agencies, NATO intelligence analysts managed the Twitter feed of @HMS_Nosuch. 
39
8
47
48
49
In addition to this record, hobbyists listened in on radio broadcasts from NATO's psychological operations, preserving these messages on internet blogs.
NATO conducted psychological operations in Libya using its EC-130J "Commando Solo" aircraft. This aircraft broadcasted radio messages from NATO to Gaddafi, encouraging him to peacefully step down from power. 
50
51
52
After 223 days of bombing, Muammar Gaddafi's regime fell. On 20 October   2011, manned (British and French) and unmanned (American) aircraft of NATO struck eleven armored platforms in a seventy-five vehicle convoy near Sirte, Libya. 
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
Opposition forces and their sympathizers across the country formed a complex network of spotters, informants, forward observers, and battle damage assessors. Anyone with a cell phone, Google Earth, Skype, Twitter, or email was in a position to report by passing coordinates, pictures, and other data. The problem that NATO faced, therefore, was not a shortage of targeting information, but a flood of it. 
62
63
65
66
The disagreement between General Wesley Clark and Lieutenant General Michael Short during Operation Allied Force over whether the enemy "center of gravity" was the Yugoslav 3rd Army or the political leadership in Belgrade highlights the limits of such a concept. Clausewitz never intended his metaphor of a "center of gravity" as prescriptive tool for targeting efforts or resource allocation. Instead, the term is only useful as a descriptive framework. After all, Clausewitz originally used the term "center of gravity" in On War as an analogy, and not necessarily as a prescriptive formula upon which to base a military strategy. 5 Yet U.S. military planners frequently rely on this concept based upon guidance from Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Operational Planning. 
6
During Operation Allied Force, NATO's political objectives did not call for a "regime change" of the Serbian political leadership by way of bombing. Instead, the aim was to coerce Milosevic into a political settlement or degrade his army's ability to wreak havoc among civilian populations in Kosovo. The latter objective required effective targeting of the Serbian army with air power-this was only accomplished after the incorporation of counter-battery radar acquisitions. In contrast, before the start of Operation Unified Protector, President Obama said that it was "time for Gaddafi to go," explicitly revealing his intention for regime change. 7 Furthermore, in policy statements prior to the air campaign, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton added: "nothing is off the table so long as the Libyan government continues to threaten and kill Libyans." 
8
9
The live feed from Predator drones, instantaneously broadcasted to General Clark's headquarters in Mons, Belgium, and LTG Short's combined air operations center (CAOC) in Vicenza, Italy, prompted both generals to become personally involved in "tank plinking." On one occasion, early in the campaign, Clark and Short, from their separate locations, simultaneously monitored the "highly magnified" aerial view of a tank in Kosovo. 
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
would have to answer the news media's daily question, "How many tanks did you kill today?" 
19
Of the various Serbian heavy weapon systems, tanks were the best at eluding aerial firepower. In comparison, NATO struck four times more Serbian artillery pieces than tanks. 
20
21
22
23
24
The integration of firepower with ground maneuver-an aspect of combined arms warfare that dates back to World War I-had to be rediscovered in Kosovo and Libya because political leaders assumed that air power could succeed by itself. In Libya, the method of integrating air power with ground maneuver-through social media-was a new and noteworthy development. Virtually everyone on the ground in Libya, solider and civilian alike, had the equivalent of a handheld telegraph machine with global reach that automatically filtered the important messages. Meanwhile, the allure of air power fascinated military leaders, politicians, and the general public alike.
The same year as the Libyan conflict, renowned military historian Martin van Creveld's book, The Age of Airpower, opened with: "Airpower is the most glamorous offensive and defensive instrument of war in military history." 
25
In a 1996 RAND study, "The Psychological Effects of U.S. Air Power in Four Wars," which covered World War II, Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf War, Stephen T.
Hosmer compared the focus on what he termed "strategic targets"-infrastructure and "targets near or within the enemy's capital city" with that of "deployed forces"elements of mobile ground power. 
26
In every major conflict from World War II on, enemies have capitulated or acceded to peace terms demanded by the United States only after their deployed forces have suffered serious battlefield defeats. In future conflicts, enemy leaders are likely to prove equally reluctant to make concessions or terminate conflicts as long as they see a chance to prevail on the battlefield. To cause future enemy leaders to abandon the strategy of protracted warfare, the United States and its allies must be able to demonstrate that the balance of forces on the battlefield will progressively shift to the enemy's disadvantage as long as the fighting continues. 
27
28
29
30
Milosevic even asked Chernomyrdin to conduct the negotiations in such a way that the ground operation would start faster. 
31
In late May, according to Yeltsin, "Milosevic's position changed. He no longer wanted an escalation of the conflict. He asked to stop the war." Of course, it is impossible to know exactly what was going on inside Milosevic's head, but the timing of his decision to concede, after almost half of the Yugoslav 3rd Army's artillery tubes were out of action,
shows that effectively targeting ground forces probably changed Milosevic's calculus.
During Operation Unified Protector, two potential "centers of gravity"-the political leadership (Gaddafi) and remnant loyalist ground forces (an armored column)merged into one entity that NATO struck with air power at the end of the campaign. 
32
NATO assured Milosevic that he would not be personally targeted during the air campaign, although the bombing of his residence signaled that NATO had the capability to do so if its strategy evolved. The idea of a "center of gravity" in military doctrine often confuses the joint decision-making process. War is already a complex endeavor without this concept.
There are numerous ways to unbalance an adversary-some of these ways are unforeseeable. In regime toppling, the game of Jenga might offer more insight when combined with Clausewitz's "center of gravity" analogy from physics. In Jenga, the In Libya, U.S. Air Force EC-130J "Commando Solo" aircraft broadcast warnings to Gaddafi that he might be targeted with airstrikes if he continued to operate and move throughout the country using the protection of armored military ground formations. Both of these messaging efforts directly corresponded with the role of air power, however, other types of informational activities that aimed at peacefully removing Milosevic and Gaddafi from power also took place in both campaigns.
In October 2013, the William J. Clinton Presidential Library released 1,170 pages of documents pertaining to the "Ring Around Serbia," a series of FM transmitters placed in countries bordering Serbia as part of a strategic communications plan aimed at bringing about "regime change in Serbia" in the aftermath of the air campaign. 
34
35
Ignoring the role of Twitter in the Libyan campaign would be the equivalent of studying military operations during the American Civil War without considering the role of the telegraph. Social media will inevitably play a role in future military decisionmaking processes, and its potential use spans far beyond the realm of public affairs and media engagements. For example, while in a firefight, the Libyan rebels used Twitter to "crowdsource" technical questions pertaining to the employment of various weapon systems. Crowdsourcing with Twitter casts a global net to rapidly seek expert answers by simply tweeting a question. On one occasion, while in contact with the enemy, a rebel contingent used crowdsourcing via Twitter to determine the minimum arming distance of a BM-21 Grad 122mm multiple rocket launcher they had encountered. 
36
In 2013, key figures in the Obama administration considered NATO's 1999 operation in Kosovo as a "blueprint" for action in Syria. On 10 September 2013, President Obama addressed the nation from the White House, stating that a potential intervention in Syria would be shorter than the Kosovo and Libya interventions:
I will not put American boots on the ground in Syria. I will not pursue an openended action like Iraq or Afghanistan. I will not pursue a prolonged air campaign like Libya or Kosovo. This would be a targeted strike to achieve a clear objective: deterring the use of chemical weapons, and degrading Assad's capabilities. 
41
42
43
44
45
Russia and China did not support the notion of intervention in Syria and threatened to veto (unlike in the case of Libya) any United Nations resolution authorizing the use of force. 
46
47
48
49
appetite for intervention in Syria reached its peak due to Assad's use of chemical weapons. 
50
51
52
53
54
55
Navy Rear Admiral Robert Burke, this weapons-neutralization process will take only 60 days upon transfer of the chemical agents from allied ships that will receive the stockpile from Syria. 
56
57
58
59
60
Protector, the U.S. public viewed the use of air power without ground forces with indifference. In the aftermath of these two campaigns, Americans nonchalantly assume that future bombing campaigns will bring rapid and precise results. Yet the reality is that future adversaries can easily counter the impacts of air power using decoys, camouflage, air defenses, entrenchment, and dispersion-all methods used during World War I for the same purpose. Gaining air superiority is only half the battle. Finding enemy ground formations will be equally difficult, particularly when fighting without a land contingent.
Since 1999, the manufacture of decoys evolved beyond Serb efforts to make fake artillery tubes with painted telephone poles and old truck axles. In one example of the new level of decoy sophistication, the Chinese company Uniforce Technology Limited, which is headquartered in Beijing, has a line of "high fidelity decoys" that includes tanks, artillery, armored personnel carriers, fixed wing aircraft, helicopters, and missile launchers. 
61
62
After the marriage of air power with mobile cyber power, special operations forces, of the sort that Ignatieff described, were obsolete. By 2011, the Libyan rebels had replaced the "heavyset American" that had "up-links to air power and precision weapons" with teenagers wielding smartphones that had Twitter and Google Earth. Of course, gaining air superiority, finding the enemy's location, and air-ground integration remained as elements of continuity in successful joint operations. Yet in Libya, dramatic technological changes in the equipment necessary to coordinate military activities over global ranges with precision position data allowed teenagers with smartphones to perform the function of coordinating airstrikes. In just one decade, sensor-to-shooter linkages had come a long way since Task Force Hawk first linked its sensors with air forces using automated data networks.
At the conclusion of Operation Allied Force, John Keegan's preliminary assessment-the first-ever campaign "won by airpower alone"-was wrong. 
66
67
68
1 Wesley Clark, Waging Modern War (New York: Public Affairs, 2001), 334-336. 
2
3 Ibid., 4. In addition, Secretary of Defense Donald Rusmfeld stated, "It's hard for me to imagine another Afghanistan. If you think about that situation, it is kind of distinctive. Now it doesn't mean that some of the things that are working there won't work elsewhere, but the totality of it is distinctive. I don't think we're going to run around with a cookie mold and repeat this." 4 Ibid., viii. Now that raids against military targets have evidently proven pointless, NATO's armed force has moved to massive destruction of civilian infrastructure-in particular, electric transmission lines, water pipes, and factories. Are thousands of innocent people to be killed because of one man's blunders? Is an entire country to be razed? Is one to assume that air raids can win a war? I should like here to turn to the lessons of recent history. The U.S. Air Force and the RAF dropped several hundred thousand bombs on Berlin, yet it took a Soviet Army offensive, with its toll of several hundred thousand lives, to seize the city [during World War II]. American air raids in Vietnam proved pointless, and the Russian Army suffered setbacks in Chechnya. Serbs see NATO and the Americans as aggressors against whom they are defending their native land. 
10
11
Earlier, on 14 April, President Clinton called President Yeltsin to request that Russia contribute troops for peacekeeping operations in Kosovo after the air campaign. 
12
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
12
11
9
36  
36  
39    
39    
States unprepared to defend other interests because it "forced the U.S. Navy to reshuffle its deployment of aircraft carriers, leaving forces assigned to defend South Korea without a carrier presence."
States unprepared to defend other interests because it "forced the U.S. Navy to reshuffle its deployment of aircraft carriers, leaving forces assigned to defend South Korea without a carrier presence."
Source: Eric V.
In April 1993, Albright advised President Clinton to use air strikes to destroy Bosnian Serb heavy weaponry and bridges used to support these forces' resupply.
In April 1993, Albright advised President Clinton to use air strikes to destroy Bosnian Serb heavy weaponry and bridges used to support these forces' resupply.
152  
152  
the U.S. effort to halt North Vietnamese support of the fighting in South Vietnam by 'signaling' U.S. resolve through carefully constrained, politically designed bombing, which avoided seeking a decisive impact, had been a failure."
the U.S. effort to halt North Vietnamese support of the fighting in South Vietnam by 'signaling' U.S. resolve through carefully constrained, politically designed bombing, which avoided seeking a decisive impact, had been a failure."
. All Sorties, 30 August-14 September 1995, Operation Deliberate Force Source: John A Tirpak, "Deliberate Force," Air Force Magazine 80, no. 10 (October 1997): 39.
6
1  
1  
82
73  
73  
1  
1  
Source: "Support for Action in Kosovo Is Tempered by Risks of War," ABC News/Nightline Poll, 9 April 1999, http://abcnews.go.com/images/pdf/788a1Kosovo.pdf (accessed 14 April 2014). Political and military leaders in the United States mirrored the sentiments revealed in polling data concerning the commitment of ground forces. Despite President Clinton's initial reluctance for a ground option, Madeleine Albright argued for "a credible threat of ground invasion." 13 Additionally, in a 28 March 1999 interview with
Source: "Support for Action in Kosovo Is Tempered by Risks of War," ABC News/Nightline Poll, 9 April 1999, http://abcnews.go.com/images/pdf/788a1Kosovo.pdf (accessed 14 April 2014). Political and military leaders in the United States mirrored the sentiments revealed in polling data concerning the commitment of ground forces. Despite President Clinton's initial reluctance for a ground option, Madeleine Albright argued for "a credible threat of ground invasion." 13 Additionally, in a 28 March 1999 interview with
The two Serbian pilots ejected into a sector patrolled by Russian troops serving as peacekeepers within NATO's Stabilization Force (SFOR) in Bosnia, prompting strategic-level interplay between Russia, Serbia, Bosnia, and the United States. 48 In a press conference, Patricia Kelly of CNN asked what would happen if the Russians picked up the downed pilots before other SFOR troops. NATO spokesman David Wilby responded, "I'm sure if the air crew come [sic] down into a
Subsequently, the KLA, devoid of sanctuary from a nonexistent population, fell victim to direct attack by the Serbians due to their exposure like fish out of water. 78 Tank Plinking On 26 March 1999, in a CNN interview with Christiane Amanpour, GEN Clark explained, "GEN Clark's focus on destroying Serb heavy weapons frustrated his air component commander, LTG Michael C. Short. The majority of U.S. Air Force officers on LTG Short's staff equated what they referred to as "tank plinking" with "the fruitless hunt for Scud missiles batteries during the Persian Gulf War." 84 In an interview with Air Force Magazine, LTG Short stated, "I never felt that the [Serb] 3rd Army in Kosovo was a center of gravity." 85 According to LTG Short, GEN Clark's "No. 1 priority, which he expressed to me
171 U.S. public support for the war reached its highest level-65 percent-during the NATO summit, but dropped to an alltime low of 49 percent in the week after.
171 U.S. public support for the war reached its highest level-65 percent-during the NATO summit, but dropped to an alltime low of 49 percent in the week after.
At the onset of phase three, Serb state television compared the bombing over Easter weekend to that of the Luftwaffe in April 1941, with the latter killing 16,000 civilians in Belgrade.
At the onset of phase three, Serb state television compared the bombing over Easter weekend to that of the Luftwaffe in April 1941, with the latter killing 16,000 civilians in Belgrade.
unacceptable. . . . There have been too many mistakes in public affairs. You must find a new spokesman."
unacceptable. . . . There have been too many mistakes in public affairs. You must find a new spokesman."
After a Department of Defense investigation, Pentagon spokesman P.J. Crowley admitted, "There is a normal acceleration that goes on through this process of converting the gun camera footage." 257 Despite this realization, NATO kept playing the fast forward versions of cockpit videos.
After a Department of Defense investigation, Pentagon spokesman P.J. Crowley admitted, "There is a normal acceleration that goes on through this process of converting the gun camera footage." 257 Despite this realization, NATO kept playing the fast forward versions of cockpit videos.
302    
302    
2
Herbert George Wells, The War in the Air (London: George Bell and Sons, 1908), 79.
Alan Johnston, "Libya 1911:  How an Italian pilot began the air war era," BBC News, 10 May 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-13294524 (accessed 18 May 2014).
Eyder Peralta, "100 Years Ago, World's First Aerial Bomb Dropped Over Libya," National Public Radio, 21 March 2011, http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwoway/ 2011/ 03/21/134735395/ 100-years-ago-the-first-aerial-bomb-fell-over-libya (accessed 17 May 2014).
Gerard J. DeGroot, The Bomb: A History of Hell on Earth (London: Pimlico, 2005), 2.
Raul Colon, "Newsflash: Italy Bombs the Turks," Aeroflight, 29 September 2007, http://www.aeroflight.co.uk/military/italy_turks.htm (accessed 18 May 2014).
DeGroot, 2.    
Stephen Budiansky, Air Power: The Men, Machines, and Ideas that  Revolutionized War, From Kitty Hawk to Iraq (New York: Penguin Books, 2005), 55.   
John T. Correll, "The Strategy of Desert Storm," Air Force Magazine 89, no. 1 (January 2006): 31.
Eliot Cohen et al, Gulf War Air Power Survey, Volume 1 (Washington, DC:  Government Printing Office, 1993), 8.    
Ibid., 102.   
Spencer Ackerman, "General FAIL: The Military's Worst Tweeters," Wired, 28 December 2010, http://www.wired.com/2010/12/general-fail-the-militarys-worsttweeters/ (accessed 28 April 2014).
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Operational Planning (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), xxi.
Marcus, Johnathan. "Ground Troops: Why Nato says no." BBC News, 30 March 1999. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/special_report/1998/kosovo2/307387.stm (accessed 22 December 2013).
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Greta Marlatt
Dudley Knox Library
John Dubuisson
Russell Rafferty
Michael Browne
Combined Arms Research Library
Scholars program
Clinton Library archives
Dr. Dean Nowowiejski
Art of War Scholars program
Art of War Scholars program
Dr. ; Dr. Jack Kem
Team Leader
LTC Scott Roxburgh (USAF)
Dr. , Jason Alexander
Lance Tomlinson
Bobby Gichert
In addition, I acknowledge 
Dr. Daniel Moran
At the strategic level, policymakers' assumed that ground forces were not required to accomplish the stated political objectives in Kosovo. This speaks to a larger underlying assumption-common among policy makers, military leaders, and the general public-regarding the efficacy of air power to degrade the capacity of mobile ground forces. The divergence in military opinions centered on the preferred technique rather than the actual capability of air power. Leading up to Operation Allied Force, the U.S.
Army and Air Force had differing views on how to limit the capacity of the Serbian military. The 1991 Gulf War and the 1995 campaign in Bosnia shaped military service perspectives on air power. From the U.S. Army perspective, destroying tanks and artillery through precision aerial bombing limited Serbian military capacity. On the other hand, from the U.S. Air Force perspective, bombing Serbian leadership, command centers, critical infrastructure, and resources (fuel, ammunition, power generation, etc.) indirectly degraded the effectiveness of the Serbia's fielded forces more so than targeting them directly. Nevertheless, both viewpoints assumed that air power could quickly accomplish the Kosovo campaign objectives, albeit with different techniques.
The U.S. strategy in Kosovo, by exclusively relying upon air power, did not link to the three stated U.S. objectives in Kosovo. Ruling out the use of ground forces worked in contradiction of the first objective, demonstrating NATO's resolve, by revealing that the United States perceived the NATO alliance as so fragile that it might fall apart if called upon to employ the full depth of its resources. Using air power to achieve the second objective, deterring genocide, assumed that bombing would not spur increased levels of atrocity. Lastly, solely using air power to achieve the third objective, limiting Although the Cold War was over, Russia continued its typical rivalry against the United States with undercurrents of diplomatic power. As the first-ever elected president of the newly formed Russian Federation, Boris Yeltsin was well-aware of attitudes Kosovo. 
351
Just as in Bosnia during Operation Deliberate Force in 1995, counter-battery radars detected the location of Serbian artillery tubes when decoys fooled aerial sensors.
According to retired Army Lieutenant General Theodore G. Stroup, "The result was that NATO air power was finally able to precisely hit the Serb army in the field. The Kosovars acted as the anvil and TF Hawk the eyes and ears of the blacksmith so that the hammer of air power could be effective." 
353
Within Task Force Hawk, COL Odierno's fire support assets, with their radars, were merely a shaping effort for the helicopters. In the end, at the operational level of war, Task Force Hawk's sensors turned out as the cog in an ad hoc arrangement of military systems that GEN Clark sought to wreak havoc on Serbia's 3rd Army with. Once allied air forces bombed something other than wooden telephone poles, perhaps Milosevic's crony generals took NATO air power seriously. 
354
18
By the end of Operation Allied Force, the Serbs had displaced nearly one million ethnic Albanians. 
19
20
21
22
23
After rapidly toppling the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, by 2003, President Bush shifted the nation's focus towards Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq.
On 5 February 2003, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell addressed the UN Security Council in New York City, calling for "regime change" in Iraq. That same month, Ballantine Books published an updated version of My American Journey that included an addendum with Powell's UN speech in an effort to promote American enthusiasm and legitimacy for the pending invasion. 
91
92
93
94
95
96
41
42
43
44
45
46
8
Nevertheless, more accurate targeting data, combined with better terrain and weather for allied air forces, led to greater success in Libya at the tactical level.
Further analysis, including a daily breakdown of the Libya bombing, is necessary to determine whether the use of cell phones and Twitter provided better targeting information than the 5,310 person contingent of Task Force Hawk in Kosovo.
Preliminary data, however, indicates that a networked system of sensors (people on the ground) employed by amateur ground forces, albeit one using mobile phones, Twitter, and Google Earth, provided better targeting data that the network of sensors envisioned by the $200 billion Future Combat Systems program that Secretary Gates cancelled in 2009. Nevertheless, these methods only work in in situations where there is both a capacity and willingness to tweet target locations. In Libya, text messages, pictures, videos, and cell phone calls from observers on the ground worked better than counterbattery radars and more expensive sensors such as JSTARS in identifying a wide-range of dispersed mobile targets for NATO headquarters. time from hours to "minutes" for airstrikes based upon ground observation of a target by rebels. 
67
68
69
1
2
3
4 "UN Vote Approves Libya No-Fly Zone; China, Russia Abstain," International Business Times, 17 March 2011, http://www.ibtimes.com/un-vote-approves-libya-no-flyzone-china-russia-abstain-276107 (accessed 21 January 2014). 
5
In the past twenty years, from Operation Desert Storm to Kosovo to Afghanistan to 2011 operations in Libya, the success of air power consistently depended on a ground component. The widespread perception of these recent operations, however, was that air power succeeded on its own. In Kosovo, the U.S. Army provided a ground contingent with Task Force Hawk. As the V Corps commander, LTG Hendrix became the de facto land component commander for General Clark, adding a ground force perspective to air operations. 
1
In Afghanistan, during initial operations in 2001, special operations forces, working in concert with Northern Alliance fighters, effectively coordinated airstrikes against Taliban forces, quickly toppling the government. In 2002, historian Stephen Biddle referred to interventions that relied on indigenous forces to exploit air power as the "Afghan Model" of warfare, but admonished advocates who argued that it "represents warfare's future and should become the new template for U.S. defense planning." 2 Instead, Biddle argued that the success of air power in recent operations indicated a continuity in trends extending back to World War I rather than a divergence from the past. 3 He stated, "The key to success, whether in 1916 or 2002, is to team heavy, well-directed fires with skilled ground maneuver to exploit their effects and overwhelm the surviving enemy." 4 In 2011, nearly a decade after the start of U.S. involvement in Afghanistan, NATO operations in Libya, as a result of not having any allied troops on the ground, depended heavily on Twitter messages from rebel forces who spotted targets for air strikes. block structure holds on tenuously after its center of gravity appears compromised. 
33
The impromptu methods of integrating counter-battery radar acquisitions in Kosovo and "tweets" with grid coordinates of pro-Gaddafi forces in Libya tipped the scales in both campaigns by simultaneously emboldening the rebels (KLA and Libyan) while striking elements of ground power that eluded observation by air power using primitive measures such as camouflage, decoys, and dispersion. But the weight that "tips the scales" is not always the heaviest of those amassed. Continued research on both campaigns can further examine the effectiveness counter-battery radar, tweets, and other concurrent measures that NATO stacked against Milosevic and Gaddafi.
Three areas exist for continued research on the use of air power during the Kosovo and Libya interventions. First, examination of NATO's use of counter-battery radar from the Serbian perspective can expand on the operational bearing of this development by determining whether it influenced the adversary's decision-making.
Second, further study of NATO's use of information operations as leverage over Milosevic might show how this measure, in conjunction with air power, had an impact on his capitulation. Third, deeper analysis on the role of social media in the formation of the Libyan rebel movement and its subsequent use for "crowdsourcing" as well as for and Khalid Hatashe in Britain, and conference called them via Skype to learn that Gaddafi's BM-21 Grad operators typically used an electric cable to remotely trigger the launcher. 
37
38
39
40
In recent operations, from Desert Storm to Unified Protector, the successful employment of air power depended on the incorporation of a ground element for spotting targets. Regardless of whether this land contingent employed counter-battery radars or youths armed with cell phones posting messages to Twitter via SMS, the ability to spot targets and accurately relay their location to the appropriate operational-level military headquarters in a timely fashion remains a decisive aspect of air campaigns. The reliance on indigenous forces to locate targets has the secondary consequence of unleashing revolutionary fervor that cannot be fully controlled. Politicians and military planners must consider the methods used to locate targets in planning any future air campaign.
Decisions on this aspect of targeting will prove more significant than the actual employment of air forces. It does not matter how precise JDAMS and TLAMS can strike if planners cannot find relevant targets.
During the opening stage of the U.S. intervention in Afghanistan, a Canadian commentator, Michael Ignatieff, described America's newest technique in nation building with a sarcastic tone: . . . in Mazar-i-Sharif, second city of Afghanistan, in this warlord's compound, with a Lexus and an Audi purring in the driveway, armed mujahedeen milling by the gate and musclemen standing guard in tight black T-shirts and flak jackets and sporting the latest semiautomatic weapons, the heavyset American is the one who matters. He comes with a team that includes a forward air controller, who can call in airstrikes from the big planes doing Daytona 500 loops high in the sky. No one knows how many C.I.A. agents and Special Forces troops there are in country. The number is small-perhaps as few as 350-but with up-links to air power and precision weapons, who needs regiments of ground troops? When you ask the carpet sellers in Mazar why there has been peace in the city, they point up into the air. Only America, the carpet sellers say, puts its peacekeepers in the sky. 
64
65
1
3
4