# ID: 520bce7e7aa54c98a26c7c916288b5ec
# Title: Road to Damascus
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
The VKS's experimentation with dynamic forward-based aircraft rotations and unit configurations enabled Russian forces to generate relatively timely CAS across a growing geographic area.
The VKS forward-based a daily average of more than half of its rotary-wing fleet throughout the campaign (and, since 2017, a more-modest 5 percent of its fixed-wing fleet).
Russian aircraft operated out of at least five distinct base locations.
ISIS attacks on Russiancontrolled air bases had also led Russian leadership to station unmanned aerial vehicles for surveillance and base protection forces at forward operating bases.
U.S. employment of airpower against ISIS predated Russia's by over a year, and CJTF-OIR's Operation Tidal Wave II overlapped Russia's long-range strike efforts in Deir al-Zour for the first two years of Russia's intervention.
Indeed, the two forces' respective airstrike volumes in ISIS-controlled areas indicate a clear disparity in level of effort.
 The information displayed in Figures 4.4 and 4.5 contradict the notions that Russian airpower was either primarily responsible for the SAA's recapture of Deir al-Zour or uniquely effective at rolling back ISIS more broadly.
In the next sections, we explore whether these trends are rooted in the VKS's and OIR's different levels of operational effectiveness, or if they reflect deconfliction efforts that effectively partitioned Russian and U.S. air operations in Syria.