# ID: 520bce7e7aa54c98a26c7c916288b5ec
# Title: Road to Damascus
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help
• Russian airpower played a decisive role in Syria. The Russian intervention ensured the survival of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad's regime, defeated his opposition, contributed to the rollback of ISIS, and secured Russia's position in the region. • Russia's intervention was designed as a limited-liability expeditionary campaign, with a small theater footprint predicated on Russian aerospace and naval forces providing support to regime ground forces. Tactical effectiveness was mixed, but it was adequate to the mission and improved as the VKS adapted to the operational environment. • To sustain Russia's expeditionary capability, the VKS experimented with a distributed basing model. Opening additional air bases enabled the VKS to relieve congestion at its main air base, scale up the deployed force, and operate more responsively. However, this model exhibited key gaps, including poor base protection and high attrition rates. • The VKS's employment of airpower was significantly more effective in engagements against the opposition than in conflicts against ISIS.
• Despite making key adaptations in counter-ISIS operations-including joint operational planning, concepts of employment (CONEMP), forward basing, and advanced capabilities-Russian airpower was not uniquely powerful or decisive against ISIS. The U.S. Coalition conducted at least 50 percent more airstrikes, in aggregate, than did Russia in ISIS-controlled regions in north, central, and eastern Syria. Ultimately, Kurdish forces, supported by Coalition airpower, propelled the rollback of ISIS in northeastern Syria. Implications for Future Russian Air Campaigns
• It is unclear how effectively Russia might be able to export its expeditionary capability to other theaters. The geography in Syria was uniquely favorable for the VKS's reliance on rotary-wing operations, the conflict was low intensity, and Russian forces rarely encountered adversaries with advanced air-to-air or surface-to-air capabilities. • The VKS's heavy reliance on distributed basing exhibited shortcomings that suggest a limited applicability to different operational contexts. It is unclear how well the VKS would perform, for example, if its basing options were limited. • Russia refined CONEMP for enabler aircraft that it will likely apply to future conflicts.
The VKS experimented with new capabilities in airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), early warning and control, command and control (C2), and command post roles. Russia has also invested in combat unmanned aerial vehicles with self-protection suites and the ability to conduct dual recon-strike missions. • Russia's reluctance to invest in expensive precision-guided munitions, underdeveloped targeting and penetrating ISR capabilities, and lack of intertheater tanking could be liabilities in future campaigns with a larger area of operations, fewer regional basing options, or against a peer force that can deny Russia's less-capable legacy aircraft.
Shortly before Russia's military intervention in the Syrian civil war in September 2015, the Syrian government controlled less than one-fifth of the country's territory and many Russian analysts believed that the regime's collapse was imminent. By the following December, the Syrian military had retaken Aleppo from the Western-backed opposition, with Russia's brutal air campaign having played a key supporting role. The introduction of Russian airpower in Syria has been widely cited as a turning point in the Syrian conflict. However, to our knowledge, no study has attempted to systematically assess the impact of Russian airpower on all major ground operations to which it was applied. 
1
Our approach is multimethod, blending a qualitative evaluation of Russian air capabilities and operational outcomes with descriptive quantitative data. To this end, we developed an integrated database that weaves together operational histories, Russian airstrikes, and disposition of deployed Russian aircraft. We also created a software tool that generates theater-wide visualizations of the geographic distribution of daily Russian airstrikes, territorial control, and known Russian air and naval bases throughout the campaign. 
3
This study seeks to provide a strategic-and operational-level analysis about the application of Russian airpower in Syria-how it was employed, why it was used in the ways that it was, and what effects it had. We identify key issues that emerged from Russian air operations and chart their evolution over the course of the campaign to provide a set of insights for U.S. Air Force, Joint Force, Coalition, expert community, policy, and academic audiences about Russian aviation's approach to expeditionary warfare. These insights include lessons learned that could influence Russia's warfighting approach in future conflicts.
Our analysis partitions Russia's intervention into five phases that capture distinct shifts in Russian strategic priorities, force employment and basing patterns, and operational tempo. 
4
In the third phase, following the regime's recapture of Aleppo in December 2016, the VKS shifted its focus to the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) from December 2016 through July 2017. This transition to a focus on ISIS intensified to a nearly exclusive focus on ISIS, the fourth operational phase, from July through December 2017. After achieving a "complete victory" over ISIS in central Syria and Deir al-Zour in December 2017, the VKS withdrew most of its aviation assets from counter-ISIS operations, focused on eliminating remaining pockets of opposition forces in Damascus and Idlib, and began to settle in permanently in the fifth and final phase analyzed in this report. 
5
Tracking Russian aircraft deployment and airstrike patterns over time with meaningful precision entails significant uncertainty in the best of circumstances. Data availability and reliability challenges amplify this uncertainty. We employed a series of remedial approaches to correct for incomplete or unreliable data, taking care to document any remaining sources of uncertainty. In the following sections, we characterize the public data environment encapsulating Russian aircraft deployment and airstrike patterns, identify potential data gaps and inconsistencies, and describe the methods by which we sought to remediate data problems. The first section below focuses on aircraft deployment patterns; the second focuses on airstrike patterns.
Documenting Russian VKS aircraft deployment patterns to the Syrian theater was a core task of this research effort. To accomplish this task, we used open-source reports (see details in the following section) to create a database-the RAND Time-Phased Russian Aircraft Deployed to Syria-Open Source (TRADS-OS) Database-that tracked deployed Russian aircraft across multiple analytic dimensions, including deployment date, aircraft type, estimated number of deployed aircraft per platform type, and base location.
Our data set begins on September 1, 2015, which roughly coincides with the inception of Russia's direct involvement in the Syria conflict, 
6
We limited our analysis of aircraft deployments to rotary-wing and combat fixed-wing platforms. However, it is important to note that the VKS has employed an array of other aircraft types during its Syrian air campaign. For example, the VKS has relied on several intra-and intertheater cargo and transport platforms to rotate personnel and equipment. The VKS employs a range of fixed-wing enabler aircraft, most notably the Il-20M Coot-A 7 electronic signals intelligence (ELINT), Tu-214R multi-intelligence, 
8
September 30, 2015. 7
8
VKS's concepts of employment (CONEMP) and operational performance of enabler aircraft, we excluded these types of aircraft from our data analysis due to lack of sufficiently robust observational data. We also excluded aircraft that participated in the VKS's air campaign but were based outside of Syria. These primarily consisted of long-range bombers (e.g., Tu-160M/M2 Blackjack and Tu-95MS Bear) stationed at the Mozdok and Engels air bases located in southwestern Russia.
Table 
1
1
Given our research objective of tracking Russian aircraft deployments, including daily movements and their relationships to strike patterns, we concluded that the ideal method for documenting the numbers, types, and locations of Russian aircraft in Syria would be daily or weekly geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) provided by publicly available satellite imagery. However, data availability and reliability challenges often limited the viability of this approach. Although many commercial providers of geospatial products such as Airbus, DigitalGlobe, and Stratfor have periodically generated satellite imagery of Russian air bases for public consumption, no single commercial firm has persistently tracked Russian activities in Syria at the desired level of daily, weekly, or even monthly fidelity. Even in aggregate, no commercially available geospatial products have been produced with enough consistency or frequency to suffice as the linchpin of our data efforts.
Satellite imagery of Russian air bases in Syria poses three additional constraints. First, imagery analysis is, at times, an art rather than a science, particularly when the diversity of sourcing is limited. We encountered multiple examples of commercial imagery analysis that potentially misidentified Russian aircraft or posited an air order of battle (AOB) that conflicted with other reliable public reporting. Second, we found that it was extremely rare for all active Russian air bases in Syria to be verifiably covered on any given day, even if imagery was available for individual bases. This yielded a perpetually incomplete picture of the VKS's AOB across its network of basing locations and necessarily injected uncertainty into aircraft deployment patterns. Finally, satellite imagery captures only a slice of daily activity at an airfield. This activity is necessarily confined to a narrow time window and is also potentially constrained in geographic scope. An image may exclude aircraft that are actively engaged in daily air operations or are temporarily hidden from view (e.g., in shelters) but should logically be included in the base's AOB. This final pitfall was common in the imagery we reviewed as part of this research and inevitably led to inaccurate results unless reconciled.
In spite of the limitations of commercial GEOINT, we nonetheless found it to be the most rigorous, consistent, and verifiable source of information regarding Russia's aircraft deployments. We therefore compiled all publicly available satellite imagery of Russian air bases in Syria from September 2015 through March 2018. 
10
11
As a general rule of thumb, in the absence of verified satellite imagery on a given day, we required the presence of at least two concurring open sources to establish a concrete aircraft estimate. Even in the event of two or more concurring sources, the information may be apocryphal, based on a flawed interpretation of GEOINT, or may reflect temporary disruptions in a base's AOB from aircraft rotations or some other variation.
The essential empirical basis for understanding any air campaign is a reliable and detailed record of what operations the air arm in question conducted during the campaign. For an air-toground campaign like the Russian effort in Syria, this first and foremost means understanding where the VKS struck, when, and how often.
Unfortunately, Russia is a notoriously poor source of information on its operations. Not only does the Ministry of Defense (MoD) make very little systematic data available to the public, but 
10
11
12
Other potential sources proved no more satisfactory. Western media reporting on Russian operations in Syria often commented on the apparent scale and scope of airstrikes, but reports were too infrequent and geographically sparse to serve as a basis for operational analysis.
Official Western government open-source reporting was similarly incomplete.
To overcome this lack of data, the project team searched for unconventional sources that might be sufficiently informative to support detailed analysis. We noted that social media reporting, both from private individuals and from local media outlets, frequently included nearreal-time reporting of strike activity by Russian, Syrian, and/or Coalition aircraft. The team purchased a subscription to a database of Syrian social media reporting, maintained by IHS Janes as the Syria Conflict Monitor database, and analyzed the raw data for reports of Russian strike activity, finding more than two thousand georeferenced and time-stamped reports.
It is important to note that the Conflict Monitor database broadly classifies airstrikes as events in which Russian or Syrian aircraft are documented to have released munitions on identifiable targets. This means that an airstrike could consist of a single aircraft striking a single target, or it could represent multiple aircraft striking multiple targets. Therefore, our airstrike data do not describe all individual strikes delivered, weapons released, or targets destroyed by Russian aircraft. Although this clearly limits our ability to comprehensively assess Russia's operational performance in Syria, the event-driven character of our airstrike data still allows us to track patterns in VKS air activities and key operational priorities underlying Russia's air campaign. Our georeferenced data provide a conservative approach to tracking Russian airstrikes, the obvious benefit of which is that we do not rely on dubious government figures.
The team subsequently built a software visualization tool that allows analysts to view strike reports, territorial control data, and major ground operations by locality and day in order to easily understand how the pattern of Russian airstrikes related to ongoing ground operations and the shift in territorial control over time. Figure 
1
12
Clearly, individual social media reports of Russian strike activity may be incorrect for a variety of reasons. Observers may mistake Syrian or Coalition aircraft for Russian types, particularly in poor lighting, or may simply report bad data by mistake or by intention. In order to ascertain whether enough errors existed in the data to prevent rigorous analysis, the team cross-referenced the social media reporting with mainstream Western media reports on the timing and location of major ground operations. We found that the bulk of reported Russian strike activity could be collocated in time and place with ground operations of the sort that generate requirements for Russian airstrikes. Figure 
1
Further analysis by the team, partly codified in this report, indicated that social media reporting of Russian strike activity revealed patterns that could be profitably subjected to rigorous analysis. Thus, although the strike activity database developed by the project team undoubtedly includes a significant number of erroneous entries, subsequent analysis indicates that the overall empirical patterns are sufficiently valid and detailed for the purposes of understanding the broad design of the Russian air campaign as well as its strengths, weaknesses, and overall effectiveness.
Ideally, we would like to be able to compare Russian and U.S. Coalition airstrike activities to gauge both overall operational effects and the comparative intensity of Russian and U.S. airpower in ongoing operations. As we outline above, there is a wide discrepancy in the credibility of published Russian and Coalition airstrike figures. The Russian and U.S. militaries also employ different methods for counting airstrikes, compounding the challenge of comparability. In particular, Russian government strike releases tend to conflate airstrikes with targets engaged. As we discuss in Chapter 4, the latter is often exaggerated or is further conflated with weapons released. Therefore, official Russian airstrike data are not directly comparable to published CJTF-OIR strike reports.
To make a comparative analysis more tractable, we employed two distinct data sources that track Coalition airstrikes over time. First, our original data set uses georeferenced social media reporting to compile daily Coalition airstrikes in Syria. These airstrike figures use an eventdriven aggregation method that is directly comparable to our data collection method for Russian airstrikes. The key limitation of this approach is that our daily Coalition airstrike data are aggregate figures-they are not broken out by geographic region. Even though we can use these data to draw top-line conclusions about Russian and Coalition airpower employment patterns, this clearly inhibits our ability to analyze performance and outcomes in specific operational areas.
We used CJTF-OIR airstrike data compiled by Wasser et al. to create a more complete picture of the U.S. Coalition's use of airpower in Syria. 
14
16
Given the systematic undercounting present in our data, we used a bounded estimation approach to facilitate a more consistent comparison with the official CJTF-OIR numbers. First, we set the conservative, event-based Conflict Monitor strike figures as a lower bound on actual airstrikes. We then assumed that missing Russian and Coalition airstrike data followed a uniform process (i.e., missingness varied systematically between the two), enabling us to scale Russian airstrikes to match the Wasser et al. Coalition airstrike distribution. 
17
The integrated data collection process described in the previous section served as the foundation of our analysis. We constructed a history of Russia's air campaign that crossreferences operational narratives with data on daily airstrikes, changes in territorial control, and numbers and locations of deployed aircraft. This approach enabled us to draw conclusions regarding the structure and execution of Russia's air campaign. For example, Figure 
1
18
1
1
18
Chapter 2 tracks the chronology of Russian air operations in Syria from 2015 to 2018. Chapter 3 describes Russia's strategic and operational blueprint, basing strategy, and the disposition of VKS forces in Syria over that time. Chapter 4 assesses the strengths and weaknesses of Russian airpower in Syria. Chapter 5 offers concluding insights about the Russian intervention and its potential applicability beyond Syria.
Russia's Operational Priorities in Syria
In the four years following the inception of the Syrian civil war in early 2011, Russia assiduously refrained from directly participating in military operations. Mindful of the risks of escalation, the Russian government initially limited its engagement to providing arms, assistance, diplomatic backing, and other support to the Syrian regime. Although Russia's support was constrained prior to September 2015, this is not to suggest that it was insignificant. Indeed, the companion report to this study characterizes Russia's pre-2015 intervention in Syria as "mediumscale."
1
3 After a modicum of success in the autumn of 2014, Syrian government-aligned forces did not fare well in the early months of 2015. We analyzed operational outcomes in the Syrian conflict and found that the regime did not win a decisive victory in any of its nine major operations in 2015, from January through September. Advances by U.S.-backed opposition forces in both the northwest (Aleppo, Idlib) and southwest (Daraa, Damascus) resulted in two decisive losses for the regime: in Idlib and at the Battle of Bosra. ISIS gains in Homs and Deir al-Zour compounded the pressure on the Syrian government, which saw its geographic control dwindle to less than one-fifth of the country by early fall 2015. 
4
2
5
Although the regime's setbacks against ISIS were significant, ISIS strongholds tended to be geographically isolated from Damascus and Alawi enclaves in the northwest. 
6
7
Meanwhile, the Kremlin watched the events unfold in Syria with a growing sense of alarm. 8 ISIS's capture of Palmyra in May 2015 was a symbolic turning point for Russia's perception of the conditions on the ground. Then, in July, Turkey granted the "U.S.-led anti-ISIS coalition" access to its air bases, a decision that was swiftly denounced by Iran as an infringement of Syrian state "sovereignty." 9 Some observers have concluded that Russia's decision to intervene crystallized in the wake of multiple visits to Moscow in July by the commander of Iran's Quds Force, Maj Gen Qassem Soleimani.
10
11
Spaulding et al., 2015, p. 1. 8
Charap, Treyger, and
Geist, 2019. 9 Spaulding et al., 2015, p. 2.
12
Charap et al. reviewed contemporaneous Russian government statements, U.S. government reports, and conducted interviews with Russian foreign policy experts to compile a list of primary Russian objectives and secondary considerations. They identified three broad sets of factors underlying Russia's decision to intervene: primary political-strategic, secondary politicalstrategic, and military. 
13
14
15
12 Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019, p. 4. 13
Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019. 14
16
17
18
Third, containing both opposition and ISIS forces was, in Russia's view, vital to preventing the return of foreign fighters who had hailed from former Soviet states. 
19
20
16
Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019, pp. 6-7. 17
18
19
Sladden et al., 2017, pp. 3-5;
and Spaulding et al., 2015, pp. 1-2. 20
In late July 2015, open-source GEOINT observers geolocated Russian Spetsnaz special forces troops being "discreetly deployed" to Syria, ostensibly as military advisers to the SAA. 
21
22
23
24
A series of Russian airstrikes on September 30, 2015, irrevocably transformed Russia's participation in the Syrian civil war into a direct military intervention. Following strikes in Homs and Hama Provinces, Russian aircraft targeted rebel groups in the provinces of Latakia, Idlib, and Aleppo, and ISIS forces in the provinces of Raqqa and Deir al-Zour, over the next 21 Sarah Fainberg, "Russian Spetsnaz, Contractors and Volunteers in the Syrian Conflict," Russie. 
Nei.Visions, No. 105, Ifri, Translated by Frances Thomas, December 2017
, pp. 5-6, 12. 22 Spaulding et al., 2015, p.
23
24 Lavrov, 2018, p. 1;
John Tirpak, "Russian Roulette," Air Force Magazine, December 2015, p. 43.
Table 
2
2
Russia's campaign in Syria can be partitioned into five phases that capture distinct shifts in Russian strategic priorities, force employment and basing patterns, and operational tempo. The first phase, beginning with the VKS's initial deployment in September 2015, reflected a heavy focus on degrading Syrian rebel forces. Counter-ISIS operations were sporadic and typically involved long-range bombers stationed at bases in Russia.
In the second phase, beginning with an initial cessation of hostilities negotiated between a group of world powers (including the United States and Russia) in February 2016, the VKS significantly de-escalated its counteropposition air operations. This gesture reflected a genuine desire by Russian leaders to reach a favorable political settlement with the West. When the VKS maintained a steady-state theater force presence and continued to provide air support to the SAA's assault of Aleppo, despite intimations to the contrary, it became clear that Russia's veneer of good faith was designed to maximize military leverage for subsequent negotiations with the West. Following the collapse of bilateral negotiations between the United States and Russia in September 2016, however, the SAA completed its brutal recapture of Aleppo with significant Russian air support. This crippling blow to the opposition highlighted the broad success of Russia's initial strategic objectives-preventing the collapse of the Assad regime, countering U.S. influence in the Syrian conflict, and establishing a successful expeditionary warfare capability-and signaled the onset of a new phase in Russia's campaign.
In the third phase, following the regime's recapture of Aleppo in December 2016, the VKS shifted its focus to ISIS. The resurgence of ISIS throughout the winter of 2016-2017 directly threatened Russia's newly developed expeditionary basing and logistics infrastructure. The VKS limited its participation in the regime's counteropposition operations to defensive air support, enabling it to concentrate its airpower on clearing ISIS out of Homs Province to prepare for a major assault on Deir al-Zour.
This transition to a nearly exclusive focus on ISIS constituted the fourth operational phase, from July through December 2017. After achieving a "complete victory" over ISIS in central Syria and Deir al-Zour in December 2017, the VKS withdrew most of its aviation assets from counter-ISIS operations, focused on eliminating remaining pockets of opposition forces in Damascus and Idlib, and began to settle in permanently in the fifth and final phase analyzed in this report. 
25
26
27
29
Still other analysts of Russian military doctrine have countered that to claim Russia's initial counter-ISIS justifications were deceptive is to misread Russian strategic thinking. Borshchevskaya observes that Russia's approach to counterterrorism operations in Syria-the belief that "anyone who is armed and opposes Assad is a terrorist"-was consistent with the Kremlin's "historic definition of terrorism and approach to it." 
30
31
Since preserving the regime (what Putin calls "Syrian statehood") was a necessary precondition for any effective counterterrorism strategy, attacking those groups that were threatening the regime's survival was the most urgent priority. Therefore, the initial focus of the bombing on the non-ISIS opposition does not necessarily undermine the case that Moscow genuinely feared the terrorist threat stemming from the Assad regime's collapse.
According to this view, the Assad regime's survival was critical to Russia's counterterrorism strategy. Russian strategists believed that maintaining the Syrian government was essential to both conducting the ground campaign and holding territory. Therefore, Russian operational plans prioritized those groups that posed the most significant threat to the regime.
The VKS's force employment and strike patterns early in its Syria campaign were thus important indicators of Russia's strategic and operational priorities. More than three-quarters of observed Russian airstrikes in the first months targeted opposition-held areas. Likewise, VKS operational planning prioritized counteropposition operations for most of its deployed combat 
29
Czuperski et al., 2016, p. 12;
and Lavrov, 2018, p. 2. 30
31 Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019, p. 5.
33
34
Figure 
2
33
35
36
37
38
The first distinct shift in the VKS's employment of airpower began in November 2015, following two watershed events. First, President Putin declared on November 16 that ISIS had been responsible for the Metrojet Flight 9268 crash in Egypt two weeks earlier, and he signaled the need to intensify Russian air operations in Syria as part of a "retaliation campaign." 
39
40
42
2
Total Russian airstrikes in Syria steadily rose from October 2015 through February 2016; however, Figure 
2
2
The second watershed event occurred on November 24, when a Turkish F-16 jet shot down a Russian Su-24 in Turkish airspace. 
44
40
41 Lavrov, 2020, pp. 93-94. 42
43
44 Trudeau, 2015.
45
This event starkly highlighted the limitations of the Mi-24P in the Syrian theater: In addition to being daylight-only, the older helicopter model does not possess a modernized self-protection capability to counter surface-to-air threats. 
46
47
48
The Turkish shootdown of the Russian Su-24 thus fundamentally altered the VKS's CONOPS and basing posture for core air-to-ground missions in Syria (e.g., CAS, CSAR). However, the episode further transformed Russia's prosecution of air-to-air and surface-to-air missions. In addition to raising questions about Russian pilot inexperience (a major concern for the VKS throughout the early campaign; see Chapter 4), the encounter with the Turkish F-16 offered a stark reminder of the congested nature of Syrian airspace and the risks of escalation. 
49
45
46
47
48
49
50
However, the encounter with the Turkish F-16 highlighted deficiencies in Russian capabilities and operational execution. As Hamilton et al. observe, the episode "rais[ed] tensions between Moscow and Ankara to levels not seen since the Cold War." 
51
52
53
From December 2015 through February 2016, Russian intratheater air assets were primarily employed in support of the SAA's offensive across the northwest, which targeted opposition forces in Hama, Latakia, and Aleppo. VKS assets available for counter-ISIS operations were limited to the long-range bombers stationed at Mozdok and Engels in southwestern Russia, which conducted several air-to-ground sorties to slow the ISIS siege of Deir al-Zour, and rotating attack helicopter units at Shayrat and Tiyas, which provided CSAR for VKS pilots and CAS to Syrian ground forces, respectively, in Homs Province.
During the fall of 2015, VKS aircraft averaged between 40 and 80 daily combat sorties. 
54
55
56
2
2
58
Following the initial cessation of hostilities in February, President Putin announced on March 14, 2016, that Russia would be withdrawing its deployed forces from Syria. 
59
58
59
60
However, the gesture itself was mostly empty-at most, it was a post hoc justification with the potential to redound indirect political benefits to Russia. Putin's public declaration aside, Russia imposed only a partial withdrawal of deployed fixed-wing aircraft, with the entire Su-25 squadron and four Su-34s rotating back on March 15. The rotating fixed-wing aircraft were replaced with two advanced attack helicopter units, such that the VKS AOB actually increased following Putin's announcement.
Following its removal from the theater, the Su-25 would be absent from Syria for nearly a year. In its place, Russia deployed its two most-capable attack helicopters, the Ka-52 Hokum-B and Mi-28N Havoc, in detachments of four helicopters each, to fulfill the primary CAS role. Although diplomacy was Russia's official justification for the force rotation, the change was more likely driven by operational considerations. It was the first of at least three major VKS force rotations (the other two occurring in 2017), reflecting a belief by the Russian General Staff in the need to cyclically "deleverage" its presence in Syria. 
61
64
61
62
63
64
65
The bulk of Russian operational activities during spring 2016 concentrated on recapturing Palmyra from ISIS. On March 27, the SAA finally pushed ISIS out of the city for the first time in nearly a year. 
66
67
After roughly six months of stopgap cease-fires between pro-government and rebel groups and fleeting talks between U.S. and Russian diplomats, it became clear to Russia and the Syrian regime that the United States was unwilling to forgo its demand that Assad step down. Preserving Assad's tenuous hold on the Syrian presidency was a critical Russian precondition to deeper bilateral negotiations with the West. Indeed, the Kremlin viewed the prospect of Assad stepping down as a serious threat to Russian national security. As Charap et al. note, Assad's downfall "was understood to mean both a victory for the forces of transnational terrorism (and thus an increased terrorist threat to Russia) and a legitimization of Western-backed regime change, which also represented a threat to Russia's national security." 
68
69
65 Lavrov, 2018, p. 12.
March 27, 2016. 67
68
The participation by the Kuznetsov's carrier air wing in Syrian operations, starting on November 16, 2016, marked the first combat experience for carrier-based aircraft in Russian naval history. The carrier air wing, composed of about 14 fixed-wing aircraft and a half-dozen helicopters, conducted more than 400 sorties, only one-third of which were carrier based. 
70
71
Although the operational performance of Russian naval aviation was ultimately disastrous, the decision to deploy the Kuznetsov reflected both the Russian military's desire to project seabased airpower and the VKS's adaptation to congestion problems at Hmeimim. Moreover, Russian air support was vital to the SAA's recapture of Aleppo in late December. Jones describes the VKS's relatively effective air-to-ground integration in Aleppo:
Dubbed "Operation Dawn of Victory," Russia conducted intelligence collection from human sources, signals intelligence, and satellite imagery throughout 2016. Moscow then used intelligence derived from those assets and platforms to identify targets and orchestrate an extensive bombing campaign in and around the city to weaken rebel positions. In August 2016 alone, Russian aircraft flew an average of 70 sorties per day against targets in Aleppo, using aircraft like Tu-22M3s and Su-34s. . . . In addition to air and naval strikes, the Russians supported ground forces with Orlan unmanned aerial vehicles, electronic warfare capabilities, forward air controllers, and soldiers from the 120th Russian Guards Artillery Regiment. By December 2016, ground forces had effectively encircled and crushed rebel groups operating in the city.
Russian airstrike patterns during the last half of 2016 largely mirrored the intermittent peace talks, intensifying in September as the regime resumed its assault of Aleppo and initiated other offensives in Latakia, Idlib, and Rif Dimashq. These trends are evident in Figure 
2
70 Lavrov, 2018, p. 24
71
72
The decisive SAA victory in Aleppo allowed the VKS to reallocate fixed-wing sorties to strike and CAS missions in Homs. Spring 2017 was the first time that the VKS dedicated a preponderance of its deployed aviation forces to counter-ISIS operations. For nearly two months, a majority of the airstrikes-generated by a combination of fixed-wing fighter-bombers out of Hmeimim, long-range bombers from Mozdok, and forward-stationed attack helicopters at al-Shayrat-targeted ISIS locations in Homs and Deir al-Zour (see the right tail of Figure 
2
Russia had viewed Deir al-Zour as a long-term strategic priority from the start; loosely affiliated Russian private military companies, likely hired to secure Syrian oil and mineral resources for their Russian and Syrian benefactors, had been active there since at least 2012, and the Russian military chafed at ongoing U.S. operations near the Euphrates. 
74
75
74
75
76
The VKS's air support in the SAA's final siege of Palmyra and surrounding areas in spring 2017 (evident in the Homs Province wedge in Figure 
2
77
78
By dedicating nearly half a squadron of Su-25 aircraft to the Deir al-Zour operation, the VKS was able to reallocate its remaining fixed-wing assets to support defensive air operations in countering renewed opposition advances from Hama and Damascus. The opposition's Hama offensive in spring 2017, led by the Islamist group Tahrir al-Sham and the Free Syrian Army, aimed to roll back SAA advances in Hama and Idlib. 
79
80
81
82
83
78
79
2
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
The Kremlin responded by voiding its memorandum of understanding with the United States and increasingly pushed for the creation of "zones of exclusive operations east of the Euphrates." 
96
97
98
101
With much of eastern Syria now occupied by the regime, the VKS rotated multiple Su-25s to Deir al-Zour air base and an attack helicopter detachment from Tiyas to Kuweires air base, near Aleppo, to assist SAA operations in Raqqa. These rotations reflected the VKS's increasing comfort with employing flexible basing postures to optimize the effectiveness of Russian air operations.
Concurrently, the Syrian opposition, led by Tahrir al-Sham (formerly al-Nusra Front), was engaged in a counteroffensive against SAA ground forces in Hama. Early battlefield successes by opposition forces were quickly reversed in April, with the regime emerging the clear victor. The surge of Russian airstrikes in the Idlib de-escalation zone in September, however, prompted Tahrir al-Sham to resume its Hama offensive. The SAA used Russian air support to stem the opposition's push, but the outcome was inconclusive based on changes in territorial control. The Hama conflict continued in a stalemate through the end of 2017, with modest Russian air cover in Hama and Idlib. 
96
97
98
99
103
2
In early 2018, the VKS dedicated nearly all of its remaining fixed-wing air assets to offensive CAS and air-to-ground sorties in support of the SAA's dual offensives against the remaining pockets of opposition forces: the northwest Syria campaign in Idlib, and the Rif Dimashq offensive in Damascus, East Ghouta, and Hama. By this point in the campaign, the VKS had established a robust network of forward operating bases across Syria, including in the south. The  VKS split its fixed-wing force between Hmeimim, which generated sorties in Hama and Idlib, and forward locations in southern Syria, which provided dedicated CAS to SAA ground troops in Rif Dimashq. The regime's spring offensives proved devastating to the opposition, which decisively lost all five major operations.
Although Russia's role in counter-ISIS operations diminished significantly in 2018, a key exception occurred on February 7 when "around 400 Russian Wagner group mercenaries armed with tanks and artillery crossed the deconfliction line and assaulted an SDF outpost in Khasam." 
104
105
106
107
108
Russia's air campaign in Syria has been complex and oft-changing, but broad patterns are discernible. The volume of Russian airstrikes was heaviest in late 2015, as Moscow sought to halt a series of opposition offensives that posed an existential threat to the Assad regime. The high tempo of initial air operations, coupled with the VKS's practice of indiscriminately targeting opposition forces and civilians in northwest Syria, revealed Russia's core strategic objective: degrading the U.S.-backed Syrian opposition to save the Syrian regime, a by-product of which was to enhance bargaining leverage with the West. Russian airpower was effectively employed in the regime's northwest Syria campaign and then wielded before an international audience at Aleppo.
Although counter-ISIS operations were originally of only secondary importance, Russia's posture adaptations enabled the VKS to deliver a modest tempo of counter-ISIS intertheater strike sorties to Deir al-Zour and on-demand CAS in Hama and Homs. Ultimately, Russia's experimentation with force structure and capabilities enabled it to shift from an inefficient allocation of resources, producing mixed results (particularly in counter-ISIS operations), to a concept of operations that prioritized adaptable postures, targeting and precision fires, and persistent air coverage that could be scaled to the regime's operational needs.
Before we assess the strengths and weaknesses of Russian airpower in Syria, it is important to contextualize how Russia's strategic and operational blueprint for the air campaign shaped the deployment patterns of Russian aerospace forces to Syria, the types of forces the VKS employed, and Russia's experimentation with different concepts for employment and basing postures. To this end, the next three sections break down Russia's strategic and operational blueprint in Syria; deployment patterns and CONEMP for VKS fixed-wing, rotary-wing, long-range strike, and enabler aircraft; and the disposition of theater aviation forces.
Two decades of observing Western warfighting innovations, beginning with the first Gulf War, fundamentally altered Russian military doctrine and operational art. Russian strategic planners, under the direction of General Valery Gerasimov, Russian chief of the General Staff since 2012, contemplated ways to counter the "indirect and asymmetric Western military methods in the late 1990s and early 2000s." 1 General Gerasimov's New-Generation Warfare (NGW) doctrine seeks to counter the perceived shift in America's warfighting approach toward hybrid warfare:
NGW minimizes the role of the large-scale military operations of the industrial war era and instead combines hard and soft power across military and nonmilitary domains. It capitalizes on indirect action, informational operations, paramilitaries, and special operations forces backed by sophisticated military capabilities, both conventional and nuclear.
2 Although Russian military strategists increasingly conceived of modern warfare primarily in terms of "nonmilitary tools and political conflict," NGW nevertheless espouses a realistic appraisal 
1
of the "importance of military power." 
3
4
5
Russian strategists therefore devised a limited-liability military intervention that would obviate the need to commit overwhelming ground forces, limit conspicuous losses, and avoid sunk costs. Russia's lean approach embodied a small theater footprint (by U.S. standards), with Russian aerospace and naval forces providing support to allied Syrian, Iranian, and Shi'a militia ground forces. 
6
7
8
10
11
12
Long-range Kalibr sea-launched cruise missiles, air launched Kh-101 cruise missiles, and Tu-22M3 bombers were employed within a radius of 4,000 kilometers. Medium engagements up to 500 kilometers were supported by Su-24 bombers and [Su-34] fighters carrying special computer subsystems.
Near engagements used reconnaissance-strike loops, the Strelets reconnaissance, command and control, and communication complex, and the Su-24M bomber.
13
This approach aligned with conventional Russian operational planning, which delineated near-and medium-range from long-range strike operations. Thus, Su-24 and Su-34 fighterbomber aircraft retained responsibility for most strike operations from Hmeimim. In contrast, Russian CONOPS prioritized Su-25 strike aircraft for fixed-wing CAS. Table 
3
3
14
Russian operational plans initially assigned deployed Su-25s the primary CAS role, consistent with prior air campaigns (e.g., Afghanistan, Chechnya). As we describe in Chapter 2, however, older Su-25s were unsuited to the SAA's operational needs in its counter-ISIS offensives in Homs and Deir al-Zour. Therefore, beginning in early 2016, Russia increasingly fulfilled its CAS responsibilities with advanced attack helicopters, which were night capable and equipped with modernized targeting and self-protection systems. The Su-25 eventually resumed its role as a CAS workhorse in 2017 but only after the VKS deployed an upgraded variant (Su-25SM3) and had established a basing posture that was more conducive to fixed-wing CAS operations.
14 Although older-model Su-25 aircraft have a combat radius of approximately only 200 nm with external stores, the strike aircraft-Su-24s and Su-34s-the VKS doctrinally employed in strike missions reach considerably farther, at nearly 550 nm and 590 nm, respectively.
The fixed-wing combat aircraft at Hmeimim constituted the core of Russian airpower in Syria throughout the campaign. The initial composition of the Russian air wing stationed at Hmeimim resembled the air-to-ground strike packages employed in prior Russian engagements:
• two attack squadrons, composed of twelve Su-24M/M2 air-to-ground bombers and twelve Su-25SM/UB strike aircraft for CAS • one fighter-bomber squadron, composed of four Su-30SM air superiority fighters and four Su-34 fighter-bombers to deliver air-to-air support and precision-guided effects. 
15
16
17
3
The VKS initially employed most of its fixed-wing aircraft in a strike role. The Su-24M2 was the workhorse of early strike operations, but even some Su-25 and Su-30 aircraft were used in "nontraditional" strike roles (though a residual detachment of Su-25s was placed on alert status to perform CAS). 
18
20
22
23
A key lesson learned from Russia's recent operational experiences in Georgia and Chechnya was the importance of air-to-ground integration. 
26
27
28
29
To enhance operational effectiveness, the VKS initiated rotations of increasingly sophisticated enabler aircraft. 
30
31
32
Autonomy was a heavy emphasis of Russia's recent military modernization effort. In addition to scaling up production of unmanned systems, the Russian military developed new CONOPS and TTPs that it tested in Syria. 
33
34
35
36
37
The initial composition and employment of deployed Russian UAVs reflected the Russian military's evolving doctrine regarding unmanned platforms. Most deployed UAVs at the outset were light Orlan-10s and Granat-1s, which are cheap and do not require a runway to operate. The Russian military originally planned to establish a constellation of attritable light UAVs that it would use exclusively on the front lines as artillery spotters. 
38
39
By contrast, MALE UAVs such as the Forpost, were used in a wider range of missions. In addition to ground-centric missions (artillery spotting, reconnaissance fire), Russia increasingly employed Forpost UAVs in air-centric roles (target designation and control, penetrating ISR and BDA, reconnaissance strike). As Figure 
3
Although Russia's decision to scale up its deployed UAV force helped relieve the stress on special operations forces as tactical air controllers and expanded the scope of persistent theaterwide coverage, the VKS's reliance on UAVs to fulfill much of its ISR and BDA responsibilities in Syria came at a cost. The deployed Forpost and Orlan-10 UAVs were unarmed and equipped with minimal self-protection capabilities, 
40
41
38
39
40
41
There is some evidence, however, that the VKS's ongoing challenges in consistently closing the reconnaissance-strike loop and in effectively delivering precision effects have led the VKS to increase its use of UAV-driven targeting for precision-strike missions and to invest in several new technologies. 
43
44
42 Shield, 2018
, p. 237. 43 Bendett, 2020, pp. 41-42;
Kofman, 2020
, p. 54. 44 Lavrov, 2020, p. 102.
45
It is also worth noting that for much of the campaign, the VKS was not concerned with target selection and vetting. Most targets in early operations were either large, stationary, and preplanned or were bombed indiscriminately with "dumb" munitions. Operational priorities and military doctrine thus de-emphasized an effective targeting capability. Nevertheless, as the situation on the ground changed, ISR shortfalls became more glaring and required the VKS to focus on developing a more-capable UAV constellation.
At the outset of the intervention, runway capacity constraints at Hmeimim and Russia's limited operational experience with dedicated manned ISR aircraft led the VKS to deploy only a small number of manned fixed-wing enabler aircraft. The legacy Il-20M Coot-A, a variant of the older Il-18 turboprop cargo aircraft that is equipped for ELINT/SIGINT missions, flew most of the ISR sorties out of Hmeimim early in the campaign. The Il-20M "controlled the radio communication data of the Islamists and searched for probable targets using modern infra-red systems and radars." 
46
As Russia began to experiment with new capabilities, however, the VKS deployed some of its newer manned enabler aircraft to the theater. The Tu-214R, first delivered from the production lines in 2011, was used in an airborne ISR role to provide electro-optical and SIGINT support to dynamic targeting, often in coordination with the advanced Su-35 multi-role aircraft. The A-50U Mainstay (first delivered also in 2011) may have been used in ISR missions, but it was primarily designed to provide AEW&C. Finally, the Il-22M, which has SIGINT capabilities, was employed in AEW&C, C2, and command post roles. In particular, the Il-22M coordinated airborne C2 with the National Defense Management Center in Moscow via satellite communications. 
47
Satellite imagery identified Russian long-range bombers being transferred to Mozdok air base as early as October 2015. Clearly, intertheater strike was a key capability that the VKS sought to deploy since the beginning of the intervention. The combination of Russian CONOPS with concerns about aircrew quality led the VKS to consistently assign long-range bombers stationed in southwestern Russia to counter-ISIS strike missions in Raqqa and Deir al-Zour.
At first, the VKS deployed a half squadron of Tu-22M3 Backfire bombers to Mozdok. It later supplemented this contingent with another half squadron of Tu-22M3s and a full squadron each of Tu-95MS Bear and Tu-160 Blackjack bombers. The long-range aviation forces at Mozdok and Engels were also routinely accompanied by a half-or full squadron of Su-34 fighter-bombers and Su-27/30 fighters. The VKS rarely maintained a continuous bomber presence at Mozdok, but it conducted frequent rotations that typically coincided with either public displays of retaliation against ISIS or major ground operations.
Russian Tu-95 and Tu-160 bombers were equipped with Kh-101 and Kh-555 air-launched, satellite-guided cruise missiles. However, the VKS generally preferred to employ its Tu-22M3 bombers, equipped with only unguided munitions, in counter-ISIS strike operations. Lavrov speculates that this decision may have been driven by cost concerns: "sorties by Tu-22M3s with unguided bombs were much cheaper." 49 As we discuss in Chapter 4, cost and munitions production and stockpile constraints appear to have driven many VKS employment decisions regarding the use of PGMs and PGM-equipped aircraft.
Another limitation of the Tu-22M3 is that it cannot be refueled in midair. 
50
49 Lavrov, 2018
, p. 23. 50 Lavrov, 2018, p. 23.
51
52
53
Runway capacity limitations at most Russian forward air bases required the VKS to rely on deployed rotary-wing (Mi-8) and smaller fixed-wing (An-26, An-30) transport aircraft to provide intratheater lift. The relatively confined AOR was conducive to the VKS's dearth of dedicated tanking capabilities. However, in a potential future engagement in a larger AOR, outside Russia's near-abroad, against a higher-end opponent, this deficiency could create operational and logistical challenges. As noted above, the VKS sporadically experimented with tanker-enabled long-range strike operations, a capability it is likely to build on in the coming years.
The VKS quickly faced key operational shortcomings at the outset of its air campaign. Hmeimim was limited to at most two runways at any one time, creating daily congestion at Russia's primary air operations hub in Syria. 
54
51
52
The evolution of the Russian hub-and-spokes basing model offered three critical benefits to the VKS air campaign. First, the model allowed aircraft to be forward-based outside of Hmeimim, fostering the potential for more-responsive air operations. Second, incorporating a geographically distributed network of air bases enabled the VKS to perform mission sets (particularly in more geographically isolated counter-ISIS operations) that force limitations rendered infeasible or ineffective from Hmeimim. These included CSAR, penetrating ISR, and offensive CAS. Third, opening additional air bases to fixed-wing aircraft enabled the VKS to relieve the congestion at Hmeimim and scale up the deployed combat aviation force to meet operational demand.
Hmeimim contained the VKS's main expeditionary air operations center and joint planning cell, which planned daily air operations and coordinated with the Russian General Staff at the National Defense Management Center in Moscow. As noted above, Hmeimim also served as the VKS's primary aviation logistics hub: Russian engineers had renovated the runways at Hmeimim to receive heavy intertheater lift and cargo aircraft, enabling an air-based supply chain to operate in parallel to the sea-based "Syrian Express." The Russian military deployed a limited number of engineers, maintainers, and logistics staff to support air operations; however, the VKS's lean expeditionary approach relied heavily on private contractors to fulfill most operational support roles. Analyst Michael Kofman notes that an "entire village of defense industry specialists was present" at Hmeimim to support combat air operations. 
55
The VKS initially employed rotary-wing assets in base protection and defensive CAS roles to secure Russia's MOB at Hmeimim, as well as CSAR for downed Russian pilots. However, the limited combat radii of the Mi-8 and Mi-24 helicopters limited the coverage area of Russian CSAR generated from Hmeimim. This was problematic for three key reasons. First, CSAR mission effectiveness is predicated on the relative coverage (time on station) that allocated forces are able to sustain and their response time during search-and-rescue events. These were indeed constraints on Russia's ability to execute its CSAR responsibilities early in the campaign. Second, the VKS consistently exhibited concerns regarding aircrew inexperience across mission sets (see Chapter 4). Minimizing operational risks was therefore an overriding priority in Russian operational planning. In terms of CSAR, this meant that establishing a permanent distributedbasing posture would be essential to maximize coverage and responsiveness. Finally, Russia's relatively high attrition during the first year of the campaign created immediate operational demand for CSAR.
As Russian Su-25 aircraft began to support the regime's northwest Syria offensive in a CAS role, the VKS therefore transferred a helicopter detachment to Hama air base for about ten days in early October 2015 to generate more-responsive CSAR. This temporary rotation of a single helicopter detachment represented the VKS's first experimentation with using forward bases to fill a limited operational role. The VKS subsequently created an enduring network of rotary-wing bases designed to optimize responsiveness to forward air operations and maximize time on station for CAS and CSAR missions. Russia's rotary-wing basing patterns over time in Syria are shown in Figure 
3
The VKS based a daily average of more than half of its rotary-wing fleet at forward locations throughout the Syria campaign. On nearly two-thirds of the days covered by this analysis, helicopters operated simultaneously out of at least three distinct base locations.
For the first half of the campaign, the VKS's core forward operating location was al-Shayrat air base in the Homs governorate. 
56
57
In addition to the diversity of rotary-wing basing locations, the VKS likewise displayed a willingness to experiment with the configuration of forward-based helicopter detachments. Two CAS detachments were stationed at Shayrat throughout early 2016, followed by a detachment each of Mi-24/35s, Ka-52s, and Mi-28s leading up to the recapture of Palmyra in March. Russian rotary-wing basing trends evolved in parallel to the regime's counter-ISIS focus. The Tiyas air base, which had based a Russian attack helicopter unit for much of the previous year and a half, gained an increased force presence in spring 2017 to support the next phases in the regime's offensive in Deir al-Zour and eastern Homs.
Russian operational planning thus increasingly prioritized short rotations of advanced attack helicopter units to forward air bases beginning in 2016. Because the higher-priority campaign against the Syrian opposition was also a higher-end fight, 58 the VKS disproportionately allocated fixed-wing resources to the Syrian regime's northwest offensive. The geographic conditions in the regime's counter-ISIS operations were likewise not conducive to on-demand CAS from the Russian fixed-wing Su-25s based at Hmeimim. The VKS's hub-and-spokes basing approach for helicopter units demonstrated effective adaptability to the operational setting and enabled the VKS to efficiently allocate resources.
However, the hub-and-spokes approach also exhibited several shortcomings, including poor base protection and limited applicability to different operational contexts in future conflicts. An attack by ISIS on Tiyas air base in May 2016 destroyed four Russian Mi-24/35 helicopters. 
59
Beyond these base protection deficiencies, there are at least eight documented incidents that resulted in helicopter losses. The first shoot-down, by opposition forces in November 2015, was the result of the Mi-24's daylight-only and minimal self-protection capabilities. Even after Russia replaced its obsolete Mi-24s with modernized Mi-35M, Ka-52, and Mi-28N attack helicopters, Russian rotary-wing forces experienced a spate of accidents throughout 2016. Pilot error caused a Mi-28N to crash at night, despite the fact that the Mi-28N is night capable. Three more helicopters, including advanced Mi-35 and Mi-28 variants, were shot down by opposition and ISIS ground fire in the last half of 2016. Finally, two more helicopters (one Mi-24 and one Mi-28N) crashed in 2017 as the result of either pilot error or a technical malfunction. The operational responsiveness, congestion relief, and resource allocation efficiency the VKS's huband-spokes basing strategy produced therefore came at the cost of higher rates of attrition.
The VKS employed an increasingly varied distribution of fixed-wing bases, opening at least the Tiyas and Deir al-Zour air bases to Su-25s in July and November 2017, respectively. 
60
58
59
60
61
The Kuznetsov's deployment represented a critical change in Russia's philosophy regarding the employment of airpower-a philosophical change that likely exceeded its operational impact. Throughout the first year of Russia's air campaign, the VKS had generated all of its fixed-wing sorties from Hmeimim, the main Russian air operating base in Syria. Russian engineers were observed making runway improvements at multiple other bases, including al-Shayrat and Tiyas, throughout 2015 and 2016, to accommodate Russian fixed-wing aircraft. 
62
Initially, this shift primarily affected the regime's Aleppo offensive, but it quickly permeated VKS operational planning for counter-ISIS missions as well. Although Hmeimim continued to serve as the foundation of Russian air operations, the VKS increasingly applied the hub-andspokes basing model to its fixed-wing aircraft. This dynamic is displayed in Figure 
3
The trends displayed in Figures 3.5 and 3.6 suggest that the VKS was far more reluctant to distribute its fixed-wing assets concurrently at multiple forward bases than it was its helicopter units. This reflects a combination of factors. First, most accessible Syrian air bases contained neither suitable runway space nor shelter capacity at the outset to accommodate a robust forward presence of Russian fixed-wing aircraft. As noted above, commercial satellite imagery observed Russian engineers at multiple air bases over the course of the next year building out the infrastructure to accommodate fixed-wing aircraft. Second, distributed basing was not an operational imperative for strike missions since most targets were well within the combat radii of Russian strike aircraft stationed at Hmeimim.
The Su-25 was a key exception: the combination of technical deficiencies (minimal targeting and self-protection capabilities), aircrew inexperience, and a smaller combat radius significantly hindered the Su-25's ability to consistently and effectively provide CAS in more geographically remote counter-ISIS operations. After the VKS rotated its entire Su-25 squadron out of the Syrian theater in March 2016, the hub-and-spokes model became even less applicable to fixedwing operations. However, the VKS shifted its focus to counter-ISIS operations in 2017 and rotated a squadron of upgraded Su-25SM3s back to the theater. By that point, Tiyas air base had been sufficiently improved to accommodate a limited fixed-wing presence. 
61
62
During the first four years of the Syrian civil war, the Assad regime experienced a dramatic series of losses on the battlefield. We estimate that, at its operational nadir in September 2015, the SAA had lost, on net, 30 more major operations than it had won. The overwhelming majority of these losses had come at the hands of the U.S.-backed opposition, but ISIS also began to secure major victories over the regime in late 2014. As the opposition consolidated its control over northwest Syria, and as ISIS progressively expanded its reach to the north and east, the regime appeared susceptible to imminent collapse. Against this backdrop, it is therefore difficult to observe Figure 
4
4
1
4
2
3 Lavrov, 2020, p. 92.
Fifth, a dearth of available ISR resources in Deir al-Zour early in the campaign may have reduced its operational value as a target for Russian airstrikes. At the outset of Russia's intervention, Russian CONOPS relied heavily on Spetsnaz forces to provide long-range reconnaissance and targeting for strike missions. Spetsnaz detachments embedded with SAA ground forces throughout the country to coordinate operations and have been observed at key battles for Aleppo, Damascus, Latakia, and Palmyra (among others).
10
Aerial ISR, typically from light-or medium-range UAVs, increasingly assumed the responsibility for reconnaissance and targeting missions for air operations in Syria. Since the scope of Russia's UAV employment was constrained at the outset, this meant that the VKS had limited ground-based and aerial ISR capabilities in Deir al-Zour until 2017. VKS aircraft exhibited a suboptimal capacity to perform dynamic targeting and were reluctant to consistently rely on PGMs, which meant that the bulk of Russian air operations in Deir al-Zour for the first two years consisted of long-range bombers striking large, static ISIS targets with "dumb" munitions. The VKS's decision to return the Su-25 to Syria paralleled both Russia's rising comfort with employing UAVs in longer-range ISR missions and the completed runways at T-4 air base. Shortly thereafter, Russian airstrikes in Deir al-Zour increased by 50 percent above levels in the previous operational phase. The VKS's preference for long-range strike operations and minimal CAS in Deir al-Zour may therefore have been the result of poor ISR capacity.
Sixth and finally, Russia was concerned with the risks of escalation since the beginning of its intervention. It was committed to a small footprint and a lean expeditionary approach, and Russian decisionmakers were reluctant to dedicate more resources than were necessary. Importantly, Deir al-Zour marked the point of convergence between the Russian and Coalition operations; with CJTF-OIR engaging ISIS along the eastern bank of the Euphrates River in Raqqa and Deir al-Zour, and the VKS operating exclusively to the west, Russia and the U.S. established the Euphrates as a formal deconfliction line in October 2015.
It is likely that the VKS was particularly sensitive to the risks of escalation with the West considering its concerns about aircrew quality and aircraft technical limitations. Most Russian pilots had no real combat experience when they first deployed in September 2015. Many analysts of Russian military strategy have observed that the VKS was sensitive to the risks that aircrew quality and inexperience posed to early air operations.
11
Whereas Russia's focused employment of airpower had a demonstrably positive impact on the SAA's battlefield reversals against the opposition, the VKS's operational effectiveness in counter-ISIS missions was less clear for much of the campaign. This contrast was driven by three factors. First, the VKS allocated fewer fixed-wing resources, on average, to the SAA's counter-ISIS operations, reflecting the lower strategic priority the regime had placed on countering ISIS.
Second, the VKS primarily tasked older, less-capable Su-25s with providing CAS to Syrian ground forces in counter-ISIS operations. As previously discussed, the Su-25 possessed significant operational limitations that, coupled with poor air-to-ground integration and C2, constrained the effectiveness of this particular package of Russian airpower. The VKS also appears to have been cognizant of its aircrew quality challenges, embodied in a series of aircraft losses, which led the VKS to adapt its CAS doctrine to the operational circumstances.
Third, although long-range bombers based at Mozdok and Engels air bases in southern Russia maintained a steady operational tempo of intertheater airstrikes, particularly in remote Deir al-Zour, the relatively lower strike rate in ISIS-held areas reflected both resource allocation priorities and distinct strategic objectives. Whereas the VKS's initial concentration of airpower in northwest Syria reflected Russia's immediate objective of degrading the Syrian opposition, Russia's primary strategic objectives vis-à-vis the Islamic State were merely (1) to slow ISIS advances in Deir al-Zour through a steady flow of strike sorties and (2) to provide CAS to Syrian ground troops in Homs. Consequently, Russian airpower was, for much of the early campaign, relatively ineffective in altering the regime's operational success against ISIS.
Despite this strategic demotion, the VKS explored adaptations in joint operational planning, CONEMP, forward basing and force posture, and advanced capabilities that eventually proved vital to Syrian counter-ISIS operations. Russia's increasing comfort with and reliance on unmanned aerial ISR throughout the campaign compensated for its relative dearth of groundbased intelligence and targeting capabilities in the deserts of eastern Syria. This enabled the VKS to "establish a more effective 'kill chain' and to improve reaction time from detection to target destruction," a critical enabler for Russia's ability to "send helicopters for free hunting to established 'kill zones' during day and night." 
12
Limited C2, poor interservice communications, and poor air-to-ground integration had marred Russian air operations against ISIS early in the campaign. The VKS thus made operational planning and coordination with Syrian ground forces a priority. Likewise, Russian CONEMP from prior engagements in Georgia and Chechnya had proved unsuited to the geography and counterterrorism mission in Syria. Generating a preponderance of sorties from the fixed-wing hub at Hmeimim air base had prevented the VKS from flexibly adapting to evolving operational needs and had limited the scope of feasible operations in more-remote geographic areas. The evolution of the Russian hub-and-spokes basing model offered at least three critical benefits to the VKS air campaign. First, the model allowed aircraft to be forward-based outside of Hmeimim, fostering the potential for more-responsive air operations. Second, incorporating a geographically distributed network of air bases enabled the VKS to perform mission sets (particularly in more geographically isolated counter-ISIS operations) that force limitations rendered infeasible or ineffective from Hmeimim. These included CSAR, ISR, and CAS. Third, opening additional air bases to fixed-wing aircraft enabled the VKS to relieve the congestion at Hmeimim and scale up the deployed combat aviation force to meet operational demand.
The VKS's experimentation with dynamic forward-based aircraft rotations and unit configurations enabled Russian forces to generate relatively timely CAS across a growing geographic area. The VKS forward-based a daily average of more than half of its rotary-wing fleet throughout the campaign (and, since 2017, a more-modest 5 percent of its fixed-wing fleet). Russian aircraft operated out of at least five distinct base locations. ISIS attacks on Russiancontrolled air bases had also led Russian leadership to station unmanned aerial vehicles for surveillance and base protection forces at forward operating bases. U.S. employment of airpower against ISIS predated Russia's by over a year, and CJTF-OIR's Operation Tidal Wave II overlapped Russia's long-range strike efforts in Deir al-Zour for the first two years of Russia's intervention. Indeed, the two forces' respective airstrike volumes in ISIS-controlled areas indicate a clear disparity in level of effort.  The information displayed in Figures 4.4 and 4.5 contradict the notions that Russian airpower was either primarily responsible for the SAA's recapture of Deir al-Zour or uniquely effective at rolling back ISIS more broadly. In the next sections, we explore whether these trends are rooted in the VKS's and OIR's different levels of operational effectiveness, or if they reflect deconfliction efforts that effectively partitioned Russian and U.S. air operations in Syria.
We argue above that the YPG and SDF, supported by U.S. Coalition airpower, propelled the rollback of ISIS in northeastern Syria. By contrast, Russia concentrated the bulk of its airpower on opposition-controlled areas, peaking during the first two years of the campaign; the volume of its airstrikes against ISIS is comparably smaller. These trends are highlighted in Figures 4.6   Russia's strike activities ramped up dramatically in the first half-year of its intervention, culminating in its assault on U.S.-backed opposition forces in Aleppo. Following the SAA's decisive recapture of Aleppo in December 2016, Russian strike operations never reached the same tempo again (as of March 2018). As CJTF-OIR shifted its focus from Iraq to Syria, Coalition air operations targeted ISIS in Raqqa and Deir al-Zour with increasing intensity. By September 2017, average daily U.S. Coalition airstrikes in Syria doubled Russia's, even during the VKS's final air assault to break ISIS's blockade of Deir al-Zour. Likewise, at nearly 13,000 total airstrikes in north and eastern Syria 
16
17
A comparison of targets and munitions employed by Russia and the United States further elucidates the differences between the two air campaigns. In the first months of Russia's intervention, deployed VKS aircraft exclusively struck stationary targets. 
18
19
20
Beyond the VKS's lack of experience with PGMs in an operational setting, Russia exhibited a reluctance to invest significantly in expensive guided weapon stocks. 
21
16
17
18 Hamilton, 2018, p. 13;
Lavrov, 2020, p. 94.
Gressel, 2016;
Lavrov, 2018;
Shield, 2018;
and
Wetzel, 2017. 20 Lavrov, 2018, pp. 2-3.
By comparison, most of the U.S. Coalition's initial air-to-ground sorties in Syria supported requests for CAS by Kurdish forces, requiring mostly dynamic targeting. 
33
34
The Deir al-Zour Puzzle Revisited: Russian Risk Aversion and U.S. Deconfliction Figures 4.5-4.7 contradict the narrative that Russian airpower was instrumental in the SAA's recapture of Deir al-Zour in 2017. U.S. airstrikes far exceeded Russian airstrikes in ISIS-controlled areas since the beginning of Russia's intervention. It is possible to interpret this disparity as a statement of priorities; Russia's overriding strategic objective was to defeat the opposition, not ISIS, and the VKS's comparably high volume of airstrikes in northwest Syria conveys an inherent difference in priorities.
However, the geographic distribution of Russian and U.S. airstrikes in Syria, as shown in Figure 
4
35
33 Wasser et al., 2021
. 34 Wasser et al., 2021
35 Hamilton, Miller, and Stein, 2020, pp. 3-4.
Nevertheless, as we describe in Chapter 2, Russian aircraft routinely defied the deconfliction agreement and engaged in risky encounters with their U.S. counterparts near the deconfliction line. In June 2016, Russian aircraft used cluster munitions to strike areas "near the U.S. and British forces base at al-Tanf, on the Syrian-Iraqi border," and struck again shortly thereafter despite "being warned via the deconfliction [hotline]." 
36
37
38
39
40
41
4
Although it is possible, again, to interpret this distribution as a reflection of the two campaigns' diverging priorities, another interpretation is that Russia was strategically risk averse (aside from engaging in risky maneuvers for specific tactical purposes). The VKS's "limited liability, limited risk" approach acknowledged the risks of escalation; the VKS was particularly sensitive to aircrew inexperience and aircraft technical limitations. Deadly encounters with peer forces, as when a Turkish F-16 shot down a Russian Su-24, led the VKS to make significant adjustments to its operational planning and TTPs, such as deploying advanced S-400 surface-to-air missile systems. Therefore, the deliberate, sequential nature of Russia's air campaign was plausibly driven by Russia's reluctance to escalate with a peer adversary. In this view, the deconfliction line was no less important to Russia's ability to adhere to its lean expeditionary approach than it was to the United States, despite Russia's periodic willingness to attempt asymmetric maneuvers against Coalition forces.
Since the start of Russia's intervention in Syria in 2015, Russian air operations planning and resource allocations prioritized the Syrian regime's offensive against the U.S.-backed opposition, with counter-ISIS operations constituting only a subsidiary priority. Russia's brutal and indiscriminate air campaign in northwestern Syria played a decisive role in the regime's recapture of Aleppo in December 2016; air support was also an important supporting factor in SAA advances against the opposition in Idlib, Daraa, and Damascus.
Key shortcomings emerged in Russia's initial counter-ISIS operations, leading to minimal operational effectiveness for much of the early campaign. In addition, personnel overstretch and high operating tempo, with regular rotations of aviation crews occurring every three to four months, appear to have posed significant challenges to the VKS in Syria. 
43
In this brief concluding chapter, we summarize preliminary lessons learned from Russia's intervention in Syria and suggest possible implications for future Russian air campaigns.
Russian airpower played a decisive role in reversing the fortunes of the Syrian regime. The Russian intervention ensured the survival of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad's regime, defeated his opposition, contributed to the rollback of ISIS (albeit in a subordinate role to U.S. Coalition airpower), and secured Russia's position in the region. Tactical effectiveness was mixed, but it was adequate to the mission and improved as the VKS adapted to the operational environment.
Russia's intervention was designed as a "limited-liability" expeditionary campaign, modeled after the U.S. air war in Kosovo, with a small theater footprint predicated on Russian aerospace and naval forces providing support to allied Syrian, Iranian, and Shi'a militia ground forces. Russian strategists sought to avoid committing overwhelming ground forces, limit conspicuous losses, and avoid sunk costs.
The VKS's initial concentration of airpower in northwest Syria reflected Russia's primary strategic objectives of saving the Assad regime and degrading the Western-backed opposition. Russian airstrike intensity reached a peak early in the campaign, reflecting the VKS's prioritization of airpower for the higher-end fight against the U.S.-backed opposition. The VKS sought to maximize pressure on opposition forces by inflicting heavy attrition, both in an effort to slow the opposition's operational success and to compel political negotiations with the United States.
Although Russian airpower emerged as a key enabler of the regime's erosion of ISIS control in eastern Syria, Russian airpower was neither primarily responsible for the Syrian regime's recapture of Deir al-Zour nor uniquely effective against ISIS. We estimate that the U.S.-led OIR conducted between 50 percent and 200 percent more airstrikes, in aggregate, than did Russia in north, central, and eastern Syria
1
Russia's preliminary strategic objectives with respect to ISIS were merely to slow its advance while protecting Syrian ground troops. It is also likely that the VKS was reluctant to stray too far from its primary operational hub, Hmeimim air base, in its operations against ISIS, given concerns about aircrew and aircraft quality.
The VKS's employment of airpower was, therefore, significantly more effective in engagements against the opposition than in conflicts against ISIS. The regime's progress against ISIS stagnated after some early success, whereas the regime's success against the opposition was consistently strong after the introduction of Russian airpower.
The VKS explored adaptations in joint operational planning with Syrian ground forces, CONEMP, forward basing and force posture, and advanced capabilities to enhance the effectiveness of counter-ISIS operations. Key VKS adaptations included increasingly relying on unmanned aerial ISR to compensate for the dearth of ground-based intelligence and targeting capabilities in the deserts of eastern Syria, deploying Russia's most-advanced attack helicopters to assume the primary CAS role in ground operations, and creating an enduring network of distributed air bases.
The VKS increasingly experimented with a hub-and-spokes distributed basing model. Opening additional air bases enabled the VKS to relieve congestion at Hmeimim air base, forward-base aircraft elsewhere, scale up the deployed combat aviation force, and operate more responsively. The VKS gradually adopted the hub-and-spokes model for both fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft. However, the hub-and-spokes approach exhibited several shortcomings, including poor base protection and high attrition rates.
Russia had limited experience employing PGMs and was reluctant to invest significantly in expensive guided weapon stocks. About 80 percent of munitions dropped in the first months of the campaign were unguided; some estimates for the entire air campaign range as high as 95 percent. Even in strategic long-range strike operations, the VKS typically eschewed PGMequipped bombers for Tu-22M3s carrying unguided munitions. These tasking decisions likely reflected Russia's relatively limited stock of costly satellite-guided cruise missiles. By contrast, sea-launched cruise missiles likely constituted Russia's most consistent form of precision strike in Syria.
Russia had a mixed record of air-to-ground integration in Syria, marred by several instances of fratricide, making the VKS reluctant to use fixed-wing aircraft in CAS missions. The ability of deployed VKS fixed-wing aircraft to hit moving targets does not appear to have appreciably increased during the campaign. Russia prioritized its fleet of modernized attack helicopters, which is more optimally designed for dynamic targeting, for CAS missions.
Russia's limited allocation of dedicated manned ISR assets to Syria created significant operational constraints, including a consistent lack of on-demand ISR. ISR was also a significant constraint in strike operations. The VKS eventually adapted its ISR doctrine to meet operational circumstances, but it continued to lack a real-time reconnaissance-strike option. To compensate for its lack of dedicated ISR assets, the VKS has upgraded some of its combat aircraft with multi-mission EW and ISR suites. The Russian military has subsequently heavily invested in UAVs, enabling the VKS to scale up a fleet of UAVs in Syria to assume most of the ISR responsibilities.
At the same time, the Russian military's CONEMP for its deployed UAVs came at the expense of a well-developed penetrating ISR capability. The UAV constellation, which primarily relied on light UAVs to act as artillery spotters and provide BDA, appeared to be capable of neither reliably generating ISR to enable on-demand CAS nor designed for penetrating ISR coverage. These shortfalls likely contributed to major battlefield losses against ISIS and the Syrian opposition.
Russia demonstrated a makeshift expeditionary capability in Syria that can deliver significant effects, but it is unclear how effectively Russia might be able to export this capability to other theaters. The geography in Syria was uniquely favorable for the VKS's heavy reliance on rotary-wing operations. 2 Additionally, the conflict was "low intensity" and Russian forces rarely encountered adversaries with advanced air-to-air or surface-to-air capabilities. 
3
For much of the Syria campaign, the VKS was not concerned with target selection and vetting. Most targets in early operations were either large, stationary, and preplanned or were bombed indiscriminately with "dumb" munitions. Operational priorities and CONOPS deemphasized an effective targeting capability. Russia's relatively undeveloped targeting and precision-strike capabilities could be significant constraints against an adversary capable of denying Russia's less-capable ISR and strike aircraft.
Throughout the Syria intervention, Russia iteratively refined CONEMP for manned and unmanned enabler aircraft that it will likely apply to future conflicts. The VKS increasingly experimented with new capabilities in airborne ISR roles to provide electro-optical and signals intelligence support to dynamic targeting, as well as AEW&C, C2, and command 2 Shield (2018, p. 232) notes that "the geography is more favorable in Syria for rotary-wing operations than it was in much of either Chechnya or Afghanistan," particularly in "the empty expanses of central Syria where Russian rotarywing assets have been pushed forward and appear to be most active. The lower elevation and less mountainous landscape present fewer night and poor weather navigation hazards, alleviate the tax on engine performance induced by high altitude flight, and reduce helicopters' vulnerability to the mountain-saddle small-arms ambushes that proved effective for both Chechen rebels and the Afghan mujahideen." 
3 Revaitis, 2020, pp. 48-49.
The VKS heavily relied on long-range strike capabilities in its campaign against ISIS, but its application of these capabilities demonstrated critical limitations. The VKS consistently prioritized long-range bombers equipped with cheaper, "dumb" munitions due to concerns over the cost of PGMs. The heavily used Tu-22M3 cannot be refueled in midair, requiring Russia to rely on an adaptive basing posture to enable its long-range strike operations. Although the VKS conducted limited operational tests to experiment with aerial refueling in long-range strike operations, these capability deficiencies could be a liability in future campaigns with a larger area of operations and fewer regional basing options. The VKS displayed neither a robust intertheater tanking capability nor a willingness to use higher-end but expensive PGMs on strike missions. 
Phase I (September 2015 to March 2016): Heavy Focus on Opposition Forces
82
82
This research was completed in September
2019, before the February 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. It has not been subsequently revised.
It is important to note that these phases do not align with the corresponding phases of the U.S.-led CJTF-OIR campaign in Syria, since the two reflected distinct strategic priorities and began at different points in time.
Vladimir Putin, quoted in Jack Stubbs, "Putin Declares 'Complete Victory' on Both Banks of Euphrates in Syria," Reuters, December
6, 2017.   
This date corresponds to the arrival of the first Russian aircraft to the Syrian theater; however, Russian air
The U.S. military and public reporting alternately refer to Hmeimim air base (the local Arabic name, also transliterated as Kmeimim and Humaymim) as Latakia and Bassel al-Assad air base. We use these names interchangeably. See "The Latest: Russia Moves to Extend Lease of Syria Naval Base," Associated Press,December 26, 2017.   
Becca Wasser, Stacie L. Pettyjohn, Jeffrey Martini, Alexandra T. Evans, Karl P. Mueller, Nathaniel Edenfield, Gabrielle Tarini, Ryan Haberman, and Jalen Zeman, The Air War Against the Islamic State: The Role of Airpower in Operation Inherent Resolve, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A388-1, 2021.
Wasser et al., 2021, pp. 326-327.    
Wasser et al., 2021.
Wasser et al., 2021, pp. 326-327.   
Charap, Treyger, and Geist,  
2019, pp. 13-14.2  Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019, p.  13.3 Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019, p. 13.   4  Anna Maria Dyner, "Two Years of Russian Military Operations in Syria: Results and Prospects," Bulletin, No. 103 (1043), Polish Institute of International Affairs,October 30, 2017, p. 1.   
See, for example, Quy-Toan Do, Jacob N. Shapiro, Christopher D. Elvidge, Mohamed Abdel-Jelil, Daniel P. Ahn, Kimberly Baugh, Jamie Hansen-Lewis, and Mikhail Zhizhin, How Much Oil Is the Islamic State Group Producing? Evidence from Remote Sensing, Policy Working Paper 8231, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, October 2017.
Laila Bassam and Tom Perry, "How Iranian General Plotted Out Syrian Assault in Moscow," Reuters, October 6,   2015.   
Russia had considered Tartus little more than a "minor resupply point" with "little military significance" since the fall of the Soviet Union but that it acquired increasing significance as a core foundation of Russia's aspirations to develop an expeditionary force following its initial deployment in Ukraine. Indeed, losing access to Tartus would mean the loss of a critical naval resupply and logistics hub in the eastern Mediterranean, a prospect that Russia deemed unacceptable. SeeKofman and Rojansky, 2018, p. 4.   
See JamesSladden, Becca Wasser, Ben Connable, and Sarah Grand-Clement, Russian  Strategy in the Middle East, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation,PE-236-RC, 2017, pp. 3-5; and Spaulding et al., 2015, pp. 1-2.   
Putin quoted in
Stubbs, 2017.
Reported inCzuperski et al., 2016, p. 10.    
Reported inCzuperski et al., 2016, p. 10. It is worth noting that Putin also called for nonintervention in his 2015 speech to the United Nations (UN). Importantly, he presented nonintervention in such a way as to promote the stability of existing regimes, which became part of Russia's imprimatur for intervention. We are grateful to Becca Wasser for pointing this out. See
Sladden et al., 2017.
For example,
Czuperski et al. (2016)
and Brian Glyn Williams and Robert Souza, "
Charap, Treyger, and Geist, 2019, p. 5.   
Lavrov, 2018, pp. 15-16.    
Lavrov (2018, p. 15)  suggests that half a squadron of Su-25SM aircraft may have been present at T-4 since at least December 2016, though we were unable to verify this claim.
Charles Lister, "Turkey's Idlib Incursion and the HTS Question: Understanding the Long Game in Syria," War on the Rocks, October 31, 2017.
Gonul Tol, "Why Is Turkey Silent on Russia's Cooperation with the Syrian Kurds?" War on the Rocks, December 19, 2017.
Wasser et al., 2021, p. 75.    
Rondeaux, 2019.
Wasser et al., 2021, p. 75.   
Wasser et al., 2021, p. 75.    
Wasser et al., 2021, p. 75.   
Andrew S. Bowen, Russian Armed Forces: Military Doctrine and Strategy, Washington, D.C.: Congressional
The initial presence of fighter-bomber aircraft at Hmeimim constituted less than a full squadron; however, the squadron was ultimately rounded out with subsequent rotations of Su-34 Fullback and Su-35 Flanker-E aircraft beginning in December 2015.
Lavrov, 2018, pp. 22-23.   
This was also a key tenet of NGW. See, for example, Bowen, 2020. We are grateful to Becca Wasser for pointing this out.
The Orlan-10 light UAV and Granat-1 hand-launched UAV were often used by the Russian Army as an artillery spotter in close ground tactical situations. Meanwhile, the MALE Forpost was often used for medium-range target designation and monitoring.
Hamilton, 2018, pp. 12-13.    
Sean O'Connor and Jeremy Binnie, "Russia Deploys Additional Su-34s to Syria," Jane's DefenceWeekly,   December 11, 2015.   
Kofman, 2020, p. 12.   
Throughout this report, "al-Shayrat" and "Shayrat" are used interchangeably.
Bodansky, 2016, p. 6.   
These reasons include a more-favorable operational setting, the higher priority Russia initially placed on counteropposition operations, more-capable aviation assets allocated to counteropposition operations, better intelligence-gathering capabilities that yielded a clearer operational picture, and a closer proximity to Hmeimim that enabled the VKS to minimize pilot and technical errors.
Lavrov, 2018, p. 6.   
Dyner, 2017, p. 2.   
See, for example, Jones, 2019, p. 2; Kofman, 2020, p. 52; Lavrov , 2018, p. 3; and Lavrov, 2020, p. 93.   
Lavrov, 2020, p. 95.   
Representations of geographic control also fail to adequately convey the fact that between 15,000 and 30,000 ISIS fighters remained in Syria and Iraq, with as many as 10,000 in Syria alone, as of 2019. SeeJones, 2019, p. 6.   
As discussed in Chapter 1, we imputed bounded estimates of Russian airstrikes to facilitate a direct comparison with Wasser et al. (2021) Coalition airstrike data.
Figure 4.6  draws on the Russian and Coalition airstrike events from our original data set, while Figure4.7 uses the bounded estimation approach described in Chapter 1 to facilitate a comparison with the Coalition airstrike data compiled by
Wasser et al. (2021)
Giles, 2017.   
This estimate includes the Deir al-Zour, Raqqa, Hasaka, Aleppo, Homs, and Hama Provinces.
The project team expresses its appreciation to then-
Brigadier General Dieter Bareihs, then-Brigadier General Michael Koscheski
Gregory Varner
U.S. Air Forces Europe-Air Forces Africa (USAFE-AFAFRICA)
At RAND, the authors extend their thanks to 
Stacie Pettyjohn
Rafi Cohen
Samuel Charap
Becca Wasser
The 
U.S. Air Force
RAND Corporation to assess Russia's employment of airpower in Syria
Russian Aerospace Forces
USAFE-AFAFRICA A5
Strategy and Doctrine Program
RAND
AIR FORCE as part of a fiscal year 2019
Russian Airpower Beyond the Near Abroad
February 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine
RAND
AIR FORCE (PAF
RAND Corporation
Department of the Air Force's (DAF's)
United States Air Force (USAF)
United States Space Force. PAF provides DAF
Health
FA7014-16-D-1000
Additional information about PAF is available on our website: www.rand.org/paf/
was a significant constraint on VKS operational planning, and Russian air operations initially prioritized minimizing risk and limiting aircrew burdens.
While the VKS continually experimented with the composition of its deployed strike packages, the size of its fixed-wing combat aviation force stationed at Hmeimim remained remarkably consistent throughout the campaign (reflecting the VKS's lean expeditionary approach). As seen in Figure 
3
24
Following the first arrival of Russian rotary-wing aircraft (four helicopters, by intertheater transport aircraft) to the Syrian theater on September 15, 2015, the VKS rotary-wing presence ramped up to sixteen helicopters by September 20. The initial force included twelve Mi-24P Hind-F attack helicopters and four Mi-8AMTSh Hip transport helicopters, composing three complete helicopter detachments of four Mi-24s and one Mi-8 each. Although the Mi-24 is used in a multirole air assault role, it is one of the VKS's older platforms (having entered service by the early 1980s) and is daylight-only. Thus, initially, the VKS used the deployed helicopter units primarily to perform base-protection and CSAR missions. 
25
3
3
The physical attributes of Hmeimim air base proved critical to Russian operations in Syria. The proximity of Hmeimim to key opposition locations in northwest Syria such as Latakia, Hama, Idlib, and Aleppo facilitated effective VKS fixed-wing CAS and strike missions in
From almost the beginning of the intervention, Russian actions indicated that breaking the yearlong ISIS siege of Deir al-Zour was a long-term operational priority, albeit subordinate to Russia's immediate objective of degrading the opposition. 
4
5
There is some debate among Western observers about the affiliation between the Kremlin and Russian private military companies like the Wagner Group. Although it is likely that these companies are nominally independent of direct Russian government influence, there is some evidence of close cooperation between the two. The MoD may have even provided financial and logistical support to Wagner prior to the Euphrates crossing. Rondeaux indicates that Wagner was linked both to close Putin ally Yevgeny Prigozhin and to the Internet Research Agency, a Russian disinformation proxy. 
6
8
We contend that a combination of at least six key factors likely influenced the VKS's operational planning vis-à-vis Deir al-Zour. First, Russia's immediate strategic priorities in Syria at the outset were to stave off defeat for the Assad regime, degrade the U.S.-backed opposition, and compel a political settlement with the West. With the SAA initially focusing most of its best ground forces on retaking Aleppo from the U.S.-backed opposition, a major ground offensive against ISIS was, therefore, simply not feasible until 2017.
Second, the nature of the targets and irregular character of the adversary made a sustained bombing campaign less tractable in Deir al-Zour early in the campaign. In contrast, the U.S.backed opposition may have been comparatively easier to target since they were essentially engaged with the Syrian regime in regular warfare. According to Lavrov:
Most of the Russian air strikes were transferred from targeting the opposition and Islamist groups to targeting ISIS. The main problem was that it was difficult to annihilate ISIS's small mobile detachments from the air. ISIS did not control large cities and had no large stationary facilities. Only the Syrian oil industry, which was under ISIS control in the captured desert areas, was vulnerable. 9 Third, Russian CONOPS conventionally distinguished between strike and CAS missions in its tasking of Su-24 and Su-25 aircraft, respectively. Since initial strike operations prioritized counteropposition targets in the area surrounding Hmeimim, tasking the residual Su-25 aircraft with strike operations in ISIS-held locations in eastern Syria would have gone against Russian standard operating procedures.
Deir al-Zour was close enough to Hmeimim (205 nm) to be considered a medium-range target (less than 310 nm), for which Su-24 fighter-bombers would be conventionally tasked with carrying out strike operations. News reports and plane spotters have indeed sporadically observed Su-24s conducting operations in Deir al-Zour. Although Deir al-Zour was well within the combat radii of combat aircraft stationed at Hmeimim, most deployed Su-24 or Su-34 aircraft were perpetually allocated to the SAA's counteropposition operations in the northwest, west, and south. Therefore, the VKS could not reliably generate fixed-wing strike sorties to Deir al-Zour from Hmeimim. This limitation became apparent early in the campaign, prompting the VKS to rotate at least a dozen long-range strike aircraft and a squadron of Su-34s to Mozdok. Longrange strike thus constituted Russia's primary source of air support to entrenched SAA forces in Deir al-Zour for most of the campaign.
Fourth, it is equally plausible that the VKS chose to limit its CAS sorties to Deir al-Zour due to operational challenges. ISIS had captured Palmyra and much of the surrounding areas in Homs and Deir al-Zour by 2015. The highway from Palmyra to Deir al-Zour was virtually impassible throughout the first two years of Russia's intervention. This was, indeed, the basis for Russia's airdrop missions to Deir al-Zour. The VKS's decision to base up to half a squadron of Su-25SM fighters at forward air bases starting in summer 2017 contributed to the SAA's victory against ISIS in Deir al-Zour. Government-allied air forces had previously not been able to effectively generate CAS in Deir al-Zour, which had severely hampered ground operations. Thus, the VKS's solution to the Su-25's limited combat radius-namely, to base Su-25s at forward operating locationssignificantly enhanced the SAA's offensive in ISIS-occupied territory through the fall of 2017.
Whereas the operational effectiveness of Russian airpower had been modest through nearly the first two years of counter-ISIS operations, the VKS's various adaptations to the operational environment gradually developed Russian airpower into a critical enabler of the regime's erosion of ISIS control in eastern Syria. Russian air support played a vital role in the regime's initial recapture of Palmyra in 2016 and in clearing ISIS from eastern Homs in 2017.
By March 2018, ISIS had lost over 60 percent of its peak geographic control (see Figure 
4
Russia might be able to export its expeditionary capability to other theaters.
RR-A1170-1 www.rand.org 