# ID: 52ca81e9a69b47c88ade0570e9ed5389
# Title: Initiative within the philosophy of Auftragstaktik, determining factors of the understanding of initiative in the German Army 1806-1955
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
The philosophy of Auftragstaktik is aimed at initiative of subordinates within and outside of the scope provided by the commander's intent. While acting within the intent, in general, does not cause problems, acting in alteration of or opposite to given orders regularly will. Deviating from orders within the philosophy of Auftragstaktik is justified by the grundlegende Lageänderung-fundamental change of situation, or if acting upon a higher responsibility to the unit.
In four, partly overlapping phases this thesis examines the factors determining the use of initiative while applying Auftragstaktik in the German military forces from 1806 until today.
1. The emergence of Auftragstaktik, from Clausewitz's understanding of war to the total initiative of field commanders in Moltke's age and World War I, 1806-1918.  2. Low tactical level initiative in the synchronized warfare of World War I, 1915-1918.  3. An army shaped for initiative versus detailed tactical control by Hitler, 1919-1945.  4. The ethical component of initiative-responsibility for the preservation of units to Innere Führung, 1941-1955.   Using doctrinal references and analysis of actions of commanders in the different wars, the thesis examines the influence of technological developments, culture, societal factors and political influences, as well as developments in warfare.
On October 12-13, the French bataillon carré swung to the left. With Lannes in lead, it contacted the Prussians over the Saale at Jena. By the morning of October 14, Napoleon had concentrated the better part of two full corps in a small bridgehead over the Saale, seized on Lannes's initiative the night before. With Napoleon looking on, Lannes led off the attack in the morning against the Prussian right. Two divisions advanced abreast (Gazan on the left and Suchet on the right) and drove a wedge into Prussian positions. Augereau soon joined in to the left of Lannes. Ney arrived on the battlefield and, on his own initiative, wedged himself in between his fellow Marshals without orders. He impetuously made for some tense moments as his leading units outstripped the two flanking corps, but his neighbors soon fought their way up to his relief.
Things weren't going well for the Prussians, but as the infantry of Major General von Grawert's division arrived, it seemed as if Hohenlohe might yet save something of his day. In one of those moments seemingly invented to demonstrate the changeover from one military era to another, however, they deployed far too slowly for the attack. "Solemnly, as if on the parade ground," they halted and formed line within rage of the French skirmishers in front of the village of Vierzehnheiligen. 
1
For modern warfare the military revolution following the French Revolution and the establishment of the citizen soldier motivated by nationalism liberated the commanders from the restrictions put upon them in the age of Cabinet Wars. 
2
3
4
5
Since then initiative has played a key role in the developing concept of Auftragstaktik in the Prussian and German armies; 
7
8
9
The aim of this work is to identify factors that historically have influenced or determined the acceptable extent of initiative during the application of Auftragstaktik in the Prussian and German armies over the last two centuries. This serves discussions about the future use of Auftragstaktik and Mission Command to enable distinguishing between the demanded respectively accepted use of initiative and destructive disobedience.
The philosophy of Auftragstaktik aims at the initiative of subordinates within and outside of the scope provided by the higher commander's intent. In general, acting within that intent as authorized by trust and mutual understanding does not cause problems, however acting in alteration of or opposite to given orders regularly will. Deviating from orders is within the philosophy of Auftragstaktik justified by the grundlegende Lageänderung-fundamental change in situation, or if acting upon a higher responsibility.
Different historical examples suggest that one can assess the validity of deviating from orders only after the fact, based on the resulting tactical success or failure. If
Auftragstaktik in the Bundeswehr enables and demands initiative, parameters have to be in place to qualify before the fact the acceptable degree of initiative rather than afterwards.
This section describes the methodical approach to the thesis. It consists of three elements, the framework of reference, which depicts the background of the concept of Auftragstaktik in the German Army, the definition of initiative in the context of this thesis, and thirdly the model, which is used for analyzing the different forms of initiative as well as the timeframes for the analysis in the subsequent chapters.
From the earliest depictions of humans using what had been hunting tools as weapons to fight each other in battles men have sought to gain advantages through improved weapons-technology-and specific forms or techniques of application-what later became doctrine. 
10
11
12
13
The model describes four flexibility strata:
1. Conceptual and doctrinal flexibility, an atmosphere that encourages lowerranking commanders to challenge concepts and doctrine, 2. Organizational and technological flexibility, diversity and redundancy as well as technological versatility and changeability, 3. Flexibility in command and cognitive skills, consisting of mental flexibility and flexible command, and 4. Fast learning, including a rapid circulation of lessons. 
14
The stratum of cognitive and command and control flexibility thus describes the effect that different armies want to achieve when planning meets the reality of warfare.
Consequently, it constitutes an answer to the challenges Carl von Clausewitz describes as resulting from the difficulties in gaining proper intelligence; although outside of Finkel's focus, it in addition seems to be expedient to use it in order to counter surprise from friction and chance. 
15
Finkel describes two elements in his third stratum: "Command flexibility [which]   grants the commander the freedom to make on-the-spot decisions" 
16
17
Defining the term "initiative" sets up some challenges. German doctrine literally refers to initiative in the context of the U.S. Army's definition of operational initiative. 
18
This basic definition for initiative will be categorized and related to the other terms, as reflected in the German Army philosophy of Auftragstaktik, in the following section.
The basic definition also corresponds to the U.S. Army's definition of "individual initiative-[t]he willingness to act in the absence of orders, when existing orders no longer fit the situation, or when unforeseen opportunities or threats arise" 
19
As indicated, initiative in the Bundeswehr doctrine is not explicitly defined, nor are the cases and circumstances in which it is to be executed narrowly prescribed, which is caused by its generally more descriptive character compared to U.S. Army doctrine. A full comprehension of the character of Auftragstaktik can thus only be achieved by the study of doctrine combined with experience gained through military training and education. This section categorizes three different forms of initiative contained in the character of Auftragstaktik. The three forms are determined by the conditions set up for their execution and their degree of freedom against the higher commander's directive as represented by his intent and the mission given to his subordinate. 
21
Constituting a general rule (and a core element of Auftragstaktik) there are no preset conditions in the execution of this form of initiative but it also remains constrained within the boundaries of the unit's mission. Compared to the U.S. system of mission command, similarities are visible; however in practice German orders tend to be limited to the bare minimum of tasks and one purpose per unit. The U.S. system of assigning tasks, which each include detailed directives and a purpose, is much more detailed and restrictive. 
22
While conducting an assessment of the situation during an operation commanders have to determine whether a fundamental change in the situation has occurred-in other words, would the commander had given the same mission had he known how the situation would develop?
This form of initiative is bound to both the fundamental change in the situation and the inability to communicate with the higher commander based on either a time critical reaction or the loss of communication. Nevertheless, it remains constrained by the higher commander's intent. While the U.S. Army acknowledges that commanders deviate from orders when those orders no longer fit the situation, a concept similar to the German fundamental change in situation, the search for and action upon exceptional information is no longer defined in ADRP 6-0. 
23
24
This thesis covers close to 200 years of developments in the Prussian and German
Armies. Changes in doctrine and understanding of Auftragstaktik in the four different armies of this time period did not always go hand in hand with the major political events; personalities and the conduct of warfare had more influence. This suggests using a phased model to identify major developments in the field of initiative.
This thesis therefore divides the changing doctrine and understanding of initiative into four partly overlapping phases:  1915-1918;   3. An army shaped for initiative versus detailed tactical control by Hitler,   1919-1945; and   4. The ethical component of initiative-responsibility for the preservation of units to Innere Führung, 1941-1955.   As described above, initiative is a means to counter surprise or the unexpected.
While the first form of initiative is supposed to be the normal conduct of interaction between different levels within the army, the latter two forms for the sake of coordination are bound to specific exceptional circumstances. Doctrine is aimed at informing about the conduct of planning and operations in its prevailing forms and conditions. Countering exceptional and unexpected circumstances will therefore naturally not be described to a full extent. Hence solely analyzing doctrine does not suffice for the aim of this thesis.
The analysis of the different phases will therefore also be based upon the manner of execution of operations, doctrinal documents and publications of influential leaders, as well as the external framework of the armed forces.  
58-66. 3
4
5
6
7
8
The growth of armies to unprecedented sizes created the need for separated movement of large units and concentration for the decisive battle only; increasing firepower of both artillery and infantry required more and more dispersion of units in the battle. The change process in the Prussian Army included the creation of the General Staff, the introduction of higher education for officers, and changes in force structure, equipment, drafting system and many other aspects. 
3
In addition to the internal struggle in the armed forces, the state saw a conflict between King Friedrich Wilhelm IV and the democratic movement over constitutional rights and the form of government. The Prussian Army, subject to suspicion from the democratic side from its beginnings, became a focus of the dispute during and after the 1848 revolt, when its role as an instrument for the preservation of royal power became evident. This affected the ability of the Prussian Army to professionalize, until the German-Danish War of 1864 led to the reconsideration of its role as an instrument of foreign policy and a calming down of the quarrel with the parliament, an effect chancellor Otto von Bismarck had hoped for. 
4
Initially it was not Clausewitz, who held a purely administrative position at the Kriegsakademie, but Scharnhorst and Gneisenau who shaped the instrument of the General Staff and developed the "technique of command, characterized by clear and comprehensive formulation of objective but always leaving room for individual initiative and freedom of action." 
5
Commissioned into the Prussian Army in 1822, he attended the Kriegsakademie and served, typically for a General Staff Officer, in a broad variety of positions, including military advisor in the Ottoman Empire and high level positions at the royal court. 
6
The results of the military revolution of the Napoleonic Wars changed the character of warfare and resulted in a larger geographical dispersion of the forces, which created a much larger leeway for subordinate commanders to fill. The reform process of the Prussian Army was shaped by Scharnhorst and later Gneisenau. Clausewitz's book On War formulated and preserved the underlying ideas and hence influenced the generation of officers who commanded in the wars from 1866 and 1870 onwards. 
7
8
The developments shown above are reflected in the structure and content of doctrine: The 1812 Exerzir-Regelement-drill regulations-for the infantry, the capstone doctrine document developed largely by General Ludwig Yorck von Wartenburg, was still confined to employment exercises, drill style, from single soldier to brigade level. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
18
19
20
21
22
[The battalion commander] executes the battle through missions he assigns to his companies. Only on the occasion of obvious misunderstandings or mistakes that could draw the battle into an unintended direction, the direct override in the platoons of single companies is due. . . . His actions have to be aimed at retaining the common scheme of the companies. The companies for their part aim upon accomplishment of their missions also at the common scheme. 
23
24
The 1906 drill regulations continued the trend towards individualization of the soldier on the battlefield and independent action of smaller units. The company becomes the largest element for employment drill. 
25
26
Orders (Anordnungen) given from rearward commands will easily be made obsolete by the events. Timely action is often only possible upon independent decision. The lower command units though have to observe that they are destined to solve the tactical problem (Gefechtsaufgabe) as intended by the higher commander [original emphasis]. 
27
The foremost quality of a leader remains the willingness to take responsibility (Verantwortungsfreudigkeit). It would be understood falsely, if one aimed at making arbitrary decisions with disregard of the whole or not precisely following given orders and let know-all manner take the place of obedience. But in the cases in which the subordinate has to say to himself that the ordering person could not sufficiently oversee the circumstances or where the order has been rendered obsolete by the events, it becomes an obligation of the subordinate not to obey or to alter the execution of orders received and report this to the superior. The full responsibility for not obeying the order remains with him.
All leaders have to constantly stay aware and inculcate in their subordinates that forbearance and dereliction weigh heavier than mistaking in the selection of an action [original emphasis]. 
28
29
30
31
32
The first doctrine for operational level was created by the 1869 Instructions for Large Unit Commanders. They cover the echelons from division up to the army. 
33
34
35
36
Prussians and Germans participated in several conflicts between 1806 and the First World War. The larger ones were the defeats of Napoleon following the battles of Leipzig in 1813 and Waterloo in 1815, the Austro-Prussian War in 1866, the Franco-Prussian War in 1870-1871 and the First World War. 
37
In a first step, historic case studies selected as exemplary by the Prussian General Staff for publication in Volume 4 of Moltke's Militärische Werke will be reviewed. 
38
The Official Picture of Auftragstaktik Dilatory advance of the French justifies assumption that the Second Army can be concentrated on the 6th instant in front of the forest zone at Kaiserslautern. If rapid advance of enemy cannot be prevented, concentration of Second Army to take place behind the Lauter. Combined action of both armies in the battle intended; First Army from St. Wendel and Baumholder. His Majesty orders that First Army concentrates on the 4th against Tholey. Tomorrow Third Army crosses frontier at Weissenburg. General offensive intended. 
40
41
42
43
44
Describing the events accompanying the battle Columbey-Nouilly on the 14th of August, the case study explains again the need to coordinate the operations of the First and Second Army. General Steinmetz's now much more passive and defensive conduct of operations is described in a very balanced way. Steinmetz's attempt to preserve his independence by hiding the position of his headquarters is the only point of obvious criticism. 
45
46
48
49
50
To illustrate Moltke's essay on battle-Die Schlacht-several historic examples have been drawn to exemplify his findings about the independence of leaders. The first case study briefly describes the advance of the Prussian I Corps under Prince Friedrich Karl during the 1864 campaign against Denmark. The corps on the 2nd of February had the mission to secure the eight-kilometer wide chokepoint between the Eckernförde inlet and the Schlei River in the disputed duchy of Schleswig. 
51
52
53
Nevertheless, the decision arrived at independently demonstrates a correct appreciation of conditions and the enterprising spirit of the commanding general." 
54
55
The second case study attached to the battle-essay is the account of the unfolding battle of Königgrätz. On the evening of the 2nd of July 1866 patrols of the Prussian First Army had identified the positions of what they thought was a major portion of the Austrian Army at Königgrätz and the neighboring heights. The commander of First Army decided to maneuver his divisions into attack positions early next morning, informed Second Army about the situation and his plan and asked for support by available units.
The messenger to Second Army was dispatched at 9:30pm and shortly afterwards the commander's aide-de-camp was sent to the royal headquarters where the king and Moltke were woken up with that news. Moltke assessed that they had the whole Austrian Army in front of them and that First Army, attacking alone would not be successful. It was decided that First Army was to frontally fix the Austrians and that Second Army would attack the enemy's right flank. 
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
The third historical example covers the battles on the frontier at the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War. The illustration concentrates on the decisions and operations of commanders at the corps and division level, leading towards the bloody battles and victories of Wörth and Spicheren. Two different principles of Prussian operational art are depicted as forming the motivation for the different commanders to exercise initiative while being exposed to an unclear enemy situation: The aim to get or stay in contact with the adversary and to concentrate forces for the battle-the marching to the sound of the guns. 
63
It shows how opportunities were used, for example at the Saar River crossing, when an attack on the hills at Spichern was necessary to extend that bridgehead to an appropriate depth. 
64
65
66
68
69
71
72
73
74
Overall the 1906 analysis is much more aware of the risks and limitations coming with independent actions of commanders at the different levels. While the need for dispersed formations is stressed especially against the background of the firepower that had further increased at the beginning of the twentieth century the author stresses the need to keep up communications between the echelons. Initiative is no longer depicted as a value in itself, so that its extent has to be shaped to the necessities and possibilities of the specific situation on the battlefield.
Two additional facets of initiative have to be reviewed to complement the execution of initiative: The independent actions of soldiers, non-commissioned officers, and junior officers at the lowest tactical levels and the developments at the Western Front leading the race to the sea and the loss of operational level maneuver.
It is interesting that in contrast to the fact that the different doctrinal sources stressed the need for independent actions at the lowest level as early as 1812 there were no historical examples chosen to illustrate how this initiative should look like. On a regular basis sources covering the above mentioned wars deliver accounts that battalions or regiments lost most or all of their officers during the battle. The increased precision of infantry weapons allowed for deliberate targeting of leaders as this sarcastic quotation of a Prussian soldier at Königgrätz depicts: "Na, we'll come out of this in fine shape. The dogs are aiming only at our first lieutenants." 
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
The general withdrawal was not executed, instead all forces except a cavalry division were thrown at the Second Russian Army in the south of the Masurian Lakes.
While the envelopment was developing and an initial attack into the Russian left flank was to take place, the I Corps' commander, von François, decided upon his own judgment to delay the attack. He had to be urged twice to attack by Eighth Army chief of staff von Ludendorff. 
82
Subsequently the Russian First Army in the north was driven from East-Prussian soil although the attempt to decisively defeat it failed. The scheme of independent operations continued on the eastern front for the remainder of the war, the sheer width of the terrain and the relatively smaller number of forces allowing for operational level maneuver from both sides.
On the Western Front, commanders of the seven German armies concentrated from north to south along the border enjoyed the same leeway as their counterpart in East Prussia. They were to follow a modified version of the so-called Schlieffen Plan-the basic idea, that the right wing (First, Second and Third Army) would wheel into the French Army's left flank and push it against Alsace, Lorraine and the Swiss border. 
83
Ignoring this need and the restrictions to independent actions of subordinated commanders his uncle had imposed during the Franco-Prussian War, 84 the Chief of Staff of the High Command, Helmut Johannes Ludwig von Moltke (the younger), kept the headquarters initially in Berlin and moved it then to Koblenz and later Luxemburg-the subsequent positions still being too far behind the main thrust at the right to allow for effective command and control. This way he also sought to prevent the emperor from intervening in the daily operations. He left the coordination of the advance of First, Second and Third Army to the army commanders with at first informal and later formal authority to be in the hands of Second Army's commander, General Karl von Bülow. 
85
86
87
88
91
92
93
It is outside of the scope and possibilities of this work to discuss the details and reasons for the developments, which led to the failure of the German offensive. What can be seen is that the spirit of independent operations by large unit commanders still prevailed at the beginning of World War I. The specific conditions at the eastern front where the replacement of Prittwitz with the strong command team of von Hindenburg and Ludendorff prevented a catastrophe and helped overcome the difficulties with the very independent von François. In the west, where the need for coordination was much higher, the problems arising from overly independent commanders were obvious with Moltke not able to resolve them as his uncle had done in 1870.
This chapter depicts the emergence of Auftragstaktik. Two different factors influenced its development at the tactical and operational levels. At the tactical level, the increasing accuracy and firepower of infantry weapons and artillery required the subsequently increased dispersal of assault formations from the linear tactics to open lines. This came at the price of reduced command and control abilities of leaders at the lower tactical echelons. Hence the autonomous conduct of battle and the will to act upon one's own judgment within the purpose of the operation and the higher commander's intent had to be established. The doctrinal development depicts how initially the first category of initiative, the autonomy to decide how a mission is fulfilled was established by 1876. The second category of initiative, the independent decision and action within the higher commander's intent, can be found as early as 1888.
The growth of the armies and the increased geographical extension of the battlefield was already established in Napoleon's Army and required that commanders at the operational level maneuver independently and move to the sound of the guns for the concentration of the armies. The Prussian Army only belatedly introduced this principle with the development of the General Staff officer system and the 1869 instructions for large unit commanders. Huge efforts were made to depict and explain the value of higher commander's initiative and actions upon their professional judgment. This led, at least in part, to overly independent commanders who were unwilling to accept supporting roles in the battle and unlikely to accept interference into their operations by their own higher commands. The independence of those commanders was outside of the initiative model introduced in chapter one of this thesis. During the wars of the second half of the nineteenth century, fought without contiguous frontlines and the resulting threats to the flanks, the negative effects of such arbitrariness were less visible; as long as neighboring units would march towards the sound of the cannons, battle success was still possible.
Moltke the elder's strong leadership counterbalanced negative effects. The 1906 manual and the historical examples illustrating it had to stress the importance of keeping the concept of operations in sight. Its text expresses all three categories of initiative. 
94
1
2 See page 1.
32 Ibid., 106, 256-257. 
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
Ibid., 235-237.   Ibid., 238-241.   Ibid., 246, 248-250, 254.   See page 9.
While I was expeditiously carrying out the preparations for the attack, ordering the machine-gun platoons into position, and organizing assault squads, the order came from the rear: "Württemberg Mountain Battalion withdraws." . . . The battalion order to withdraw resulted in all units of the Rommel detachment marching back to Mount Cragonza, except for the hundred riflemen and six heavy machine-gun crews who remained with me. I debated breaking off the engagement and returning to Mount Cragonza.
No! The battalion order was given without knowledge of the situation on the south slopes of the Matajur. Unfinished business remained. . . . We ventured to attack in spite of our ridiculously small numbers. 
1
The perception of World War I is dominated by the Western Front trench warfare that followed the Race to the Sea, a series of outflanking attempts ending the capability to maneuver at the operational level. The resulting stalemate, based on the increasing importance of firepower, machine-guns and artillery compared to maneuver enforced a close coordination between the infantry and its supporting arms. This led to complex, precisely coordinated fire plans that stifled initiative of the ground forces.
However, this is not the whole story: On the Eastern Front the density of forces and the vast space allowed for operational level movements throughout the war, leading to a series of more or less successful envelopment attempts from the Łódź campaign to the Kerensky-Offensive. 2 Those battles were fought based on the doctrinal background and mindset described in chapter two of this paper (the selected phases overlap) and will therefore not further be analyzed.
At the tactical level synchronized methodical battle dominated the trenches while the exercise of initiative retained its position and finally rose to glory again with the techniques of deep defense and storm trooper tactics.
With the new realities at the Western Front the prewar doctrine had become inappropriate by December 1914. The 1906 drill regulations had pointed out that the infantry had to "herd its inherent urge for offensive advance. . . . Forward on the enemy, may it cost what it costs!" 3 Utilization of the terrain was described on one page; the defense was seen as subordinate to the offense. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
For the troops the following is applicable for the battle: . . . .The defender is not bound to one place; instead he is justified to fight mobile in the battlezone, which means to attack or withdraw whatever is required. . . . For tactical action best suiting the concept of battle a certain level of leeway has to remain with the leader-also the mid level leader. This is applicable to all branches. The conduct of battle according to this concept requires a lot of initiative [original emphasis]. 
10
11
12
13
The adaptations to the offensive doctrine were less groundbreaking: The storm trooper tactics combined the offensive spirit and willingness to sacrifice of the German Army with increased training on newly developed weapons, improved coordination of infantry and artillery and the concept of deep operations. The concept Der Angriff im Stellungskrieg (Attack in Position Warfare), published on the 1st of January 1918, became the basic document for the German offensives of 1918. Again a captured French exposé had been part of the development process as well as German units' best practices. 
14
The surprised enemy shall not reconstitute. His countermeasures have to be neutralized through a rapid advance of the attack. The assault has to be executed quickly, based on the knowledge that for the protection of flank and rear and the fire support care will be taken from behind. The danger that the drive of the attack gets lost is great. The culmination point has to be overcome through the energy of the leaders up front. . . . Everything depends upon the quick and independent actions of all involved, based on the concept of operations as well as the follow-up of artillery and ammunition supplies. [original emphasis] 
15
16
The German answer to the changing environment at the Western Front is remarkable as it was counterintuitive and contrary to the Allied approach of centralizing command, further synchronizing fire plans and subordinating the infantry to its support weapons. The spirit of initiative within the army was maintained as a value while the increased effectiveness of heavy weapons required a close coordination of maneuvering infantry and its support weapons. This allowed for timely reactions and the avoidance of devastating enemy firepower in defense and offense.
The doctrinal discussion shows that the new and unexpected nature of combat at the Western Front led to a development of doctrine based upon analyzing the experiences and good practices of units on the ground. This inductive way of adapting doctrine naturally leads to less exciting findings in the review of the conduct of operations.
In his book Infantry Attacks, then Lieutenant Erwin Rommel describes the conduct of operations on the platoon to battalion level. In his accounts about the trench warfare in the Argonne and the High Vosges the first measures of the frontline practices that later made it into doctrine are traceable. He describes the difficulties of proceeding against the massive firepower of machine-guns, nurture an attack, and defend the terrain gained against enemy counterattacks, when the artillery fire sealed off the attackers from reinforcements and resupplies. 
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
The creation of specific defensive and offensive doctrine for trench warfare does not constitute a general adaption of the understanding of Auftragstaktik similar to the developments described in chapter two. The fundamental understanding of initiative and independent actions of commanders remained unchanged. They were applied to the new circumstances of warfare at the Western Front to benefit from its advantages when avoiding the effects of enemy firepower became crucial. The leeway of junior commanders and individual soldiers to flexibly change positions within a defined zone to avoid the preparatory fires and defend based on the own initiative clearly constitutes an established understanding of category one initiative. The question, whether independent counterthrusts were an integrated element of the defense and thus also part of the category one leeway, or whether the constituted an independent action within the higher commander's intent is debatable. Assault or Storm Trooper units were starting off their attacks based upon detailed intelligence and planning. The freedom to operate as deemed necessary to overcome unexpected enemy strongholds or fields of fire, based upon the understanding that the forward commander has the best insight into the changing situation reflects the concept of the second category of initiative. Finally, the example of Rommel in mountain warfare quoted at the beginning of this chapter indicates that the spirit to act upon professional knowledge outside or against given orders was still intact.
Ideally LT Delica, who was senior on the ground, should have taken charge. His glider, however, had landed a fair way to the south and his squad was busy dealing with its target position, a 75mm-gun casemate. Unable to contact [LT] Witzig or Delica, SGT Helmut Wenzel of fourth squad took command and established headquarters for Sturmgruppe Granit inside the machine-gun casemate, which his men had captured minutes earlier. SGT Wenzel . . . was fully familiar with the mission and continued with the plan. He had his radioman establish contact with [his company commander CPT] Koch in order to inform the overall commander when his men had taken their main objectives, as well as to gain situational awareness as to the whereabouts of the relieving troops. Meanwhile, the other squads had landed in proximity to their targets and set about dealing with them. As Witzig described it, "they didn't need to ask questions. They had their orders, and they did them. Front. He had made his reputation for successfully planning and executing major offensives, and countering enemy offensives through mobile defense. 
5
6
7
8
The aspects of Auftragstaktik were now handled more prominently in the first chapter compared to being covered in part two of the 1888 and 1906 manuals. The fundamentals of Auftragstaktik are not changed: "The foremost quality of a leader remains the willingness to take responsibility. All leaders have to constantly stay aware and inculcate in their subordinates that forbearance and dereliction weigh heavier than mistaking in the selection of an action." 
14
15
The mission designates the objective to achieve. The leader may not lose sight of it.
The situation will seldom be clear enough to provide a detailed insight into the enemy disposition. Uncertainty is the general rule of war. . . . Based upon mission and situation the decision is developed. If the mission does not suffice as a basis for own action and is obsolete through the events the [new] decision has to account for those developments.
Full responsibility for not executing or altering of the mission remains with the leader. At all times he has to act within the framework of the whole (im Rahmen des Ganzen). . . . No deviation is to be made from a decision taken without a grave reason. In the vicissitudes of war inflexible adherence to a decision can be a mistake. It is the art of command to identify, when a new decision has to be taken. [original emphasis] 
16
1933 Truppenführung-Troop Leadership Truppenführung, written under the auspices of Generals Ludwig Beck, Werner von Fritsch and Otto von Stülpnagel, updated the aspects of modern weapons in the Führung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen according to the standing of technological development achieved by 1933. 17 More significant from the perspective of this thesis however is the addition of the "Introduction section, with its fifteen highly philosophical paragraphs that set the manual's tone." 
18
They restate Clausewitz's fundamentals about the human aspect of warfare, friction and the principle of the German art of war, the aim for the decisive annihilation of the enemy. 
19
Every leader in all situations must exert, without evasion of responsibility, his whole personality. Willingness to take responsibility is the foremost quality of a leader. It should not be aimed at making arbitrary decisions with disregard of the whole or not precisely following given orders and let know-all manner take the place of obedience. Autonomy may not become arbitrariness. Autonomy however, utilized within the right limits, is the basis of great successes. 
20
21
22
From the youngest soldier upwards, independent employment of all spiritual, intellectual and physical power is stipulated. Only this way the full capabilities of the troops can be brought into effect in common action. . . . Everyone, the highest leader as well as the youngest soldier has to constantly stay aware that forbearance and dereliction weigh heavier than mistaking in the selection of an action. [original emphasis] 
24
Section 2-leadership-of Truppenführung describes the concept of Auftragstaktik in similar but more precise terms than the 1921 command and combat of the combined arms manual:
The mission designates the objective to achieve. The subordinate may not loose sight of it. A mission that contains multiple tasks easily distracts from the essential (Hauptsache).
Uncertainty about the situation is the general rule. Seldom can a detailed insight into the enemy disposition be won. . . . Based upon mission and situation the decision is developed. If the mission does not suffice as a basis for own action and is obsolete through the events the [new] decision has to account for those developments. Whoever changes a mission or does not accomplish it has to report this and takes sole responsibility for the results. At all times he has to act within the framework of the whole. . . . No deviation is to be made from a decision taken without a grave reason. In the vicissitudes of war inflexible adherence to a decision can be a mistake. It is the art of command to identify in time, when and under which circumstances a new decision is required.
The leader has to allow for freedom of action of his subordinates as long as this does not endanger his intent. However, he may not leave decisions he himself is responsible for, to them. [original emphasis, substantial additions to 1921 manual underlined] 
25
Overall, Truppenführung did not introduce fundamentally new aspects of Auftragstaktik. As shown above, its fundamental philosophy was emphasized and prominently depicted in the introductory section of the manual. As a specific aspect, the requirement for individual soldiers' independent action was stressed more intensively. In addition, the manual seems to address leadership developments that emerged during the intensive interwar training of the Reichswehr.
Although Auftragstaktik and initiative of the Reichswehr were a philosophy encompassing all levels of leadership, the executions of it were nevertheless subject to different circumstances or environmental factors. Initially, the division as the maneuver element of the corps constituted the boundary between the tactical and operational level, especially in the case of the tank divisions. They were meant to operate freely and accomplish tasks in support of the achievement of operational level objectives. Later on in the war, the sparse forces available for extensive sections of the front often meant that this task fell to Kampfgruppen-ad hoc battlegroups of different available units.
The accounts of autonomous and aggressive execution of initiative of German soldiers and low level leaders in World War II are legion. The Combat Studies Institute publication 16 Cases of Mission Command alone describes three cases of exemplary leadership and initiative during the opening days of the campaign at the Western Front in 1940. 
26
27
28
29
30
The battlegroup, which had fulfilled its mission to prevent an outflanking maneuver against the corps for some days, was now threatened with encirclement. Against the necessary withdrawal stood a Führerbefehl (order by Hitler) that prohibited any retrograde movement under the threat of punishment by court martial. The Russian breakthrough had made my mission obsolete. I therefore saw it, under analogous development of my mission, as my obligation to preserve the battlegroup by leading it back through the last gap. I thereby was aware that I was acting against the Führerbefehl, but after fulfilling my mission was serving the human duty to prevent no longer justified loss of human life. [author's emphasis] 
31
32
These examples can only provide an overview about World War II initiative at the tactical level. In his study Fighting Power, Martin van Creveld also points out how mission-type orders, freedom of action, mutual trust and the willingness to assume responsibility contributed to a high combat effectiveness of the Wehrmacht. 
33
The execution of initiative at the operational level is for the Western Front closely connected to the discussion about tank doctrine and the operational concept itself. The Sichelschnitt (sickle cut) plan developed by General Erich von Manstein was built upon surprise and a quick decisive thrust through the difficult terrain of the Ardennes and across the River Meuse. It was risky and the traditionalists within the Wehrmacht leadership were highly skeptical about its success and doubted the underlying assumptions about the capabilities of the new tank weapon. 
34
The Sichelschnitt operation proceeded as planned. Attacking on August 10, 1940, Guderian's corps had passed through the Ardennes within three days and on the next day -relying on air support of historic dimensions-crossed the River Meuse, thus avoiding the need for extensive artillery support which would have cost one to two additional days due to the constraints of the road network in the Ardennes. On the following day, August, 14 and while the bridgehead on the west bank of the river still was not secured, Guderian attacked further westwards without prior approval of his superior, General Paul Ludwig Ewald von Kleist. 
35
37
38
42
43
The result of a rigid interpretation will unavoidably be cauldrons and with those the destruction of the force therein, which due to the lack of reserves cannot be relieved or received upon a breakthrough. The result can furthermore be the destruction of the army before the arrival of the announced reinforcements. . . . Fully aware of my responsibility I therefore want to point out the results of a rigid and verbatim execution of the Führerbefehl and request to be allowed to interpret it in the sense of the before mentioned [more flexible and terrain utilizing] manner. 
44
Commanding General VI Corps, Otto-Wilhelm Förster, Lieutenant General Eccard Graf von Gablenz, Commanding General XXVII Corps, and Field Marshal Wilhelm Ritter von Leeb, Commander Army Group North. They all requested to be dismissed because they could not take it upon themselves to force the troops to hold ground when they were not sufficiently equipped and supplied and without a chance to counter Soviet breakthroughs and encirclements. General Colonel Erich Hoepner, commander Fourth Panzer Army, was sacked and expelled from the Wehrmacht when he disobeyed the order and withdrew his forces. 
45
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
63
64
1. What was the situation when the defendant received the denial of the withdrawal? 2. How had the situation changed when he decided to deviate from the order? 3. Could he assume that his own decision would fit into the general operational idea of his army commander? 
65
Auftragstaktik as a proven concept was carried from the end of World War I through the Interwar Period well into World War II. The combination of Auftragstaktik and the concept of breakthrough towards deep operations that had prevailed during the 1918 offenses and the integration of the emerging capabilities of modern weapons into it were the main focus of doctrinal change and training efforts in the Reichswehr. The developments in terms of the understanding of initiative were less groundbreaking-the need for autonomous actions was explicitly extended down to the single soldier. The everlasting risk of overly independent leaders still is a topic reflected with changing effort within the two pieces of capstone doctrine of this period. The 1933 Truppenführung names two topics that are still highly current nowadays, missions that encompass so many tasks that they do not provide focus and overly detailed orders that restrain the subordinate's level of leeway.
The execution of initiative consists of three major topics: At the lower tactical level junior leaders down to squad and fire team level earned high respect by their Allied counterparts through adaptive, aggressive, and autonomous actions, which seized opportunities and contributed to the high combat effectiveness Martin van Creveld describes in his comparative study.
At the operational level the agility of German offensive operations, against which neither of the Allies had means, initially led to great successes of the Wehrmacht. The capabilities of the panzer divisions-in fact combined fighting teams-not countered by equivalent units on the French, British and Soviet side allowed for deep penetrations and encirclements that were successful in decisively defeating large Allied formations. The under the stress of the difficult situation the troops faced on the Eastern Front in the winter of 1941-1942. Einbeck on page 26 denies that Graf Sponeck had lost his nerve. He had planned to transfer him to a position similar to his at an army corps in a calmer section of the front. Einbeck, Das Exempel Graf Sponeck, 33. To v. Manstein's credit it also has to be said that he tried to achieve a pardon for Graf Sponeck after the court martial von which v. Manstein had thought would prove that Graf Sponeck had acted appropriately. He also persuaded the personnel office of the army to pay Graf Sponeck's family the full pension according to his rank. Einbeck, Das Exempel Graf Sponeck, 60.  His account in his book however seems to be primarily driven by the aim to explain his decisions and actions to a post World War II audience. 
64
65
66
67
68
We have to understand that we cannot allow for technocracy in our armed forces, but that we have with priority to reflect on the ethical fundaments of our actions. This means especially that we have to break the consequences of such thoughts down to the every-day problems for the individual soldier, if Innere Führung 1 is to be an understandable concept for the soldier. Respecting and protecting human dignity are an obligation of the German state and thus the Bundeswehr. This obligation is at once the ethical justification and the limitation of military service. Values based on human dignity are also the foundation for the principles of Innere Führung and thus for legal norms within the Bundeswehr as well as the structure of its internal order [original emphasis]. 
4
Through Innere Führung, the values and norms of the Basic Law are realized in the Bundeswehr. It embodies the principles of freedom, democracy and the rule of law in the armed forces. Its guiding principle is the "citizen in uniform".
Innere Führung thus ensures a maximum of military effectiveness and guarantees a maximum of freedom and rights for soldiers in the framework of our free democratic basic order.
The principles of Innere Führung are based on ethical, legal, political and social foundations and meet military demands. These foundations and demands shape the concept of Innere Führung and its areas of application. [original emphasis] 5
In this system, the application of the principle of Auftragstaktik by leaders and individual soldiers is one of eight criteria for Innere Führung, constituting the leadership style that best conforms with the principle of the "citizen in uniform." 
6
7
8
9
10
11
The adaptations of the command philosophy conducted during and through the foundation of the Bundeswehr are different from those that had happened in the periods Graf Sponeck in life was always trying to engrain into his soldiers spirit and conduct. He subordinated the Diktat of unconditional obedience to his conscience and his responsibility towards his soldiers. For this he let his life. To honor him a memorial stone has been set up in the Sponeck Barracks in Germersheim. . . . It shows a quotation of Field Marshal Moltke that appropriately characterizes Sponeck's actions: "Obedience is a principle. But the man stands above the principle." 
12
Auftragstaktik-as the fundamental leadership style applied in the daily work within the Bundeswehr-is the second quality added. It provides a modern way of interaction between superiors and subordinates thus creating commitment and active participation throughout the ranks. It is therefore a motivational factor contributing to the role of the Bundeswehr as a competitive employer.
Last but not least the realities of a frontline state in a possible nuclear war directed the nature and role of Innere Führung and the established principle of gaining an understanding of the reasoning for a mission by the subordinates to provide a motive to fight for freedom and democracy despite the almost certain devastation in such a war. CHAPTER 6
The aim of this work was to identify factors that historically have influenced or determined the acceptable extent of initiative during the application of Auftragstaktik in the Prussian and German armies over the last two centuries. The thesis was that parameters have to be in place to qualify before the fact the acceptable degree of initiative rather than afterwards. Identifying these factors and parameters should serve discussions about the future use of Auftragstaktik and Mission Command, and specifically, Auftragstaktik used as the basis for Mission Command.
The problem set of knowing before the fact if a decision upon one's own authority would be seen as appropriate execution of initiative or disruptive disobedience did not emerge until the concept of Auftragsstaktik had been fully established by the end of Moltke's age. During the nineteenth century in the Prussian and German Army, initiative of operational level commanders was seen as an objective with a value in itself, with a disregard for the outcome of an action. As long as a commander showed proactive leadership and elan, his actions were justified as part of the effort to fully establish this behavior. A supporting factor for this judgment, which can be found most exemplary in the editions of Moltke's writings published by the General Staff at the fin de siècle, was the fact that commanders who aggressively went after the enemy could trust in their neighboring units joining them and hence ensuring success. The contrast to the reluctance of French commanders to act independently in 1870 provides good reasoning for this Prussian virtue.
The selected historical examples of the later periods depict the problem of identifying universal parameters. The only enduring truth for a commander acting independently would be that success justifies all measures. When contrasting the execution of the Schlieffen Plan with Guderian's and Rommel's successes in 1940 one cannot miss to ask oneself how today's judgment would look like, had a French counterattack cut off the dangerously exposed supply lines of those two German commanders. For tactical level initiative of the categories one and two-restrained to independently accomplish the mission or support the higher commander's intent respectively-the problem of identifying parameters does not seem to be correspondingly critical. It remains open however, how many cases of subordinates misjudging the situation or not understanding the higher commander's intent there are untold for each account of exemplary initiative.
The cases of the German generals dismissed from their position and in some cases court martialed for not obeying the Führerbefehl, issued by Hitler in December 1941, demonstrate the effect of a loss of trust by the political leadership. Although not successful in the show trial against Graf Sponeck, the legal scheme used by his defense counsel documents the professional understanding of the limits of initiative at that time.
Several factors were instrumental in the development of Auftragstaktik. It began with the societal factors leading to mass armies of unprecedented size requiring independent actions by higher commanders who had to march separated and then concentrate in time for the battle. In parallel, the increased accuracy and firepower of both infantry and artillery-a technological factor carrying through to World War I-led to the introduction of increasingly dispersed tactical formations on the battlefield. This encouraged low-level tactical initiative due to the need to fire weapons at one's own rhythm and to utilize the terrain independently. The necessary autonomy at the level of squads and fire teams meant a certain degree of independence was unavoidable-at least in situations where communications technology was relatively inefficient. An interesting interdependence developed between the cultural attraction of the German Army towards initiative and, the capability of operational level maneuver. Due to the cultural disposition of the German Army, tactics based upon initiative were selected as the answer to the stalemate at the World War I Western Front. This led to the reemergence of the capability of operational level maneuver in 1918, which then reinforced the predisposition towards initiative allowing for the exploitation of opportunities at an unprecedented level proving the value of both concepts. The professional, ethical element motivating initiative emerged in adverse circumstances during World War II allowed for the re-founding of German armed forces under the auspices of a democratic and ethical foundation.
When writing a historical paper with the aspiration to not only describe the past but contribute to current discussions, one has to ask what those contributions should be.
The paper shows that Auftragstaktik in the Prussian and German armies is a result of a long developmental process and that it consists of several facets. It is not within scope and possibility of this paper to elaborate on the challenges of the application of Auftragstaktik in armies grown with other command philosophies. A good source for the interested reader is the work of the Israeli scholar Shamir Eitan, Transforming Command:   The Pursuit of Mission Command in the U.S., British and Israeli Armies. There are however some recommendations from a German perspective.
Auftragstaktik is the result of random and deliberate developments during the vicissitudes of last two centuries of German history. In its current form it is an allencompassing command philosophy that informs critical aspects of service in the Bundeswehr. The adherence to this principle guarantees that individual soldiers and leaders at every level are trained and educated in the spirit and at the required level of quality to allow for mutual trust in the abilities and the capability to search for, identify, and exploit opportunities to gain and maintain the initiative. The establishment of the General Staff as an instrument to create the professional foundation for Auftragstaktik at the operational level serves as an example for this, as well as the training and education during the Interwar Period. In both cases the prerequisites for the successful execution of initiative were laid during peacetime.
The ethical foundation of Auftragstaktik is grounded upon a positive role model to adhere to instead of creating a way to behave professionally based upon regulations that restrict. This implies a priori trust in the "citizen in uniform" or candidate for officer or non-commissioned officer positions. Jörg Muth's, Command Culture, Officer Education in the U.S. Army and the German Armed Forces, 1901-1940, and  Auftragstaktik is therefore-although having come into being in a piecemeal fashion-a philosophy that is directly applicable only in the environment of the German Army. It roots in a Clausewitzian understanding of warfare and nested in a culture of mutual trust and tolerance to mistakes. It requires proficient leaders with a strong ethical compass who command through a decision making process laying more effort into the understanding of the problem compared to the perfection of a solution accounting for all eventualities. While this philosophy, if holistically applied, creates adaptive leaders and thus the flexibility in command and cognitive skills Meir Finkel describes as one requirement for the ability to counter surprise, the question whether a selective implementation in absence of the described prerequisites can be successful, remains at least debatable.
The Future of Auftragstaktik Does Auftragstaktik have a future at a time where integrated command and control systems provide the opportunity to link the individual tank to the commander several levels up? Where a live video feed of the helmet mounted camera and the
1
The detailed discussion of the development of early warfare from group hunting methods and ist tools to ancient armies with designated technology is far beyond the
Soldatengesetz in der Fassung der Bekanntmachung vom 30. Mai 2005 (BGBl. I S. 1482), das durch Artikel 6 des Gesetzes vom 11. Juni 2013 (BGBl. I S. 1514) geändert worden ist: § 11.
For a detailed description of the change process see Gordon A. Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army 1640-1945 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1964), Chapter 2-4.
The 1847 version of the regulations still enforced strict control about maneuvers with the exception of the skirmisher line; the changes until 1876 included columns down to the level of platoon split in half and sections to avoid the effects of enemy fire on
Hughes, Moltke, On the Art of War,
[79]
The term Innere Führung cannot properly be translated into English. The literal translation would be "internal direction," the concept however covers in addition to providing an individual ethical guidance the whole spectrum of leadership development and civic education.
Wolfgang Schneiderhan, Chief of Staff of the German Armed Forces, in a speech on the occasion of the scientific conference at the Führungsakademie der Bundeswehr with the topic Innere Führung, a high demand for the practice,
June 20, 2003
Karl Diefenbach, "Staatsbürger in Uniform, Ausgangspunkt und Ziel der Inneren Führung," in Reader Sicherheitspolitik, Die Bundeswehr vor neuen Herausforderungen,
operational art. I therefore thank the "
Ike Skelton Distinguished Chair for the Art of War
Dr. Dean A. Nowowiejski
(Troop Leading) manual that mainly incorporated the emerging potentials caused by the rapid technological developments of weapon systems. 
9
The experience of the horrific attritional warfare in the static trench systems of World War I forced officers in all armies to search for ways to avoid such slaughters through decisive maneuver warfare. The different efforts were centered around technological means and their adequate application in warfare with the discussion about the role of tanks and the best form of air warfare as the most prominent topics. For this thesis those discussions are relevant only to a very limited degree because the German approach to doctrinal change sought to develop technological instruments as means towards the execution of concepts in the art of war. 
10
The Führung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen marks the German transition into modern doctrine. No longer, was the capstone doctrine a designated infantry manual that provided little reference to the supporting arms. The structure of the manual was fundamentally different, addressing the fundamentals of combined warfare first and integrating the modern means of warfare in its second part. 
11
12
13
39
40
The commanders named in the following cases strongly believed in following the Nazi government as part of their profession if they were not believers in the cause of the war.
Nevertheless, they identified a responsibility towards their troops as part of their professional ethos as we have already seen in the case of Lieutenant Colonel von 
Raesfeld. 41
46
Nevertheless, Graf Sponeck requested on December 26, and again on December 28, to take his forces back to the isthmus of Parpatsch, a move that would allow for a more dense defensive line for his 46th Infantry Division. 
47
48
49
58
59
60
61
62
When the war at Eastern Front could not be won in a Blitzkrieg stroke in 1941 it became more and more clear that the German resources were not sufficient for the extended land mass and ability to mobilize men the Soviet Union had. Commanders at the operational level and tactical leaders operating outside of a contiguous front subsequently faced missions that were overambitious for the forces and resources available. Hitler's Führerbefehl, restricting the withdrawal of forces against doctrine and the tradition of Auftragstaktik set up the conflict between obeying orders and losing soldiers and units without gains. The manual Truppenführung states about the issue of breaking contact: An engagement can be broken off after its purpose has been achieved; when the circumstances require the use of units at another position where their redeployment seems more advantageous; when continuing the engagement may not lead to success; or when defeat can be avoided only by breaking contact.
The breaking of contact can be deliberate or forced, and executed on the decision of either the immediate commander or the next higher commander. Subordinate units should be informed of the reasons for a deliberate break in contact. 
66
68
4
25-26. 5
26-28. 6
7
8
9
10
11
Facing a near peer adversary the next time, western armies could be forced to restrict the use of their command and control systems to avoid detection. Cyber warfare could disrupt the friendly networks forcing the armed forces to use less sophisticated systems. It is more than questionable that centralized command would work once the majority of subordinate units get engaged with the enemy simultaneously-the best commander and the best staff might get overwhelmed by the sheer amount of information. How sophisticated is the situational awareness provided by a video stream?
Other aspects of Auftragstaktik demand attention too, when considering its future role: How can armed forces develop leaders instead of managers or administrators if they do not allow for junior leader's autonomy? How can they compete with other employers if service in the armed forces is determined by restrictions and does not require the use of the own intellectual capabilities? Auftragstaktik as an overarching command philosophy provides the opportunity to develop a military that has sustainable access to adequate human resources and is capable of coping with the surprises from future conflicts