# ID: 52e5c5107ec54349b421d1cf920d7821
# Title: Emerging Science and Technology Trends: 2016-2045: A Synthesis of Leading Forecasts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
By 2050, the average global surface temperature is forecast to rise by 2.5 to 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit.
8 Sea levels could rise up to five feet by the end of the century, 9 leading to increased flooding.
Many coastal areas will become inundated with water, transforming coastlines around the world and adversely affecting millions of people living in coastal cities.
Temperature change will also affect global weather patterns, leading to more frequent and more severe weather events in many parts of the world.
Desertification will accelerate, leading to a decline in agricultural output.
Agriculture in equatorial regions will be particularly affected, potentially causing food shortages across North Africa and the Middle East.
Oceans, which absorb a large amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide, will experience increased acidification of up to 70% by 2050.
10 Acidification will cause potentially devastating ripple effects throughout the oceanic ecosystem, causing a decline in global populations of fish and other aquatic food stocks and increasing food stress in many regions of the world.
At the same time, melting of polar ice will open vast new regions to exploration for energy and minerals.
The Arctic is already becoming a focus of strategic maneuvering for the U.S., Russia, and Europe, and expanded access to polar resources could trigger interstate conflicts.