# ID: 533f95ead664487ab767d094753621da
# Title: Success in Low Intensity Conflict: Conclusions & Implications
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1991.0
# Fulltext:
The missionaries had also taught them Christian beliefs which they could not reconcile with European behavior, especially following WW II.
Kikuyu, he had been active in emerging African politics since the 1920's.1" He had been in England trying to enlist support for his cause when WW II broke out.
Before the war, on previous trips to England, he had received a British college education and joined the Communist Party.1 4 He also made two short trips to Russia.
's An avowed nationalist, his leftist teachings were manifested in his organizational and propaganda methods much more than his political ideology.
Kenyatta quickly capitalized on the vulnerability of the Kikuyu in creating his movement for nationalism in Kenya.
His announced aims were the expulsion of all Europeans and Asians and an African rule (Kikuyu domination) in Kenya."
6 Through careful agitation and propaganda he enlarged the land problems of the Kikuyus, drew attention to racial barriers and created problems where none had existed.'"
Secret, dark of night ritual oathings terrified Kikuyu and, under duress, committed them to the service of the insurgent movement.
Sacred tribal ceremonies were combined with animal slayings and strong native symbology to prey on the superstitions of the Kikuyu.
Whether the Kikuyu believed in Kenyatta and the political ideology or not, they respected the power of the oath."'
This became a new dimension in creating support for the insurgents.
Labor unions were inspired to strike and the agricultural reformed programs of the colonial government were abandoned in the Reserve."
Kikuyu loyal to the tribal chiefs opposing Kenyatta received greater and greater pressure to join the Mau Mau."'
Kenyatta expanded his political power base by taking over the Kenya Africa Union (KAU) party and using it as a front for his outlawed militant Kikuyu Central Association (KCA).
2 4 By May 1946 he also controlled the Teacher's Training College at Githunguri, insuring it carried forth his political message.
"s These measures were aimed at the Kikuyu, with the intent to incorporate other tribes as the movement expanded.
6 Indications of serious unrest appeared outside the rallies.
Attacks on reluctant Kikuyu for refusing the oathing were becoming common and raids on settler's farms started.
Europeans demanded greater action by the colonial administration."
The government was slow to acknowledge the problem and respond.
In 1950 an attempt was made to establish a joint security committee.
It failed due to lack of interest by the Eaf t Africa Command in Nairobi.'"
In late 1952 the retiring Governor, Sir Philip Mitchell continued to deny that the trouble was serious or unusual.
2 9 Fortunately Sir Evelyn Baring arrived on 29 September 1952, replacing Sir Philip as Governor.
He conducted a nine day tour of the colony, concluding that matters required iuunediate and serious action. " '
On 9 October, Chief Warukiu, oii cf tLiLuts iniuor chiefs of the Kikuyu, was murdered.
The loss of a loyal and respected senior official prompted Baring to cable London recommending a state of emergency and the arrest of Kenyatta and his supporters.
3 "