# ID: 533f95ead664487ab767d094753621da
# Title: Success in Low Intensity Conflict: Conclusions & Implications
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1991.0
# Fulltext:
e00S 'C ..i' tpe ! ,me'fvqW~rcg :P.Itru.r'i. sesa)rign e.rst-nq aIot sour~es .3Th1'Triq 414 eSMa"'qt fhedii necd an,* C.,nolevnq ai-d 'e''~r'-e ~'in c~r of -formax-on send commr'ti re~adr ~ br ' "t *lct or ýn _,te'e saoe(Ij of - :0lct0 f t cd.
Each low intensity conflict or event creates certain circumstances that are responded to in a variety of ways.
Fundamental methods s.ýress the application of some elements of power more than others. Approaches to problems vary by the resources available, desired results and scores of other variables.
The circumstances, fundamental approach, and variables combine to impact on success or failure. This study will examine a sampling of conflicts analyzing the approaches or methods, variables and success or failure achieved in respect to the circumstances.
The essential question is: " What elements of pcwer or activities are critical to success in low intensity conflict?". Can th!3 question be answered using historical examples derived from historical analysis and comparisons?
If so, will it shed light on previous lessons and give some broad indications of future operations? This inquiry forms the basis of the research.
The resulting answers will also serve as operational definitions of concepts and methods for low intensity conflict.
There are several subordinate questions which further define and categorize the results.
The answer may be different for the strategic, operational and tactical levels of war.
The answers may also be different for each different type of conflict. The diversity and ho-, the activities, operations and uses of power interrelate at the different levels may establish trends useful in low intensity conflict doctrine.
Another important aspect of the research is how the critical elements combine to produce a synergistic effect or a sum greater than the parts. Answering this question can provide a framework for commanders at each of the three levels of war to synchronize activities to produce the desired results.
The study seeks historic examples of low intensity concepts and methods. These examples can be either of success or failure, but must be accompanied by indications of why the effort was lost or won. These examples give concrete definitions to abstract concepts and build a broader picture of success.
The results may also serve as guidelines for some conclusions about the applicability of the current U.S. low intensity conflict doctrine.
Verifying and or clarifying current doctrine at the operational and tactical level fulfills part of the secondary purpose of the study.
Finally, the results may give some strategic direction anJ insight into different methods of projecting power and how that is related to national resources and security interests. How do countries with different resources approach conflicts differently? Do the different approaches lead along diverse paths to the same success?
What conclusions can be drawn between a nation's strategy for success in low intensity conflict and the resources available? How does this affect the outcome and what impact should it have on U.S. doctrine?
Fundamental to the question of "What are the critical elements of success in LIC?" is a definition of success.
This essential question is difficult. For many defining success would substantially ease the problems of conducting LIC.
Where does the conflict stop and success begin?
If LIC involves all four elements of national power: political, military, economic and informational, how does success in one area affect the others and which area constitutes definitive success? How are the relationships of the elements of national power different in LIC than in mid and High Intensity Conflict (HIC)?
These are important concepts that demonstrate some of the major distinctions between LIC and Mid Intensity Conflict (MIC). fore pursuing a discussion of success an examination of the nature of low intensity conflict is necessary.
Military actions in low intensity conflict support political, economic and informational actions.' This is in dramatic contrast to mid and higF intensity conflict where military operations are designed to meet military objectives of military programs with the other elements of national power in -upport. This is most evident at the strategic level of war but is also important at the operational and tactical levels.'
Thus LIC is not merely a distinction in size, magnitude or commitment buL a fundamental difference in character.'
Low intensity conflict is a misnomer in two other major respects.
The term is simply a positional indication on a linear scale or spectrum and not a functional descriptive statement. It implies that there must always be some form of conflict present, when in fact it includes operations that do not inciude conflict.
Secondly the notion of intensity is a matter of perspective and differs considerably from operation to operation and level of involvement.'
For example, the category of peacetime contingency operations includes disaster relief.' These operations are conducted in response to emergency conditions and not in response to conflict or belligerent actions of a state or group. 
6
In many respects the operational definition of low intensity conflict includes the range of the spectrum covered by routine peaceful competition also. For this study low intensity conflict includes any actions short of war.
In the second sense, any conflict to those directly involved is one of very high intensity.
The term was desined to distinguish the subtle, indirect and long terr.
.ature of LIC. 
7
More refined concepts (Figure 
1
9
Figure 
1
The character of mid and high intensity conflict has been well studied and defined. Success will be further defined within each operational category in respect to the individual conflicts.
During the discussion of each conflict evidence of success will be prL tented.
Circumstances will be considered and 
compared between conflicts and one of the resulting trends should be an operational definition of success for each area.
Characteristics of each type of conflict will also emerge. These characteristics will be used to draw conclusions and mold some implications about the nature of these conflicts, the operational categories and the applicability of current doctrine.
CURRENT U.S. ARMY DOCTRINE U.S. Army Low Intensity Conflict (LIC) doctrine contains some fundamental voids.
To better understand the applicability of this study some background on the current doctrine and nature of the problem must be examined.
FM 100-5 states:
"An army's fundamental doctrine is the condensed expression of it's approach to fighting campaigns, major operations, battles and engagements.
Tactics, techniques, procedures, organizations, support structure, equipment and training must all derive from it."
In other words, doctrine outlines how an army fights and wins with the resources and organization available. It guides the army to success within practical restraints, and everything an army is and does is built upon doctrine.
Doctrine must be developed in the same way a complex building is built.
The framework for the building, or This is considerably different from starting with a pile of material and by putting pieces together building a structure.
This goal or set of goals defines the desired product toward which all operations should serve in a common effort.
Intermediate objectives can be mapped out toward this product and subordinate tasks developed to synchronize available assets.
Critical paths can be identified and a branch network is developed that integrates individuals, functions and resources. This leaves two alternatives.
Redefine and aceprt t' dcctrine of FM 100-5 and its derivatives to give low intensity conflict the doctrinal base it requires.
nr develop a doctrine consistent with the unique requirements of low intensity conflict. Which is the correct choice? That is an important question that this study attempts to solve.
Using the results of this study's examination of success some conclusions can be made about how unique LIC is and some implications can be drawn about the need for an expanded doctrine.
In answering these questions the results should also provide some basic guidelines. This contribution to doctrine forms the secondary purpose of the study.
Establishing a solid doctrinal base has important consequences for conducting training and operations.
Effective training will begin only if the doctrine accurately maps a course to success. Otherwise training will be ineffective at best and possibly counterproductive. The relationship of doctrine to operations is much the saine.
Cpe:.ations are planned and conducted to achieve success.
Without a proper doctrinal framework and focus on success, operations will be meaningless, costly and even counterproductive.
The question is how to determine the critical elements of success in Low Intensity Conflict. In the absence of actual observed conflict, two methods offer the most direct answers; one is historical analysis and the second is wargaming. Historical analysis involves examining    War between two or more nations and their respective allies, if any, in which the belligerents employ the most modern technology and all resources in intelligence; mobility; firepower (to include nuclear, chemical and biological weapons); command, control and communications; and service support.
(CGSC P511 Text)'" Huxnanit•rian Assistance Operations (Disaster Relief).
Operations which provide emergency relief to victims of natural or man-made disasters. They are based on requests for immediate help and rehabilitation from foreign governments or international agencies. They include refugee assistance, food programs, medical treatment and care, damage control, or other civilian welfare programs.
(JCS Pub 3.07) 
29
Instruments of National Power.
The means (political, economic, informational, and military) available for employment in the pursuit of national objectives.
(JCS Pub 3.Q7)'
1. Economic Actions.
Actions to persuade or compel a foreign government or group to conform its actions to one's aims, or to assist it to do so, by means of transfer of funds, methods, or materials, or the withholding or restricting of such transfer.
2. Informational Actions.
Communication with a foreign government, its supporters, its opponents, and others to explain one's own policies and actions. The level of war at which campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, and sustained to accomplish strategic objectives within theaters or areas of operation.
Activities at this level link tactics and strategy by establishing operational objectives needed to accomplish the strategic objectives, sequencing events to achieve the operational objectives, initiating actions, and applying resources to bring about and sustain these events.
These activities imply a broader dimension of time and space than do tactics; they ensure the logistic and administrative support of tactical force, and provide the means by which tactical successes are exploited to achieve strategic objectives.
3. Tactical Level of War. The level of war at which battles and engagements are planned and executed to accomplish military objectives assigned to tactical units or task forces.
Activities at this level focks on the ordered arrangement and maneuver of combat elements in relation to each other and the enemy to achieve combat objectives.
(JCS Pub 1.,2)44 LIC Imperatives. Prerequisites for the successful prosecution of low intensity conflict; political dominance, unity of effort, adaptability, legitimacy and patience.
Limited War.
Armed conflict short of general war, exclusive of incidents, involving the overt engagement of the military forces of two or more nations.
(CGSC P511 Text)' 
6
The struggle involves the use of all four elements of national power, political, economic, informational and military.
However, the political element temains the dominant factor. LIC occupies the portion of the spectrum of conflict below conventional war. It includes the entire range of non-hostile uses of military forces. LIC includes both routine peaceful competition and operations short of war.
(Modified FM10020.) 
3
Mid Intensity Conflict (MIC1.
War between two or more nations and their respective allies, if any, in which the belligerents employ the most modern technology and all resources in intelligence; mobility; firepower (excluding nuclear, chemical and biological weapons); command, control and communications; and service support for limited objectives under definitive policy limitations as to the extent of the destructive power that can be employed or the extent of the geographic area that might be involved.
(CGSC P511 Text)'" Military Strategy.
The art and science of employing the armed forces of a nation to secure the objectives of national policy by the application of force or the threat of force.
National Strategy.
The art and science of developing and using the political, economic and psychological powers of a nation, together with its armed forces, during peace and war, to secure national objectives.
(CGSC P511 Text)4 0
Nationbuilding.
The full range of assistance to developing nations to promote growth and assist in developing selfprotection measures to combat subversion, lawlessness and insurgency. "The majority of U.S. programs for devej.',pir i nations are economic, political, and humanitarian in nature Some foreign assistance, however, does take the Zc.in of selected military programs." "The strategy focusers on building viable political, military, economic and soci.al institutions that respond to the ne2ds of the society."
(Mo, if.ied ,F~j.•_•)
Operational Art.
The employment of military forces to attain strategic goals in a theater of witr or a theater of operations through the desitgn, organization and conduct of campaigns and major operattco-s.
Operational art requires the commander to answer three questions:
I. What military condition uiusL be piodu.•ed :Lr. t
•heer of war or operations to achieve the strategic goal?
2. What sequence of actions is most likely to produce that condition?
3. How should the resour•ces of the force be applied to accomplish that sequence of actions?
(EM 100-5)4
operational Categories.
Groupings of methods of military operations in low intensity conflict, according to shared characteristics; they are; insurgency and counterinsurgency, combatting terrorism, peacekeeping operations, and peacetime contingency operations.
Operational Continuum.
The general states of peacetime competition, conflict and war within which various types of military operations and activities are conducted.
(CGSC P511 Text) 
4 4
Efforts taken with the consent of the civil or military authorities of the belligerent parties to a conflict to maintain a negotiated truce in support of diplomatic efforts to achieve and maintain peace.
(JCS Pub 3.07)4S
Peacemking. A type of peacetime contingency operation intended to establish or restore peace and order through the Principles of War.
The nine principles that are fundamental to U.S. Army doctrine.
Objective.
Direct every military operation towards a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable objective.
Seize, retain and exploit the initiative.
Concentrate combat power at the decisive place and time.
4. Economy of Force. Allocate minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts 5. Maneuver. Place the enemy in a position of disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power.
6. Unity of Command.
For every objective, ensure unity of effort undeone responsible commander.
Never permit the enemy to acquire an unexpected advantage.
Strike the enemy at a time or place, or in a manner, for which he is unprepared. 9. Simplicity.
Prepare clear, uncomplicated plans and clear, concise orders to ensure thorough understanding.
(FM 100-5) 
4 9
The condition of relations among states in which each seeks to protect and advance its interests by political, economic and informational means without employing violence.
Success.
Achievement of national security objectives in concert with desirable outcomes in each respective element of national power. National policy goals are satisfied or furthered while individual objectives are not sacrificed.
"A favorable or satisfactory outcome or result., (Webster's Dictionary)"1
Strategy.
The art and science of developing and using political, economic, psychological and military forces as necessary during peace and war to afford the maximum support to policies in order to increase the probabilities and favorable consequences of victory and to lessen the chances of defeat. (CGSC P511 Text)"
Terrorism.
The unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence against individuals or property to coerce or intimidate governments or societies, often to achieve political, religious or ideological objectives.
(JCS Pub 3.07)t3
War.
Sustained armed conflict between nations or organized groups within a nation involving regular and irregular forces in a series of connected battles and campaigns to achieve vitai national objectives.
War may be limited with some self-imposed restraints on resources or objectives. Or it may be general with the total resources of a nation or nations employed and the national survival of a belligerent at stake. (CGSC P511 Text) 
5 4
The review of literature serves primarily to connect the central themes of related literature to the concepts applied in the thesis.
The individual footnotes relate specific facts and limited ideas to portions of the study.
The review on the other hand gives an overall summary, collating general ideas so the reader can follow the development of the ideas in the thesis.
In this way the review provides a road map for anyone wishing to duplicate or elaborate on the findings and recommendations of the thesis. By highlighting aspects of the available literature the author identifies which portions or ideas in the literature were important to the study and in which way.
A secondary purpose of the review is to serve as a reference and guide to further research. The summary of related literature provides a starting point fcr further, possibly more specific or detailed research. By sunlnarizity
the key aspects of the different references, readers can decide whether a certain work is applicable, advantageous or necessary to their own research.
There is a tremendous amount of literature concerning Low Intensity Conflict (LIC).
Only recently is there a direct connection in the writings between events and the theoretical environment now described as LIC.
Previously, most works examined the events or concepts and were assembled into individual subcategories such as guerrilla warfare or insurgency, terrorism, small wars and peacekeeping. These subcategories became the genesis of the four operation categories outlined in FM 100-20, Military Operations in Low Intensity Conflict.
More recent theoretical and doctrinal works have combined the separate categories under the overall heading of LIC. Therefore many of the earlier military histories discuss the details of operations but comment only briefly on the nature of the conflict and its uniqueness.
It is easy to examine this development in hindsight and understand the difficulties involved in coming to grips with LIC in doctrinal terms.
VveAiLd being dealt with in an isolated manner with an all encompassing theory developed later in retrospect. This is exactly opposite of the scientific method.
The literature can be roughly be divided into four categories. These are: 1. Theoretical works 2. Political histories 3. Conflict or military histories 4. Doctrinal manuals
The four categories can be further divided and characterized by the level at which the particular work concentrates.
For instance, most political histories by their nature focus on the strategic level of war. On the other hand, military histories span the range between tactical and strategic.
Works by senior military men often detail operational level accounts with some light shed on both the tactical and strategic arenas. The limitations uf historical accounts must also be kept in perspective. Security classification, limits of memory and personal motivations all impact on historical accounts.
Secrecy often limits the available information to write a detailed history. At the same time the human elements of vanity, significance of an event in one's memory and personal perspective can color or shape certain accounts.
The focus of this study is examining the historical literature and placing diverse conflicts into a central framework.
This serves as a check on the theory and doctrine while providing concrete examples of esoteric principles.
Secondly it demonstrates the direct and interdependent linkage of political and military events.
Each category of literature and the major works relevant to this study will be outlined individually. Some categories contain conflicts with extensive literature that have been divided and listed individually.
Other categories such as Peacekeeping Operations and Combatting Terrorism have relatively little literature on specific events and are therefore considered as a group.
This study is primarily focused on the American a perspective of Low Intensity Conflict and the accompanying American military doctrine. The majority of this section in the review of literature therefore concerns the evolution of American perspectives.
Other literature is used to outline important concepts or events that in turn are related to U.S. Although far short of recognizing the emergence of a full spectrum of conflict, they signal a theoretical move away from total war. Both approach recognizing the need for a full range of capabilities.
As limited conflicts continued, strategists and historians began to wrestle with the dimensions and character of these conflicts.
Often referred to as small wars, the concept lacked an umbrella theory. Although some cogent lessons are drawn from detailed analysis they are rolled together with little regard for the large disparity between the case studies.
In the second example, Internal Security and Military
Power and Peaceful Conflict, examine the concept of military civic action and its usefulness.
Latin American examples the authors conclude that one of the most important tools in assisting developinq democracies is civic action. These two excellent, though very specific, studies were quickly forgotten in the rush to erase anything even closely resembling Vietnam era information from institutional knowledge.
Central to understanding the evolution of conflict theory in post World War II terms is the issue of the "Cold
War" and the threat of world communist domination. John Recounting the principie events from the early "Cold War" until 1964, B3.acr.!tock coi~cludes that covert actions constituted a major threat to peace and stability. These operations are often counterproductive because of thbir reliance on despotic regimes and bandage fixes.
They have a place in the arsenal but fundamental issues such as human rights and corruption should be solved first.
At the strategic level hundreds of essays and books have been written on modern or post World War II military strategy.
Limited Wag is complemented by such works as
Halperin's on.tempoZary Military Strategy. At a higher, more politioal level, Young's 'T'he Politics of Forp-analyses decision makino during international crises.
From an evolutionary perspective all these works contributed, diiectly or indirectly to establishing an overall concept of a spectrum of conflict.
Chapter I, tht-sre,2trum encompasses everything from thermonuclear wvr on one extreme to internal political violence and trade wars on the other. Several authors have expanded the understanding of these concepts.      Therefore the focus of this portion of the review will be on the individual case studies and the works directly related to them.    Although each is not satisfied within the question itself, the introduction and definitions, taken together, outline the requirements.
Operationalism is "the demand that the concepts or terms used in the description of experience be framed in terms which can be unequivocally performed". 
5
The definitions are consistently applied, unless otherwise noted.
The requirement of open-endedness serves as a guide to limit the information applicable to the study without predetermining the outcome. 
6
Flexibility, or the ability to refine questions further is addressed in the broad terms of the original question. 
7
The pattern for research uses categories from existing doctrine and is flexible enough for discussion of the conclusions based on the outcome.
The research question is not analytical and does not allow for logical subdivision and research. 
8
The requirement to be precise is not completely solved by the research question standing alone. 
9
Finally, the findings of this study will determine how well the question was tested or empirically verified."' Quality of the evidence and sound reasoning of the conclusions will give empirical verification or some fault will be found within, which must be corrected. The reader must be the ultimate judge.
The category of low intensity conflict is broad and contains a variety of potential scenarios for conflict.
Barzun and Graff discuss the need for a system or pattern to examine history methodically." This pattern must fit the evidence and provide a graspable design for the reader.12 "There are many factual patterns -an infinite number of them -which can be superimposed on past events. An historian's task is to find patterns which are more relevant to his problems, and more accurate and more comprehensive than others."
This study will use a modified topical outline for organization."
Within major subject areas a combination of modified topic outline and chronological order will be used to examine events within each individual conflict. This allows a logical pattern of examination and considers the subordination and perspective provided by chronological ordering of events."s
The modified topical outline will use the four operational categories of low intensity conflict from A major concern is whether the sample of conflicts is sufficient to permit generalization in the conclusions.17 The first axiom requires the best evidence be presented in support of conclusions. 
2
The other two types of evidence, the event itself and authentic remains of the event are not useful to the research. 
2 3
4
The third axiom lays the burden of proof on the author and not the reader."
The quality of evidence and the sound conclusions will satisfy this requirement.
'The fourth axiom applies to all aspects of the study.""' It stales that "all infercrices from erripiritcal evidence are probabilistic"." 
8
9
30
Finally, the sixth axiom cautions that facts must nct be given more precision, weight or significance than the evidence allows. 
Conditions for success outlined for each conflict.
Major activities at each level of war, strategic, operational and tactical which contributed to overall success will be detailed.
The interaction of activities and outside variables will be included.
2. Comparison analysis conducted within the four operational categories to establish trends. This will determine similarity of conditions within categories and whether geographic regions or nationality of participants creates major differences.
3. Overall cause and effect relationships established.
c) Conclusions on the applicability of results to current doctrine, training and operations. This will be done within each category and also for the low intensity portion of the conflict spectrum in general.
Barzun and Graff note that there are two primary avenues for verifying the truth of a historical event. First is an abundance of documentary evidence.
The second is a critical examination of the evidence available that will show the high probability of truth."
The critical examination referred to forms the critical method:
"...
No piece of evidence can be used for historiography in the state in which it is found. It is invariably and necessarily subjected to the action of tae researcher's mind, and when that action is methodical and just, what is being applied is known as the critical method."" This critical method causes the author to answer three critical questions for each fact. They are: a) "Is this object or piece of writing genuine?" b) "Is its message trustworthy?" c) "How do I know?" 34   The critical method is the primary instrument for determining the historical facts in this study. 
3 5
To support this, several diverse sources for each conflict are used.
The relationship and applicability of those facts will be supported in the conclusions.
The research question requires a description of the conditions at each level of war leading to success be produced for each conflict in the sample.
It is important to note that overall success requires the correct application of strategic, operational and tactical elements of power and activities.
Activities must be consistent in their application or individual successes will remain fragmented achievements which do not contribute to the overall aim. The relationship of each of these elements and how they interrelate between the host and intervening countries are the subject of a portion of the discussion.
Examination and analysis of each low intensity conflict will be based on direct observations. These observations are a primary source for an individual in the conflict giving primary evidence about his actions, methods and thoughts.
These same observations are a secondary source for information on the actions, methods and thoughts of the others around him. Sources for material will center
primarily on books and articles written on each conflict.
Personal interviews, news documentaries and special studies will also be included where applicable and available.
interacted and the contribution of each toward success involves assimilating and comparing the evidence. 
3 6
The actions and reactions designed to produce success for each major participant are examined with the aim of enlarging the perspective and giving additional weight to evidence using multiple sources.
One aspect of the additional weighting of evidence examines the actions and counteractions of participants toward specific goals. By examining multiple aspects of the conflict success is partially defined in terms of the prevention of success of the opposition.
In other words one side sought to establish X condition as an element of success and the other side prevented X condition.
The strategy and tactics associated with its prevention are an element that contributed to the success of the opposition. The fact that more than one participant worked either for or against a specific condition may indicate that it contributed in a major way to success.
Another aspect of evidence focuses exclusively on the desired results of one side and whether that side was successful or not. The events leading to that success can be evaluated both in terms stated by primary and secondary sources. Relative probability of the success of a course of action can also be evaluated and in retrospective whether the action was likely to produce the desired results.
By examining and analyzing several aspects of each conflict a complete picture of the conditions associated with success should develop. Conflicting evidence and views must be addressed and resolved before comparisons and conclusions may be drawn. Similar characteristic's will be highlighted and exceptions will be investigated to determine a cause and effect relationship. In this way a set of common characteristics for a group of conflicts will emerge, along with the cause and effect relationships at various levels of conflict.
The conditions contributing to success can be graphically displayed in matrix form for each conflict. Each matrix must outline the strategic, operational and tactical levels of conflict and subordinate the conditions as they apply to each level. For example, a particular strategic &-;sign~ might require two or more operpti'-vrv2 plans arid several contributing tactical efforts. These would be displayed as follows: Cause and effect examinations can be conducted once the critical elements have been identified and categorized.
Interdependence and interrelations can also be established.
Thus the study addresses complex issues in a proper perspective, separating the important from the unimportant.
It does not attempt to find a single cause or essence of success in low intensity conflict. 
3 7
Nor does it seek to exact specific examples from history and apply them literally as policies to present problems without regard for intervening changes." 
8
Generalizing the results of this study to future conflicts requires a cause and effect relationship between critical elements of success. Dr. Fischer defines a causal explanation as "One that identifies underlying conditions which were of such a nature that they rendered the effect probable"." He notes that there can be correlation without cause but no cause without correlation. 
4
a) "There must be a correlation between X and Y." b) "There must be a proper temporal relationship in their occurrence." c) "There must be a least a presumptive agency which connects them. ,,41
Using both the comparison developed earlier and the cause and effect discussion, several common conditions applying to success in low intensity conflict should develop.
From these, the critical elements for success can then be derived.   
Pltchtlt , aijtULu1_aii iui g ~tu-LUAI -Thuuv". 30  12. llnr7.11n Atnd GrAff, ThnJ4-u~zU 1: u~~h 159.
Tuwaxd A Logic.-Ql ilia uicThl -hlg"i , 7 0.
iiL, -/tlln id Graf, f li "V~lR~~~y1 233 thru 2'34.
Bar-zur arid Graff, Til M.gdazij jRegearcbjU, 233 thru 234. 
F'i. ncli r, 1iIi~~Q llut 1037.
JBhrmui and clr~ff, IM~~jJuex1n   . ru~eios,6.a GAM8ODIA' The party and the Min Yuen used small, strictly divided cells with message links as the basic unit in the organ3ation.
The people comprising these cells were spread throughw,-t: the population, working and living seemingly normal lives.
The regular military was organized into platoons that operated from small hideouts located in the dense jungle. Messengers carried orders from the respective headquarters and made supply pick-ups from the Min Yuen. Europeans were ambushed while traveling on the roads or even making the rounds on their plantations. Mine equipment was sabotaged and rubber trees were slashed." 
6
In the meantime the MCP was declared illegal.   It is important to note that only one of four, and the last in order of priority, talks of directly fighting the insurgents.
All the other elements of the plan applied indirect force against the insurgents. Note also the primary reliance on security and information. This was not a military operation designed to hunt and kill iztsurgents.
This plan characterized the entire British approach to the conflict. Each "New Village" was surveyed and organized on the ground in advance. Families were allocated one-sixth of an acre for a house and garden.
Wells were drilled and schools built. Tight security measures such as perimeter fences and guard positions were also constructed. Additional land outside the enclosed village was allocated for agriculture depending on the type of village being constructed. 
3 4
Army unit would be tasked to resettle a specific group of squatters.
Generally a limited sweep operation would be conducted to secure the overall areas and drive the insurgents away during the assembly and transportation of the squatters.
Infantry units would be augmented with sufficient transport to accommodate all of the families, their possesBions and livestock.
Nothing would be left behind. 
3 5
Quickly, but with demonstrated concern, the people in the area would be Assembled and told of the mandatory move.
A portion of the unit provided local security while the remainder was divided and assigned to load individual families into the arriving transport. 
3 6
Military engineers were often detailcd to assist in the construction of the new homes. Funds were paid to the inhabitants for five months while food crops were planted and homes constructed.
Agricultural implements and other supplies were distributed on long term credit." 
7
After the transport column had departed to the new village, the unit conducting the sweep operation normally destroyed the squatter's shacks and crops.
Nothing was left for the insurgents to benefit from, and the jungle quickly reclaimed the area.
Of 500,000 Chinese squatters, 400,000 had been moved into 500 New Villages by the close of 1951."' Village administrations were established and democratic elections held.
Comprehensive food denial sanctions were also put into effect. Rice was issued to plantation workers already cooked so it could only be kept for 2 or 3 days. Canned foods sold in shops were punctured upon sale requiring speedy consumption.
Unauthorized possession and transport of food items became a serious crime. 
4
Taken together these sanctions made food resupply from the general populace to the insurgents very difficult.
Intelligence determined later that the insurgents were forced to retreat deeper into the jungle and tend small plots for their survival. These plots then became targets of air and ground searches in the jungle and were destroyed or observed for ambush whenever they were discovered. 
4
Another massive program involved a nationwide census and identification card issue. Each person was issued an identification card that was regularly checked a various roadblocks, checkpoints and for food purchases. 
4 4
Government administrators operating the program were targeted in ambushes and threaten with execution notices. 
4 5
Home Guard and Police augmentation fcrces were widely recruited.
Although arms were not available initially these forces freed regular police and troops for more pressing tasks and involved the people in their own security. As arms became available, in another controversial decision, Briggs urged that the Home Guard be universally armed and trained. 
4
As regular military units were freed from security tasks and additional units, such as British Special Air This allowed units to operate for long periods, deep in the jungle, undetected by the insurgents. 
4 9
Plan" and added his own philosophy. Two of his four main points are now famous.
"Any idea that the business of normal civil government and the business of the Emergency are two separate entities must be killed for good and all. The two activities are completely and utterly interrelated."
52 "The answer lies in not pouring more troops into the jungle, but rests in the hearts and minds of the Malayan people."
The other two points dictated that "the whole population must play its part fighting communists" and that "the insurgents must be defeated before Malaya could expect selfgovernment". 54   Malaya was fortunate that the Korean War inflated world market prices for its chief exports: tin and rubber.
The colony was able to fund large programs such as the resettlement initiative and expand the police and Home Guard units.
In addition, civil services were improved and expanded, making the insurgent propaganda campaign more difficult to sustain.  Emergency legal measures adopted during Sir Harold
Briggs' tenure allowed suspects to be held without trial for extended periods. Military courts were allowed to try certain types of crimes and impose especially strict sentences.
Especially effective was the ability to depor:. suspected insurgents to China without trial. 5 9   Special Branch took advantage of these sanctions and often was able to capture jungle bands without the regional communist organization knowing. Selected members were then retrained and with police or military support reinserted into the jungle.
In tracking small bands the counterguerrilla operations were very successful.G" In several cases large groups were convinced by their former comrades to surrender without any shots fired.
Closely tied to the intelligence operations were the propaganda efforts aimed at the insurgents. Hundreds of leaflets and specially modified planes carrying loudspeakers brought the message to the small insurgent bands. 
6
Large rewards were offered to surrendering guerrillas as well as bonuses for information and assistance in further captures. These cash payments, sometimes combined with transportation out of the country were also extremely effective."
When these efforts were combined, especially with the increased security to the population of the New Villages and plantation camps, intelligence information increased beyond expectation. 
6 3
The Min Yuen civilian support structure was infiltrated with different cells captured and messengers tracked to effectively dismantle large sections of the network." 
4
As government strength and effectiveness continued to grow, insurgent bands were forced to disperse and move deeper into the jungle.
Captures, surrenders and killings depleted insurgent ranks and the population separation and security measures denied the movement new recruits. Guerrilla life became harder and more uncomfortable.
Their ability to communicate and mount operations was further limited.
In an effort to demonstrate the dimensions of governments successes Sir Gerald Templer declared a large area in the State of Malacca a "White Area" on 3 September
Emergency restrictions were lifted and life allowed to return in large part to normal.
Residents were reminded that as long as communists remained out of the area they would live free of restrictions. 
6 6
Word spread quickly and increased the ever expanding At the strategic level the British realized that the insurgency was as riuch a political battle as a military one.
General Brigqs' recognition of the population as the target and not the communists was central to this theme. He realized that efferctive government was as essential as military strength.
Civil government must remain in control of the situation, with the military in a supporting role. As Sir Robert Thompson stated:
"Government that not only functioned, but was seen to function, so that the births, marriages, and deaths still get registered. For this, as much as anything else was the key to the changing fortunes."
The British strategy focused on eventual independence, but only whei the threat to democratic government had been eliminated.
The Emergency was really a conflict for the succession of government in Malaya and not between communism and colonialism.
This approach was strengthened significantly when the Korean War inflated prices and demand tor rubber and tin.
The revenues and general state of the economy allowed for sweeping social programs and defense expansion to be funded. Secondly he attacked the organization of the insurgents as the key to their strength. By breaking up the organization, he knew that he could eliminate the real power of the insurgents.
Thirdly he sought to isolate the insurgents ftom the population.
External support for the instirgents was almost non-existent. This meant all their support was cominq from inside the country.
By removing the sources of food, oupplies and information he insurgents would be operationally crippled.
Finally, having succeeded in the previous three effortq, he sought to bring the insurgents to fight on terms favorable to the government. Although all these areas would receive some emphasis simultaneously, there was clearly a priority, starting with the first main point.
As an example of a successful counterinsurgency strategy, it is important to examine the operational and tactical efforts that grew from the strategy General Briggs outlined and his ruccessors followed.
Instead of discussing each level of war individually, the four main points listed above will be traced through all three levels of war. Many programs advanced several points of the strategy. These will be discussed in only one section, but the collateral benefits will be noted.
Before any of the points indicated in the overall strategy can be discussed, twu other major points must be covered.
The first is the philosophy which governed how the strategy would be implemented.
The second is the tool to implement them.
The British philosophical approach to insurgency revolves around the "Rule of Law". This means that all actions taken to fight the Emergency had to be subject to the national laws.
No unusual or unnecessarily harsh measures were sanctioned or permitted.
Even though special legal provisions were enacted, they applied to everyone and were uniformly employed.
Excesses by any agency or branch were not permitted and punishable under the law.
In this way the British approach takes the long view.
It avoids alienation of the civil population through the driving of a wedge between the people and the government.
All actions are implemented to gain effectivcness and respect for the government and not hatred.
General Briggs' first move was to streamline the administration.
By doing this, he created the tool to carry out his strategy.
He made it more responsive to the demands placed on it by the insurgency.
In effect, it brought all the power of government to bear on the insurgency.
It became not a military problem, but a problem for the entire government.
The head of the colonial administration remained a civilian for the entire Emergency.
Administrators controlling the health and human services were required to coordinate with the security forces to carry out their programs.
Thus not only were all the elements of national power focused on the problem, they were in a coordinated effort.
The integration was extended to all levels of administration down to the local village. Information was coordinated and different departments gained a measure ot consistency, as the level above and below were coordinated also.
This, as much as the strategy, was significant in the overall success.
The national intelligence organization was no exception to this policy of integrated administration. There was a single integrated intelligence structure with each service providing liaisons. This eliminated partisan debates and demanded that intelligence was shared.
It collated requirements and eliminated duplication, when critical resources were scarce.
The first point of the strategy focused on the population, security and increasing the flow of intelligence.
Several operation programs grew out of this strategy, but the most important was the resettlement plan of the "New
Villages".
Thu resettlement program contained as many oweeping social changes, as it did physical. Chinese refugees were made citizens and given valuable land. This made them part of the country, not an outside element with grievances against the government.
The "New Villages" provided security and also isolated the insurgents from their 9upport infrastructure.
In thn onerational sense, the program was coordinated to provide a measure of common security in an entire area.
"New Villages" were constructed in a planned manner to expand governmental. control across an area and not just be 1.11dlvidua]., F3)oradic loc-ull1.
Security forces involved in the program were well trained and disciplined. They treated the refugees with respect and in return gained a measure of respect for themselves and the government.
The program was well organized and well executed, taking care to not create new problems in place of the old ones.
Once the security forces established the "New
Village" and proved the population was free from intimidation by the insurgents, information generally flowed quickly.
This relationship between information and security formed a vicious cycle.
The security forces needed information to interdict the insurgents and protect the population. But the population was not willing to provide the information until its security was guaranteed.
Once this cycle was successfully broken, security forces were often inundated with information.
The extensive legal measures complimented the security of the "New Villagos" by making food smuggling and curfew violations serious crimes. This gave the population reason not to support the insurgents and provided a legal basis for the population control measures.
The second main point targeted the insurgent organizations.
As already outlined the "New Villages" did a great deal to break up communist organizations. Intensive intelligence efforts aimed at breaking into the organization and then fo]lowing the trail. The final main point sought to attack the insurgents on favorable terms. All of the other programs eventually contributed to this, but several others were very successful in this area alone.
An extensive Psychological Operations (PSYOPs) campaign was conducted against the insurgents.
It was coordinated at the national level and had surrendered insurgents as advisors.
Leaflets and broadcasts complemented tactical operations and intelligence efforts. These campaigns often provoked surrenders, which provided candidates for counterguerrilla and intelligence operations.
The PSYOP effort and the counterguerrilla operations also had the effect of breaking up the insurgent organization from within.
Guerrillas became suspicious of each other and were forced to adopt tighter internal security measures.
This further limited their freedom and ability to operate.
The creation of a Home Guard involved the local population in their own security and rapidly increased the available manpower where it was most needed.
In the closing years of the Emergency the 11ome Guard accounted for more ccntactz than the :egudi± cuLues, it also treed regular forces for more extensive duties against the insurgents.
Another operational effort constructed a series of jungle forts to act as bases for tacticai deep patrols.
These deep patrols denied the insurgents safe areas, no matter how remote.
They forced the guerrillas farther from the population and kept them moving and fearful of discovery.
The patrols also forced the insurgents into smaller and smaller bands, complicating their command, control and resupply problems. This made assembling a force to conduct an operation against the security forces very dangerous and easier to detect.  Confusion over their role in the future and questions of the settler's rights led to feelings of resentment between both groups and disorientation on the natives part. 
8
Although post war Kenya was prosperous, the Kikuyu tribe, closest geographically to the Europeans, was in the midst of what Fred Majdalany characterizes as "detribalization'. 
9
Following WW II, this well organized and disciplined tribe was caught between Christian teachings and tribal customs, the Victorian work ethic and subsistence existence.
They had been given an education and not allowed to put it to use.  Unfortunately most European settlements bordered this area on the adjoining plains and plateaus of Central Kenya. 
4 4
More than a thousand Mau Mau concentrated around the village of Lari to attack and kill loyal Kikuyu who were known by name.
In spite of an intelligence tip warning of the attack, Army forces and Home
Guard had been diverted that afternoon to other duties.
After dark the Mau Mau surrounded the village, tied cables around the Kikuyu huts to lock the doors and set fire to the thatch roofs.
Other Mau Mau were posted to kill anyone escaping with machetes. 200 huts were destroyed, 84 Kikuyu, mostly women and children were killed and 31 others seriously injured. 
4
Terrifying though it was, the attack backfired on the insurgent Mau Mau.
Parliament that conditions in Kenya were serious and confirmed support for Government actions. Many Kikuyu were absolutely horrified at the massacre. They pledged total support for the Government, despite previous beliefs, and some even violated oaths to give information.
Finally the debate about arming the Kikuyu Home Guard was laid to rest and they were immediately armed with modern weapons. 
4 6
5 9
As development and education increased, so did social and political unrest.
Although this trend appears unusual there are several reasons why it closely typifies the norm.
As education and social development increase, the population become more aware of the standards of living and differences in culture.
Often, as standards rise there is an unrealistic expectation that they will continue to rise indefinitely. This is commonly referred to as the theory of rising expectations.
When these expectations are not met, social unrest occurs.
Political unrest usually follows closely as different elements seek to gain power by creating a platform or filling a power vacuum. Thus, in Kenya, despite the high living standards and improving conditions social and political unrest emerged.
The government was slow to acknowledge the threat of insurgency until violence reached a climactic point. Several attempts were made to increase capabilities and address rising social unrest, but little real progress was made.
When events clearly demonstrated that problems were widespread and serious, resources were very limited.
Fortunately the insurgents were not as well organized as other popular revolts had been.
A solid central committee existed and a reasonably good political apparatus. But the insurgents lacked the complete top-to-bottom infrastructure that characterized many communist inspired insurgencies.
Below the central party level, organization was loose and centered on several large semi-independent groups. This made the organization much easier to isolate and break up.
At the strategic level, the British applied the general philosophy of "Rule of Law" (See Malaya Case Study).
When the State of Emergency was declared, several extensive, emergency legal measures were adopted.
Under the auspices of these measures the initial group of arrests were made.
Despite an initial lack of intelligence, the insurgency was assessed as being the responsibility of the Kikuyu tribe.
The government, in understanding that the insurgency was limited socially and geographically, maintained normal governmental services and functions.
Effective and efficient government was seen as the ultimate solution to the Emergency. Separate programs were targeted at the population and the insurgents with excellent results.
The population began to realize that it was needlessly suffering for an unjust cause.
The insurgents also began to understand the futility of the effort and that conditions in the forest were far worse than living with the government.
The massacre at Lari held tremendous psychological value, and can be viewed in many respects as a turning point.
Insurgents lost respect with the native population, even to The decision to expand the police force, Home Guard and armed forces simultaneously demonstrated the integrated approach to the Emergency. Each agency had a role to fulfill, and each part was unique. These different roles maximized the advantages of the respective organizations, while assigning missions to minimize their shortcomings.
Emphatid was placed on isolating the insurgcnt rather than initially trying to track them down and kill them.
emotion and not reason, a comprehensive Psychological Operations (PSYOPs) campaign was extremely effective.
Separate programs were targeted at the population and the insurgents with excellent results.
The population began to realize that it was needlessly suffering for an unjust cause.
The insurgents also began to understand the futility of the effort and that conditions in the forest were far worse than living with the government.
The massacre at Lari held tremendous psychological value, and can be viewed in many respects as a turning point.
Insurgents lost respect with the native population, even to Reliance on enlarging the police force, civil 
Once again the city was divided and the Casbah sealed off.
Following another round of detentions, "tough" interrogations and raids the organization was completely penetrated.
In September Yacef was captured and within two weeks the remainder of the terrorists were either killed or captured. 
4 1
It raised a number of questions.
Gradually, accounts such as  1956 Tunisia and Morocco were granted independence. 
4 4
Increasing evidence of French torture and the abduction of insurgent leaders while on a commercial flight diverted .to Algiers, changed their policy. 
4 5
4 6
French patrol plane was shot down and another fired upon from the Tunisian village of Sakiet.
France quickly retaliated, bombing the village, killing an estimated 80 civilians and wounding many more. 
4 7
Five major changes had occurred in French government at home since 1954, contributing to a lack of support for and policy in Algeria. Yacef's terrorism had the desired effect of widening the gulf betweer belligexents and the "tough methods", along with incidents such as the Sakiet bombing, brought sympathy to the Arab cause.41
The Army regarded the insurgency as communist inspired and therefore, by and large backed the extremist "pied noirs". Leftist governments, seeking negotiations with the insurgents, angored the Army.
Senior officers felt they were being betrayed by their own government as they had been in Indochina.
Several large factions in the Army and in thr! "pied noirs" favored a "pied noir" government independent of Paris.' 9 In focusing on a military solution the French operational efforts centered on isolation and destruction of the insurgents.
Initially large cordon and search operations by conventional units were unsuccessful, maybe even counterproductive.
The arrival of elite units, more accustomed to operating in small groups proved much more successful.
The quadrillage method required an all-consuming commitment of troops. However, when it was coordinated with the SAS teams it showed some results in isolating the insurgents from an area. The execution of any social programs was relegated to the tactical level of the SAS teama.
Thia left and uncoordinated and poorly resourced effort, with no operational direction.
The limited resettlement efforts are excellent examples of good programs which were uncoordinated and poorly resourced.
No improvement of the living standards of the population and only resentment toward the government resulted.
In the short term the resettlement isolated the insurgents from the population, but in the long term it produced no better appreciation of the government.
Other systematic efforts to isolate the insurgents included comprehensive urban population measures. These measures placed responsibility for urban insurgent incidents back on the population. Although effective in the short term, they alienated the population even further and did ncthing to reinforce the effectiveness of the government.
Intelligence was developed, not in conjunction with increasing support of the population, but in spite of a lack of it.
rhis required what became known as the "tough methods".
In the short term it produced effective, timely intelligence which was quickly exploited by tactical operations.
The network of dissemination and planning was clearly a signi.ficant factor in the overall success of the operations.
In the larger sense the "tough methods" eventually surfaced and became the subject of intense media attention and propaganda by the external committee. The use of these methods distanced the native population and crcated widespread popular support for the insurgency.
France was condemned in world opinion and by the population at home.
In the long term it is questionable whether this practice produced any results which outweighed the negative aspects.
Had France remained in Algeria or installed a friendly government the backlash to these practices would have become a major obstacle to progress.
At the tactical level, the urban operations in Algiers were very successful.
The cordon and search methods, combined with the strike breaking eliminated much of the general popular support in the city. Outside of the "'-ough methods", the curfew and apprehension system was very effective.
Had other methods been used to gather intelligence, the Battle of Algiers may not have had the negative connotation now normally associated with it.
The integration of the civil-military operations at the tactical level was good in concept.
Had the quadrillage and SAS units been better coor3inated and allocated more resources, greater results may have been produced.   As plans were developed the British favored an initial bombing attack to destroy the Egyptian Air Force.
This would be followed by eight to ten days of air attacks and aero-psychological warfare designed to undermine the Egyptian will to fight.
During the air campaign the invasion fleet would complete the six day sail from Malta. Then airborne assaults and naval landings would secure key areas.
The central focus of the British plan required that the operation appear as a response to the Israeli attack. 
1 5
It was common knowledge that there was a British build-up going on in the Mediterranean. 
4 4
In light of these issues it was difficulL, iLi hindsight, tI zee the Anglo-French intervention as a humanitarian mission. The deception may have been much more credible given swift action and quick resolution.
The operation did not even succeed in maintaining access to the Suez Canal. This was a major objective of the operation.
Following the Anglo-French ultimatum and initial air attacks, Egypt filled more than 50 large ships with concrete and sank them in the main channel and harbor entrances."
On the positive side, the coalition of Britain and
France was a wise political move. Individually they would
have not been able to stand international pressure. But together the two countries, both U.S. allies, slowed diplomatic actions and diluted the intensity.
In the end the veto in the United Nations Security Council forced the matter to the General Assembly.
Thus the actions which could be invoked had far less power than those generated by the Security Council.
The British acceptance of a cease-fire as a unilateral action had disastrous results on the coalition.
French military staff officers were left without sufficient transport.
In the larger perspective, France appeared as the aggressor when a coordinated diplc.iatic action could havc:
easily avoided the situation.
Relations became immediately strained and made further efforts difficult.
At the operational. leveli British domination of all sections of the combined command did little to encourage interoperability.
Original plans called for the respective forces to conduct operations primarily on one side of the canal or the other. This would ease command and control problems. However, when plans were hurriedly changed the initial dispositions could not be maintained.'" It is a credit to the Regimental, Brigade and Division commanders that events proceeded as well as they did.
It is also a result of the short duration of the operations.
On the other hand, a combined staff gave depth and experience to the organization. It insured that national differences in the operating forces were accounted for in planning.
Individual national commands would have complicated planning beyond hope and doomed events to failure.
Shortage of heavy lift transport aircraft plagued the entire operation from the beginning. 
4
Lack of sufficient port facilities in Cyprus also dictated the six day sailing time for the amphibious fleet.
The logistical requirements and size of the force imposed many of the strategic/operational limits which eventually defeated the effort.
In tactical terms there were many successes. The airborne insertions were extremely successful as were the follow-on landings and subsequent penetrations.
Unfortunately, with a hostile strategic environment and a badly flawed operational plan, the tactical successes meant almost nothing.
The British and French drops were on time and exactly on target.   
Moving almost 250 miles, the rebels overran Wanie Rukula on 2
August.' 
4
In Stanleyville the temporary U.S. Counsel, Michael
Hoyt arranged evacuation for the remaining U.S. dependents and destroyed the consulate's sensitive files." 
5
Responding to Olenga's threats on the lives of the consular staff, Hoyt sent a veiled message outlining the impact of American aid to Le~poldville. Ambassador Godley immediately recognized the plight of the American staff. Several criticisms of the plan surfaced.
The CWG wanted to return to the smaller force of one company and stage from three separate locations in the Congo.
Fortunately the Belgians stood firm, but the political concerns of the Washington planners prohibited any increase in the size of the force. More to the point, General Adams commented that the time necessary to actually make contact with the hostages was too long. 
5 4
Laurent was reminded time and again that his mission was not "to make war but rather to conduct a humanitarian rescue.11 
5 5
56
1
6 4
Phase III concerned the evacuation of the hostages to the airfield and the security for the force during the evacuation.'" Linkup with Colonel Vandewalle's column was also detailed.  Isaacson had misunderstood the drop heading, requiring all the aircrews to recompute their approach to Paulis enroute. 
9 7
information on the Simbas and their motivations as well as possible behavior hampered estimates and assessments at each staqe of planning.
In some cases lack of intelligence limited options outright.
In this same respect, existing contingency plans had not considered this type of involvement in the region. In spite of the Eact that countries and situations are often too numerous to allow detailed planning on each one, no generic plan existed. This meant that each detail of the operation had to be created from scratch and greatly increased the chances that some major element or concern would be overlooked.
Only the fact that several agencies and headquarters created several simultaneous plans alleviated some of these problems.
They also had the luxury of several mornths to review their plans and update them.
If immediate action would have been necessary, significant problems and a sub-optimal plan would have resulted.
A convoluted, layered and at points confusing chain of command did not facilitate ease of coordination and execution.
Belgium sent a tailored staff, centered on the operators to the critical planning conferences. The U.S.
sent staff officers, not directly related to the operation.
It was fortuitous that several of these officers later became involved.
The best tactical planning occurred once the air element and the ground assault force met together in Belgium.
The use of USSTRICOM as a control. headquarters did little to assist the operation. General Adams was removed from the planning and even from the actual execution. The USSTRICOM liaison officers interfered with direct coordination that almost inflicted failure on the second airdrop.
The USSTRICOM communications package did not arrive in time to contribute and the code word system from other plans only confused the operators.
On the other hand, the use of the C-130 airborne command and control platform greatly assisted local communications.
It allowed the operational. nets to be monitored and gave the operational commanders sufficient information to make timely and correct critical decisiong.
Forward positioning of the force had both ponitive arid negative aspects. It greatly reduced the transit. and reaction time for operattons once the decision had been made. This additional emphasis made the assault much more effective.
Intelligernce hampered the tactical operations also. The inclusion of an aircraft dedicated to medical aid was critical to the survival of many of the wounded hostages.
Timely, intensive medical care overcame some of the shortfalls in the ability of the airborne force to rapidly locate and secure the hostages. Even if the paratroops had entered town earlier, some killing or wounding of the hostages would probably have been unavoidable.
Breaking the assault force into small units once they entered the urban area was essential.
The paratroop platoons covered more area, quicker and were able to secure hostages before further deaths occurred. The unit's ability to function in small groups while maintaining their overall objectives greatly speeded the securing of Stanleyville.
The armored jeeps and motorized tricycles gave critical mobility and firepower to the advancing paratroops.
The tradeoff in airframes and lift to include this portion of the force was excellent judgment.
In both assaults the mobile elements were required to make extended patrols to secure hostages in rural areas. Without these assets many more hostages would have been killed after the assault forces departed.
Thus, the airfield seizure and subsequent airland of reinforcing elements was crucial to the tactical success.
Units were given the mission to quickly clear the airstrip to facilitate aircraft landing. Manual labor, as well as vehicles "hot wired" with special kits assisted in moving debris and troops.
The logistics of airborne operations made important impacts in several parts of the operation. Notably, the second and subsequent operations were constrained by a lack of parachutes that had to be airlifted in.
Requirements were based on earlier staff plans with no flexibility built in.
This limited the follow-on operations to one.
Airfield capacity also became a factor when the assault forces could not be redeployed from Stanleyville in time for the second operation.
Staging operations from a limited airfield almost slowed loading to the point that the operation could not be carried out.
It was fortunate that one member of the U.S. Air Force element had extensive experience in staging airborne operations.
He identified the problem but even with his completely dedicated efforts, the timing was very close.
In the final analysis the evacuation operations were just as important as the actual combat. Sea was ordered about steaming enroute to Australia, while the destroyer-escort USS Holt and the destroyer USS Wilson were also ordered to the area. 
6
Marines in Subic Bay, Philippines (alerted by Adm. Gayler) and 2nd Battalion 9th Marines, Okinawa (alerted by Gen.
Burns) were put on alert. The boarding party assaulted on time, following an aerial CS (tear gas/riot control agent) attack.
The boarding was unopposed and the ship quickly searched and declared secure, 62 minutes after the initial boarding.
Evidence of recent activity remained but no Cambodians were found. 
2 5
As the eight large helicopters landed, heavy ground fire quickly downed As the Marines fought to gain a beachhead, the Khmer Rouge government announced that it would release the ship in exchange for a cessation of hostilities.
2 " Unclear about the fate of the crew, President Ford delayed the first airstrike against Kompong Som until a reply could be sent." 
8
2 9
The fourth strike was terminated on the recovery of the crew by the USS Wilson from the fishing boat."
As word of the safety of the crew was passed confusion on what to do with the beached Marines reached a peak.
A second wave was launched, recalled and finally redirected back to Koh Tang. 
3
Presumably it had some effect. 
4
4
In analyzing the strategic objectives, it is important to note that the crew could probably not have been rescued successfully with the forces available.    Another benefit was the use of a tactical headquarters, organized for tactical operations augmented with service and regional experts to control the mission.
This produced an experienced, well coordinated headquarters on short notice with depth in the specific area. It did not unnecessarily layer the chain of command and allowed for streamlined decision making.
Early realization that follow-on or stability operations would be required was critical to the eventual outcome.
Although the Presidential decision to not mobilize reserve units caused some problems, the JTF was at least mentally prepared to improvise and establish law and order.
Media reporting and speculation brings up the point of media responsibility.
In compromising the mission, the media broadcast of the airlift from Ft. Bragg could have been responsible for hundreds of American deaths.
Incorporating training exercises and troop deployments into an overall deception plan was critical. In many cases the PDF were completely confused when massive U.S.   
Odom, Drag Operations, 13 thru 14; Ball, The Past, 322.
Odom, Dragon Operations, 9.
Odom, Dragong Qgxat/ion, Entebbe is a very large operation while the Flight 847 hijacking permitted no operakicn at al.
between the different levels of war.
The incidents are relatively small, but because of their nature they command national attention.
In an effort to maintain the consistent application of the analytical framework, some license is taken in this section on assigning factors to the levels of war.
This study examines these case studies to determine whether certain key elements make common contributions to the success or failure of the individual operations. The government offered to fly the terrorists out of the country with the hostages. This was accepted and a bus arrived to move the group to a nearby helipad.
It was only now that the police realized that there were eight terrorists rather than five.' Preparastions, including the number of snipers, were all geared to five terrorists. Almost immediately, Israeli intelligence received a detailed description of the terrorists and the direction of the eventual destination from Scotland Yard, as a result of a pregnant passenger being released in Benghazi. '  The broadcasts from Radio Uganda also indicated the terrorists were being supported by the Ugandan President, Idi Amin. 
3
6
As time went on, more terrorists arrived in Entebbe and support from Idi Amin increased.
Airport also appeared to increase and the Israelis realized they would have to contend with Ugandan government troops along with the terrorists. The four aircraft were staq"ered at n c. v~l~.' 7a~ j i Landed on separate runways i~n pairs. J'Lej :tw~ie.;
.t 3vway from the terminals and unloaded the Assault and Securing
Forces."
The Assault. Force immediately deployed to the Tower/Old Terminal complex to secure the hostages. Two guards were engaged and killed enroute with silenced pistols. 
2
Five soldiers and four civilians were also casualties. Most importantly, the planners were the operators.  Finally, adequate and immediately available medical treatment saved the lives of many of the injured hostages.
Although requiring additional aircraft space and lift this also demonstrates the direct impact of a strategic requirement on the tactical plan and execution.  Faction as a viable terrorist organization. 
1 4
The overriding concern for the safety of the hostages makes tactical surprise an essential element. Operational surprise is also clearly desirable.
The fact that the assault force was capable of getting on the aircraft, placing charges, forcing an entry and killing the terrorists before they could massacre the captives is exceptional.
At the strategic level, the concept of the state's sovereignty in actions on its territory is important. Cyprus denied the counterterrorist force the option of using force on the island.
In the same respect, political pressure had to be brought to bear against President Barre to allow the operation within Somilia. Cyprus used its sovereignty to prevent the operation; Somalia's sovereignty was permissively violated to conduct the operation.
Negotiation was used as a tool to move the initiative away from the terrorists and gain time for a successful operation to be mounted. This is an important adjunct to the idea of force in structuring the operational area for the counterterrorist unit. Strategic mobility to allow the force to shadow the terrorists and be reasonably available was important.
Although the force was limited in size, the requirements for aircraft capable of landing under black out conditions and having long ranges is essential.
Sophisticated communications equipment allowed the assault force to pinpoint the terrorists and determine their exact number prior to forcing their entry. This, coupled with the anticipated need to concentrate the terrorists in the cockpit and the deception of a false radio message, significantly enhanced the chances of success.
However, it must be noted on the negative side that in spite of the sophisticated communications equipment the assault force used, the long range operational level communications link almost compromised the entire operation.
Had the wire services inadvertently used or broadcast the information on the ongoing mission it could have htid tragic results.
Portunately the only broadcast was on Israeli television anO not directly available to the terrorisLs.
As an aside, the intercepted meseage and the subsequent broadcast of its contents brings up the question of media involvement and responsibility in sensitive operations dealing with hostages and violent tertorists.
Government control and security is one facet however media responsibility is also an issue. Regardless of security measures, an alert reporter may piece together critical details of an upcoming operation. Thus media respoisibility and cooperation become important aspects of operations.
Surprise and security at all levels is critical to missions involving hostage rescues.
The advantage of seconds is critical to saving hostage lives and killing terrorista after a forced entry or assault. This is an excellent example of how detailed plans and well supported tactics could be easily negated by some peripheral aspect (such as a situation report back to headquarters) of the operation with dramatic consequences.
On the other hand, the counterterrorist force used all available methods, i.e. stealth, deception, communications, advanced munitions, to increase their chances of success.
In closing it is also important to note that the Airline Pilots Association accumpli-hod a substantial shift in international positions on supporting terrorists without .331 any military force.
The economic sanctions, threaten by the boycott, achieved their purpose and served as a deterrent to overt, state sponsored terrorism.  As the crew confirmed the loss of nitrogen from the rotor blade, #8 helicopter landed and evacuated the crew.
All sensitive items and documents had been removed but the crew did not destroy the helicopter in order not to draw attention to the mission."
The C-130 transports and fuel tankers flew on to Desert One and arrived on time despite the same weather conditions.
The hidden beacon lights worked correctly and all aircraft were on the ground awaiting the helicopters."1
As the formation continued through the second dust cloud #5 helicopter lost its internal navigation system. The formation was now fragmented and in the dust cloud unable to see each other. #5 struggled on for a time but unsure of its position and approaching a 9000 foot ridge without knowing exactly where aborted back to the USS Nimitz.1 
3
At Desert One security elements were forced to engage and blow up a fuel truck along a road adjacent to the landing area.
A bus with 40 Iranians was also forcibly stopped and its passengers now being held.' 5 These were relatively minor problems and could have been overcome had later events turned out better.
More than an hour and a half late, the remaining six helicopters arrived at Desert Cne.Ir
As they were refueling word was passed to Colonel
Beckwith, the assault force commander, that another helicopter had broken down. Investigating, he found that #2 helicopter had lost its backup hydraulic system and could not safely proceed. 
1
Instructions were relayed to abort and reload the transports.
As #3 helicopter repositioned to refuel, in the tremendous dust that all the running engines caused, it collided with the Air Force C-130 tanker. An immediate explosion and fire engulfed the two aircraft." 
9
The requirement for tight security cannot be argued but when it takes precedence over selecting the best person or conducting a full rehearsal it becomes counterproductive.
Had specially trained and earmarked forces been available much of this problem could have been eliminated.
During operations the OPSEC problem became most pronounced.
Pilots were prohibited from talking to weather furecasters and C-130 pilots were not aware of the role of the helicopters. This is cited as a primary contributing cause for the helicopter pilots not being warned of the ominous dust clouds. Added to this was the prohibition of radio transmissions which kept critical decision from not only commanders but also from other actors.
The plan was clearly complex and required the precise coordination of many unrelated and previously untrained elements.
No headquarters capable of planning or executing joint special operations on a standing basis existed.
Personnel with little special operations background were placed in key positions.
However planning was started early and provisions for changes dictated by new intelligence were accepted. Flight 847 returned to Beirut and shortly after landing an American Navy diver, Robert Stethem, was beaten, shot and. his body thrown onto the runway. This action was followed by repeated demands and threats to kill the remaining Americans.'
The Areal faction of the Shi'ites in Beirut took charge of the passengers moving them out of the airport. The passengers were split into small groups of two or three and quartered in various sate houses throughout. the area around 4enrut. 
4
.400 out to safety. 
7
The tremendous media attention throughout the length of the hijacking did much to publicize the Lebanese Shi'ite cause. This was certainly a consideration in the final outcome.'
Critical to the analysis of this terrorist incident is the question of why the military option was not used. The key element was the dispersal of the hostages into the Beirut area.
The terrorists maintained the initiative allowing them to take events beyond the capabilities of symmetrical military intervention. An asymmetrical response, not directly linked to the hostage situation was not considered.
A secondary concern was the permission to act inside another sovereign country.
The single act of dispersing the hostages created several difficulties which would have to be overcome to mount a successful rescue operation.
The hostages were broken up into small groups of two to four and dispersed throughout the Beirut area.
It would have taken a massive intelligence effort merely to locate the hostages.
In some instances the hostages were moved regularly to avoid any possible pinpointing.
The control of the hostages by a loose organization such as the Amal faction actually worked in the terrorists favor.
The chain of command and its base areas were not well known and its support by the population was widespread. An in place Human Intelligence (HUMINT) net was probably the only way of locating all of the hostages.
As with insurgent organizations, the underground support network was critical to the successful operation of the terrorists in this instance. By having a popular base of support in the local population it was impossible to isolate likely hostage locations in order to plan operations. In this way the support structure provided excellent security for the terrorists.
Once located, any action to rescue the hostages would have to be coordinated and timed to strike all the locations simultaneously to prevent slaughter of the captives. In addition to being difficult it would have required a large assault force to cover all of the hostage sites. The difficulties presented continue to expand from this point.
For instance, the large force requires coordinated transportation to all the locations prior to the assault.
Meeting these requirements and preserving security in a distant country racked with civil war were not attractive options.
Several points are clear from this incident. The terrorists should not be allowed to maintain the initiative.
Beirut tried to turn the plane away but relented when the captain informed the tower he was declaring a fuel emergency.
Proactive actions should have been undertaken before circumstances reached a critical point.
Once the terrorists were in an area from which they could draw support, the problems of a rescue magnified to the point of impossibility.
This speaks for structuring the terrorists into a plan of the governments choice early, before events severely limit options. Well trained, instantly alert counterterror forces are required for this type of strategy, as well as support from other nations to allow staging and actual operations.
Media attention also played a major role in the final outcome of the terrorist incident.
Interviews with the hostages were conducted and became significant world news events.
The terrorists were able to publicize their plight and gain a measure of world sympathy for the cause. The reasonable treatment of the hostages reinforced this favorable image, as did individual hostage testimonies.
It is almost impossible to control world media on this scale. Therefore it is more important to attempt to assess the impact media is having on the incident and predict the reactions. Using these predictions can open options for strategic planners and evaluate more clearly available alternatives against the threat to the hostages and desired outcome.
In this way negotiations can use media to meet potential terrorist objectives and gain the release of hostages if a threat to their safety is not high. Media coverage can be shaped to portray certain aspects without the countries involved appearing to accede to terrorist demands.   The Achille Lauro serves an example of aa operation not constrained by the strategic concerns of hostage safety.
At the strategic level, international agreements broke down and terrorists were allowed to go free after committing murder.
As a final recourse the U.S. conducted unilateral action in international airspace to recover the terrorists before they reached a friendly country.
Sovereignty was a critical issue while the terrorists remained in Egypt.
Outside elements were precluded from taking action on Egyptian soil without permission. Thus, despite public statements of concern by the Egyptian government, privately they succeeded in sheltering the terrorists.
Later in Italy, sovereignty also became a pointed issue when the Italian authorities insisted on taking custody of the terrorists. U.S. bases are still sovereign host nation territory, which left U.S. forces little choice.
International political pressure was successfully applied to deny the airliner permission to land at both Tunis and Athens.
Israel had also made prior arrangements to take action in the event U.S. operations failed.
Intelligence played a vital role at the operational An unwise move at 5sionella would have tur ned an otherwise successtul mission into an international tragedy.
In a larger sense, the incident had profound consequences.
Italy's failure to cooperate fully with the U.S. led directly to the government losing popular support.
Diplomatic relations were stretched between the U.S. and both Egypt and Italy.
On the other hand, the U.S. sent a clear message: responses may not always be made only while hostages are directly at risk.
Although not a truly asymmetrical response in tae same terms of the Libya raid, it used an indirect approach to take action. This also sent a rnessage to the sponsors of terrorism in the world.
Thu Qlj~v.LWA.Y ijl Jai Liunal ToyuJmi 44.
Nottnyahu, "Oparat ion lonrathan", 221 stavem~oori,
Gtovovuuuri, Qjijtu k j4,1 1, 124.
flt~votiaon, 1-~.1.
To'rrociy It.w?" (31 Ot1. . LI/) i22
komtý, ¶'I Th -iL"(JtUjl'y .LA~fLiL~1a~UkJLM 101l; N"iII C. Li.ivnqatuoil, '14t -Wai A~gainvL -uvL u4Ijoi
Lo.x I nqio:i, Mn. I Lo.x I rcjt.ori Iscockm, I 9f1) ) 100.H
livinsil.uoui, The -jnfLrAU&jhMLiILLLJ"1 179 tIhro 100.
L.irinq~t~on, TligWgaL-A!J ujjft-ThLj:oxim, 179 thru 18 
I'lVlingatonTlAlA Lui .xa, 
Li~vilnqat~ol, Thj' AiZ.L~im 100 thIrul 181.
Livi~ngst~oni, T~a.gtiL~~Dn 11
N~fm "l~ 1ho '1ido Tuirnringc" , 22.  12.
Bol~qer, AB=1vaLdu-uL.Waz, 107 thru 116; Ryan,
Hoicyor, &wAi q~~ Wijr_ Ill thru 112; Ryan,
IHy1iii, ITh~j4Lwi J1 Mu0MiIm, 38 thrU 41 TboIm&ilan Ktt~ru.wjw 1'lign jU, 79 thru 90.
16 -Hyni, Thej ýILnhkiall IieUuQaiJ&ijLUi, 03; no]qhr. , AmuLlumuji ait, W&L, 116 thru 117.
bul1JUZ, Ann 1ut~knAL=WAz& 1171 Ryan, jjV"jj 
I1otJrJi , AllmLimumlI aL Wat , 1 19 
1.1ir 11
TWA -LIGITJ B147,
aL"-,Lzy (.Ltj~jtucaLju~aQj T"GLLur.iII ( ?d1nbu r.-ch Ma i ritt.rtimn Puul i.pih inq , 1986 ) , 23001 Nows-6 WQJAIJ 1RelpQt.0, "MidenavaL '1'rror 11f~zikoii Amoeric~ants" 
(24 June 198.5)
Smolowe "Piecing TIogather the 1)ramna", 31; Holgor, Anix~iannat.Wl.A, 3-71.
8.Holger, IAnkli=W-LiiJj., 375 t~hrO 376; Serrill, "The U.S. Sends a Memoago", 23. 9. Smolowe "Pipcinig Togtither, t~he Drairia", 1 )ý Bolger, Am XI10--AL Wax-, 37 6.
cGenrge Runsell, "The Price of 5-tccefia", TIMe_ (28 October 1985): 28.  From a strategic and operational standpoint, it is important to know exactly how the peacekeeping operation was conceived. This will, in many ways, detex-mine the charactcr of the operations and may serve to limit the forces mandate.
UN peacekeeping operations historically span a range of activities and show a variety of organization and composition.
In the four case studies examined here UN forces range from a small group of observers, prohibited from interrupting operations, to a large intervention force which eventually conducts unilateral operations.
Despite this wide variety of forces and methods, this study examines these case studies to determine if common elements exist which uniformly contributed to the success or failure of the operations.
In August 1947 the terms of the Indian Independence Military Observation Group -India / Pakistan (UNMOGIP). 
4
"1) investigation of complaints and efforts to settle the complaints, 2) determination of the order of battle of the two armies and other troop information, ;and 3) control of civilians." • Observers were directed to investigate and report, avoiding any interference in operational matters.' when incidents occurred, observers were tasked to investigate immediately, normally from both sides simultaneously.
This often involved separating Indian/ Pakistani patrol clashes on the border.'
Information on the respective orders of battle is provided to the Chief Military Observer to preclude force build up by either side. This information is used by the UN only, and maintained as strictly "Top Secret". 9
Civilian control refers to the 500 meter demilitarized zone on either side of the cease-fire line.
Although civilian police are charged with this responsibility, mili.tary units from one side or the other often become involved. Facilities are provided to the Indian portion of UNMOGIP and liaison maintained, but observer functions limited. 
2 4
At the strategic level the most important element which led to the success of the UN peacekeeping operations was the prior agreement by India and Pakistan to cease hostilities.
The peacekeeping force served primarily as the impartial agency to supervise the agreements already made.
In this way the UN forces were immediately recognized as being impartial and gained a large measure of respect.
The fact that the original mandate required the observers to report and specifically not interfere with operational matters implied a measure of unattached integrity.
The obvious concern that UN forces represent the United Nations, with a varied representation on hand, gives the force an inherent credibility.
This case demonstrates how a UN commission devoted to several tasks evolved into a peacekeeping force.
The issue of coordinating a plebiscite was the original priority. That fell into obscurity when neither country could agree on the conditions and military observers became a full time mission.
The commission was then terminated and the observer group expanded.
It is also important to note that the only UN forces were observers and not large UN peacekeeping forces. It is clear why the mandate was not to interfere but to investigate and report. This is well within the capabilities of the observer group.
The mission of an impartial observation team between agreeing nations is considerably different than having to forcibly separate belligerents and maintain a demilitarized zone. The resources required were well matched to the task at hand, and the task was specified and mutually agreed upon.
At the operational level, the chain of command in this case was dedicated to an exclusively military mission.
The UN Chief Military Observer reports directly to the UN Secretary-Geieral.
Thus UNMOGIP is singularly focused on its military duties of investigating violations and reporting.
There are no ancillary duties associated with civil development or humanitarian assistance.
During the intermittent phases of active hostility the UN forces did not in any way interfere with the ongoing operations.
When the two belligerents were ready to come to terms the UNMOGIP remained an impartial force, capable of supervising and coordinating talks, disengagements and withdrawals.
Only after January 1966 when India refused to continue with the bilateral nature of the UN force did the effectiveness of the operation suffer.
Even today, operating solely on the Pakistan side, the UNMOGIP fulfills a valuable function.
Patrolling the cease-fire line and investigating violations, even if only from one side maintains an impartial presence. This facilitates a measure of common ground between the two countries and a mechanism to resolve differences originating from the confrontation.
At the tactical level, the assignment of observer teams to front line units is a decided advantage. Observers are aware of unit operations and status, giving them an area background and familiarization with the units involved.
Their proximity to forward positions allows rapid response to areas of conflict. This rapid response enhances quick resolution and the ability to keep events from escalating.
It also facilitates rapid investigation and reporting to preclude removal of evidence or changing the appearance of a violation.
The attachment of UN observers to forward units also acts as a deterrent, limited as it may be.
At the individual observer level, the accuracy of reporting, map locations and force positions have tremendous potential to become an international incident. Only accurate, thorough investigation and reporting can build a basis of credibility and respect.
The UNMOGIP mission to supervise the application of legal jurisdiction insures that civilians in the disputed areas receive fair treatment. Without this supervision it is likely that the military units that occasionally become involved would show preferential or brutal treatment depending on the civilians nationality. This would only increase local resentment and lead to longer term problems in the area.
The presence of a standing peacekeeping force has allowed for a more rapid return to a cease-fire once  Atlantic TURKEY  The mining companies feared this as well.' 
1
A UN commission later determined that Lumumba had been murdered on 17 January "probably in the presence of high officials of the Katanga provincial government". 
3 8
Word spread of the deaths, provoking riots and violence by different factions either supporting or opposing Lumumba.
As the threat of all out civil war loomed, several countries withdrew their contingents from ONUC. The forces, which had been inadequate to the massive task before, were now reduced from 20,000 to 15,000.  Belgians and the Congo, there was no mutual agreement to respect a peacekeeping force.
The force was required from the beginning to establish its authority. This often had to be done through the use of force.
It is fortunate that Belgium agreed to unilaterally withdraw its troops in coordination with advancing peacekeeping forces.
In the case of the Congo, none of the basic groundwork was ]aid to ensure the smooth operation and eventual success of the UN forces.
From the initial agreements with Prime Minister Lumumba it is obvious that there was no common agreement on the intent of the force.
Tshombe sought to remove the Belgian intervention, while the UN mission outlines the establishment of law and order as a primary task. In addition to the deployment of the 1,500 man peacekeeping force to separate the belligerents, administrators for every aspect of government would be needed.
Volunteers in public works, agriculture, law, economics, security and public health were recruited from all over the world. Key Dutch adminis. :ators were asked to remain for the interim period. British military officers were assigned to the militia and police.'
Indonesians were also included to facilitate the eventual transfer one year later. Officials were selected to administration and move away from conflict.
In spite of a dual focus (civil and military), the mission for the UN forces was well laid out and remained more a matter of execution than a need to modify the ground rules.
Operationally the United Nations organization was headed by a civilian, with the military peacekeeping and security functions subordinate to him. The respective functions of the military and civilian branches were definitively outlined and operations were well coordinated.
This may have been easier to accomplish in the atmosphere of relative peace and security of West Irian.
Personnel integration at all levels became a major task for the organization. The Danish and Finnish contingents probably had the most difficult mission. Disputes and fighting had been especially bitter between the Greek and Turkish communities of the capital.
A sing]le street. was declared the "Green Line" opanrating the two communitica and patrolled cornstanitly.
Helligerenta were always within rock throwing distance and events had the potential to escalate quickly.
Visible presence, excellent discipline of troops and special alertness proved the tactics of success. 
14
Casualties were high on both sides and feelings only became more bitter.'"
The Cyprus government enacted an island wide embargo on any supplies movinq into Tiirkiqh ont-oelid arcac.
Conditions in Kokkina and Mansoura deteriorated rapidly.
Refugees had swarmed into the towns as the National Guard captured outlying positions. Heavy mortar and artillery shelling destroyed many buildings and there were few medical supplies.
Through patient negotiations the UN Force  man invasion. 
3 3
In aa& a:
where UN observer forces were forced to withdraw, unnecessary damage and civilian deaths often occurred. 
3
Despite several UN resolutions calling for troop withdrawals, Turkish forces remained. 
3 5
Approximately one-third of the island's population was homeless.
UNFICYP humanitarian branch became the coordinator of all relief efforts to assist the refugees."
Today Cyprus is partitioned by a "green line" running diac rnally from northwest to southeast through the center of Nicosia. This line varies in width from 20 meters to seven kilometers."
The UN forces remain, separating the belligerents, occupying the neutral "green line" with patrols and outposts.
UNFICYP continues to perform such diverse tasks as water and sewage system maintenance in the disputed areas to fire-fighting and medical relief. These missions are accomplished along with its mandated peacekeeping duties.
The UN forces often act as security during religious services and supervise agriculture in the buffer zones. This approach also maintained the national contingents as units under their internal chain of command. This is far superior to having to split the force up into many small detachments which are often isolated from their national command structure.
Intelligence was a major element in the ongoing ability of the UN peacekeeping forces to counter the provocative moves of General Grivas. Anticipation of the National Guard's attacks on Turkish Cypriots allowed the UN to intervene with forces to stop the aggression. Many disputes were solved before General Grivas was able to make an issue of them.
In many instances the UN Peacekeeping Force Commander functioned as an intermediary between opposing sides. 
They served notice to the belligerents that under certain circumstances that force would be used. But more importantly they formed the framework of restraint for the UN forces in specifying in detailed terms when force was allowable.
Mobility was key in several instances in the rapid concentration of UN forces to counter an aggressive act.
Helicopters and armored cars assisted the relatively small forces monitor large areas and still be able to concentrate quickly.
As several incidents demonstrated, the rapid intervention of UN forces between opposing sides was often enough to reduce tension and prevent violence. Their presence undoubtedly served as a deterrent in preventing belligerents from using unnecessary violence to achieve their goals. Human rights and collateral damage were closely moniitored, forcing combatants to be more cognizant of    Politically Britain was much more stable and singular in purpose than France. France on the other hand had to contend with liberal politicians who sought an end to colonialism.
Conduct of operations also becomes a factor as media aLtertion and world opinion question the methods used.
Franc:e's use of harsh treatment and the "tough methods" holcqhtoni(id ptublir concern and made political positions more difffculIt. Britain's "rule of law" approach justified security forces actions on the domestic front and gained a measure of world approval.
Beside the obvious moral questions involved in comparing the "rule of Law" and the "tough methods" the short or long term nature of the approach must be considered.
France was forced to negotiate from an inferior position in both Indochina and Algeria.
Although the military approach resulted in at least a military stalemate with the insurgents, this was only the immediate result. Few of the basic causes of the insurgency had been addressed and relations between the French and Algerians had sharply deteriorated.
A temporary defeat of the insurgents may have been achievable but the question of how long it would last m ist be asked.
France only created the conditions for a much more effective and bitter insurgency to follow. The solution would have required a harsh and repressive administration to achieve any stability.
Malaya and Kenya moved into an era of selfdetermination and continued good relations with Britain.
When the socieýty, along with the political situation, was stabilized the two ex-colonies prospered.
The short term success of the "tough methods", especially during the Battle of Algiers, cannot be ignored.
The "tough methods" produced results.  At the tactical level the number of successes, even in the French columns is impressive.
The well trained and disciplined troops of both armed forces proved able to carry out many tasks successfully.
The key was whether these tasks contributed or detracted from the eventual outcome.  Z.
- Therefore, if action will receive international criticism another method of minimizing the impacL is to conduct rapid, decisive operations.
in the simplest sense, it may be easier to ask forgiveness than permission.
Although this concept can be construed many ways, the intent is to minimize the negative world opinion and its impact on operations. Intervention in the sovereign affairs of a nation will almost always be condemned, but if done correctly this condemnation can be short lived and less intense. This is especially true if the operations do not cause extensive civilian casualties and collateral damage.
In the same sense, refugees must be well cared for and provisions made for compensation for losses.
The different case studies surface an apparent dichotomy in objectives for contingency operations.
Security/protection of citizens or foreign nationals is a predominint c-nu:,c fo;r mounting operations.
This must be taken in perspective, as there is usually a higher political aim surrounding the int.ervention. Once innocent civilians are safe, then intervention fotces often turn to stability operations to reestablish law and order. Finally, communications must support real-time information flow to preclude jeopardizing the forces involved.
Elements such as international political pressure and basing rights concern the political element of power.
National will and world opinion involve primazily the informational element of national power. Shows of force and surprise revolve mostly around the military element of power.
But the economic element of national power must also be considered.
Britain's economic vulnerability led to a unilateral cessation of operaticns.  Sovereignty is a prerequisite to performing operations outside the territorial limits of the government undertaking operations. This becomes essential in considering where to maneuver terrorists and maxir'zing options.
In the same sense basing/staging rights are critical.
Terrorists often have world-wide mobility or at least access to it. Counterterrorist forces must be just as mobile, while maintaining a posture that permits them to conduct operations. This may require a distant location to be used as a staging area rather than sacrificing surprise by shadowing the terrorists directly.
Terrorist incidents are usually high priority items for news coverage. They can continue for several days or even weeks, while the world is kept abreast of every move.
This has the potential to arouse world opinion either for or against military action. The same is true of domestic national will.
Generally terrorist actions are universally deplored but as more information is broadcast opinions may change.
Although few condoned the hijacking of TWA Flight 847, the terrorists succeeded in gaining sympathy for their cause through skillful use of news media. levels for successful action.
Safety of the hostages dictates that firepower be absolutely accurate, yet operations must be lightening fast. Thus, information on terrorist background and likely reactions is as important as how many terrorist there are and how well they are armed.
Surgical operations with international attention require very direct command and control linkages. Issues such as national sovereignty and rule of engagement must not be passed through unnecessary, successive layers of command.
Decisions must be made quickly and be responsive. The organization and all the physical apparatus needs to support this aim.
Communications must be foolproof and cover the entire range of available networks. They must be rapidly deployable and compact enough for operations under severe circumstances.
The C-130 ABCCC is one asset that can perform this function well.
Other more sophisticated options are available, but retain the same basic principles.
All operations require some measure of deployability.
Most require long range international movement. This requires heavy lift, long range aircraft. Large scale operations might be ultimately dependent on this asset.
Although costly to procure and maintain, a fleet of heavy transport is essential to world-wide deployability and power projection.
The TWA Fight 847 hijacking demonstrates the importance of an underground support stLucture. Similar to the importance of the insurgent suppoz.. structure, terrorists may also depend on an underground organization.  . wzz u-z z-E oc~mx-ý:a 'ZL499, criticism.
Any unilateral power or even small coalition attempting the same could expect no less. Often with selfish agendas, the external nations want to exploit the conflict for their own gain and not necessarily the benefit of the native population.
In the same way, an explosion of an internal conflict can negate peacekee4ing efforts and rekindle international conflict. These conflicts are generally beyond the purview of the United Nations so that peacekeeping forces cannot intervene.
If they do, as in the case of the Congo, they tend to lose their impartiality. Equally serious, they may become the subject of intense criticism from one side, both or even internationally.
Peacekeeping forces are subject to the concerns of sovereignty.
The host nation has explicit rights. Some may be absolute, if the force is present only with their consent.
Others may be very limited if the force is mandated by the Security Council. This issue must constantly be considered and operations kept within the guidelines of the mandate.
Both the multi-national forces and a single national force have proven effective.
Generally the multi-national force is favored as displaying the concept of the United Nations and is more acceptable to the nations involved in conflict.
It is easier to find common ground with a multi-national force.
However, when time is essential and available forces limited, the single national force might be very acceptable, even preferable.
In spite of the single nationality, the image of impartiality is important to maintain the force's credibility.
Like many of the other elements, a prohibition on the use of force is not absolutely necessary but certainly preferable.
It maintains the image of impartiality and requires that peaceful means be used to enforce decisions.
This often makes the mission difficult but adds to the overall effect of reducing tensions.
The examples of ingenuity and peaceful intervention in Cyprus demonstrate that results can be achieved but actions must be well though out and coordinated. In this respect intelligence becomes very important. Understanding the intentions and likely actions of the conflicting groups can make timely intervention possible.
Even rapid and accurate reporting of events can facilitate responses that deter further violence rather than allowing it to escalate out of control. This further requires that the peacekeeping force have unlimited access and freedom of movement. This makes peaceful intervention a much more viable procedure. When mobility is limited by one faction or another, the peacekeepers are prevented from acting when it suits the purposes of that side. This detracts from effectiveness and impartiality.
Overall command and control of peacekeeping operations can be either civilian or military. Both options and even combinations with parallel leadership positions have been successful.
The military leadership appears to be more successful when operations are predominantly military. As operations involve both civilian and military activities, a civilian head seems to be more appropriate.
Peacekeeping operations may be limited to strictly military observer functions. They may also cover the entire range of available options, to include responsibility for the national government, as they did in West Irian. Operations are geared to support the ultimate objectives.
If separation and supervision is all that is desired then military actions may suffice.
If social development and humanitarian actions are mandated then a full range of social, civil and military operations may be required. Some countries in conflict may be fully capable of the development and welfare of its population.
In these cases, only military observer duties may be necessary.
The objectives of the mission dictate the organization of the force and the programs it undertakes.
If the peacekeeping forces include humanitarian missions then security is a prerequisite. Even a temporary cease-fire must be put in place before basic services can be attempted.
More extensive development programs require that the population be secured so that military action will not destroy limited assets.
Isolation of the country or peacekeeping area may be necessary when external support becomes a factor. The At the tactical level, it is particularly desirable for peacekeeping forces to be highly trained and well disciplined.
Restraint and peaceful intervention require delicate methods and forces that do not respond to provocation.
The diversity of tasks that the force must perform as well as the relative isolation, requires that the soldiers be industrious and motivated.
The value of rapid reaction and accurate reporting has already been discussed.
It is important to note that the peacekeeping soldier might be required to perform military observation, armed patrols, civilian transportation and food distribution all in the same day. Depending on the overall objectives, the combined civil and military programs often COMMON ELEMENTS OF SUCCESS Z FAILURE (Refer to Figures 4-V-5,6,11,12,19,24)   This section of the study analyzes why some elements of success/failure are found in more than one conflict across the different operational categories. Several common elements of success/failure have surfaced in comparing the different conflicts and then across the four ope-ational categories.
In spite of slight variations in the context and appearance of these elements in each area or conflict, some rough comparisons and generalizations can be made.
For purposes of this study an analysis of these elements and identification of basic trends is important.
Critical elements may or may not cross the boundaries of operational areas.
Examination of the common elements can determine whether they establish trends in critical elements or whether they are merely common requirements.
At the strategic level few elements are common to all four operational categories. However several are found in two or more of the four. Those elements that are common can be linked to the different elements of national power. 
Sovereignty is an element that was either a stumbling block or a facilitator in several case studies. This is the fundamental aspect of a nation's political power.
A nation must have the ability to control actions within its own borders.
In this same sense, a government controls the actions that other governments or organizations are permitted to take inside its borders.
In distinction to conventional military operations in There are two fundamental approaches available at the operational level.
One incorporates the integrated campaign outlined above, while the other relies on a preponderance of military action.
The strategic conditions and the operations required will determine which approach will be more likely to succeed.
The fundamental approach dictates the basis for tactical operations, as the case studies clearly demonstrate.
Integrated operational plans required multi-dimensional tactical applications, while conflicts such as the French experience in the Indochina War are very narrowly focused on military operations.
This accounts for the similarities of tactical operations between peacekeeping and peacetime contingency operations.
Regardless of the strategic implications, an integrated operational approach to any of the four conflicts will result in similar tactical operations.
Military units will be responsible for a wide range of duties from combat patrols to food distribution.
A significant concern outside operational capabilities is the impact of media on strategic, operational and tactical success.
The case studies demonstrate how media involvement dramatically affected elements at all levels of war. Strategic national will can be undermined as well as immediate compromise of an entire operation. Tactical surprise can be lost or world opinion may be turned against the operation.
Media may require consideration as an extra-national element of power that defies control or even prediction. Its effect must not be underemphasized. Assessments of deliberate and unintentional media involvement must be calculated into strategic and operational plans.
Civilian and military organizations involved in LIC should devise a comprehensive media plan to allow for cooperation without compromise. Common agreements on responsibility and trust at lower levels may preclude operational level problems.
the four operational categories.
These common elements within the four operational categories establish a group of, category specific, critical elements of success.
The question remains whether these can be described as universally critical elements of success/ failure. The Several things would be beneficial to U.S. operations in LIC, but a lengthy checklist is not one of them. New variables may evolve at any time.
The requirement is for soldiers and civilian administrators who understand how to analyze these variables and produce effective strategies using them.
The historical case studies with their analysis of success and failure diagram the complex relationships present in LIC. Success is determined by several factors that are not always related to the defeat of the enemy, or even military power. This study has amply demonstrated that the diversity of circumstances requires an analysis that progresses in series.
Starting with the desired end state and strategic environment, each situation has a variety of responses that will produce results. This study has followed that process of analysis and given operational examples of the options available.
Equally valuable, the study has described the linkages between the levels of war and examined the relationships of the different elements in terms of success or failure.
Thus, the original research question might have been;
How can the critical elements of success be determined for the conflict under consideration? This is not to say that each LIC is totally unique. Tactical operations that are not coordinated with all the applicable elements of power and respective agencies, will often tioL suppoLL the strategic aim.
Inf the zname manner, Wha". is the desired end state following resolution of the conflict? Does the operation need to change the government in power, or does it need to establish programs for internal social development?
Secondly, how can all elements of national power be efficiently focused on the problem to achieve the desired result? What is the proper mix or balance of these elements of power?
The case studies show a wide range of different mixes. Some led to success while other led directly to failure.
The case studies also examine why the respective applications were flawed.
Command and control in one instance may be better suited to a military commander and in others to a civilian head of power. In other circumstances some measure of compromise may be the best alternative.
The key is matching the most appropriate option to the given circumstances. The broad guidelines outlined in the analysis section assist in accomplishing this.
Third, how well do the operational plans and tactical executions support the next higher and overall strategic objectives? Are the subordinate plans integrated? Are they compiled by an integrated staff with representatives from all elements of national power? Are they adequately balanced to reflect the relative importance of each different agency?
What agencies, military units and what type of and command and control structure can best execute this operation? These questions can be carried on to whatever level of resolution is required. These questions will often result in complex answers that must be deconflicted and acted upon.
The answers are by nature complex because, unlike conventional operations, tactical operations in LIC can have direct strategic implications and vice versa. Conventional doctrine focuses on the force, or the element that will accomplish the mission, as the instrument These TTP manuals are badly needed in the field.
Units are forced to constantly reinvent methods whenever humanitarian missions arise.
There are certainly good ways and bad ways to organize food distribution systems and points, as well as for establishing refugee centers. There are superior methods for stability operations. These are not currently documented, forcing hit and miss, ad hoc solutions when there is a wealth of historical knowledge available.
Again, this study could be used as basis and expanded upon to develop a historical approach to writing detailed doctrine and TTP for LIC.
Although the historical solutions cannot be applied blindly to new problems, they could serve as a valuable starting point for assessment and planning. Commanders and staff officers need well laid out doctrine to make informed plans and carry out successful execution.
Modifying current military platitudes will be counterproductive to the objective of incorporating all the diverse elements of national power into a single, unified effort.
Radically new doctrine outlining the various economic, informational and political initiatives must be created.
Appropriate models for integrated organizations and staffs should be developed to serve as guides during crisis situations.
Only with adequate, comprehensive, doctrine to serve as a guide can effective contingency plans be developed to deal with emergencies.
Other governmental agencies must become involved in these regional contingency plans, providing sound input and conducting reasonable preparation for ultimate implementation. Field grade officers will be the action officers on the operational level staffs. They will be responsible for integrating the strategic assets and the tactical operations.
Without an adequate understanding of the principle issues and complex interactions involved in LIC they will undoubtedly fall back on conventional military operations. This is precisely the wrong direction to move.
The case studies clearly demonstrate the need to limit violence and utilize indirect or unconventional methods whenever possible.
The study was unable to establish universal critical elements of success beyond the four operational categories.
In spite of this, several important trends did evolve from the study. They are broad based, usually consolidated from two or three common is3ues highlighted by the case studies.
They carry important implications for the manner in which the 
The requirements of intelligence for LIC have already bten coveýred.
In surunary a balance of national assets needs to r'fJect the threat of LIC.
HUMINT and SIGINT capabilities mLit be expanded and maintained throughout the world.
Contingencies are difficult to predict in a timely manner, requiring in-place assets.
In-place assets would, in turn, make earlier prediction and assessment more effective. Priorities must be determined and choices made.
The level of proficiency required and diversity of skills for both conventional and LIC operations require a unit focus.
Ultimately, unit commanders must be given a singular priority
for training and possible employment. The application of all elements of national power requires a staff capable integrating the diverse assets into a coherent operational and tactical plan. Expertise in each speciality area must be consistent with the overall strategic combination of the elements of national power.
If economic programs are an integral part of the strategic approach, then a representative of that speciality area must be present to integrate these programs at the operational level.
Otherwise, an uncoordinated, factional approach to the problem will result and any synergy and even success may be sacrificed.
Media involvement was a significant factor in several case studies. This reflects the growing importance of world opinion and national will.
The media can also amplify the natural tendency of low level actions to have widespread implications.
The impact of media is far too important to leave completely to chance. Assessments of impact and a contirmious flow of information that supports the overall strategic objectives must be provided.
Accurate information, even if initially unfavorable, seems to be preferred to stonewalling or whitewashing events that are later readdressed.
The impact of media is an intervening factor in the concept of operational and strategic sense of time.
Strategies must be outlined in coherent terms so that unrealistic expectations are not encouraged early.
In the same respect, any time operations can be conducted swiftly and concluded, chances of overall approval and bringing matters to a conclusion on original terms are increased. Constant attempts to expand the limits will be counterproductive for all parties involved. Escalation will generally be met with escalation, reaching a point when it escapes the capacity of thce belligerents to control.  
The historical case studies and subsequent analysis demonstrate both common trends and unique aspects of Low Intensity Conflict.
The common trends have several implications but defy universal application in the form of a checklist for success. This demonstrates the fallacy of attempting to apply conventional doctrinal checklists to LIC.
At best the conventional approach will be disjointed and confusing.
In the worst case it will be counterproductive and lead to disaster.
Even the LIC Imperatives outlined in FM 100-20 cannot be universally applied to all of the case studies.
The trends do provide a framework for consideration in establishing doctrine and trainiug for LIC.
The study clearly established the need for an expanded doctrine at the strategic and operational levels.
The elements of success/failure outlined for each operational category should form the basis of an expanded U.S. military doctrine at the operational level.
Senior capstone manuals should incorporate the aspects outlined in the analysis to establish a consistent doctrine for the entire operational continuum. This doctrine must address all four elements of national power and their relationships during the conflict at different points on the continuum.
Tactical TTP manuals must be researched and written to provide a basis for training, planning and operations at the unit level. Ad hoc solutions cannot take the place of planned and organized operations when time is an essential element at the operational and strategic levels. Historical lessons should provide the basis for standard procedures required to execute the many common tactical operations acrosq the four operational categories of LIC.
The "American way of war" can capitalize on the wide spectrum application of solutions to LIC. Instead of wielding a tremendous military organization against the enemy to overwhelm them, a coordinated, integrated organization, using the full strength of the aation's power, should be focused on the problem. This takes advantage of America's strength in an entirely new dimension, better than purely military solutions alone ever could.
The requirement is for a new approach to organization, planning and operations. Traditionally separated and diverse agencies must become part of the coordinated effort. Civilian groups, not normally associated with conflict, must be included in a widely based integrated doctrine of applying national power to conflict situations.
Military doctrine, training and planning are not sufficient.
Civil agencies must be required to take the lead, establish policics and create an integrated strategy at the national level. Once this is accomplished, military
insurgencies during the twentieth century. Sir Robert Thompson's Defeating Communist Insurgencies and UQ Exit From Yietnam. Both books are unique because of Thompson's participation at senior levels in both Vietnam and Malaya. Outlining basic guerrilla strategy and government countermeasures, Thompson compares the successes of Malaya with the failures in Vietnam. Another definitive work using British experience is Paget's Counter-Insurgency Qperations. Using descriptions of the inourgencies in Malaya, Kenya and Cyprus, Paget outlines the British counterinsurgent techniques, largely from the operational level. In the final chapter Paget summarizes the nucce"ePe In tho three campaigns and concludes with general rulen for cournterinsurgancy. Froi aintAlr nrational p)orrpn)otIvo are Trinqu ir' i MQ~duiiL1•Mtij~ arnd Parot' s iNM BUAL-tv-tA gad•0ia. 0".I IJg anil yim f romi Fr erico ' 4') experiences in Indochina and Algeria, these works give a good background on the French methods in counterinsurgency. Guerrilla, Bell's The Myth of the Guerrilla and McCuen's The. Art of Counter-Revolutionary Warfare. An interesting aspect of Bell's book is the conclusion that insurgencies are often not the popular movements they are assumed to be. In many cases both the government and the insurgent forces represent only a small fraction of the population, each vying for control of the majority of the population. For much more detailed analysis of individual aspects of insurgency, SORO's Undergrounds in Insurgent, Revolutionary, and Resistance Warfare and Human Factors Considerations of Undergrounds in Insurgencies provide well documented research. FRANCE IN INDOCHINA Maclear's The Ten Thousand DayWag and Karnow's Tanham's Communist Revolutionary Warfare, Fall's The Two Viet-Nams and Duncanson's Government and Revolution in Vietnam are detailed accounts of the political and social events shaping the First Indochina War. Tanham's book is especially detailed with respect to Viet Minh organization, operations and tactics. Approaching Vietnam by Gardner chronicles America's involvement with France in Indochina. Focusing on senior U.S. decision makers, such as Secretary of State Dulles, the book outlines the behind the scenes de,:isions following World War II and how they were made. He concludes that America was in a unique position to influence events at the end of the war and made flawed decisions eventually leading to the French defeat and The singular event most remembered from the First Indochina War is Dien Bien Phu. Roy's The Battle of Dienbienphu and Fall's Hell in a Very Small Place are superb accounts of the battle. Although the final battle is a relatively minor event in this study, both books characterize French military plans and the basic flaws that led to Dien Cross' In Gurkha Company, Baynes' The Cameronians and Sinclair Stevenson's The Life of a Regiment provide vivid accounts of tactical operations and tnt life of a soldier during the Emergency. Written as Britisi, Army regimental histories they collectively cover periods in Cyprus, Kenya, Borneo, Aden and Oman. The British equivalent of the U.S. Army Ranger Handbook during the Emergency is The Conduct of Anti-Tegrrorist Operations in Malaya. Savage Wars of Peace, Paget's Counter-Insurgency Operations and Carver's War Since 1945 provided the bulk of detailed information on military operations for this study.
Lloyd's Suez 1956 and Thomas' Suez are political histories covering the crisis. Both are written from the British perspective and avoid the issue of collaboration with the Israelis. They are particularly valuable for the analysis and comments on the political/military command structure and its coalition aspects. Finer's Dulles Over SueZ is the American equivalent of Lloyd and Thomas. Along with Dayan's Q v .y-of the Sinai Campaign they complete the collective view o0f the major western powers. Airborne to Suez by Cavenagh and Leulliette's lI-rin &gia (many French units were pulled out of Algeria to participate) provide good first hand, individual soldier accounts of the intervention. As in other cases, works such as Thompaori arid Keegan's Wr in Peace were used to gather operaLioniai l~vvl details on military operations. CONGO Odom's 111 Days in Stanleyville by Reed is a good account of the DRAGON ROUGE as told from the hostage perspective. Reed gives more insight into the rebel organization and leadership making it a good complement to Odom's work. MAYAGUEZ INCIDENT Americans at WAr by Bolger formed the basis of the discussion on the Mayaguez incident. OEERATION JUST CAUSE Because of the recent nature of Operation JUST CAUSE, few accounts have appeared in print at this writing. The Center for Army Lessons Learned Bulletins and the author's personal experiences are used for the majority of the information In this case study. Brigg's Operation JUST CAUSE is an excellent account foL the individual soldier perspoctive. Although limited by his units pnrticirpation, the hook covyrn many of' the uniliont points of the cornflict. Thero are many exreoll.nt: books in tertnn of' gqrinra] thour (0.1 (:.al worrks on e1 ý ,,a I "r-m. 1,1Iqlo,1ur 'H , l •Ar by Bolger formed the basis of the a J..,•url; U r' ,R ,';.,r the Vi,',a.quez incident. Bo,:cau.,, of the rocent nature of Operation JUST CAUSE, few 3r•icni,ts heive appeared in print at this writing. The Ce,,tt~c). for Army Lessonii L.earuned Bullletirna and the author's pe.-ional expe-A."incos &trt, tfied for the majov:'ty of the information in this ctI5s( study. '10 e..ý' a i ( :,-any r Ixc I prit book• in torinr (fi 9"rlI Tl a r )
concludes that coordinated action is not the norm and only entered upon when it clearly is mutually beneficial.
** AUTHOR'S NOTE: As an aid to further research the Bibliography includes works on other conflicts not specifically reviewed in this study.
** AUTHOR'S NOTE: As an aid to further research the Bibliography includes works on other conflicts not specifically reviewed in this study.
4. V 7. Yhi':Iini , li.uLMluaLL Yailivjj-TWaiU A uJ~ I iliatuiluai ThjvwgkL, 3(1 thi u 3).
4. V 7. Yhi':Iini , li.uLMluaLL Yailivjj-TWaiU A uJ~ I iliatuiluai ThjvwgkL, 3(1 thi u 3).
I inhaA~ A, LOClu 3Xa ta&I~LLaĨ llumLu~iua12wuU IiLp 311 thi'u 39.
I inhaA~ A, LOClu 3Xa ta&I~LLaĨ llumLu~iua12wuU IiLp 311 thi'u 39.
The missionaries had also taught them Christian beliefs which they could not reconcile with European behavior, especially following WW II. Kikuyu, he had been active in emerging African politics since the 1920's.1" He had been in England trying to enlist support for his cause when WW II broke out. Before the war, on previous trips to England, he had received a British college education and joined the Communist Party.1 4 He also made two short trips to Russia.'s An avowed nationalist, his leftist teachings were manifested in his organizational and propaganda methods much more than his political ideology. Kenyatta quickly capitalized on the vulnerability of the Kikuyu in creating his movement for nationalism in Kenya. His announced aims were the expulsion of all Europeans and Asians and an African rule (Kikuyu domination) in Kenya." 6 Through careful agitation and propaganda he enlarged the land problems of the Kikuyus, drew attention to racial barriers and created problems where none had existed.'" Secret, dark of night ritual oathings terrified Kikuyu and, under duress, committed them to the service of the insurgent movement. Sacred tribal ceremonies were combined with animal slayings and strong native symbology to prey on the superstitions of the Kikuyu. Whether the Kikuyu believed in Kenyatta and the political ideology or not, they respected the power of the oath."' This became a new dimension in creating support for the insurgents. Labor unions were inspired to strike and the agricultural reformed programs of the colonial government were abandoned in the Reserve." Kikuyu loyal to the tribal chiefs opposing Kenyatta received greater and greater pressure to join the Mau Mau."' Kenyatta expanded his political power base by taking over the Kenya Africa Union (KAU) party and using it as a front for his outlawed militant Kikuyu Central Association (KCA). 2 4 By May 1946 he also controlled the Teacher's Training College at Githunguri, insuring it carried forth his political message."s These measures were aimed at the Kikuyu, with the intent to incorporate other tribes as the movement expanded. 6 Indications of serious unrest appeared outside the rallies. Attacks on reluctant Kikuyu for refusing the oathing were becoming common and raids on settler's farms started. Europeans demanded greater action by the colonial administration." The government was slow to acknowledge the problem and respond. In 1950 an attempt was made to establish a joint security committee. It failed due to lack of interest by the Eaf t Africa Command in Nairobi.'" In late 1952 the retiring Governor, Sir Philip Mitchell continued to deny that the trouble was serious or unusual. 2 9 Fortunately Sir Evelyn Baring arrived on 29 September 1952, replacing Sir Philip as Governor. He conducted a nine day tour of the colony, concluding that matters required iuunediate and serious action. " ' On 9 October, Chief Warukiu, oii cf tLiLuts iniuor chiefs of the Kikuyu, was murdered. The loss of a loyal and respected senior official prompted Baring to cable London recommending a state of emergency and the arrest of Kenyatta and his supporters. 3 "
"
tonse and included a plan by the French paratroops in Algeria to sei/e key sites in Paris arnd conduct a coup. "Pied noir" demonstratio increased and veiled threats of military action from Algeria continued.'' Civil government in France was completely split nnd immobilized. On 1 June 1958, de Gaulle acceded to tho demands of several factioub in France and returned to power in ParJi with a mandate to role by decree for nix monthn.'' On 4 June he traveled to Algeria to quell the cezmonstrations and show his support.
tonse and included a plan by the French paratroops in Algeria to sei/e key sites in Paris arnd conduct a coup. "Pied noir" demonstratio increased and veiled threats of military action from Algeria continued.'' Civil government in France was completely split nnd immobilized. On 1 June 1958, de Gaulle acceded to tho demands of several factioub in France and returned to power in ParJi with a mandate to role by decree for nix monthn.'' On 4 June he traveled to Algeria to quell the cezmonstrations and show his support.
19. 24. Maclear, Thnt..2 a2I'bTUOfl a nd A31 ...kj, 18 thru 25; Carver, Wa ig_.U 108 thru 109. 25. Macleair, VIInT 25; Carver, War Snc i2.4J, 1.08 thru 109. 26. Mn'.lemr, JbS ia~Lk~u~ndQAyW~ji, 25 thr'j 26; Carver, .-195 108 thru 109. 27. Maclear, TjnL...TwbusAnd 2Day War, 26; Carver, WLar S.inge 19A5., 109. 29. Maclear, Thj--jvjjhguan p~~..ay W.Gr, 28. 30. Macleai., 2bQfaTh., o'~j3 Dy-W-a, 28 thru 29. 31. Maclear, Tli ._,..T i the United S ates.'
Simultaneous attacks pushed through the Gaza Strip ing the north coast, toward Mitla Pass in the cen~.er of the Sinai, and toward Sharm el Sheikh in the south. 2 "
Simultaneous attacks pushed through the Gaza Strip ing the north coast, toward Mitla Pass in the cen~.er of the Sinai, and toward Sharm el Sheikh in the south. 2 "
with Leopoldvilie."
with Leopoldvilie."
).
).
C +• : •l the C11 & HIH-53 crews)." Time was considered essential to the NCA/NSC and Gen.
fijhting, how the captors are equipped, and where the captives are located in order to be succenufu].
fijhting, how the captors are equipped, and where the captives are located in order to be succenufu].
9    
9    
4 . Chslc II A. Istw-P~wWI Iii ( Col n-l(4.1-Rol~i s i*d ) cl~iL I)''uiri I'wiui, IigJlta k3.a.1I ( Now Ywnkj ' O it Pubi ibhirWl,
4 . Chslc II A. Istw-P~wWI Iii ( Col n-l(4.1-Rol~i s i*d ) cl~iL I)''uiri I'wiui, IigJlta k3.a.1I ( Now Ywnkj ' O it Pubi ibhirWl,
, 32 thiti 331 Runic, jI'lI Dirmaury-ut n uain~roL~n 39; B~olger, Amm-IgAiUA at. WaL, 361).
, 32 thiti 331 Runic, jI'lI Dirmaury-ut n uain~roL~n 39; B~olger, Amm-IgAiUA at. WaL, 361).
3Lotiwncon, 9Q__M___ j L_• LLLgz, 10.
follow-on operations even more difficult.
Department advisor on the Congo, George Ball quotes President Johnson (referring to the missionaries who did not depart when warned) as telling him: "That he did not want to 'get tied in on the Congo and have another Korea or another Vietnam just because of somebody wandering around searching for Jesus Christ."
Original plans called for one company each to be dropped on the follow-on objectives.
Based on the performance of the Simbas and the size of the towns, Colonel
Laurent felt this was completely inadequate. He required a minimum of two companies for each operation. His men had now been awake for the best part of three days.
In addition the shipment of parachutes included only enough for one more operation if two companies were used. 
9 3
13olgor, AIIIzi 8Ano-a.Wa, 376.
aggression broke out.
Observers were able to verify cease-fires, limiting the conflict and stopping a bitter stalemate from occurring. Their presence encouraged talks aimed at cease-fire and force withdrawal.
In ti'e larger sense, the mission of the United Nations in resolving the underlying differences has not been as successful. Some argue that with the pressure of direct conflict removed the incentive to negotiate for a lasting agreement is not very high. This way action could be taken swiftly. 
9
Both events recognized the inability of the ANC to effectively establish law and order and promote governmental authority.
On The political police conducted a campaign of genocide against tribes not loyal to shombe. Primary targets were Secretary-General refused to cooperate in this manner the miissccn of the force began to suffer.
The UN concern for the sovereignty of a nation is paramc-.ýnt. However, when the central government broke into factious; the UN forces were placed at a disadvantage.
Greater initiative, early on, on the part of the Seouritv Couriýil to expand its mandate would have helped considerably. It is commendable that the force was able to perform as well as it did, given Soviet attempts to discredit the mission and covertly overthrow the central government. On the other hand, it is clear that Belgium continued to aid Tshombe in his efforts to secede. This also undermined the efforts of the UN and the peacekeeping force.
The issue of national and international will is also raised in conjunction with Tshombe's deliberate attacks against the UN forces. These attacks were designed to wear down the member nations resolve to maintain their forces as posts they would eventually control and worked subordinate to the UN administration until the turnover.'
Senor Bennett, who had been the UN Secretary-General's Deputy Chef de Cabinet, was appointed as the UN Administrator. All aspects of the United Nations Temporary
Executive Authority (UNTEA), including the peacekeeping forces, came under the control of a single civilian. UNTEA functioned as a civil government, with the military forces as one of several subordinate departments. 
9
For the first time the United Nations controlled all aspects of a territory's day to day functioning."
The dense jungle covering much of the island made the peacekeeping forces much more than just a military force. Their transport and patrolling activities included surveys and census along with public health duties.
The most difficult task was to locate the Indonesi'an The Netherlands was able to exit gracefully and the colony was much better prepared to work toward autonomy or assimilation into Indonesia.
A bloody international/civil war was averted and stability in the region continued, 
1 4
The UN administration effectively reorganized the entire government in a short time and took over day to day functional control.
Once again the strategic framework for success was well laid by international mediation and agreement prior to the UN peacekeeping forces' arrival.  Before the respective strategies are examined, the basic conditions in Britain and France must be analyzed. the assessment of the desired outcome weighing against the resulting costs.
Once insurgents are isolated from the population, large scale operations may be the most effective method on some types of terrain.
The succepsful cordon and search operations conducted by both armies in urban areas crippled the insurgent support organizations.
Intelligence was the focal point of both operations.
The difference lay in the methods of gathering the necessary intelligence.
French methods centered on the "tough methods" while British methods focused on Psychological Operations (PSYOPs) and monetary rewards.
The use of PYSOPs and monetary rewards are more consistent with the "rule of law" while the "tough methods" follow the application of military strength. Both produced excellent short term results.
The "tough methods" eventually forced condemnation of the French in world opinion while operations in Kenya proceeded.
Complex rules of engagement (ROE), requiring shouted orders to halt and surrender before firing, often frustrated British soldiers operating on deep patrols. In the short term, at the tactical level, they allowed insurgents to escape and foiled hasty ambushes.
Although difficult for soldiers to understand, they followed instructions in a disciplined manner. This tendency convinced many insurgents that the government was more concerned with their surrender than eventual death. In the long run, at the operational level, these strict ROE aided operational PSYOP surrender efforts and built respect for the government programs and security forces.
The lowest common denominator may be termed These case studies outline a number of important elements that led to the success or failure of the operations.
All of the cases detail operations outside the sovereign territory of the primary nations involved.
Although this focuses on the international aspect of peacetime contingency operations, many of the same lessons will be applicable to domestic operations. More importantly, the international interventions raise more complex issues for examination and analysis.
The discussion in this section parallels the earlier analysis as issues are highlighted in descending order, beginning at the strategic level. 
Information on counterterrorist forces and government actions is especially sensitive. Media representatives should be responsible in deciding which information they make available: that cannot be counted on.
The case of the Lufthansa hijacking is excellent evidence. Even in Israel,
where sensitivities should run higher, the media acted irresponsibly.
International political pressure, national will and media coverage can all be of national importance during terrorist incidents.
Options must take into account the impact of these factors and assess the reaction in advance.
Non-military actions may also achieve results. These types of actions are less threatening to the safety of the hostages, but must address very sensitive areas to achieve some direct success.
More likely is the indirect, but nonetheless extremely important, success non-military actions might have.
The Airline Pilots Association demonstrated that through the threat of economic and trade sanctions they could influence several countries to stop at least their overt support of terrorists.
Once again, this demonstrates the utility of the indirect approach and a long term strategy in dealing with conflict.
Intelligence in all operations is essential, but it is particularly vital in counterterrorist operations.
Precision intetvention requires detailed information on many medical support can be a distinct advantage. Finally, these common elements were compared and analyzed to determine if there was a common group of critical elements of success in LIC.
The examination of historical case studies provides valuable insight into the conduct of operations in LIC.
Several common elements of success/failure were demonstrated in the Analysis of the individual case studies. Scveral more interesting relationships were outlined in the comparison of LIC.
The military element of national power applies military campaigns and military tactics to defeat an enemy militarily.
LIC requiries ,lifferent applications of the elements of power based on the situation, desired outcome and resources available.
Each element of power and its application add anew dimension to Lhe development of the conflict. The interaction of the elements is important. Some applications can create a sum greater than the parts or a synergistic effect.
Other applications can deteat the individual programs because of a lack of mutual support and coordination.
This multi-dimensional aspect of LIC makes generalized applications and lock-step formulas dangerous.
Success in LIC begins with a strategic assessment and is consistently derivative. Strategic success is defined and operational campaigns designed to accomplish it. Tactical operations are planned in accordance with the operationai guidance.
Casual observers would see no difference between this process than that of traditional operational warfighting.
The difference lies in the multi-dimensional aspect of each level's planning and operations. Isolated, even coordinated tactical successes will not lead to strategic success and can bh countprproductive if they have not been tightly integratcd into the overall effort. Until this approach is taken, and the "American way of war" is adjusted to include, rather than exclude, all elements of national power, the U.S. will find its success rate in LIC a mixed score.