# ID: 53f559d4700648a1b1b4432e06cb61f8
# Title: Limits of Decentralization: Streamlining the Dispersed Parts of the Information Whole
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
When the US Joint Staff introduced information as the newly incorporated Joint Function in 2017, it was a clear indication that the US military was aware of critical changes taking place within the contemporary operational environment. However, despite this recognition, the US military continues to disaggregate its information capabilities. This monograph argues that the US military must revisit and revise its current methods of dividing information into separate conduit and content-oriented fields. Specifically, this paper argues for the centralization of information operations task organizations in two ways. First, the information-related officer must be given command authority over all information related capabilities, in order to successfully synchronize and coordinate them. Second, the overall structure of information organization in the US military should be reworked so that both content and conduit are represented at the level of a combatant command. In juxtaposition to the current US construct, this monograph examines a case study of Russia's holistic organization of information, and notes how such a system of organizations could offer advantages to the United States.
On July 2017, the US Department of Defense's (DoD) Joint Staff published an update to its Joint Publication 1 (JP 1), Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, where it presented 'Information' as a newly incorporated Joint Function, alongside traditional Joint Functions of 'Command and Control,' 'Intelligence,' 'Fires,' 'Movement and Maneuver,' 'Protection,' and 'Sustainment'. 
1
However, information as a functional variable in military operations has consistently served as an enigma. Even within the construct of the D-I-M-E framework (Diplomacy-Information-Military-Economic), military researchers have found it challenging to quantitatively determine the value of information vis-à-vis more tangible variables such as diplomacy, military and economy. 2 Furthermore, the current operational environment has undoubtedly given new meaning to the role of information within the study of warfare. The rise of Russian military operations in the Balkans and the Baltics serve as an indicator of what may further come; and one cannot discount the evolution of the Russian state and its military in adapting their use of information since the early 2000s, leading to their full-blown invasion of Ukraine in 2014. 2 Ibid., I-12 to I-14. 
3
4
5
was able to rise to the national priority level of other combatant commands, such as US Special Operations Command (USSOCOM), US Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM), and US Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM). 
6
7
6
7
optimize itself in order to support the content, as well as the conduits, required for information warfare and its IO forces.
The general field of in IO literature within US defense industry and academia can be divided into the post-Cold War period and hybrid warfare phase. 
8
In its inception, the post-Cold War IO literature forecast a world full of new possibilities.
It described future conflicts which took place within the growing digital landscape of the internet, a field that was experiencing continuous technological innovation. Nonetheless, amid this development, the literature remained too conceptual and abstract to envision a coherent path for 
8
9
Two of the primary advocates of this future cyberwar movement were John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, former defense analysts at the RAND Corporation. Beginning with their 1993 report, Cyberwar is Coming, Arquilla and Ronfeldt emphasized the changing nature of warfare brought on by the advent of the information age and propelled by the possibilities of the internet. 
10
11
12
Therefore, it was of critical priority for the United States to discuss and pave a future strategy that could provide protection in the newly created space of the digital domain.
Yet, Arquilla and Ronfeldt's focus was heavily geared towards the technological advancement of the information conduit system, as opposed to the psychological and cognitive impact of information. In sum, these two prominent researchers focused their attention on the improving technologies and digital networks that would lead to a future full of offensive cyberattacks by highly specialized computer hackers and programmers, who would be the future elite warriors in America's military. Nevertheless, this research offered little information on the content of such infowars 12 John Arquilla and David F. Ronfeldt, eds., In Athena's Camp: Preparing for Conflict in the Information Age (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1997). Also see John Arquilla and David F. Ronfeldt, The Emergence of Noopolitik: Toward an American Information Strategy (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1999).
Aside from the persistent research taking place at the civilian-led RAND Corporation during the 1990s, DoD also focused on generating its own ideas regarding IO. One particular discussion of note came from US Army War College's 1999 conference entitled "The Information Revolution and National Security" at Carlyle, Pennsylvania. 
13
14
15
16
Nonetheless, at the turn of the 21 st century, this technical prioritization would begin to change, as the field of IO started to give more emphasis to the information message, and as hybrid warfare activities began to take place around the globe. Scholars in the United States began to focus on clarifying the nuances of IO by differentiating between a concept reliant on the systems one employed via technological advancements-such as the digitized internet-versus a concept centered on traditional understanding of information-such as thematic ideas and human cognition-which affected the thought processes of human audiences. This delineation between 
16
18
19
20
17 Armistead,
Information Operations,
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[192]
[193]
[194]
[195]
[196]
[197]
19 Timothy Thomas, a former research analyst at US Army's Foreign Military Studies Office (FMSO) in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, had taken note of these changes in Russian military philosophy, and contributed heavily to the wider body of US Army IO analysis. However, his distinction of IO as either being a system-based framework versus a content-based idea further bifurcated the holistic notion of information warfare in US military establishments. Russia's tendency to integrate and consolidate the separated information variables was merely a continuation of old Soviet practice. See Timothy Thomas' chapter, "Russian Information Warfare Theory: The consequences of August 2008" in Stephen Blank and  Richard Weitz, eds., The Russian Military Today and Tomorrow: Essays in  global technologies, that, when tied to military weaponry, inevitably transforms "the way wars are fought by the world's leading military powers." 21 RMAs have great effect on how society adapts to the new advantages as well as demands of the new technological advancement.
Likewise information technology, alongside the information revolution, were integral parts of Goldman's conceptualization of IO and information warfare. 
22
Goldman categorically differentiated between the function of information as content and information technology as conduit. While the former related to the substance of the message and the inherent meaning of information affecting human psychology, conduits represented the physical and virtual medium of transferring information. This latter category was reminiscent of This differentiation between technology and content shaped how US IO and informationrelated organizations would be constructed during the early stages of the post-Cold War era. This divided US IO organizational efforts at the presidential level. 
24
25
Therefore, in 1999, then-President Bill Clinton signed Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 68 "International Public Information," as his executive action to establish a centralized national body that could coordinate all US government activities relating to information in Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2017), accessed January 7, 2018, http://carnegieendowment.org/2017/03/20/concurrent-session-i-cyber-weapons-and-strategic-stability-pub-67884.
USCYBERCOM Commander Admiral Michael Rogers was also interviewed by Retired Admiral James Stavridis at the WEST 2017 Conference sponsored by the US Naval Institute. This conference focused on future innovation and technology platforms. Both Rogers and Stavridis concentrate on the systems aspect of 'cyber warfare' without much discussion on the use of information in both defense and offense. See Admiral Michael Rogers, "Are We Organized and Aligned to Fight the Cyber War?," Youtube, February 23, 2017, accessed September 6, 2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d8WITQuOQFI. 
24 Armistead,
Information Operations,
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[124]
[125]
[126]
[127]
[128]
[129]
[130]
[131]
[132]
[133]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
26
27
The synchronization of diverging organizational priorities and culture, particularly between DoS and DoD, actually delayed IO synchronization and coordination. 
28
29
30
31
The original bifurcation of information into the content-oriented and conduit-related parts has evolved into an organizational bifurcation with multiple stakeholders. This paper questions whether such an organization structure for US military IO and information warfare are optimized for effective content-oriented information activities. However, prior to questioning the organizational makeup of US military forces geared towards contemporary IO and information warfare, this paper first reviews the theoretical field of modern Ironically, while the offensive IO development was being stalled through interagency bureaucracy and sensationalized press coverage, the defense of IO/information warfare systems slowly began to emerge over the latter part of the 1990s and early 2000s. See Ibid., 21-33.  organizations, in order to understand how the composition and makeup of organizations affects coordination capacity.
In 1958, James March and Herbert Simon-interdisciplinary political scientists at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania-published Organizations, which became the cornerstone text for encapsulating organizational theory during the Cold War and throughout much of the post-Cold War period. March and Simon's book is not the first work in the field of organizational theory, but it provides an overview and continuation of a theory that began during the industrial revolution in the late 19 th century by Frederick Taylor, Henri Fayol and others, who identified potential shifts in traditional hierarchical analysis of organizational behavior. 
32
33
33
34
Classical organization theory complimented early 20 th century sociology and thinking that stressed the management of human organizations through a more scientific and rational methodology. For instance, the classical school of organizational theory embraced the concept of division of labor stemming from traditional social economic theory. This notion of dividing organizational tasks into various sub-specialties had resonated with much of Western social sciences during the 19 th and 20 th century. 
35
36
37
38
35
36
37
[211]
[212]
[213]
[214]
[215]
[216]
[217]
[218]
[219]
[220]
[221]
Simon,
Administrative Behavior,
[4]
[5]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[192]
[193]
[194]
[195]
[196]
[197]
39
40
41
39
Admittedly, while human capital and initiative were intangible in themselves, the case studies during the 1920's foreshadowed the rise of a new field within organizational theory that described how institutions could adapt and change to an evolving world. 
42
43
44
42
45
46
47
45
46
March and Simon,
Organizations,
[182]
[183]
[184]
[185]
[186]
[187]
[188]
[189]
[190]
[191]
[192]
Simon,
Administrative Behavior,
[185]
[186]
[187]
[188]
[189]
[190]
[191]
[192]
[193]
[194]
[195]
[196]
[197]
[317]
[318]
[319]
[320]
[321]
[322]
subordinate actors to respond to the demands of a fluctuating market. 
48
49
50
51
50
Within the military, this notion of decentralization has been in common usage over the past many decades. The US Army's use of 'Mission Command' is a clear product of the military's implementation of decentralization. 
52
According to Joint Publication (JP) 3-13, Information Operations, IO plays a critical role in providing situational awareness and understanding necessary for visualizing and shaping one's operational environment during joint operations. 
53
54
55
56
The function of the IO officer is to consolidate and de-conflict the multiple information streams, in order to support or prosecute operations. 
57
While joint doctrine specifies that IO functions are "not about ownership of individual capabilities," the IO officer, as the designated information entity, remains the functional focal point for a command's information-related operations. 
58
56
57
59
60
61
As a subsidiary staff under the J-3 division, IO, as a form of non-kinetic operations, are typically treated as a secondary concern to the kinetic J-3 priorities. 
62
To be sure, all staff functions within a given organization face the same constrained environment. It is debatable whether IO planners face challenges as coordinators and synchronizers of information that are any more challenging than other staff functions such as 59 US Department of the Army, FM 3-13; US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-53, Military Information Support Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013). 
60
61
62 Rod Thornton, "The Changing Nature of Modern Warfare," The RUSI Journal 160, no. 4 (September 2015): 42. 'Command and Control', 'Maneuver', 'Fires', and 'Logistics'. However, in a standard   prioritization of kinetic and non-kinetic requirements, IO will inevitably take a secondary position in a military commander's cognitive thinking and prioritization. 
63
64
65
66
64
Kelley,
Allison,
and Garwin,
Nonlethal Weapons and Capabilities,
33,
[38]
[39]
Underhill,
[10]
[11]
66
67
68
69
A successful organization must account for varied specializations subordinate to its overall structure, but must balance the benefits of decentralization with the need for centralized control of processes. As organizational theorists have pointed out, subdividing the department specialties within a large organization remains necessary for developing a thorough understanding of specific areas. 
70
71
68
March and Simon,
Organizations,
[211]
[212]
[213]
[214]
[215]
[216]
71
The principle of decentralization as an idea stirs a certain sense of democratization which inevitably resonates with American audiences. Whether from neoclassical organization theory or supporters of army mission command concepts, the notion of leveling the communications and information playing field via a more equalized organizational structure wins the attention and support of both civilian and military thinkers.
difference between how private business organizations embrace the theoretical principles of decentralization as a renewed way of organizing, processing information, and making decisions compared to how the military has adopted the decentralized practice of delegation. Military organizations have typically been more hierarchical in their structure and their cultural identity. 
72
The practice of decentralization is less likely to be as applicable in the formal hierarchies of the military. In the case of the US Army, power and authority are principally based in a centralized command headquarters. It is the consolidation of power, authority, and ultimate responsibility for life-and-death situations that allow actual decision-making fundamental to the realms of war and conflict. The sheer nature of military reality demands adherence to orders during combat, and requires a form of more absolute control than that needed by business organizations. 
73
72 US Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 1, xxiii, II-18, IV-2 to IV -20; Wilson, Bureaucracy, 14-28, 185-194; Allison and Zelikow, Essence of Decision, 158-159, 164-176; Morris Janowitz, "Changing Patterns of Organizational Authority: The Military Establishment," Administrative Science Quarterly 3, no. 4 (March 1959): 475-476. 
73
Yet even beyond this differentiation of military and commercial organizations, organizational theorists have always agreed upon the preliminary structure required for streamlined information flow leading to shared understanding. Neither classical nor neoclassical organizational theory discounted the foundational role of structure leading to fluid and logical process for decision-making within an organization. Much of this vertical framework serves as the foundation for organizational decision-making. This paper argues that the current decentralization of US Army IO's organizational architecture retards a command's potential to fully appreciate the information environment, conceptualize the various array of information data, and ultimately enact an effective information warfare strategy against rising near-peer adversaries. US Army IO forces are hampered by a decentralized structure which disaggregates its force capability within a growing and emerging domain that it is tasked to dominate.
In the past, the formalized framework of US Army's command and control structure has prepositioned it for operational success during combat. 
74
74 Janowitz,
"Military Establishment";
Wilson,
Bureaucracy,
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[185]
[186]
[187]
[188]
[189]
[190]
[191]
[192]
[193]
[194]
Allison and Zelikow,
Essence of Decision,
[158]
[159]
75
75
USCYBERCOM could be given additional taskings and responsibilities to oversee information messaging activities. Alternatively, the US military could create a new FCC that focuses on all aspects of content, comparable to the USCYBERCOM's focus on conduit activities. By implementing one of these options, the US military would gain more robust capabilities and provide a centralizing structure to oversee and support both content-oriented and systemstechnical military personnel.
By addressing the issue of decentralization through new authorities and organizational structures, the US military can mitigate the challenges facing current IO and information warfare capabilities. A US Army IO, which can seamlessly command all the IRCs, will be able to mitigate the unnecessary bureaucracy which appears prevalent in the present force structure. By either expanding USCYBERCOM or developing a new FCC focused on the content orientation of information, the US military will be better able to support all aspects of information warfare. In order to demonstrate what a more centralized IO and information warfare capabilities could look like, and what they would be capable of, this paper examines the case study of Russia.
The current American adaptation towards the realities of the information revolution stand in stark contrast to Russia's understanding of information and adaptation of its warfare practices within that domain. While the US has resorted to a domain-specific organization, a USCYBERCOM designated for cyberspace superiority and dominance, Russia has blended the technical-system and political-psychological aspects of IO to enrich a greater understanding and way of its information warfare. The Russian military adaptation to the globalized information environment offers an alternative conceptualization of information warfare and of the organization of information capabilities. demonstrated military hybridization of lethal and non-lethal activities, coordinating cyberattacks, an information propaganda campaign, and kinetic military actions. 
80
81
82
83
Georgia won support from both the Caucasus region states and the international community. This support aided in the eventual defeat and withdrawal of Russian forces, though Russia continues in a partial occupation of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. 
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
According to Jolanta Darczewska of the Centre for Eastern Studies, Russian IO does not separate the employment of information for psychological effect from the technical advantages of the conduit system during actual execution. In fact, Darczewska argues that modern, post-Cold War Russian IO remains a continuation of the ideological and disinformation practices historically dominant within Soviet information doctrine. 
94
92 Armistead,
Information Operations,
[192]
[193]
[194]
[195]
[196]
[197]
95
96
97
95
In Russia, information is not only centralized in its conceptual understanding but is also centralized between the differentiated levels of IO capabilities available to the state. This streamlined vertical organizational structure enables analysis, production, and dissemination, and is the central characteristic of Russian IO. Such centralization can be seen in the relationship between the government and the Russian media. It can also be seen in the organizational hierarchies within the Russian bureaucracy. 
98
99
presented by a dispersed Spetsnaz force. 
105
106
108
While there has been an intense academic attention paid to Russian information warfare since Crimea in 2014, in conjunction with the more popular study of hybrid warfare, much of Russia's use of IO nevertheless remains opaque to Western study. 109 Some see this 
105
106 Ibid., 15; Bukkvoll, "Military Innovation Under Authoritarian Government -the Case of Russian Special Operations Forces," 602-605. 
107
108
109
In terms of this holistic understanding of information, contemporary theory and practice of Russian information warfare models itself after the nation's traditional understanding of information warfare dating back to the USSR. 
114
In addition to this holistic interpretation of information, the modern Russian state today also conducts information warfare in a much more streamlined fashion due to the centralization of its military and state apparatus. 115 This latter form of holism is an additional important component of Russia's practice of information warfare, based on an organizational structure that has much more fusion between the political and the military aspects. Furthermore, contemporary Russian information concepts capture a large swath of intelligence activities and collections, which in the US are typically an integrated but distinct field of military operations, remaining separate from US IO force structures. The field of Russian intelligence remains part and parcel of the larger whole of Russian information warfare, which mitigates the challenges of authorities and delegation that are common in the decentralized American military IO organization.
In sum, Russia offers an alternative view of IO, conducted by both the military and political apparatus, which has strong implications for the future of information warfare. Through its way of conceptualizing information as a whole, and the manner in which it has streamlined its decision-making by lateral and vertical centralization, the contemporary Russian security apparatus has adapted and evolved to the demands of the post-Cold War information age.
However, this type of all-encompassing framework seems unlikely to develop in the current organizational context of US DoD, given that the US military has yet to even centralize or consolidate the multiple sub-functions of information into one cohesive and functional entity.
Despite the overarching concept of information as the new Joint Function, US DoD continues to disaggregate information into two parts: content and conduit. This can be seen in the established organizational path set for USCYBERCOM, and the continued separation of US military IO forces responsible for information content. However, the challenge of streamlining organizational functions and processes in the contemporary era will continue to persist as long as the US military continues to disaggregate the information specialties across its organization. 
116
Prior to the advent of organizational management and change management within organizational theory, American scholars valued the role hierarchies and structures played in the construction of organizations. Even neoclassical organizational theory, which stresses decentralized networks and adaptation, still notes the importance of an underlying hierarchy.
While the concept of organizational decentralization may make organizations more flexible and adaptive, the benefits garnered through decentralized structures cannot be supported without some establishing hierarchy.
As American information warfare forces continue to separate its IO, PA, PO, EW and CO forces into different branches with different organizational support structures, there is less room for US military adaptation to address the realities of today's operational environment. While organizational parochialism is natural during a process of military adaptation, in order for American information warfare to be effective, this monograph argues that the US military must revisit and revise its current methods of separating its IO forces into the systems-technical and the content-oriented fields. Specifically, this paper argues that US DoD should centralize IO task organization in two ways. First, the information-related officer must be given command authority over IRCs, in order to successfully synchronize and coordinate them. Second, the overall structure of US DoD information organization should be reworked so that both content and conduit are represented at the FCC level.
As discussed in the case study of Russian information warfare, Russian theory and concepts have always delineated the psychological aspects of information content from the technicalities of its conduit. While the disaggregation of information between its informationpsychological and conduit system remained useful in developing future capabilities for the information age, Russian information theory did not advocate the complete separation of the information variables during the actual course of war. In fact, Russian information warfare practices still regard information as being part of a greater system of warfare. This holistic viewpoint allowed Russian hybrid warfare to shape the operational environment with great effectiveness. Through its tendency to conceptualize the whole of information alongside its tendency for organizational centralization the current Russian practice of information warfare offers an alternative structure for information organization.
The identification of information as the new Joint Function within US DoD is a positive step for understanding the role of information. However, the task of organizational adaptation to fully integrate this function remains undone. Continuing to question the working framework of American IO's coordination and synchronization mission in the face of complex changes taking place within a digitized information domain remains the central task in understanding how the US military can successfully adapt to the contemporary information environment.
information-operations-age-social-media; Richard O. Hundley et al., eds., "Security in Cyberspace: Challenges for Society" (presented at the Security in Cyberspace: Challenges for Society, Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1996).
94  
94  
97  
97  
John Arquilla and David F. Ronfeldt, Cyberwar Is Coming (Santa Monica, CA: RAND  Corporation, 1993).
John Arquilla and David F. Ronfeldt, The Advent of Netwar (Santa Monica, CA: RAND  Corporation, 1996).
Thomas E. Copeland, ed., The Information Revolution and National Security (Carlisle, PA:  Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, 2000).
Ibid. Armistead, Information Operations,[124][125][126][127][128][129][130][131][132][133][134][135][136][137] 
In 1996, the Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics produced a report on the state US internet infrastructure protection. While it was an earlier study of information warfare than the conference at US Army War College, the report remained focused on the information systems aspect of US infrastructure defense. See US Department of Defense, Defense Science Board, Information Warfare -Defense (Washington, DC: Defense Science Board, November 1996).
US Office of the President of the United States, Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 68: "International Public Information," Federation of American Scientists, last modified April 30, 1999, accessed January 7, 2018, https://fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd68.htm.
US Office of the President of the United States, Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 56: "Managing Complex Contingency Operations," Federation of American Scientists, 56, last modified May 1997, accessed January 7, 2018, https://fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd56.htm.
Armistead also detailed the bureaucratic challenges faced by Bill Clinton's administration. However, Clinton's PPD-68: "International Public Information," fell short of developing the necessary framework for authorizing and enacting US IO in the strategic sense, due to its failure to understand the challenge of enacting a whole-of-government approach mandated to a self-interested DoS.As a countermeasure, George W. Bush's administration attempted to regain the IO momentum from DoS via its creation of the Office of Strategic Influence in 2002 under DoD. However, this initiative was killed through by an intra-department battle led by its DoD public affairs supervisor, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (ASD/PA) Victoria Clarke. SeeArmistead, Information  Operations,[133][134][135][136][137] 
Ibid.,[125][126][127][128][129][130][131][132][133][134][135][136][137] Certainly, the authors did not believe that such delay of US IO development was intentional. Rather, they emphasized that because one cabinet agency was given the final approval authority for national strategic IO, which in reality was an equally shared commodity to all federal agencies, the national approach to a holistic American IO hinged on DoS operating culture. This culture, defaulting to its internal processes and procedures, was not well suited to serve as the driving force for national offense in the information realm.
Armistead, Information Operations,[23][24][34][35][36]; US Department of Defense Science Board, Information Warfare -Defense.
US Department of Defense Science Board, Advanced Cyber Threat; US Department of Defense Science Board, Capabilities for Constrained Military Operations (Washington, DC: Defense Science Board, December 21, 2016), accessed December 2, 2017, https://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/2010s/ DSBSS16_CMO.pdf; US Department of Defense Science Board, Final Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Cyber Deterrence (Washington, DC: Defense Science Board, February 2017), accessed December 9, 2017, https://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/2010s/DSB-CyberDeterrenceReport_02-28-17_Final.pdf.
March and Simon, Organizations,[179][180][181][182]. This latter notion of division of labor modeled itself after the classical economic theories of Adam Smith, and purported to incorporate his ideas of marketization into enlarged economies of scale necessary for modern business organizations.
Ibid.,[188][189][190] Simon, Administrative Behavior,[223][224][225][226][227] 
US Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy (Washington, DC: US Department of Defense, 2018), 7, 10-11.
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The initial research studies focused on defending computer networks. This focus primarily catered to DoD's 
Defense Information Security Agency
US Department of Defense, "Cyber Command Flexes New Acquisition Muscle" (US Department of Defense
On April 27, 2007, Russian military forces conducted distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks on Estonia's internet servers. 
76
77
78
79