# ID: 54c12904877740289220cee8c448795c
# Title: Leadership or hegemony? Investigating US command of the sea and implications for US grand strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
The United States was recognized as the sole international superpower following the Cold War and has since based its grand strategy on a universally acknowledged command of the global commons. At the turn of the 21st century, the U.S. was fully dominant in its command of sea and space, and largely uncontested in its command of the air. However, in the years since, China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea have made significant military advances in all three arenas and the global picture has expanded to include cyberspace and nonstate actors. This work argues that the U.S. no longer commands the sea; offers implications for naval doctrine, strategy, and acquisitions; and provides vital lessons to inform U.S. grand strategy.
We share a lot of space in modern life. Our economies rely on one another; our ideas bump into each other; our activities generate air-, water-, even noise-pollution for our neighbors. The world can feel very small, and crowded, and conflict-ridden. But our livelihood relies on our ability to overcome inconveniences, misunderstandings, and conflicts because the space we share is more important than it has ever been in human history: the global economy depends upon secure travel through it. Developing nations and first world economies alike rely on the 90 percent of world commerce valued at $8 trillion that floats through international waters every year.
For the global economy to work, our oceans, the airspace above them, the atmospheric space above that, and the invisible cyber world around everything must all be secure. Commodities of all kinds-from milk to meat to weapons-travel between shipping ports and the virtual currency of modern life travels between USB ports. But it is a treacherous journey; ships and bytes contend with pirates, airborne missiles, satellite orbits, firewalls, and malware as they travel through our shared space. This shared space-the "commons"-are areas that no one state owns and that provide access to much of the globe.
Stability and security of the commons have since the Cold War relied upon the credible threat of the United States as an international superpower. Due to an astounding overmatch of economic and military power, the U.S. and its allies have enjoyed almost completely unopposed movement of goods and armies through the commons. Freedom of movement through the sea commons-the ability to move merchants and armies through the sea, and to prevent an opponent from moving theirs-is typically referred to as "command of the sea." The decades-long U.S. command of the sea has enabled both the rapid response to threats that arise in any part of the world and the resulting secure commerce that's grown the global economy. But times, they are a-changing.
In the 20 years since the fall of the Soviet Union, the global picture has expanded to include the economic rise of several states, the military modernization of others, and the emergence of agile and well-armed nonstate actors. Rising economic powers developed their navies; defunct regimes transferred precision-guided munitions to nonstate organizations, and near-instantaneous exchange of information connected ideological demagogues with their sleeping armies. The economy and access we all rely on are the same machines that efficiently deliver inexpensive weapons to the hands of our technologically savvy opponents. As a result, the sea commons are increasingly crowded and increasingly dangerous. This situation requires a careful assessment of the world as it is, rather than as it was just a short time ago. Specifically, the situation begs an analysis of whether the U.S. still commands the sea.
To what extent does the U.S. retain its ability to move commerce and armies across the oceans unopposed-and to what extent do capable opponents now have the ability to block that movement? How able is the U.S. to block the travel of adversary commerce and armies across the oceans? In the case of nonstate actors, is this capability relevant? In the process of assessing these realities, it is important also to answer the question of whether one must exercise a capability for it to serve its purpose. That is, can the deterrence of U.S. sea power sufficiently provide command of the sea, or can the mere threat of adversary action in the world's oceans and littorals sufficiently undermine it?
Today, all of the commons are more important and under more threats on more fronts than ever before. An analysis of the sea commons-the arena with the most concrete reality, the longest history, and the most actors in play-should illuminate lessons for the others. In an increasingly interconnected world, the security of the global commons underwrites nearly all of worldwide trade, travel, and telecommunications. Thus, understanding the sea commons and assessing who is in command of the sea helps shape foreign policy decisions that affect both U.S. national interests and worldwide exchange. In the end, this work is not an international relations dissertation, but it should reliably inform them.
Command of the commons, even using a narrow definition, is a question of assumptions and semantics, and is an underdeveloped area of study. There are a handful of exceptions, but the preponderance of extant research and scholarly discussion relating to command of the commons centers on the U.S. position as a superpower rather than explicitly addressing the command of the global commons, or command of the sea in particular. Experts that do study the commons struggle to apply their understanding across disparate fields, and tend to have little interest in the idea of commanding them. 1 1 Elinor Ostrom, Nobel-prize winning economist and "commons" expert, helped establish the International Journal of the Commons in part due to a lack of interdisciplinary understanding amongst scholars addressing common-pool resources like the ocean, the internet, or the Amazon rainforest. The Journal and the Association that funds it focus on solving commons problems, rather than discussing who should be "in charge" Thus, one limitation of this research will be in making logical and palatable assumptions about the measure of command in a body of knowledge that has not yet agreed upon the metrics. Where command is impossible to determine or unconvincing in its reliability, it will be important to acknowledge the limitation.
Regarding means of assessment, one must keep in mind that it is not possible to evaluate command of the sea by whether it is used or by how it is used. Command of the sea is a strategic condition enabled by particular naval capabilities, and power may be vested in the threat of a capability in addition to the active use of it. Indeed, this is even truer as capabilities grow in lethality; reference nuclear weapons for one example of a capability that need not be used to provide significant influence. 2 Moreover, possessing a set of capabilities that results in command of the sea does not imply responsible use of that command. Members of the liberal international order, such as the United States, believe that responsibly using command of the sea commons retains them open and free for international trade and navigation. But not all actors who could gain or exert of them. Frank van Laerhoven and Elinor Ostrom, "Traditions and Trends in the Study of the Commons," International Journal of the Commons 1, no. 1 (October 2007): 3.
2 Bernard Brodie, "The Anatomy of Deterrence," U.S. Air Force Project Rand Research Memorandum RM-2218 (July 23, 1958): 7-17. Interestingly, though perhaps not coincidentally, Brodie began his career as a naval theorist before becoming a nuclear deterrence theorist. The U.S. Navy states about deterrence: "We achieve deterrence by convincing potential enemies that they cannot win or that the cost of aggression would be unacceptable… Conventional deterrence is provided by naval forces through the overwhelming combat power of our Carrier Strike Groups with embarked airwings; surface and subsurface combatants with precision attack weapons; and the scalable, deployable, expeditionary combat power of Marine Expeditionary Forces (MEF), Marine Expeditionary Brigades, and Marine Expeditionary Units employed from various combinations of amphibious ships, maritime prepositioning, and forward bases. United States Navy, A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower (March 2015): 22. command of the sea would necessarily be interested in responsible command, or ensuring a "global security environment that permits unrestricted global systemic flow."
3
In terms of space and time, this analysis has practical delimitations that service the question but also provide opportunities for future study discussed in chapter 7. First, this work will not include evaluation of command attained by non-naval means. While using cyber-attacks or space effects could be the force multiplier needed for a weak navy to exert influence over the sea, those details are not central to command of the sea. And although influence may be exerted over the sea through political/diplomatic, economic, or even informational means, this analysis will concern only the preponderant influence that occurs through the use of physical naval power (i.e. military power). 
4
5
5
6
The chapters of this work are designed to engage the reader progressively as ideas are developed. Chapter 2 provides a nuanced understanding of terms and concepts relating to the topic, including the commons, the sea, and national power and strategy.
Chapter 3 conceptually frames how one can evaluate command of the sea and offers a two-part metric to that end, which chapters 4 and 5 investigate separately. Chapter 6 concludes that the United States no longer commands the sea and provides implications for U.S. naval doctrine, education, strategy, and acquisitions. Chapter 7 details the flawed model of national power and resulting implications for U.S. grand strategy. Areas of future study abound; they are offered in closing and represent a promise to the reader that this topic will be the defining question of our times. CHAPTER 2 UNDERSTANDING COMMONS, POWER, AND THE SEA Terms used in international scholarship often have both colloquial meaning and academic meaning. Because the findings of this thesis are central to the precise meaning of "command of the sea" and relevant to the idea of "command of the commons," this literature review will detail each aspect of the phrases. First, the meaning of "commons" is explained, including identification of the relevant modern commons. Next, the review addresses naval terminology: sea power's source and nature are explored, and local sea control is distinguished from command of the sea. Finally, the reader is acquainted with the basic language of sea control or sea command, and the ships thought necessary to achieve them.
Commons and sea power have colloquial understanding and a mostly unconfused history, but as we will see here, "command" is a slippery slope, and the idea of command of the world's oceans or other commons is particularly tricky for modern thinkers.
Any legitimate discussion of sea power and related tenets begins naturally with naval theorist Alfred Thayer Mahan. Writing over 125 years ago, before the advent of modern ballistics, globalization, or deep ship-based land effects, Mahan attempted the first comprehensive history of sea power's influence. His work is most often cited, if not for its precise modern value, then as a starting point of language. Though the term "common" was used by economists discussing shared plots of land and other public commodities, Mahan was the first to use it to describe shared international sea space. He wrote that the sea "presents itself as a great highway . . . a wide common, over which men may pass in all directions, but on which [they] choose certain lines of travel [more] than others." 
7
8
9
Garrett Hardin advanced the theory in his 1968 work "Tragedy of the Commons," which was cited in a 1993 study as one of the most formative works for biologists. 
10
11
10 Laerhoven and Ostrom,
"Traditions and Trends,
" 3.
12
14
12
13
MIT professor Dr. Barry Posen introduces the term "global commons" to the international relations discourse by in his 2003 paper "Command of the Commons: The Military Foundation of U.S. Hegemony." 
15
16
16 Craig H. Allen, "Command of the Commons Boasts: An Invitation to Lawfare?" in International Law Studies, vol. 83, Global Legal Challenges: Command of  the Commons, Strategic Communications, and Natural Disasters, ed. Michael D. Carsten  (Newport, RI: U.S. Naval War College, 2007), 39.  he does not understand it well enough. 17 As with Mahan, his definition stuck amongst scholars without much fanfare or analysis and is today the accepted definition of "commons" or "global commons" in international relations theory and military parlance.
Defining precisely where the commons begin and end has proven a complex challenge. A nuanced detail of Posen's commons is the idea that there are margins on the edge of the commons that may expand or contract occasionally, making their boundaries fluid rather than fixed. Posen termed these regions on the fringes of the commons, where local actors or multiples states claim territorial holdings or other rights, the "contested zones."
18
term in her article "The Contested Commons" to discuss the increasingly contested global shared space. 
19
20
International agreements define the boundaries between territorial and international waters, yet the sea commons involve more than these disputed lines and encompass more than international waters. According to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), a state's sovereign territorial sea is defined as a belt of water 12 nautical miles from the agreed upon territorial baseline. 
21
22
Source: World Ocean Review, "Law of the Sea," accessed 5 May 2017, http://worldoceanreview.com/en/wor-1/law-of-the-sea/a-constitution-for-the-seas/.
The Convention gives each coastal state special security provisions in its territorial sea and sole rights to the resources in its EEZ, but permits the travel of both 
22
international merchant shipping and military warships through them for the purpose of peaceful navigation. 
23
Although shipping traffic may be directed by coastal states to restricted sea lanes, free and secure navigation through both those sea lanes and all coastal state EEZs is the crux 
23
of the global economy. Scholars agree that the commons are areas that belong to no one state-but part of the modern problem is that the sea lanes of the sea commons go straight through waters that do in fact belong to individual states. 
24
25
24
Sea lanes are an important part of the sea commons because they allow states, including those without direct ocean access, to efficiently export goods and armies for trade, colonialism, and war. Where sea lanes are especially restrictive or are the only means of transport from one place to another, they are called chokepoints. As ideal locations for naval blockades or diplomatic sanctions, chokepoints vary in size, location, and purpose, but have fared prominently in history as far back as 480 B.C. The Dardanelles, for example, is the 38-mile strait that connects the Black Sea with the Mediterranean Sea; it was involved in the Trojan War, the defense of Constantinople, the Ottoman conquest of Gallipoli, the Crimean War, the WWI Gallipoli campaign, and Turkish WWII negotiations with both the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Yet not all straits stand the test of time. The Mozambique Channel, for example, is the stretch of water between Madagascar and the east coast of Africa. One thousand nautical miles long and 250 nautical miles wide at its narrowest point, it was the primary trade route between Asia and markets in Europe and the Americas until the Suez Canal opened in 1869. The Suez Canal provided alternative navigation around the continent of Africa, splitting travel time and costs in half and rendering it the "forgotten chokepoint." 
26
Empire and continued trade with its colonies spread across the globe. These included the southern extremities of Africa at the Cape of Good Hope and South America at Cape Horn, as well as the man-made passages at Egypt's Suez Canal and Panama's Panama Canal. To facilitate trade through the Mediterranean Sea and Indian Ocean, Fisher named the straits of Gibraltar, Bab el-Mandeb, and Hormuz. To the North, he identified the Turkish straits, made of up the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus; and to the South, he noted the Strait of Malacca to enable trade with Asia. Today, the major global chokepoints are nearly identical, and all of them are contained in territorial waters In most cases, these maritime chokepoints are the only link between territorial waters and the high seas. For example, the Strait of Hormuz between Iran and the United Arab Emirates is the only link between the Persian Gulf and the high seas of the Indian Ocean, and the Strait of Malacca on the northern coast of Indonesia is the shortest sea route between the Persian Gulf and Asian markets in China, Japan, and the Korean Peninsula. These two straits alone represent over half of the world's maritime oil trade. Note: In 2014, the world supply was 90 million barrels and 56.5 traveled by sea. In 2017, the EIA did not recalculate precise barrels moving by sea, but trade is essentially the same. For comparison, total world oil supply in the first quarter of 2017 was 96.89 million barrels and newly commissioned supertankers transport approximately 2 million barrels at a time; the change in seven million barrels over three years is notable, but does not appreciably impact the trade patterns depicted in this image.
Goods entering and leaving markets in the Baltic States or southern Europe have two main routes to the high seas: either through the Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean or through the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean. The Turkish straits connect Russia and the Baltic states on the Black Sea with the Mediterranean Sea, and the Strait of Gibraltar connects the Med to the Atlantic. The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean to the Red Sea, and the Bab el-Mandeb Strait links the Red Sea with the waters leading to the Indian Ocean. Due to both the economic value of mineral exports and the physical value of food and fuel imports, these four chokepoints are the sole mechanism for survival of nearly every landlocked nation on the Eurasian continent. The vital regional and worldwide chokepoints in 2017 total 15 in all, separated into eight main naval theaters. Eight are found in Europe and the Middle East, while only two are in the Americas. For an in-depth explanation and depiction of the Eight Naval Theaters, see Appendix A. Comparing global EEZs with maritime chokepoints, one sees that every modern chokepoint lies inside at least one state's territorial waters or EEZ. The relevance of this circumstance is twofold: they are frequently the source of local conflict, and they are under the growing influence of both benign and hostile nonstate actors.
Local conflict can arise at chokepoints when nearby nations have disputing territorial claims, disagree on jurisdiction, or even go to war with one another. According to UNCLOS, territorial waters are divided in half when lands are closer together than 24 nm and their territorial seas have no space between them. For example, the Strait of Hormuz is 21 miles wide at its narrowest point, which means that the territorial waters of Iran and Oman overlap and no high seas between them exists for the strait navigation.
International shipping relies on nonthreatening interaction between the two states. In addition, in straits narrow enough for even rudimentary modern weapons to cross, both benign and hostile nonstate actors have significant potential to impact straits navigability.
The Panama Canal is one clear example of the rise of nonstate actor influence and the folly of thinking about chokepoints only in terms of naval power. The Canal is under the territorial jurisdiction of Panama, and the nation's primary trading partner is the United States, but the two ports bookending the Canal itself are run by the Panama Ports Company, which is a subsidiary of a Chinese investment firm. 
28
While this situation is not simple, it is benign in that China benefits from smooth Canal operations. Hostile nonstate actors often do not benefit from maintaining the status quo, and can have a destabilizing impact on maritime chokepoints.
Terrorist networks have the potential to project power into constricted sea lanes to either damage shipping traffic or cause enough doubt to divert traffic. The Bab el-Mandeb strait is within 100 km of five different tumultuous nations: Yemen, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia. Since the effective range of even the least advanced antiship missiles in the Middle East is 120 km and the traffic in the Bab el-Mandeb Strait is extremely slow and limited to channels that are two miles wide, warships and oil tankers are easy targets for potential foes. As a point of reference, in 2016 Houthi rebels firing from Yemen destroyed the USS Swift, a former U.S. ship operated by the United Arab Emirates. The ship attack and mining action in the area were in response to longstanding territorial tensions with Saudi Arabia. In order to stabilize the region and keep shipping lanes open, the U.S. deployed two destroyers to patrol the Red Sea. Within days, one of the destroyers launched a precision strike on land at a rebel sight believed to have originated rockets shot at one of the U.S. destroyers. Tensions ended, but this incident was one of many examples of nonstate actors asserting their influence on the sea commons.
And coastal states may follow their lead. Although the sea commons are accessed by all nations and less than a dozen nations in the world today have the ability to project power onto the high seas, nearly 40 states can project some form of power into their contiguous littorals.
Unlike other forms of physical power, theorists do not simply think of sea power as the sum total of a nation's ships. There are certain considerations that make sea power possible in the first place, aspects that make it more potent than it might otherwise be, and commercial considerations that confound it. Also, because sea power involves a common rather than sovereign national territory, much of sea power involves power projection, both in the form of offensive naval action and effective naval defense.
Sea power begins of course with a navy, and a navy is born of access and intention. Access and intention mean that a nation must be near water, its government must be willing to fund a navy, and its people must be willing to staff it. Mahan described in depth the conditions affecting the sea power of nations: geographical position, physical conformation, territory, population, character of people, and character of government. 
29
29
30
30
31
32
33
Although modern exercises of sea power have been more varied and perhaps even more influential than in the time of wooden ships, the point is the same: there is no power to a navy that is not used in its nation's seagoing interests. Most theorists before, 
31
32
33
Sea power is but one part of a larger picture of total national power, both resulting from national power and adding to it. Total national power is the combination of all resources and options available to a state to advance its national objectives. 
34
35
36
While discussing his ideas on soft power, Nye points out that power is conceptually over simplified by those who view it as a simple equation of more vs. less.
Rather, he says, power in today's world depends on context and is distributed in a pattern that resembles a complex, three-dimensional chess game: 
37
The bottom chessboard is the realm of transnational relations that involve actors crossing borders outside of government control. This realm includes players as diverse as bankers electronically transferring sums larger than most national budgets, terrorists transferring black-market weapons and hackers disrupting Internet operations. On this bottom board, power is widely dispersed, and it makes no sense to speak of unipolarity, multipolarity, or hegemony. And yet it is from this bottom board that many of the most important security challenges arise. Those who recommend a hegemonic American foreign policy based on traditional military power are relying on inadequate analysis, and like one-dimensional chess players in a three-dimensional game, they will eventually lose.
A final point to consider: although sea power interfaces with the world on all three chessboards (which makes it a crucial part of American national power), it is not necessarily permanently relevant in itself. Writing during the greatest naval battles of all time, when not a single other theorist could conceive of navies ever being obsolete, Brodie did. He wrote, "If in the future the greater part of ocean transport is carried in aircraft rather than in ships, or if the transfer of men and commodities across the seas becomes unimportant, sea power as such will cease to have meaning."
38
Having clarified the sources of national power at sea and the centrality of protected interests, theorists turn next to how much and in what ways a nation with significant sea power might dominate shared sea space. Note that in naval discussions, command of the sea commons implies command of all sea commons; it is expressed as "command of the sea," occasionally shortened further to "sea command." This is different from "sea control," and each of these ideas will be discussed further. There is consensus on the point that shared space domination is not thought of as permanent or unchallenged, but there is some evolution of language in the terms used to discuss warring sea powers, as well as some later inclusion of the dynamics between sea powers not in active war with one another.
Although Mahan never explicitly defined sea power or command of the sea, he referred to a warring navy as having "that overbearing power on the sea which drives the enemy's flag from it, or allows it to appear only as a fugitive, and which by controlling the great common, closes the highways by which commerce moves to and from the enemy's shores." 39 Without clearly explaining whether control of the great common was required or possible in all oceans at all times, or distinguishing between local control of thoroughfares and general control of all oceans, Mahan's writings did not fully illuminate this topic.
The compelling ideas about command of the sea were from his contemporary, Sir Julian Corbett, an influential British historian who was chosen in 1905 to serve as an advisor to the Admiralty in command of the Royal Navy. Like Mahan, Corbett tended to discuss command of the sea in the context of war, stating that the object of naval warfare is "the control of communications, and not, as in land warfare, the conquest of territory,"
and "must always be directly or indirectly either to secure the command of the sea or to prevent the enemy from securing it." He explicitly connected communications and command later in his work: "Therefore the 'command of the sea' means the control of communications in which the belligerents are adversely concerned." 
40
39
40
Brodie and Kennedy echo this active, trade-centric definition. In Brodie's words: "The side which is able to carry on its own commerce and stop that of the enemy is said to be in 'command of the sea' in the region where it enjoys that marked advantage." 41 In Kennedy's words: "If it is possible for a nation generally to preserve its traffic along these "well-worn paths" and to deny the privilege to the enemy, then it would possess command of the sea: its trade would flourish, its links overseas would be maintained, and its troops would pass freely to desired destinations." 
42
43
41
42
43
45
44
45
46
expression meaning that we have (a) adequate Naval positions; (b) an adequate Fleet to secure the command when war breaks out." 
47
Corbett and Brodie saw command of the sea as a continuum of active influence in which the preponderant naval power operationalizes command of the sea by controlling the sea lines of communication. Corbett wrote, "The question then in the consideration of any proposed operation or line of operations will be, not 'Have we the command of the sea?' but 'Can we secure the necessary lines of communication from obstruction by the enemy?'" 48 This is a relevant point, but since the last 60 years of naval operations and modernization have occurred during a period of relative peace when dozens of modern navies have ably sent forces to sea, there remains a need for discussion differentiating between naval powers in relative peace.
Kennedy coined the term "naval mastery" to describe a preponderance of sea power that serves to deter adversary action-an idea that can be thought of as a peacetime command comparable to Corbett's permanent general command. The definition does not imply an active control over a belligerent's commerce, but an obvious and foreboding threat to it. The details are worth reading in his words at their full length: Sea power appears in practice to lack quantification: almost any state can claim to have or have had a certain amount of sea power. . . . By the use of the term "naval mastery," however, there is meant here something stronger, more exclusive and wider-ranging; namely a situation in which a country has so developed its maritime strength that it is superior to any rival power, and that its predominance 
47
48
49
Command of the sea implies a largesse not held by most navies in history, in the 21st century, the meaning of "command" has shifted from a purposeful exertion of rare capabilities to a latent position of rare potential. In addition, command of the sea and other military prowess have merged in popular discussion with estimations of total national power. Posen began this trend in 2003 when he adapted "naval mastery" to describe not just U.S. command of the sea, but U.S. command of all commons. The collusion of "naval mastery" with national power and "command of the commons" 
49
Writing nearly 100 years after Sir Julian Corbett, Rubel explained in modern terms the key components of and differences between command of the sea and control of the sea. He notes that the U.S. Navy was so uncontested in its command of the sea in the 20 years since the 1990 fall of the Soviet Union that it stopped talking about sea control completely. 
50
51
50
51
52
In "Command of the Sea: An Old Concept Resurfaces in a New Form," Rubel addressed the change of the global picture, how once-minor skirmishes now have global repercussions, and how that change impacts command of the sea definitions. He detailed the crux of his argument in a few very salient sentences:
In today's world, sea power, even for nations with small coastal navies, cannot be properly understood on any scale less than global. Command of the sea . . . is directly associated with overall military and economic superiority, which in turn allows a nation to establish a world order on its terms. . . It is useful to understand modern command of the sea as a condition of naval superiority that influences other nations' decision in a way that is congenial to U.S. interests…The point lies in the nature of the global system that has emerged and in the potential consequences for that system if the U.S. Navy suffers even a local defeat. 
53
Navy, in conjunction with allies and partners, is able to maintain a global security environment that permits unrestricted global systemic flow." 
54
Command is defined in the vernacular as the exercise of legitimate authority to influence, control, or force-and this is a useful starting point for a reasonable definition 
53
54
55
Command of the sea thus means influence in all sea commons during peacetime and successful defense (or rapid recovery) of local sea control during conflict. The distinction between general and local command of the sea is irrelevant during peacetime because a state losing sufficient influence in one area of the globe to achieve its interests means that state is disadvantaged in the global economy, and experiences a corresponding reduced influence in the rest of the commons. In addition, influence in all sea commons rather than influence in any sea common is the difference between largesse and a lack thereof. As discussed in this thesis, control is local, but command is always general. Command can be thought of as the composite of global influence and local control.
For the sake of clarity, local sea control is that condition most people imagine when they refer to command of the sea, but the two are different. A navy that has control of the sea in a defined area can accomplish its interests-from moving its merchants and armies, to blocking those of its adversaries, to controlling international traffic and access to resources in the area. This local sea control can be exerted temporarily by navies other than the single navy in command of the sea, and in that case, local sea control can be lost temporarily while still retaining command of the sea. In addition, local sea control may even be achieved using non-naval means such as with land-based weapons or local air superiority. Several theorists have analyzed the ideal ships a navy might need to exert or defend local sea control, and they use detailed language that helps illuminate a thorough discussion.
Corbett went into great detail about tactics and ships a defending navy might use to exercise command, or an opposing navy might use to dispute command. He wrote that command of the sea is exercised by conducting defense against an enemy's invasion, by attack on and defense of maritime commerce, and by support of military expeditions.
Conversely, an opposing fleet may challenge or dispute command of the sea by conducting minor tactical actions or using fleet-in-being threats. 
56
57
56
57
Rubel's contribution to the discussion of sea control is again a modern adjustment of timeless ideas. He counters the assertion that capital ships are necessary to command the sea; in his view, modern times have inverted the ships required to gain command of the sea or to exert control of the sea. In previous times, "one fought for command of the sea-via battle, if possible-and exercised sea control, via dispersed security operations. Now . . . our most capable ships, the carriers, are best used to exercise command of the sea-that is, maintain the security environment-while smaller, more numerous forces may have to fight a decisive battle for local or regional sea control." 
58
59
58
59
Regardless of the ships required or the verbs used, the point for this thesis is the same: command of the sea is a strategic condition, while local sea control is a tactical exchange, and a navy in command of the sea will exert local sea control as needed. The following chapter will distill these ideas into a metric for assessing command of the sea.
In the modern paradigm of war, command of the sea is a strategic condition, sea control is its operationalization, and specific naval maneuvers are its tactics. In order to conceptually frame the evaluation of command of the sea, this chapter will use the definitions of command and commons, and the means of naval maneuvers, to propose a two-part metric for command of the sea. Chapters 4 and 5 will then separately apply each of the metric's parts-global naval influence and local sea control-to evaluate the extent of U.S. command of the sea.
Recall from chapter 2 the meaning of sea commons and the definition of command of the sea. Sea commons encompass all waters outside the 12nm belt from land, including the sea lanes used to travel through the belt. Although modern analysis tends to focus on the sea lanes part of the commons, the high seas outside 12nm and beyond EEZs are also vitally important because they contain undersea data cables and natural resources that all nations may exploit. Command of the sea means influence in all sea commons during peacetime and successful defense (or rapid recovery) of local sea control during conflict. These two aspects of sea command are quite different, and are thus analyzed separately.
Measuring global influence with absolute precision is impossible, but measuring the influence of one state relative to others is certainly manageable. "Influence" is the ability to affect things-to shape policy, direct decisions and movements, ensure favorable treatment, and the like. In the sea commons, indicators of effective influence are the ability to globally navigate and trade at will, or to prevent adversaries from navigating or trading at their will. Other examples of exerting influence in line with national interests include gaining or restricting rights to resources, or protecting the rights of navigation and rights to resources of one's allies. As command of the sea is that largesse of one navy over all others, the global aspect of influence is the key to this part of command. Since no nonstate actor currently has the ability to influence all sea commons, the analysis of influence will compare only states to states.
Naval influence results primarily from the credible threat of offensive naval power, and the threat is furnished by a measurable set of capabilities. Global naval influence requires substantially more complex capabilities than local influence. In addition to the sheer size of a state's navy and high seas capability that allows it to maneuver into multiple theaters at once, global naval power includes the survivability and capabilities of its assets as well as the capacity and mobility of a state's reserve of naval power. A global navy must possess a high seas capability either to battle in the open seas, or to traverse them to battle in an adversary's home waters. During peacetime, the size of a navy provides simultaneous service to multiple theaters, while ship survivability, advanced offensive and defensive capabilities, and a naval reserve that can be mobilized quickly, all work together to produce a credible threat that can swell forces worldwide as needed. Expansive and expensive, global naval influence requires sustainable global capability. 60 60 Global naval influence may come from different capabilities at some time in the distant future; the important thing here is that analysis address current capabilities Today, global naval influence is achieved by a combination of two capabilities: long-term, long-range power projection, and stealth. With current technology, states can accomplish distant power projection with long-range missiles carried by sustainable aircraft, surface ships, or submarines. Stealth comes from ships and aircraft that have low radar cross-sections, or submarines that are quiet or remain hidden. Yet not all of these assets are created equal, and not all are ideal for global naval influence.
Surface ships have traditionally been the cornerstone of naval power because they carry a compelling amount of firepower, but they present several problems for global reach. Large surface ships are difficult and costly to sustain, easy to detect, and expensive to lose, both in dollars and in life. 
61
62
On the other hand, submarines embody deterrence, enhance survivability, and are easier to sustain due to their smaller crews and access to sanctuary under water. 
63
63
Because deterrence does not work without firepower, the second facet of credible offensive naval power is the volume and reach of weapons that can be mobilized quickly in the event of conflict. This includes weapons maintained in the active fleet that may be launched from operational submarines, globally sustained surface ships and aircraft, or unmanned vehicles. Deterrent weapons also include reserve fleet weapons that are stockpiled and can be mobilized quickly and launched from either operational vessels or from a standing fleet of naval reserve vessels. It is obvious that stockpiles of weapons are useless without vehicles to deliver them; therefore, this analysis must include an assessment of capable delivery vehicles in addition to mere numbers of weapons.
The third facet of offensive naval power leading to global naval influence in peacetime is the deterrent value of naval power reserves. A reserve of naval power is more than a standing reserve fleet and stockpiles of weapons; it is an expensive and complex component of global naval influence because it provides the longevity required for more permanent credibility. If adversaries assess that a state lacks the ability to generate naval assets beyond those fielded for a conflict, they could mass a comparable fleet and mount an attack that would handicap the navy attempting to command the sea.
But a reserve of naval power creates a navy that can project power throughout a protracted conflict and generate capabilities as needs arise during war. Naval power reserves are comprised of a merchant marine fleet that can be weaponized and that provides legions of capable mariners, a robust shipbuilding capability, and an efficient naval research & development process that can equip the fleet as needed. This facet of offensive naval power conveys a deep well of resources that few adversaries are wont to challenge.
Finally, in addition to the credible threat of submarines, ships, and weapons, and the deterrent value of a large naval reserve, global naval influence is achieved by a navy's effective defense against primary threats to its survival. That is, if all of a state's offensive naval capabilities are indefensible, these capabilities are essentially irrelevant as a mechanism of influence. Since the most important facet of naval power is a fleet of submarines, they are also the first primary threat, and the most important facet of naval defense is antisubmarine warfare (ASW). ASW can be accomplished using mines or torpedoes launched from any platform, including unmanned vehicles and even satellites.
The second primary threat to global navies are the missiles designed to attack nonsubmarine assets, including expensive surface combatants and aircraft. Many of these missiles are inexpensive, and many are land-based. Missile defense can be achieved by using technologies that launch anti-missile defenses or that create electronic barriers preventing missile launch, or even by using unmanned vehicles that don't require survivability after releasing their payload. Whether submarines, aircraft, or surface ships, naval assets must be defensible for offensive capabilities to be credible. Thus, there are four modern metrics of peacetime global naval influence. The first is the size, stealth, and capability of a state's submarine fleet. Second is the total weapons payload available for long-range delivery, regardless of weapons delivery vehicle and including stockpiles of reserve weapons. Third is a state's ability to mobilize a high seas reserve of naval power, which includes its merchant marine fleet, shipbuilding capacity, and research and development capability. Fourth is a state's ability to defeat primary threats. Submarines, Weapons, Reserves, and Defense make up the measurable components of a globally influential navy.
There are less than a dozen states worldwide that have the ability to field all of these components. As midfield navies grow and modernize, their capabilities may be analyzed against others in the same manner once their reaches are global and the reserves capabilities are robust enough to sustain long-term command of the sea. But simply massing sea power is not sufficient to command the sea. The other half of fielding a navy that commands the sea is its ability to consistently defend its interests against attacks on local sea control.
A state that has or claims command of the sea will inevitably be challenged, and at those times must be able to defend against adversary acts vis-a-vis its local sea interests. As previously established, command of the sea does not imply absolute control at all times or that the navy with command is all-powerful or able to defeat all other navies combined. There is no need to have policing forces in all global theaters at once; in fact, the largesse of command implies that employing police forces in all places at all times is unnecessary. But a state in command of the sea ought to be able to defend local challenges in the sea commons from adversaries as they arise.
Command of the sea is concerned with local sea control because it enables the state that has command of the sea to accomplish its interests. As the U.S. Navy puts it, "achieving local or regional maritime superiority may be a goal for a limited duration in order to accomplish specific objectives. For example, naval forces could establish local maritime superiority in the Strait of Hormuz or regional maritime superiority in the Arabian Gulf to facilitate the free flow of commercial shipping." 
64
65
Rapid recovery of control can be measured by the ability to regain control fast enough to retain influence. That is, if a state's defense of sea control is too slow to maintain the credibility of its threat, then the state does not express control.
In general, the aggressors attempting to overturn local sea control are from two sources: those states whose home waters are under more outside influence than they prefer, or those nuisance forces whose primary aim is to detract from the preponderant influence of the state in command of the sea. It is also possible that a battle for local sea 
64
65
In the current era of threats in the Mediterranean/Arabian waters and the South Pacific, analysis of local sea control decreases the relevance of high seas capability and adds the importance of home-court advantage. Local sea control is synonymous with the ability to block naval movement or access to sea commons for duration of the controller's choosing, where the controller is either the state that commands the sea or the state that has challenged that command. Blocking can be achieved with traditional or asymmetric methods. Historically, large navies have achieved this localized influence with naval blockades, but in the modern world large navies, small navies, or nonstate actors could also use alternate means such as small patrol craft or mine laying measures. 
66
It is worth noting that defense of control might fail-and later be recoveredwhile maintaining command of the sea. In some attacks on local sea control, the state that commands the sea will lose the battle by being overrun by local naval assets, land-based weapons, or asymmetric advantage. But to retain command of the sea, that local control must eventually be regained. Regaining control must be timely and clear; much of command is achieved through the perception of threat rather than through active expression of control. Some indications that a state's sea control credibility is diminished are increased challenges on its control; lack of adherence to treaties or international norms; changes in non-naval indicators of power such as stock exchanges; or prevailing international opinion. These are complex to understand and even more difficult to assess, but may be useful in helping states determine whether to exert control of not.
Because the state in command must retain at all times those capabilities required to defeat all likely threats-no matter how distant those regions or how disparate those threats-it is much more expensive to retain command of the sea than it is to challenge it.
For the U.S. to defeat today's most likely threats-the navies of China and Russia, as well as Iran and nonstate actors in the Middle East-its necessary capabilities are vast and varied. These include anti-submarine warfare to protect the vital submarine fleet; mine countermeasures to defeat mining action designed to block littoral straits; defense measures to face a variety of threats, from sophisticated missiles based on land in Russia or China, to rudimentary land-based weapons at chokepoints or launched from small, mobile patrol craft, to those needed to face swarms of small ships, including suicide attacks and remote-controlled vessels. In addition, just as offense can be defensive in nature, defense can be offensive in nature-the U.S. benefits significantly in these theaters from offensive mining, as well as from advanced submarine warfare and precision targeting of land objectives. As is no surprise, many of the facets of offensive naval power that lead to naval influence are also vital in the defense of local sea control, while longer-term facets, such as reserve mobilization, are less relevant in the short-term battle. Most are riverine or constabulary forces unable to project power regionally or even to the reaches of their own EEZs. Approximately two-dozen navies worldwide currently possess the capability to influence their entire EEZ, and only 13 are assessed to be able to project power beyond their home waters. These nations are Australia, Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Russia, Spain, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States. 
67
Nations achieve global naval influence with a lethal, stealthy submarine force; long-range weapons delivered from vessels that can be sustained far from a state's home waters; a high seas reserve of naval power; and the ability to defeat primary threats. Yet all four of these aspects do not lend themselves to unclassified study or timely conclusions. For example, advanced military states can evolve their weapons and defense 
67
68
69
68
69
Since global naval influence is most enabled by a quiet, lethal submarine fleet and most limited by global logistical reach, these aspects of influence will be the two metrics for analysis.
The ideal submarine fleet is quiet, lethal, and versatile. Extremely quiet propulsion maximizes surprise and survival, enabling a navy to project a submarine threat that may not be present and perform reconnaissance undetected while also preserving the submarine's ability to return to the fight for weapons delivery or off-board targeting. A wide variety of accurate submarine-delivered weapons offers a navy that commands the sea options for targeting surface vessels, submarine adversaries, aircraft threats, and even land targets.
Beginning in the 1940s, nuclear-powered submarines were considered superior to diesel submarines in noise attenuation, but the introduction of Air Independent Propulsion (AIP) has changed this estimation somewhat. 
70
70
Worldwide, few states possess even 10% of the U.S. submarine fleet, never mind readiness and capability due to these very advanced weapons. North Korea (85 submarines), Russia (83), China (62), India (25), Iran (24), Japan (21), South Korea (24)   the United Kingdom (11), and France (10) are the only states that have more than seven submarine vessels, but their stealth and reach are not necessarily commensurate with their numbers. For example, although the Japanese Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) submarine fleet is comprised of only 21 total submarines, 19 of them are diesel/AIP powered, less than 20 years old, outfitted for the attack mission, and operated by internationally lauded seamen. The remaining two are dedicated training and testing platforms. Japan's submarine fleet is global; it crosses the Pacific biannually to participate in the Rim of the Pacific Exercise hosted off the coast of Hawaii. On the other end of the spectrum, Iran's 24 submarines are comprised of 3 attack submarines, with the remaining 21 being either midget submarines or semi-submersibles, and fully half of North Korea's fleet is either more than 35 years old and/or midget submarines. All 109 submarines operated by Iran and North Korea combined are conventionally diesel powered rather than AIP augmented and manned by crews that are not highly proficient at lengthy underway periods. It is noteworthy, however, that the littoral waters around Iran and the Korean Peninsula contain so many shipping traffic diesel engines that it is difficult to acoustically track a diesel submarine-even with a proficient crew.
The United Kingdom and France are both able to project power globally.
Although their fleets are very capable, this projection is not due to a preponderant inventory of submarines. The United Kingdom's 11 submarines are all nuclear-powered, operated by an exceptionally well-trained officer corps, and carry both the Spearfish torpedo and the TLAM. French submarines number 10 total, are pump-jet propelled like those of the U.S., and carry both torpedoes and land attack missiles. In addition, both nations have strategic ballistic missile capability, with each of their four SSBNs capacity of 16 missiles with 12 warheads each, for a total of 768 warheads deployable at any one time. As of 2015, it is British policy to deploy only 8 Tridents per boat with a total of only 40 warheads on board. 
73
74
75
74
75
76
Those strategic weapon submarines plus 8 designated as surface-to-surface and 11 designated as auxiliary make up Russia's nuclear-powered submarine assets, leaving approximately 40 conventionally powered Russian assets for operational missions. China is in a similar situation, with 67 useful submarines of varying capability and stealth. All five of its nuclear-powered submarines are ballistic missile strategic weapons, but it also has 57 conventionally powered diesels, plus five more designated auxiliary. The most capable Chinese submarines have traditionally been Russian vessels sold before the deterioration of Sino-Soviet relations, but indigenous capability has advanced, and Chinese engineering is now able to compete with the quiet and payload of Western submarines. 
77
Moreover, both states are developing ever-capable weapons for delivery from those submarines.
The gap between the weapons payload of a submarine and a surface ship closes as technology evolves, but the significant payload of surface combatants is prominent in both theater war plans and the ideal fleet architecture of a globally influential navy.
Although submarines form the backbone of a navy that commands the sea, surface ships 
77
In terms of global reach and logistics support, the United States is in a class all its own, in part due to the size of its force. The U.S. Navy estimates that 47 percent of its personnel are tied up in carrier positions or those that support carriers. 
78
79
Globally, only three other navies can sustain ships for more than a couple weeks at a time. In 2016, MSC employed 9700 people and transferred or transported 43 million ton of petroleum.
80
81
The global naval influence required for a navy to command the sea is most clearly evidenced by its submarine force and global logistical reach. This chapter has shown that the United States submarine force outperforms all navies in the world and history, both in terms of propulsion and hull quieting, and in metrics of acoustic processing power.
Moreover, no other nation in the world has even a fraction of the global military logistics capability of the United States-and at the present time, none appear to want it. But global naval influence is only half the battle of command. Yet threats continue to mutate, weapons continue to proliferate, the Arctic ice thaws the eighth naval theater a little more every day, and command of the sea remains primarily a naval enterprise.
The United States must prioritize naval assets to primary threats, and this chapter will prioritize the analysis accordingly. The disruption to local sea control in Mid-American and Southeast African waters is largely defeated, the Arctic challenge is in its infancy, and threats to U.S. interests in Northern European waters are minimal. Threats https://fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/RS20871.pdf; ReCAAP 2016 Annual Report on Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, accessed 27 April 2017, http://www.recaap.org/DesktopModules/Bring2mind/DMX/Download.aspx?Command= Core_Download&EntryId=464&PortalId=0&TabId=78.
because although other forms of power can be projected into multiple theaters simultaneously, naval power is physical in nature and the challenge or defense of sea control is limited by geography. To conduct local sea control analysis correctly, it is important to begin with an establishment of a theater's strategic value and an understanding of relevant geography, follow with a review of viable actors and capabilities, and then assess the result of likely conflict. Delineating accurately between theaters is thus crucially important; see Appendix A for a discussion of the Eight Naval Theaters, which are separate from the current U.S. Naval Fleets or Combatant Commands.
The Med/Arabian theater waters stretch from southern Europe to northern Africa and west of India-including the Mediterranean Sea, Red Sea, Black Sea, Gulf of Aden, and the western edges of the Arabian Sea. This naval theater combines two fleets the U.S. currently separates: the Fifth Fleet in the Middle East and the Sixth Fleet in Europe.
These fleets are connected both by the reach of modern land-based missiles and the ability of ships to traverse the Suez Canal to mass as needed in either the Mediterranean or west Arabian waters. Physical conformation is a region of high population density with shallow and acoustically complicated waters, half a dozen restricted sea lanes, and a history of intense resource conflict as well as a rising population of hostile nonstate actors.
The strategic value of secure Med/Arabian waters is difficult to overstate. They carry the world's oil supply and much of its dry cargo and foodstuffs; they represent the "backyard" of the world's nuclear powers; and they provide Russia and many of the Baltic States their primary means of interacting with the global economy. The Med/Arabian waters involve more players and at higher stakes than any other waters on Earth, and for the United States, they are as important as secure coastlines. A coordinated attack on Med/Arabian sea control by all of the powerful navies in the region is highly unlikely and highly indefensible, but there are two likely scenarios requiring defense of sea control: a single state attack from Russia or Iran, or a coordinated asymmetric attack from nonstate actors.
A Russian attempt on Med/Arabian sea control would come in the form of submarine warfare and missiles launched from inside Russian territory as well as from naval vessels in the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. The attack would likely begin from inside Russian territory and expand outward progressively as adjacent territories (and sea control) were overturned. Russia's KALIBR family of weapons includes a land attack cruise missile, an anti-ship cruise missile (commonly called the SIZZLER), and an antisubmarine missile, each of which has a nominal range of 1,000 nautical miles, can be salvo launched, and employs waypoint navigation. The U.S. Office of Naval Intelligence and U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group assess that the KALIBR family of weapons and Russian Anti-Access/Aerial Denial capabilities would render U.S. air superiority in the region temporary and fleeting: Russia uses a very dense network of air defense systems that overlap in layers to increase their protective capabilities. Gaps in coverage can also be filled by new EW systems that confuse incoming missiles, overload ordnance guidance modules, or cause premature detonation of electronic fuses. Faced with this type of air defense network, U.S. formations will be, at best, able to achieve brief or momentary air superiority to support ground troops. Russian Air Defense capabilities will also severely affect aerial resupply and medical evacuation (MEDEVAC). 
83
84
Perhaps the most daunting scenario for U.S. war planners is the opportunity a major conflict with a near-peer state affords other states or transnational terrorist organizations to challenge sea control in areas of their local interests. Iran, for example, has shown a savvy awareness of global politics, and has the ability to blockade the world's most important maritime chokepoint while the U.S. fleet is embroiled in a conflict with Russia. The Strait of Hormuz collocates American naval assets and commercial interests with Iranian small boats, submarines, coastal cruise missiles, and mines, and Iran has threated to use them to close the Strait. 85 Some analysts believe the 85 Iran most recently threated to close the strait in 2012 and 2016. For background see Kenneth Katzman, Iran's Threat To the Strait of Hormuz, CRS Report R42335 (Washington, DC: Library of Congress, January 2012), accessed 25 April 2017, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/R42335.pdf. For direct quotes on the 2016 threat see Strait of Hormuz is not under any real threat beyond words, but few could say it is exceptionally secure; the import of the situation is that the threat of a capability, even if it is not used, suffices to destabilize both the region and global markets. 
86
87
88
Unless its intelligence assets, strategic decision makers, and ships and weapons were occupied elsewhere, the United States could fairly easily recover local sea control from a nonstate actor by massing its firepower and intelligence capability. U.S. response to a transnational attempt on sea control would be similar to its response to African piracy, effectively becoming a police force and firing on targets one by one until the small terrorist force is overwhelmed and confidence in freedom of navigation is restored. This tactic of regaining local sea control with precision firepower is not without cost, however, and could prove prohibitively expensive in the case of consistent or coordinated nonstate attacks on Med/Arabian sea control.
88 Daesh reportedly purchased "naval capabilities such as 2-man submarines, high-powered speed boats, boats fitted with machine guns and rocket launchers, and mine planners," New Delhi Times, "ISIS Building Navy," 28 March 2016, accessed 23 April 2017, http://www.newdelhitimes.com/isis-building-navy123/. The U.S. has already experienced the asymmetric cost problem resulting from inexpensive and evolving terrorist tactics. In October 2016, Houthi rebels off the coast of Yemen disabled an Emirati ship with a missile launch from the shore, prompting the U.S.
to deploy two warships to the Red Sea in order to maintain freedom of shipping. Within days, land-based missiles were also launched at one of the destroyers, and the U.S. responded with a Tomahawk cruise missile strike on the radar sites where the missiles originated. 
89
90
The best way to lose to an adversary is to ascribe to it less guile than to oneself. Thus, the U.S. should assume that Russia, Iran, and transnational terrorist organizations would await ideal timing for one of the others to start a conflict, which would lead to at least a couple of the challenges manifesting simultaneously. As coastal civil war in the region destabilizes nations and their adjacent seas, sea control is increasingly under threat. And while the Med/Arabian waters are a hotbed of potential challenges on U.S. sea control, challenges in the South Pacific are already underway. 
89
91
feet of natural gas reserves and the South Pacific waters provide the primary source of protein to 4 billion Asians. China's export-based economy relies on the vast majority of its trade-over 90 percent by volume and 65 percent by value-crossing its home waters. 
92
In addition to expanding its role in the global economy, Beijing has also modernized its military in order to deter or defeat U.S. influence in the South Pacific. 92 U.S. Energy Information Administration, "South China Sea," Updated 7 February 2013, accessed 12 May 2017, https://www.eia.gov/beta/international/ analysis_includes/regions_of_interest/South_China_Sea/south_china_sea.pdf. A Chinese attempt on local sea control would utilize naval assets and defensive capabilities that analysts assess to be some of the most advanced in the world, and rapidly improving. China's naval assets are split between three fleets, the most capable of which is the North Sea Fleet based 1500 miles from the South Pacific. At a modest speed of 15kts, China could mass nearly all of its assets in the South Pacific within a few days of a conflict. At that point, Chinese submarines would outnumber U.S. 7 th Fleet submarines nearly two to one, it would have its massive inventory of 50,000 mines to employ, and at least 400 additional ships from its maritime law enforcement force, maritime militia-as well as the largest fishing fleet in the world-would be available for interdiction, To defeat a Chinese attempt on South Pacific sea control, the United States would need to commit a force greater than that required for Russia, and again resolving the conflict would likely require non-naval assets and regional allies. The greatest hindrance to U.S. success in a conflict over sea control this close to China is that the long tail of  counter inexpensive weapons from nonstate actors; and advance technology and acquisitions fast enough to keep up with the feverish pace of modernizing state and nonstate actors. It would need to accomplish it all 8,000 miles from home, in a degraded electronic environment, while sustaining ship maintenance, sailor training, and crew readiness. This is a tall order for any navy.
Simply put, there are not enough ships in the sea or hours in the day. The United States Navy is world-class: it is the most advanced, well-armed, capable fleet in history, operated by the most professional, well-trained sailors in the world. It possesses every capability required to defend sea control. But it numbers 274 ships split between two coasts and is responsible for protecting U.S. interests in eight distant theaters. Although its current offensive naval power is significant-its surface and submarine vertical and horizontal launch inventory is double that of Russia and China combined-the Navy assesses that it would need 355 ships to be able to defeat either state while deterring the other and still defending the homeland. 
96
The U.S. could defend or eventually regain local sea control from Russia, from China, or from Iran or nonstate actors influencing strategic chokepoints, but it cannot quickly defend its interests in all of the world's sea commons as threats arise. It relies on luck or good fortune that several challenges on sea control don't arise at once-and when they do, it will need to rely on non-naval forms of national power to cope. While the United States is not a static player and is currently undergoing a modernization and restructuring of its own in order to ready for challenges on sea control, neither it nor any other navy on the planet could simultaneously defend all the threats to local sea control.
The United States Navy is thus dethroned: its tenuous hold on local sea control unseats its command of the sea. area anywhere in the world. The combination of global influence and local control allows a state to move commerce and military forces across the oceans, overcome any worldwide challenges to its movement and interests, and block the movement and interests of its adversaries at any time and place of its choosing. While the means used to achieve global naval influence or local sea control may change over time, these two components are the indivisible metrics of command of the sea.
Analysis of the contemporary global picture reveals that the United States retains only part of command's necessary elements. The U.S. has an unrivaled ability to move, supply, and sustain commerce and armies across the oceans, and can marshal its highly capable fleet to block the movement and interests of most of its adversaries during conflict. It also retains the ability to perform the sine qua non of hemispheric homeland defense against seaborne invasion and the post-WWII requirement of strategic nuclear deterrence. However, U.S. movement and interests can be blocked overseas. As it nears the sovereign territory of other powerful states or the restrictive geography of maritime chokepoints, the U.S. is increasingly unable to overcome challenges to its movement and threats to its interests, or to influence those of its adversaries. Today, potential challengers and weapons proliferate the maritime commons such that even the exceptional might and global reach of the United States is insufficient to address all threats in all theaters. The challengers are too many, and their capability is too great.
Because neither the U.S. nor any other navy in the world has the ships and manpower to wrest sea control from regional powers and nonstate actors in all the sea commons, no single navy today commands the sea. 
97
98
97
A U.S. acknowledgment that it has lost command of the sea does not represent a cataclysmic shift in global politics, but the loss itself does have significant implications for navies and nations. The implications are perhaps greatest for the United States; as a result, the Navy should understand and correctly define command of the sea, actively determine its strategic goals in relation to it, and base its future acquisitions and ideas on those goals. In the 2005 quest to validate itself in the shadow of land wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Navy argued that global prosperity, maritime security, and the U.S.
Navy were inextricably linked. The idea was subsequently reflected in the 2007 maritime strategy, "A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower." 
103
104 Samuel P. Huntington, "National Policy and the Transoceanic Navy," Proceedings 80, no. 5 (May 1954): 483. "The fundamental element of a military service is its purpose or role in implementing national policy. The statement of this role may be called the strategic concept of the service. Basically, this concept is a description of how, when, and where the military service expects to protect the nation against some threat to its security. If a military service does not possess such a concept, it becomes purposeless, it wallows about amid a variety of conflicting and confusing goals, and ultimately it suffers both physical and moral degeneration."
Even as many naval thinkers recognize that the U.S. does not command the sea, they have yet to agree on terms, perhaps because some have not acquiesced to the idea.
As recently as January 2017, Admiral Rowden defined command of the sea as "a condition of naval superiority that could be regional," and wrote that potential adversaries are "working to deny us command of the seas." 
105
It is not pedantic to expect that leaders, policy, and the public all use the same terms to describe the same things-and the Navy should provide that language. The Navy has a habit of introducing new concepts and terms in either the U.S. Naval Institute's Proceedings magazine or the International Seapower Symposia hosted by the U.S. Naval War College. While these forums are readily accessible to the fleet and serve to provide a platform for feedback and discussion, they lack the permanence and severity of codified naval doctrine. 
106
105
106
Because doctrine is the thread that connects one generation of force to the next, it is the ideal forum for historically based terms that may wax and wane in popularity or prominence as maritime strategy changes. As Robert Rubel has pointed out, the Navy stopped talking about sea control and its tactics following the Cold War, and the term "command of the sea" is not a part of the current lexicon. Though he stopped short of this thesis conclusion, he does clearly express the term's value:
Command of the sea is not and maybe should not be a doctrinal term, but its utility as a tool for strategic analysis has reemerged. Some may be uncomfortable with its hegemonic overtones, but in a global system environment it is ever more suggestive of an informal partnership of nations, especially in view of the cooperative approach that the current American maritime strategy espouses. A current and sophisticated understanding of command of the sea contextualizes doctrinal concepts and terms such as "sea control," "sea denial," and others, which should improve programmatic analysis and tactical development. "Command of the sea" is an old term that, in a new form, can be usefully leveraged to enhance our understanding of the modern strategic maritime environment. 
107
In addition to improving understanding, programs, and tactics, doctrinal terms can vitally inform strategy. In the absence of a sophisticated understanding of command of the sea, naval leaders and the public at large are left grasping for terms to express their plans for the Navy-or worse, they invent new terms for old ideas and make plans that are not based on historic experience or current reality. 
108
108 For examples of new terms, consider the naval superiority/naval supremacy debate, or Paul Kennedy's decision to introduce the term naval mastery to describe what Mahan had already defined in command of the sea. Even NDP 1 uses the term "regional" maritime superiority as opposed to "local" maritime superiority. B.J. Armstrong makes this point compellingly in his article, "The Shadow of Air-Sea Battle and the Sinking of A2/AD," accessed 6 October 2016, https://warontherocks.com/2016/10/the-shadow-ofair-sea-battle-and-the-sinking-of-a2ad/.
109 Historically informed creative thinking can result in revolutionary understanding. As an example, the Navy could purposefully redefine command of the sea to accommodate rising navies and still distinguish between those that have compelling seapower and those that do not. Specifically, command of the sea could be thought of in the same way as command of a language is conceptualized. A language is commanded when it is used properly; command in this sense would mean that a person knows and understands a language, and then uses it for her needs and to her great benefit. Those that do not know language cannot command it, just as those navies that do not know the sea cannot command it. Command of the sea can still in this discussion mean that navies have achieved Mahan's largesse, but it would be a term applicable to any navy that had attained that level of understanding of the sea. It would remain a singular endeavor-but the modern adjustment of understanding would mean that "command" of the sea is not sufficient to enforce interests, and Admiral Rowden's point that "sea control is first" would remain true. The idea of command as a language is not far off from Kennedy's naval mastery term; one who has mastered a language is said to be in command of a language. The importance of retaining the term command of the sea-rather than replacing it with a new term like naval mastery-is that it represents an evolution of the term's meaning, not an entirely distinct idea.
If modern naval thinkers determine that ignoring or advancing previous thinking on command of the sea is necessary, they have the opportunity to codify why. Detailing those lines of thought in naval doctrine (in addition to magazines and symposiums) would bring collective understanding forward to match that of the greatest naval thinkers of our time. Putting the same discussion in joint doctrine would further widen the field of those "in the know." Without an understanding of what "command of the sea" is, both naval and political thinkers and leaders are wont to understand what they have lost-and whether they should want it back.
Beyond public talking points and the value of codified doctrine, the Navy might also need to reenergize the strategic, theoretical, and doctrinal education of its future leaders. To enable a generation of officers to navigate the myriad challenges and technicalities of modern naval conflict, the Navy must save them the time and blood of relearning basic naval strategy, theory, and terminology. As others have pointed out, Mahan's ideas remain important and central to modern navies-but the curriculum at the Naval War College features only a cursory exposition of his ideas, and education elsewhere is even worse. 
110
30-32. battle. 111
Good strategy, like good doctrine, stands the test of time. Yet the American tendency to see technical solutions to nontechnical problems often results in an inversion of the proper relationship between strategy and acquisitions whereby technological limitations drive shortsighted strategy. The U.S. then decides what it wants to accomplish strategically based on what it can accomplish technically. 
112
113
112
If the current strategic focus on sea control is a result of inverting the strategy/capability relationship, it will not stand the test of time because it will not meet as yet unstated U.S. objectives. If the United States seeks to defend the global system or protect the maritime commons, for example, no amount of local sea control will accomplish that end without the simultaneous maintenance of global logistical reach.
Strategy must be based on time-tested maritime realities, and so any strategy designed to defend the global system via command of the sea must also enable command of the sea by addressing the aging fleet of MSC vessels. While the 2015 National Maritime Strategy (commonly called CS-21R) acknowledged this connection in one sentence, the word logistics appears only twice in the 12,000-word document. 
114
Probably not; it is prohibitively expensive and largely unnecessary if one sees that current U.S. interests are achieved without it. Can it or does the U.S. want to lead a partnership that functions with the same largesse as a single state commanding the seas? Again, collective command is likely impossible, and even if possible, it would be extremely complicated and cost inefficient. Other solutions to the problems of the commons might be possible-and that requires strategists to look outside the naval paradigm for ideas. Should the U.S. position itself to prevent any other state from gaining command of the sea? Absolutely-and it is currently well-positioned to do just that. Do naval leaders think the sea resists command and local sea control is the only way to protect U.S.
interests? It appears they do, and so naval leaders must use the loss of sea command to help national leaders understand which naval theaters to prioritize and why. Knowing the components of command of the sea and deciding whether they are desirable, navies can build a strategy around intentional objectives, and then choose whether or to what extent they need capabilities in service of the strategy.
In addition to answering national policy questions, a strategy provides invaluable freedom and direction to the world-class brain trust that is the U.S. research and development community. Today, it seems understood that because the cost in dollars and time to build a navy that could simultaneously defend against all threats is too great, command of the sea as an end is not justified by the means necessary to attain it The Navy's recent commission of three independent studies to assess fleet architecture was a step in the right direction. 
115
On the other hand, if the Navy or its political masters determine that the U.S. is not interested in commanding the sea, acquisitions and think tanks could instead farm ideas and field technologies that make it easier to network with partner navies piecemeal as threats arise. The problems of networking with partner navies and even the joint force are well documented, but as yet unresolved. Between disparate technologies and hardware systems, unsecure communications at risk of exploit, and overly classified information, the United States is-despite its exceptional power and desire to share itonly marginally able to effectively leverage the ships and sailors of partner navies. 
117
That the U.S. no longer commands the sea and no navy in the world can take its place has implications for the United States Navy and the global system alike. As we return to a historic maritime paradigm, perhaps that of the early 20th century when Corbett asserted that the sea resists possession, the Navy must address its strategy in order to regain command of the sea or to accept the loss. In either case, it must also arm itself with usable language codified in doctrine to discuss that decision, and it must align its acquisitions with the chosen strategy. In the process, thinking beyond technical The Flawed Model of National Power Because very few policymakers have time to read about Mahan, Corbett, and the distinction between sea control and command of the sea, there is in academia a conflation of national power with command of the sea. The logic is that from national power (specifically military and economic power) flows sea power, and from predominant sea power comes command of the sea. 
118
118
Inserting these two factors into the model, one sees how even preeminent and exquisite military and economic power cannot guarantee command of the sea. It is not necessary that policymakers understand the full depth, breadth, and subtle nuances of command of the sea, but it is important that they adopt a mental model that disconnects power from command. Indeed, divorcing power from command is important even outside the scope of the sea and facilitates a deeper understanding of the U.S. position in the world. 
119
120
Just as the world is too complex to think in terms of one or two superpowers holding dominion over the entire planet's landmasses, it is too complex for any one state to attain command of the sea. And if U.S. military preeminence and overwhelming sea power do not provide expected results such as military omnipotence and command of the sea, then command of the other commons seems even less likely.
The sea is the commons with the most concrete reality, the longest history, and the most actors in play. On the other hand, shared spaces in the air, space, and cyberspace are collectively more esoteric, contemporary, and anonymous. Each commons is distinguished by its circumstances, and thus they must be viewed differently, but the sea illuminates lessons for all.
Several scholars have posited that command of the sea supports or enables command of other commons, in particular the command of the air. Barry  to sea and air, they are nearly entirely ignorant when it comes to space and cyberspace.
The expertise in these fields is limited to a comparatively tiny group of people-who alone bear the burden. Just a few dozen people are responsible for the urgent and important work of educating U.S. thinkers and political leaders in both the basics of language and the proper way to strategically conceptualize space and cyberspace. 
123
124
125
123
124
126
127
Combined Arms for the 21st Century. (The Joint Services often refer to the different arenas of the commons as domains-a term that is useful in military language because it does not imply that all arenas are shared space. That is, the military, and in particular invasion land forces, may operate in land, sea, air, space, or cyberspace that is not shared because it belongs to an adversary, and so the term commons is less applicable than domains.) Rather than understanding or solving the problems of the commons, this white paper was intended to "promote thought and discussion concerning the methods and capabilities required to address (adversary) developments." 
128
129
Recall Elinor Ostrom's idea that the commons present a problem rather than a tragedy-one that can be solved, but that may require local solutions to local problems.
In the case of the sea, what works for an anti-piracy agreement off the Horn of Africa might not work in the Mediterranean-and that is acceptable as long as the Navy is institutionally prepared for it. But Ostrom's lesson that commons problems are not always best solved by external government flies in the face of the way the U.S. military ministers solutions. In short, the U.S. needs a grand strategy that offers a whole-ofgovernment approach to the uncommanded commons.
International relations scholars debate voraciously about the important topic of U.S. grand strategy-and rightfully so. As many have pointed out, U.S. global impact and potential are unprecedented, and the responsibility of the sole superpower to guide the world is implicit in its stature. Yet arguments are centered on the wrong detail, and opinions on both sides of the debate continue to assume U.S. command of the commons. 
130
131
While the U.S. has allowed its conventional military competency and sophisticated 
130
132
Whereas U.S. military hegemony was once based on command of the commons, effective U.S. grand strategy will be based on the leadership of the commons. This does not mean the United States is in decline and must demure to growing powers or nonstate actors. Rather, it means that effective grand strategy must consider the agency of other actors in the field and how best to prevail in their presence. As the Director of the Institute for National Strategic Studies has written, "There should never be doubt that when core interests are engaged, the United States will bring the full weight of its power to bear and will persist until success is achieved." 133 In a world in which no one state commands the sea or other commons, the full weight of American power has much more to do with exercising leadership and narrowly defining core interests than it has to do with exerting influence everywhere at all times. In this role, the U.S. will likely find more money, more friends, and more options.
Peer review and development would greatly enhance this work and the entire discipline of the commons. Future research unlimited by time, space, and scope would delve into a comprehensive assessment of the sea, air, space, and cyberspace commons, as well as a consideration of grand strategy through the lens of the commons.
The United States and its Navy would benefit most from a rigorous handling of the modern world as it relates to command of the sea, sea power, and maritime strategy vis-à-vis Mahan. It would include a comparison of all the facets of a globally influential navy-Submarines, Weapons, Reserves, and Defense-and all the non-military means of influencing the sea. It would conceptualize the best way to maneuver in a world of multiple powers with a variety of strengths.
In addition, further naval study is needed in preparation for the next strategically vital maritime chokepoint in the Arctic. Today, the United States possesses just four operational icebreakers over 10,000 horsepower, the largest of which was built in 1976 and refit in 2013, while Russia operates 46 (including the world's only nuclear-powered icebreakers), with another 15 either planned or in construction. The combined icebreaker fleets of Canada, Sweden, and Finland total 28 vessels. 
134
135
Naval Theater delineations should purposefully encompass the busy waters of potentially disputed EEZs or choke points. They should take into account maximum land-based weapon ranges. And they should be divided into areas of connected or contiguous waters over which it is possible to exert or defend control given modern ships and technology. Current U.S. capabilities can project power to control areas comprised of approximately five million square miles, and centering a circle of that area on potentially contested sea commons yields approximately eight water areas in familiar parts of the globe.
The following figures identify eight different Naval Theaters based on chapter 2 analysis that are useful both for daily operations and theater threat assessment.  2. Such laws and regulations shall not apply to the design, construction, manning or equipment of foreign ships unless they are giving effect to generally accepted international rules or standards. 3. The coastal State shall give due publicity to all such laws and regulations. 4. Foreign ships exercising the right of innocent passage through the territorial sea shall comply with all such laws and regulations and all generally accepted international regulations relating to the prevention of collisions at sea.
Article 22 Sea lanes and traffic separation schemes in the territorial sea 1. The coastal State may, where necessary having regard to the safety of navigation, require foreign ships exercising the right of innocent passage through its territorial sea to use such sea lanes and traffic separation schemes as it may designate or prescribe for the regulation of the passage of ships. 2. In particular, tankers, nuclear-powered ships and ships carrying nuclear or other inherently dangerous or noxious substances or materials may be required to confine their passage to such sea lanes. 3. In the designation of sea lanes and the prescription of traffic separation schemes under this article, the coastal State shall take into account: (a) the recommendations of the competent international organization; (b) any channels customarily used for international navigation; (c) the special characteristics of particular ships and channels; and (d) the density of traffic. 4. The coastal State shall clearly indicate such sea lanes and traffic separation schemes on charts to which due publicity shall be given.
Article 33 Contiguous zone 1. In a zone contiguous to its territorial sea, described as the contiguous zone, the coastal State may exercise the control necessary to: (a) prevent infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or territorial sea; (b) punish infringement of the above laws and regulations committed within its territory or territorial sea.
Article 34 Legal status of waters forming straits used for international navigation 1. The regime of passage through straits used for international navigation established in this Part shall not in other respects affect the legal status of the waters forming such straits or the exercise by the States bordering the straits of their sovereignty or jurisdiction over such waters and their air space, bed and subsoil. 2. The sovereignty or jurisdiction of the States bordering the straits is exercised subject to this Part and to other rules of international law.
Article 35 Scope of this Part Nothing in this Part affects: (a) any areas of internal waters within a strait, except where the establishment of a straight baseline in accordance with the method set forth in article 7 has the effect of enclosing as internal waters areas which had not previously been considered as such; (b) the legal status of the waters beyond the territorial seas of States bordering straits as exclusive economic zones or high seas; or (c) the legal regime in straits in which passage is regulated in whole or in part by long-standing international conventions in force specifically relating to such straits.
Article 36 High seas routes or routes through exclusive economic zones through straits used for international navigation This Part does not apply to a strait used for international navigation if there exists through the strait a route through the high seas or through an exclusive economic zone of similar convenience with respect to navigational and hydrographical characteristics; in such routes, the other relevant Parts of this Convention, including the provisions regarding the freedoms of navigation and overflight, apply.
Article 37 Scope of this section This section applies to straits which are used for international navigation between one part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone and another part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone.
Article 38 Right of transit passage 1. In straits referred to in article 37, all ships and aircraft enjoy the right of transit passage, which shall not be impeded; except that, if the strait is formed by an island of a State bordering the strait and its mainland, transit passage shall not apply if there exists seaward of the island a route through the high seas or through an exclusive economic zone of similar convenience with respect to navigational and hydrographical characteristics.
2. Transit passage means the exercise in accordance with this Part of the freedom of navigation and overflight solely for the purpose of continuous and expeditious transit of the strait between one part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone and another part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone. However, the requirement of continuous and expeditious transit does not preclude passage through the strait for the purpose of entering, leaving or returning from a State bordering the strait, subject to the conditions of entry to that State. 3. Any activity which is not an exercise of the right of transit passage through a strait remains subject to the other applicable provisions of this Convention.
Article 41 Sea lanes and traffic separation schemes in straits used for international navigation 1. In conformity with this Part, States bordering straits may designate sea lanes and prescribe traffic separation schemes for navigation in straits where necessary to promote the safe passage of ships. 2. Such States may, when circumstances require, and after giving due publicity thereto, substitute other sea lanes or traffic separation schemes for any sea lanes or traffic separation schemes previously designated or prescribed by them. 3. Such sea lanes and traffic separation schemes shall conform to generally accepted international regulations. 4. Before designating or substituting sea lanes or prescribing or substituting traffic separation schemes, States bordering straits shall refer proposals to the competent international organization with a view to their adoption. The organization may adopt only such sea lanes and traffic separation schemes as may be agreed with the States bordering the straits, after which the States may designate, prescribe or substitute them. 5. In respect of a strait where sea lanes or traffic separation schemes through the waters of two or more States bordering the strait are being proposed, the States concerned shall cooperate in formulating proposals in consultation with the competent international organization. 6. States bordering straits shall clearly indicate all sea lanes and traffic separation schemes designated or prescribed by them on charts to which due publicity shall be given. 7. Ships in transit passage shall respect applicable sea lanes and traffic separation schemes established in accordance with this article.
Article 45 Innocent passage 1. The regime of innocent passage, in accordance with Part II, section 3, shall apply in straits used for international navigation: (a) excluded from the application of the regime of transit passage under article 38, paragraph 1; or (b) between a part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone and the territorial sea of a foreign State. 2. There shall be no suspension of innocent passage through such straits. (e) freedom of fishing, subject to the conditions laid down in section 2; (f) freedom of scientific research, subject to Parts VI and XIII. 2. These freedoms shall be exercised by all States with due regard for the interests of other States in their exercise of the freedom of the high seas, and also with due regard for the rights under this Convention with respect to activities in the Area.
Article 88 Reservation of the high seas for peaceful purposes The high seas shall be reserved for peaceful purposes.
Article 89 Invalidity of claims of sovereignty over the high seas No State may validly purport to subject any part of the high seas to its sovereignty.
Article 90 Right of navigation Every State, whether coastal or land-locked, has the right to sail ships flying its flag on the high seas.
Article 91 Nationality of ships 1. Every State shall fix the conditions for the grant of its nationality to ships, for the registration of ships in its territory, and for the right to fly its flag. Ships have the nationality of the State whose flag they are entitled to fly. There must exist a genuine link between the State and the ship. 2. Every State shall issue to ships to which it has granted the right to fly its flag documents to that effect.
Article 95 Immunity of warships on the high seas Warships on the high seas have complete immunity from the jurisdiction of any State other than the flag State.
Article 107 Ships and aircraft which are entitled to seize on account of piracy A seizure on account of piracy may be carried out only by warships or military aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on government service and authorized to that effect.
Article 108 Illicit traffic in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances 1. All States shall cooperate in the suppression of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances engaged in by ships on the high seas contrary to international conventions. 2. Any State which has reasonable grounds for believing that a ship flying its flag is engaged in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances may request the cooperation of other States to suppress such traffic.
Article 111 Right of hot pursuit 1. The hot pursuit of a foreign ship may be undertaken when the competent authorities of the coastal State have good reason to believe that the ship has violated the laws and regulations of that State. Such pursuit must be commenced when the foreign ship or one of its boats is within the internal waters, the archipelagic waters, the territorial sea or the contiguous zone of the pursuing State, and may only be continued outside the territorial sea or the contiguous zone if the pursuit has not been interrupted. It is not necessary that, at the time when the foreign ship within the territorial sea or the contiguous zone receives the order to stop, the ship giving the order should likewise be within the territorial sea or the contiguous zone. If the foreign ship is within a contiguous zone, as defined in article 33, the pursuit may only be undertaken if there has been a violation of the rights for the protection of which the zone was established. 2. The right of hot pursuit shall apply mutatis mutandis to violations in the exclusive economic zone or on the continental shelf, including safety zones around continental shelf installations, of the laws and regulations of the coastal State applicable in accordance with this Convention to the exclusive economic zone or the continental shelf, including such safety zones. 3. The right of hot pursuit ceases as soon as the ship pursued enters the territorial sea of its own State or of a third State. 4. Hot pursuit is not deemed to have begun unless the pursuing ship has satisfied itself by such practicable means as may be available that the ship pursued or one of its boats or other craft working as a team and using the ship pursued as a mother ship is within the limits of the territorial sea, or, as the case may be, within the contiguous zone or the exclusive economic zone or above the continental shelf. The pursuit may only be commenced after a visual or auditory signal to stop has been given at a distance which enables it to be seen or heard by the foreign ship. 5. The right of hot pursuit may be exercised only by warships or military aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on government service and authorized to that effect. 6. Where hot pursuit is effected by an aircraft: (a) the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply mutatis mutandis; (b) the aircraft giving the order to stop must itself actively pursue the ship until a ship or another aircraft of the coastal State, summoned by the aircraft, arrives to take over the pursuit, unless the aircraft is itself able to arrest the ship. It does not suffice to justify an arrest outside the territorial sea that the ship was merely sighted by the aircraft as an offender or suspected offender, if it was not both ordered to stop and pursued by the aircraft itself or other aircraft or ships which continue the pursuit without interruption.
7. The release of a ship arrested within the jurisdiction of a State and escorted to a port of that State for the purposes of an inquiry before the competent authorities may not be claimed solely on the ground that the ship, in the course of its voyage, was escorted across a portion of the exclusive economic zone or the high seas, if the circumstances rendered this necessary. 8. Where a ship has been stopped or arrested outside the territorial sea in circumstances which do not justify the exercise of the right of hot pursuit, it shall be compensated for any loss or damage that may have been thereby sustained.
Article 112 Right to lay submarine cables and pipelines 1. All States are entitled to lay submarine cables and pipelines on the bed of the high seas beyond the continental shelf. 2. Article 79, paragraph 5, applies to such cables and pipelines.
Article 113 Breaking or injury of a submarine cable or pipeline Every State shall adopt the laws and regulations necessary to provide that the breaking or injury by a ship flying its flag or by a person subject to its jurisdiction of a submarine cable beneath the high seas done wilfully or through culpable negligence, in such a manner as to be liable to interrupt or obstruct telegraphic or telephonic communications, and similarly the breaking or injury of a submarine pipeline or high-voltage power cable, shall be a punishable offence. This provision shall apply also to conduct calculated or likely to result in such breaking or injury. However, it shall not apply to any break or injury caused by persons who acted merely with the legitimate object of saving their lives or their ships, after having taken all necessary precautions to avoid such break or injury. Selected Surface Fleets Unlike the selected submarine fleets above, the table below is entirely unedited for the reader's sake. It demonstrates the vast differences between international naviesin composition, age, and even in naming convention-that are a result of the vastly different needs of nations. This list does not include all of the support, supply, tender, auxiliary, and rescue ships that most of the navies represented here also operate. 
Robert C. Rubel, "Command of the Sea: An Old Concept Resurfaces in a New Form," Naval War College Review 65, no.
(Autumn 2012): 27.   4  Examples of influence through other means are the threat of sanctions if trade is blocked, the use of allied exercises in a contested region to demonstrate unified resolve, or even the informational threat of mines-whether they are in place or not.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976),
Alfred Thayer Mahan, The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660-1783 (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1890.), 25.
For several hours of recent thinking on the topic, see Grand Strategy Conference 2016 videos, Texas A&M University's Bush School for Government and Public Service, accessed 30 April 2017, https://vimeo.com/196423845, https://vimeo.com/196419390, https://vimeo.com/196415210.
William Forster Lloyd, "W. F. Lloyd on the Checks to Population,"Population  and Development Review 6, no. 3 (1980): 483.   
Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons," Science 162, no. 3859 (13 December 1968):
The most well-known contested zone today is the South China Sea, where seven different states make conflicting territorial claims. The Arctic is likely to be another highly contested region.
Michèle Flournoy and Shawn Brimley, "Contested Commons," Proceedings  Magazine 135, no. 1277 (July  
2009): 17.20  Allen, "Command of the Commons Boasts: An Invitation to Lawfare?" 23. On this point, Allen references the work of VADM Jacoby, "The Global Commons and the Role for Intelligence" in the same volume.21  See Appendix B for a relevant selection of UNCLOS Articles and definitions.
Satellite circuits comprise under one percent of active U.S. international communications circuits. Cathy
Hsu, "2010
Panama Ports Company was a holding of the firm Hutchison-Whampoa, which merged in March 2015 with Cheung Kong Holdings. The new Hong Kong conglomerate, CK Hutchison Holdings Limited, retains Panama Ports Company. In 2008, a Congressional testimony assessed minimal negative impact of this arrangement. See the hearing before the Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, "The New Challenge: Chine in the Western Hemisphere," 11 June 2008, accessed 3 May 2017, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg42905/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg42905.pdf.
Author's definition.
Instruments of national power from US Department of Defense, Joint Publication 1, Doctrine of the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), 1.
Joseph S. Nye Jr., Bound to Lead: The Changing Nature of American Power(New York: Basic Books, 1990).
Joseph S. Nye Jr., "Recovering American Leadership," Survival: Global Politics and Strategy 50, no. 1 (February 2008): 55-68.
Brodie, A Guide to Naval Strategy, 2.
Asset survivability is especially important in times of fiscal constraints-it comes from ship self-defense, material quality, and damage control systems, or from the use of unmanned vehicles that aren't required to be survivable.
A Naval Postgraduate School study found that 47 percent of all personnel afloat are occupied either on carriers or in supporting roles for them. Juan L. Carrasco, "A
Reference the bombing of the USS Cole, Houthi rebels laying mines in the Gulf of Aden, and the Sea Tigers, the exceptionally effective naval wing of the Sri Lankan insurgency group Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
US Military Sealift Command, Annual Report 2017, accessed 4 May 2017, http://www.msc.navy.mil/annualreport/2016/MSCAnnual16.pdf.
John T. Kuehn. A Military History of Japan: From the Age of the Samurai to the 21st Century (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2014), 242-244.
U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group, Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook, January 2017.
Office of Naval Intelligence, "The Russian Navy: A Historic Transition," December 2015, accessed 10 May 2017, http://www.oni.navy.mil/Intelligence-Community/Russia/.
Ship and weapon inventories from Ronald O'Rourke, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, CRS Report RL32665 (Washington, DC: Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, 2017), accessed 21 April 2017, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/weapons/RL32665.pdf. See also table of comparative inventories in MITRE Corporation, Navy Future Fleet Platform Architecture Study, 1 July 2016.
Rubel, "Command of the Sea," 32.   
A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower (March 2015), 24.
Jeff Vandengel, "Too Big to Sink," Proceedings 143, no. 1371 (May 2017):  18.   
International economists and other researches focus on the ability of a state to covert its resources to human capital, and argue that the best measures of national wealth and power is not Gross Domestic Product, but Human Development Index.
Nye, "Recovering American Leadership," 55.   
Abraham M. Denmark, "Managing the Global Commons," The Washington Quarterly 33, no. 3 (July 2010): 165-182.
Sameer Lalwani and Joshua Shifrinson, "Whither Command of the Commons? Choosing Security Over Control," New America Foundation (September 2011): 1-31.
U.S. Army White Paper, "Multi-Domain Battle: Combined Arms for the 21st Century," 24 February 2017, accessed 9 May 2017, http://www.tradoc.army.mil/MultiDomainBattle/docs/MDB_WhitePaper.pdf.
Nadia Schadlow, War and the Art of Governance (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2017), 2.
Posen, Texas A&M Bush School Grand Strategy Conference, 30 November  2016.   
China, in particular, has worked to craft a strategy that is both aware of the modern world and deferent to traditional Chinese concepts such as "shi," the constant search for strategic advantage. TimothyL Thomas, "China's Concept of Military  Strategy," Parameters 44, no. 4 (Winter 2014-2015): 40.
Dr. Richard D. Hooker Jr., The Grand Strategy of the United States: INSS Strategic Monograph (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, October 2014), 26.
The conceptualization would include the time-tested practices of other middle and great powers, such as strategic denial and deception, which enhance power projection with minimal resources.
For one alternative to the Unified Command Plan map, see Defense News, accessed 16 May 2017, http://intercepts.defensenews.com/2013/08/more-cocomconsolidation-options.
The contiguous zone may not extend beyond 24 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.
IHS Jane's World Navies, accessed 16 May 2017, https://janes.ihs.com/SecurityCountryRisk/Display/1322795.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
Surfacing a diesel gave aircrews a sail to spot, a magnetic anomaly to detect, and greater noise for sonar operators to track. The AIP upgrade is a hull modification to existing diesel submarines that enables them to remain submerged for longer time periods, in particular to run after firing a weapon. And in some cases where a nuclear-powered submarine emits engine noise, AIP diesels are even quieter. 
71
72
71
72
Unfortunately, the global security picture is grim, and the home-court advantage of regional powers and local nonstate actors is both significant and increasing.
Unlike the local challenges weathered by any other navy in history, U.S. sea control is under fire in all eight naval theaters. Enterprising pirates, elicit traffickers, and transnational terrorist organizations, as well as navies and land-based weapons in China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea, challenge sea control in all corners of the globe. As a result, the United States mounts an array of sanctions, alliances, and diplomatic efforts to supplement its naval action in order to retain or regain control. For example, the U.S.  To compare sea control capabilities and threats, one must first consider the theater and then the players. Sea control analysis is most usefully accomplished at a theater level distraction, and intelligence. 
93
94
95
In order to retain or regain local sea control from the myriad threats in the sea commons today, the United States needs a naval fleet that can do it all. The navy that could overcome only the three challenges discussed in this chapter would be able to mass a fleet comparable in size and capability to those of modern Russia and China; defend against and defeat land-based weapons deep in their sovereign territory; affordably CHAPTER 6 CONCLUSIONS Command of the sea is one of those ringing phrases that dominates the imagination but confuses the intellect.
-Sir Julian Corbett, 1918   The American Navy acknowledges no superior in its ability to steam and to shoot. If nothing else was required of a fleet of ships in naval warfare we might rest securely in the belief that we are as well prepared for war as any possible antagonist.
-LCDR Dudley Knox, 1915   The goal of this work was to develop and apply a metric in order to determine to what extent the U.S. commands the sea. The value of such a metric is that it stands the test of time and philosophy: it builds on history, helps standardize language, can be  The United States does not need to panic to regain or protect command of the sea, or even attempt to control all domains at once either globally or locally. Rather, it should focus on a clear, common sense strategy limited only to national security objectives.
Much in the way Britain released its hold on Europe in the face of French local influence in the Mediterranean following WWII, the U.S. should release its hold on hegemony before it is forced to do so. As other navies and nations convert resources to power and earn a seat at the table, the U.S. can relinquish its obsession with omnipotence and technical solutions; view the world as a field of players rather than adversaries; and become the expert in commons problems and solutions.
To that end, national and naval leaders should acquaint themselves with the growing volume of commons work in disparate fields-from forestry to social programs to seabed resources-and avail themselves to the conclusions of that study. In doing so, the U.S. can evolve its grand strategy as a paradigm of leadership rather than an endless quest to outmaneuver the proliferation of ever-more powerful enemies. Like the advent of the nuclear age, this is a moment in history that requires leaders with the gumption and intellectual forbearance to face issues well outside any of our previous understanding.
The history is there; we need only find a way to apply it. In terms of friends, foes, and the shared space we all inhabit, the U.S. will remain for some time the world's most capable ally and its most dangerous game-and that, at least, is a position to protect.
The theaters for daily operations and war planning as they are currently drawn are based on the Unified Command Plan that parses the world into six geographic theaters, each under a separate Combatant Commander. Those lines are particularly troublesome for the Navy because naval theaters are different from land theaters, and even current U.S. land theaters are not optimized for modern-day threats. 
136
137
138
Article 16 Legal status of the territorial sea, of the air space over the territorial sea and of its bed and subsoil 1. The sovereignty of a coastal State extends, beyond its land territory and internal waters and, in the case of an archipelagic State, its archipelagic waters, to an adjacent belt of sea, described as the territorial sea. 2. This sovereignty extends to the air space over the territorial sea as well as to its bed and subsoil. 3. The sovereignty over the territorial sea is exercised subject to this Convention and to other rules of international law.
137 Accessed 30 April 2017, http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/UNCLOS-TOC.htm. 
138
Article 17 Right of innocent passage Subject to this Convention, ships of all States, whether coastal or land-locked, enjoy the right of innocent passage through the territorial sea.
Article 18 Meaning of passage 1. Passage means navigation through the territorial sea for the purpose of: (a) traversing that sea without entering internal waters or calling at a roadstead or port facility outside internal waters; or (b) proceeding to or from internal waters or a call at such roadstead or port facility. 2. Passage shall be continuous and expeditious. However, passage includes stopping and anchoring, but only in so far as the same are incidental to ordinary navigation or are rendered necessary by force majeure or distress or for the purpose of rendering assistance to persons, ships or aircraft in danger or distress.
Article 19 Meaning of innocent passage 1. Passage is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the coastal State. Such passage shall take place in conformity with this Convention and with other rules of international law. 2. Passage of a foreign ship shall be considered to be prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the coastal State if in the territorial sea it engages in any of the following activities: Article 20 Submarines and other underwater vehicles In the territorial sea, submarines and other underwater vehicles are required to navigate on the surface and to show their flag.
Article 55 Specific legal regime of the exclusive economic zone The exclusive economic zone is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea, subject to the specific legal regime established in this Part, under which the rights and jurisdiction of the coastal State and the rights and freedoms of other States are governed by the relevant provisions of this Convention.
Article 56 Rights, jurisdiction and duties of the coastal State in the exclusive economic zone 1. In the exclusive economic zone, the coastal State has: (a) sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conserving and managing the natural resources, whether living or non-living, of the waters superjacent to the seabed and of the seabed and its subsoil, and with regard to other activities for the economic exploitation and exploration of the zone, such as the production of energy from the water, currents and winds; (b) jurisdiction as provided for in the relevant provisions of this Convention with regard to: (i) the establishment and use of artificial islands, installations and structures; (ii) marine scientific research; (iii) the protection and preservation of the marine environment; (c) other rights and duties provided for in this Convention. 2. In exercising its rights and performing its duties under this Convention in the exclusive economic zone, the coastal State shall have due regard to the rights and duties of other States and shall act in a manner compatible with the provisions of this Convention. 3. The rights set out in this article with respect to the seabed and subsoil shall be exercised in accordance with Part VI.
The exclusive economic zone shall not extend beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.
Article 58 Rights and duties of other States in the exclusive economic zone 1. In the exclusive economic zone, all States, whether coastal or land-locked, enjoy, subject to the relevant provisions of this Convention, the freedoms referred to in article 87 of navigation and overflight and of the laying of submarine cables and pipelines, and other internationally lawful uses of the sea related to these freedoms, such as those associated with the operation of ships, aircraft and submarine cables and pipelines, and compatible with the other provisions of this Convention. 2. Articles 88 to 115 and other pertinent rules of international law apply to the exclusive economic zone in so far as they are not incompatible with this Part. 3. In exercising their rights and performing their duties under this Convention in the exclusive economic zone, States shall have due regard to the rights and duties of the coastal State and shall comply with the laws and regulations adopted by the coastal State in accordance with the provisions of this Convention and other rules of international law in so far as they are not incompatible with this Part. Article 102 Piracy by a warship, government ship or government aircraft whose crew has mutinied The acts of piracy, as defined in article 101, committed by a warship, government ship or government aircraft whose crew has mutinied and taken control of the ship or aircraft are assimilated to acts committed by a private ship or aircraft.
Article 103 Definition of a pirate ship or aircraft A ship or aircraft is considered a pirate ship or aircraft if it is intended by the persons in dominant control to be used for the purpose of committing one of the acts referred to in article 101. The same applies if the ship or aircraft has been used to commit any such act, so long as it remains under the control of the persons guilty of that act.
Article 104 Retention or loss of the nationality of a pirate ship or aircraft A ship or aircraft may retain its nationality although it has become a pirate ship or aircraft. The retention or loss of nationality is determined by the law of the State from which such nationality was derived.
Article 105 Seizure of a pirate ship or aircraft On the high seas, or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any State, every State may seize a pirate ship or aircraft, or a ship or aircraft taken by piracy and under the control of pirates, and arrest the persons and seize the property on board. The courts of the State which carried out the seizure may decide upon the penalties to be imposed, and may also determine the action to be taken with regard to the ships, aircraft or property, subject to the rights of third parties acting in good faith.
Article 106 Liability for seizure without adequate grounds Where the seizure of a ship or aircraft on suspicion of piracy has been effected without adequate grounds, the State making the seizure shall be liable to the State the nationality of which is possessed by the ship or aircraft for any loss or damage caused by the seizure.
The table below is adapted from Jane's World Navies. 
140