# ID: 54c12904877740289220cee8c448795c
# Title: Leadership or hegemony? Investigating US command of the sea and implications for US grand strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
A Russian attempt on Med/Arabian sea control would come in the form of submarine warfare and missiles launched from inside Russian territory as well as from naval vessels in the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea.
The attack would likely begin from inside Russian territory and expand outward progressively as adjacent territories (and sea control) were overturned.
Russia's KALIBR family of weapons includes a land attack cruise missile, an anti-ship cruise missile (commonly called the SIZZLER), and an antisubmarine missile, each of which has a nominal range of 1,000 nautical miles, can be salvo launched, and employs waypoint navigation.
The U.S. Office of Naval Intelligence and U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group assess that the KALIBR family of weapons and Russian Anti-Access/Aerial Denial capabilities would render U.S. air superiority in the region temporary and fleeting: Russia uses a very dense network of air defense systems that overlap in layers to increase their protective capabilities.
Gaps in coverage can also be filled by new EW systems that confuse incoming missiles, overload ordnance guidance modules, or cause premature detonation of electronic fuses.
Faced with this type of air defense network, U.S. formations will be, at best, able to achieve brief or momentary air superiority to support ground troops.
Russian Air Defense capabilities will also severely affect aerial resupply and medical evacuation (MEDEVAC).