# ID: 54c12904877740289220cee8c448795c
# Title: Leadership or hegemony? Investigating US command of the sea and implications for US grand strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In addition to expanding its role in the global economy, Beijing has also modernized its military in order to deter or defeat U.S. influence in the South Pacific.
92 U.S. Energy Information Administration, "South China Sea," Updated 7 February 2013, accessed 12 May 2017, https://www.eia.gov/beta/international/ analysis_includes/regions_of_interest/South_China_Sea/south_china_sea.pdf.
A Chinese attempt on local sea control would utilize naval assets and defensive capabilities that analysts assess to be some of the most advanced in the world, and rapidly improving.
China's naval assets are split between three fleets, the most capable of which is the North Sea Fleet based 1500 miles from the South Pacific.
At a modest speed of 15kts, China could mass nearly all of its assets in the South Pacific within a few days of a conflict.
At that point, Chinese submarines would outnumber U.S. 7 th Fleet submarines nearly two to one, it would have its massive inventory of 50,000 mines to employ, and at least 400 additional ships from its maritime law enforcement force, maritime militia-as well as the largest fishing fleet in the world-would be available for interdiction, To defeat a Chinese attempt on South Pacific sea control, the United States would need to commit a force greater than that required for Russia, and again resolving the conflict would likely require non-naval assets and regional allies.
The greatest hindrance to U.S. success in a conflict over sea control this close to China is that the long tail of  counter inexpensive weapons from nonstate actors; and advance technology and acquisitions fast enough to keep up with the feverish pace of modernizing state and nonstate actors.
It would need to accomplish it all 8,000 miles from home, in a degraded electronic environment, while sustaining ship maintenance, sailor training, and crew readiness.
This is a tall order for any navy.