# ID: 54c12904877740289220cee8c448795c
# Title: Leadership or hegemony? Investigating US command of the sea and implications for US grand strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
For the U.S. to defeat today's most likely threats-the navies of China and Russia, as well as Iran and nonstate actors in the Middle East-its necessary capabilities are vast and varied.
These include anti-submarine warfare to protect the vital submarine fleet; mine countermeasures to defeat mining action designed to block littoral straits; defense measures to face a variety of threats, from sophisticated missiles based on land in Russia or China, to rudimentary land-based weapons at chokepoints or launched from small, mobile patrol craft, to those needed to face swarms of small ships, including suicide attacks and remote-controlled vessels.
In addition, just as offense can be defensive in nature, defense can be offensive in nature-the U.S. benefits significantly in these theaters from offensive mining, as well as from advanced submarine warfare and precision targeting of land objectives.
As is no surprise, many of the facets of offensive naval power that lead to naval influence are also vital in the defense of local sea control, while longer-term facets, such as reserve mobilization, are less relevant in the short-term battle.
Most are riverine or constabulary forces unable to project power regionally or even to the reaches of their own EEZs.
Approximately two-dozen navies worldwide currently possess the capability to influence their entire EEZ, and only 13 are assessed to be able to project power beyond their home waters.
These nations are Australia, Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Russia, Spain, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States.