# ID: 54d7a17e18254f80a7bf61154094c737
# Title: Baseball Caps and Beards: The Perception of US Special Forces by Conventional Forces and Its Impact on Interdependence
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The path to Interdependence between Conventional Forces (CF) and Special Forces (SF) grew out of the success and failure in combat and peacetime operations over the last three decades. Initially a difficult concept to champion, interdependence between CF and USSF allowed for a more effective use of military power against our adversaries in the Global War on Terror. Given the combination of fiscal constraints, a downsizing military, and a non-stop demand signal for military assistance in overseas contingency operations, interdependence between USSF and CF will be crucial to future mission success.
This monograph researches what the perception of United States Special Forces is by Conventional Forces and how it will affect future interdependence. In order to answer this research question this monograph will conduct a case study analysis of previous conflicts in which United States Special Forces and Conventional Forces worked together. The researcher will then conduct non-generalizable oral history interviews to understand how interactions of the past thirteen years has set the conditions for future interdependence. Synthesizing the information gathered during the research will allow the author to make recommendations for more successful interdependence in the future.
Gradual Integration between USSF and CF ………………………………………………5 Mission Essential Task List for Armored Brigade Combat Team ……………….……...44 Buy-in and Credibility: A recommended approach ……………………………………..51
The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001 forever changed the landscape of the United States, both its citizens and its military. Embroiled in a Global War on Terror (GWOT), the United States military found itself fighting two separate large-scale wars for the last thirteen years. During the GWOT, Conventional Forces (CF) interacted closer with United States Special Forces (USSF) than at any time ever before, enhancing the capabilities of both organizations.
With the cessation of hostilities and the redeployment of forces from Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) in 2010, and the transition of responsibilities to the Afghan government in Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF), it appeared that the Army would find itself in an interwar period.
Traditionally during interwar periods, the US Army studies the previous war and incorporates changes into the force in preparation for future conflicts. With the redeployment of forces, the Army found itself directly impacted by the 2013 Bipartisan Budget Act (BBA) in which the Department of Defense lost $32 billion in funding. In concert with the sequestration from the BBA, the Army lost its funding for its wartime structure of 520,000 soldiers and was ordered to reduce to an end strength of 490,000. As briefed by General Raymond T. Odierno, the 38th Chief of Staff of the US Army, on 25 March 2014 to the members of the House Armed Services Committee, "in order to attain the proper balance between end strength, readiness and modernization by the end of sequestration we will have to dramatically slash end strength again beginning in fiscal year '16. This is in no way by choice. We will be required to further reduce the active Army end strength, to 420,000." 1 1 "House Armed Services Committee Holds Hearing On Department of the Army Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal 2015," Congressional Quarterly, March, 2014,  accessed September 30, 2014, http://www.ngaus.org/sites/default/files/TRANSCRIPT-%20HASC%20Army%20Posture%20Hearing%2025MAR14.pdf.
Exacerbating the difficult situation the Chief of Staff of the Army found himself in was the ever changing global landscape. Russian forces invaded and annexed Crimea from Ukraine, North Korea resumed its long-range missile testing, and the rapidly-growing Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) required a response from the United States government, which looked to the Army to assist in its overseas strategy. It would appear that the Army would not find itself in an interwar period after all, but instead it would need to transform its formations to meet these emerging global threats, while simultaneously managing the difficulties associated with reduced manpower and budget. On September 10, 2014, five months after General Odierno's grim report to the House Armed Services Committee, President Barak Obama addressed the citizens of the United States in response to the growing threat of ISIL:
[W]e will increase our support to forces fighting these terrorists on the ground. In June, I deployed several hundred American service members to Iraq to assess how we can best support Iraqi security forces. Now that those teams have completed their work -and Iraq has formed a government we will send an additional 475 service members to Iraq…. they are needed to support Iraqi and Kurdish forces with training, intelligence and equipment. We'll also support Iraq's efforts to stand up National Guard Units to help Sunni communities secure their own freedom from ISIL's control. 
2
Given the combination of fiscal constraints, a downsizing military, and a non-stop demand signal for military assistance in overseas contingency operations, interdependence between USSF and CF will be crucial to future mission success. In commenting on the necessity to maximize current available manpower, General Odierno told Foreign Affairs magazine that "the army will need to preserve and enhance its relationship with joint special operations forces.
The evolution of this partnership over the past decade has been extraordinary, and the ties can become even stronger as we continue to develop new operational concepts, enhance our training, and invest in new capabilities." 
3
Approaching an answer to how perceptions developed is the objective of this monograph.
In particular, it investigates the perception of CF combat arms soldiers acquired toward USSF. In order to answer this question, we first understand how the relationship evolved over time. The first section of this monograph will utilize case studies for two purposes. The first purpose is to inform the reader on the difficulty that was inherent in maximizing the potential of both CF and USSF during overseas contingency operations. The second purpose of the case studies is to allow the researcher to identify causes that led to the successful interdependence of SOF and CF, as well as the many ways in which this interdependence might have failed. This forms the basis for the second section of this monograph, which centers on a series of oral history interviews with a select group of Army officers from the conventional force who worked closely with SOF in their recent career. By delving down to the individual level of analysis and accessing the lived experience of actual soldiers, the causes of success and/or failure in the case study section can be viewed through first-hand accounts. Although the experiences are not generalizable beyond the actual individuals interviewed, they do provide a glimpse into the perceptions of CF officers who have worked closely with USSF and can therefore be useful in helping us understand the history of the CF-SOF relationship.
You cannot take a few people from one unit, throw them in with some from another, give them someone else's equipment, and hope to come up with a top-notch fighting outfit.
-Colonel Charles Beckwith
4
The path to Interdependence between CF and USSF grew out of the success and failure in combat and peacetime operations over the last three decades. Beginning with the catastrophic collision during Operation Eagle Claw to combined operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, interdependence has been a difficult process. This section of the monograph defines the concept of interdependence and its recent historical applications in doctrine. The researcher then examines the historical relationship between USSF and CF using examples of the past three decades. This will hopefully provide the reader with an understanding of the cultural and doctrinal changes enacted in the past decades and how they affected the concept of interdependence. Figure 
1
6
The Iranian Revolution of 1979 and the seizure of American hostages within the US Embassy would be the background for a dramatic change of the United States Department of Defense. On November 4, 1979, students and protestors in support of the radical cleric Ayatollah Khomeini scaled the walls of the US Embassy and seized its occupants. The hostage crisis that ensued exposed a large capability gap within the Department of Defense (DoD). There was no special operations unit trained, manned and equipped to conduct such a high-risk rescue operation.
Operation Eagle Claw was the combination of US Special Operations Forces with conventional force assets, tasked with the rescue of the American hostages. Marred by a myriad of problems such as disjointed command and control structures, lack of experience working together, poorly maintained equipment, and secrecy that prevented proper support from other conventional forces within the theater of operations, the operation failed to meet its objectives and resulted in the deaths of eight service members at Desert One. 
7
Operation Urgent Fury   in Grenada; 12 October -2 November 1983 (Washington, DC: Joint History Office, 1997), 1. operation. General Sholtes was to command all the special operations forces as part of Task Force 123." 
11
12
13
Despite initial confusion and delay, and the significant casualties sustained by US forces, Operation Urgent Fury successfully achieved all of its objectives. Following the operation, the United States Army conducted an after action review of the operation, conducted by Colonel.
Louis D. F. Frasché. The report stated "Army participants were either unaware of, or, misunderstood existing joint doctrine, while its implementation revealed deep flaws in the areas of communications, planning, and deployment." 
14
Policymakers used Operation Eagle Claw and Operation Urgent Fury as a catalyst to push for a change in the structure of the DoD. In 1986, the Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act was written into law. The new law forced the "creation of a unified combatant command for special operations missions which would combine the special operations mission's responsibilities, and forces of the armed forces." 
15
14
Each service component within the DoD was tasked with forming its own Special Operations Command that reports to both its service chief as well as the commander of USSOCOM. The headquarters for Army Special Operations Forces (ARSOF) is the United States Army Special Operations Command (USASOC), which was stood up immediately.
Within USASOC are the Army Rangers, Civil Affairs, Psychological Operations, Special Operations Aviation Regiment, and Special Forces (commonly referred to as Green Berets). With the creation of SOCOM, Special Forces became a branch within the United States Army. Prior to becoming that, Special Forces operators would rotate regularly within the ranks of the regular Army, maintaining their original Military Occupational Specialty (MOS), while also maintaining a skill identifier of Special Forces. The importance of the creation of the branch is a topic for another study, but the lack of communication between SF and CF has been evident since this divide, and is addressed in some detail in the second half of this study. While the Goldwater-Nichols Act aimed at increasing the unity of command within the Department of Defense, once the framework was set, there would still be many growing pains to make this unity of command a reality.
In contrast to the rushed planning and execution of Urgent Fury, Operation Just Cause would benefit from a large amount of time of planning, rehearsals and synchronization. As Cole describes "In l988, as relations with Panama deteriorated, the commander of US Southern 16 David Tucker and Christopher J. Lamb, United States Special Operations Forces (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 97.
Command (SOUTHCOM), General Frederick F. Woerner, Jr., US Army, had developed a strategy which gradually increased the strength of US forces in Panama to deter the dictator, General Manuel Noriega." 
17
18
19
20 17
18
21
Execute." 
22
23
On January 5, 1990, General Lindsay commented on the interoperability between CF and SOF during Operation Just Cause. "In a message to Secretary Cheney, General Lindsay noted 
21
22
23
24
25
On August 2, 1990, Saddam Hussein launched a surprise invasion of Kuwait, its oil-rich neighbor to the south. Using three of his elite Republican Guard Divisions to spearhead the attack, the Iraqi victory was swift and decisive. The United States and its international allies sent forces to Saudi Arabia to defend against any further Iraqi aggression and to prepare for a follow on counter-offensive to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait. United States and allied forces faced a formidable opponent; not only could Iraq mobilize an army of almost a million men, perhaps 
24
25
"more important, it was well equipped by the virtue of huge purchases, the sheer numbers of tanks, armored fighting vehicles, artillery pieces, and small arms of all types."
26
27
28
General Schwarzkopf decided to utilize SOF in the roles described in the 1986 published version of FM 100-5. Deep reconnaissance in conjunction with terminal guidance were used to destroy SCUD missile sites aimed at Israel, as well as manning reconnaissance posts along the border. Special Forces detachments conducted Combat Search and Rescue Missions (CSAR) as well as "worked with Kuwaiti resistance in Saudi Arabia." 30 Russell Ames summarizes exquisitely the successes and failures of SOF and CF integration during Desert Storm. He concludes, "[t]he mission sets for Special Operations Command Central (SOCCENT), although important to the combined/joint force, did not require Army leaders to manage SOF capabilities and effects. They also did not increase contact between CF and SOF, or require mutual reliance on Army capabilities. SOF effects were arguably transparent to leaders below the division level." 
31
29
33
The understanding and integration of SOF and CF capabilities experienced significant difficulties when Multi National Division-North (MND-N) Commander, Major General William Nash assumed command of Task Force Eagle. Some of this friction was due to chain of command and reporting procedures between the SOF elements in MND-N and the commander.
Since the JCOs were initially a British unit, of the six original teams "two were in the MND-N sector. These two JCO teams remained under the control of the Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force (CJSOTF), but established liaison with MND-N. JCOs in the French and British sectors, depending on their national orientation, were included in those MND command structures." 
35
33
34 Findlay, 22.   35 Ibid, 24.  planning meetings and didn't know MND intelligence requirements. Partly as a result of this lack of understanding, their operations occasionally conflicted with collection assets working with the same sources." 
36
37
38 Findlay,
26. 39
40
Requiring full battle rattle in camp struck many as odd, especially since initially the soldiers slept without their gear in tents that offered no protection from mortar or sniper fire. Meanwhile, American Special Forces working in local communities kept a low force protection posture so as not to create unnecessary barriers between themselves and the people. Rather comically, they had to put on the full body armor to enter American bases, which were obviously more secure than their own neighborhoods in town. 
43
41 Ames, 18.
42 Findlay, 51. 
43 Baumann et.al,
134.
44
49
Lived Experiences during the GWOT The previous section described the evolution of SOF/USSF interaction with CF throughout multiple combat and peacekeeping operations. Mistakes occurred during each operation and the lessons learned were incorporated into doctrine to ensure that both CF and SOF were working towards the same objective effectively. There have been multiple monographs and lesson learned publications articulating the benefit of interdependence between CF and USSF.
There remains a gap in research, however, on the current perception of SF by CF and how this may affect interdependence. The remainder of this monograph focuses on the lived experiences of a select group of Army officers from the conventional force, their experiences with SOF-CF independence during past operational deployments in the Army, and their perceptions at the time of the value, utility, and even attitudes of USSF.
In order to answer the research question a series of oral history interviews of field grade Army officers were conducted. Perception in the context of historical events was the focus of the interviews. The approach taken was that of oral history, addressing the lived experiences of a small group of conventional force officers and their perception of the Special Forces they worked with throughout their careers. 
50
51
The target audience for these oral history interviews were field grade officers between the rank of Major (O-4) through Colonel (O-6). The interviewer used a semi-structured interview method, employing a range of open-ended questions to guide the oral history interview. The officers interviewed were required to be of the Maneuver, Fires and Effects branch, commonly referred to as combat arms. These selection criteria were established for multiple reasons. The first reason was it was deemed to have the highest probability to interview officers that had both combat and battle space owner experience within the same areas that are commonly operated in by USSF. The second reason was to identify any potential differences between the senior ranking officers who had pre-GWOT experience in the military and the younger field grade officers who have only experienced the Army during a wartime setting. The intent was to interview between fifteen and twenty officers. In total, seventeen interviews were successfully conducted. Upon completion of the interviews, there were follow-up interviews with multiple interviewees in order to ensure all participants had a chance to reply to any issues or discussions that were raised through subsequent interviews.
In order to receive candid and honest feedback, interviewees' names are not used in the research. Upon completion of all interviews the recordings were uploaded on to a compact disc and secured with the researcher to ensure the original data would not be compromised or lost.
Due to budget constraints, in-person interviews were conducted with interviewees that were stationed at Fort Leavenworth, KS the same time as the author, while all other interviews took place via telephone. The interviewer made initial contact either face-to-face or via email, described the nature of the interview and asked if they would be willing to participate in the study. If the interviewee suggested interest in the interview, the researcher provided a copy of both the oral history consent form as well as a list of the open-ended questions (see appendix A for the informed consent form and Appendix B for the questionnaire). All interviewees were given ample time to review the consent form and topics to be discussed. Prior to initiation of the interview, consent was received for all interviews. All interviews were audio recorded.
Interviews were semi-structured in order to maximize open and candid dialogue. Upon initiation of the interview the interviewer utilized Figure 
1
At the conclusion of each interview, the interviewer summarized the notes taken and themes identified during the interview. This was done to ensure there was no misunderstanding during the interview, as well as to ask for clarification on any topics discussed that the researcher had not originally included.
Analysis of the interviews identified eight reoccurring historical narratives. The next section of this monograph will describe in detail each of these reoccurring narratives.
Several of the accounts regarding training were provided by officers who at one point in their career had been assigned to a unit that was co-located with USSF on the same installation.
These installations were Fort Bragg, NC where the 82 nd Airborne Division was co-located with 3rd and 7th Special Forces Group (Airborne) respectively; Fort Lewis, WA had elements of the 25th Infantry Division and 2nd Infantry Division co-located with the 1st SFG (A); and Fort Campbell, KY had the 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) co-located with the 5th SFG (A). Some officers had conducted on-post training with an Operational Detachment-Alpha. The training conducted between the units consisted of small arms, sniper weapon systems, advanced optics, room clearing, urban combat, and mortar training.
Three of the four training events were initiated and coordinated by the interviewees' unit.
One of the four training events was conducted before the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001,   two events between 2001-2002, and the fourth in 2005. The benefit of the training was not merely one sided. One training event that was not preplanned was conducted on Fort Bragg, NC. The interviewee belonged to an Anti-Tank platoon which operates mounted on High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicles (HMMWV) with Mk-17 automatic grenade launchers and M2 .50 caliber heavy machine guns as their primary weapon systems. While on the range, the 18 Bravo (Special Forces weapons sergeant) gave classes to the members of the platoon on a new weapon system, the Mk-47 automatic grenade launcher as well as assisting in repairing a damaged .50 cal. Upon completion of the training on the Mk-47 and .50 cal, the platoon was able to return the favor and provided instruction to the ODA on the Mk-17. The ODA did not have Mk-17s and were unfamiliar with the system. This shared, and mutually beneficial training, greatly increased the rapport between the two units, which facilitated a positive interaction in the future while the unit was deployed to Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF). It also increased their unit's lethal capability, while displaying the professionalism and competence of the ODAs. 
"5 th
52
Reported experiences appear to have shown an inverse relationship between the lack of professionalism of the ODAs and the lack of communication between the ODAs and CF. Some of the officers interviewed served in Iraq and Afghanistan from 2003-2005. Their duty positions held during that time frame ranged from rifle platoon leader, ranger company commander, to battalion task force commander. Narrative accounts asserted the level of competence and professionalism of the ODAs during that specific time frame was extremely high. Although the level of competence was high, the communication between the ODAs and CF was minimal. With the lack of communication between the two entities, the perception became extremely negative and counter productive. One example of this negative perception was described by an officer who had been a Battalion Task Force commander in Iraq between 2004-2005. The battalion was to be utilized as a mobile strike force within Baghdad and had interactions between multiple SOF units, including USSF. During this rotation the battalion lost multiple soldiers by small arms attacks and improvised explosive devices. The ODA that was co-located with the Battalion Task Force knew the identities of the individuals responsible for the attacks, but did not share this information. "I call this Special Agent Orange Syndrome -I have secret information and I am going share with you, but just a little bit, real quick. That was very much the attitude of this team, at this place during this time." 
53
Participant accounts identified two possible causes for the perceived degradation of competence. One was the perception that ODAs abandoned their traditional mission of Foreign Internal Defense in order to conduct Direct Action (DA) strikes. The second was youth and immaturity of the ODAs, translating into poor mission accomplishment and discipline problems. 
53
Participants often asserted the immaturity of the force gradually contributed to tensions and misunderstandings. Ranging from lack of technical and tactical proficiency, to poor military bearing and lack of respect for the conventional forces. Statements like "looking cool just to look cool" 54 and "I do not want my young impressionable soldiers around your team"
55
Lack of professionalism of military bearing was not blamed on the actions of 18Xs alone. As one officer recalled, in Iraq in 2005 "the ODA Commander approached my battalion commander and during the discussion brought up that they were 'peers.' My Battalion commander looked at him in disbelief and simply stated 'we're not peers.' This ended the relationship between my unit and the ODA." 
56
A young SF sergeant who was pulling guard from a truck, fired a burst of .50 cal warning shot at a guy on a bicycle because he had a strange package on the back of his bicycle. He thought it was a bicycle suicide bomber. Sitting on the box in the back of his bike was the guy's daughter. When you do things like that it makes you look scared, makes you look vulnerable, and untrained. Growing up as a cadet you were told, this organization (SF) is the most trained, most mature, most competent organization. When young soldiers see this kind of activity, it reduces conventional force confidence in SOF in general. While it may be isolated incidents, it happens too often. It only takes a couple conventional force interactions with these type of incidents to write SF off as cowboys who aren't as good as they think they are. 
58
58
November 15, 2014. 59
During operations in Iraq and Afghanistan confusion over unit responsibility for specific tasks occurred on multiple occasions. In the fall of 2003, a company commander in a task force that was specifically manned, trained and equipped to conduct unilateral, direct action strikes against medium-to high-level targets noted his own experience. While at a planning session, he began a discussion with a team leader from one of the co-located ODAs. He asked the team leader which host nation forces they were working with. The response he received was "Oh, we don't do that, we do DA." 60 This conversation, and many more similar to it, left a negative impression on him, and his organization. There were two differently manned and equipped organizations competing for the same targets. "I think this created a divide between our units ….if I was a conventional guy and I was looking to create a bridge with local forces, and the adjacent ODA tells me, no I do DA, I'm going to write them off. I'll talk to them [the local security forces] myself." 61
The misinterpretation of SF's mission in Iraq and Afghanistan perpetuated the negative perception that conventional forces had of SOF nighttime direct action raids. "Once you all (SOF) had the same mission (DA) of find, fix, and finish, it was hard to differentiate." 62 After the initial invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan, conventional force battalions and brigades were assigned pieces of terrain that were to be under their overall control. According to the doctrine of the time, 60 Interview 12, interviewed by author, Fort Leavenworth, KS, February 5, 2015 61 Ibid. 
62
63
64
In post-2003 Iraq, SOF operations were not always well coordinated with GPF. This led to situations where GPF, as the battle space owners (BSO), were left managing the second-order effects of SOF targeting operations. GPF complained about not receiving notice of impending operations, not receiving intelligence that came from SOF operations, and significant disruption of their battle space in the aftermath of those operations. Similar complaints were made by GPF in Afghanistan through 2008. 
65
The perception of SF "abandoning" its mission of Foreign Internal Defense in pursuit of Direct Action missions was further exacerbated by the creation of the Military Transition Teams 63 Combined Arms Doctrine Director, "Army Doctrine Update 2012," US Army Combined Arms Center, 3 April 2012, (accessed 9 December 2014) http://usacac.army.mil /cac2/adp/Repository /Army %20Doctrine%20Update%202-12.pdf.
(MiTT). One officer described his experiences in OIF when his unit was told to give up critical manpower to backfill the departing SF units: I can remember in '04 in Iraq we saw a downslide in the relationship. When I was a LT the relationship was positive, we wanted to work with SF guys and learn from them. Late in my tour in '04 is when you started to see the abandonment of the FID mission in Iraq. We were told "Every platoon, give up your best NCO, we are forming training teams and imbed teams that are going to backfill the SF teams that are leaving to do direct action missions." That didn't work out well. We didn't have that expertise at building partner capacity. What I just said, that statement may have reversed over the last ten years, as you see SF not doing that type of mission, and conventional forces doing more, the level of expertise may have shifted. 
66
67 Ibid. 
68
69 Interview 5.
Accounts by participants did not confirm the hopes that over a decade of joint training would improve perception between USSF and CF. Reported experience from Afghanistan and Iraq reflected a view that as long as both units were working towards a common objective, whether it be CONUS or OCONUS, the small idiosyncrasies between the units would not affect the overall mission. Rather than perception of SF being a factor to CF, it was CF's perception of interdependence that would affect the relationship between CF and USSF. At the time, views of Interdependence were shaped by two metal models. The first model consists of the Battle Space Owner (BSO) and ODA interactions utilized during the GWOT. As discussed above, the relationships continued to improve throughout the GWOT until CF and SF were working towards a shared objective. This mental model is very nested with combat experience and history.
Although Interdependence, as experienced during the GWOT, had tremendous positive impact on the officers and their combat experience, the concern of Interdependence surviving the interwar period was readily apparent. This is not to say that all the officers articulated a negative perception of interdependence, but a preponderance of them expressed a hesitancy to believe it would survive the post-GWOT environment. "Without a forcing function and the budget, sequestration, and drawdown we will abandon the concept." 70 There are multiple reasons for this negative perception held by most of the CF officers interviewed. This brings us to the second mental model in which interdependence is associated; that of the Regionally Aligned Force (RAF). 
70
The concept of RAF was one outgrowth of prolonged encounters between 2001 and 2012. With the necessity for conventional forces to become proficient in a wide variety of tasks such as language, culture and foreign weapons training, one might have assumed that a shared focus between CF and USSF has already been identified. The definition of RAF was approved by the CSA on 25 October 2012:
Regionally Aligned Forces are those forces that provide the Combatant Commander (CCDR) with up to Joint-capable headquarters with scalable, tailorable capabilities to enable him to shape the environment. They are those Army units assigned to Combatant Commands (CCMD), allocated to a CCMD, and those capabilities distributed and prepared by the Army for CCMD regional missions…. Regional missions are driven by CCMD requirements. This requires an understanding of the cultures, geography, languages, and militaries of the countries where they are most likely to be employed, as well as expertise in how to impart military knowledge and skills to others. 
71
72
Reflecting on the meaning of past experiences on the field, some officers were skeptical of the RAF approach to Interdependence. The pessimistic attitude towards the RAF concept had many roots on recent experience. The first root is the disconnect between the RAF concept as a building partner capacity mission and the train up and the unit's Mission Essential Task List (METL) associated with the units preparing for the RAF.
The way the Army communicates its intent and desired capabilities with its subordinate units has been through doctrine. In the past, doctrine described in detail how the individual components of the Army are expected to work together. As defined in the 2012 ADP, "[t]he unit's mission-essential task list (METL) represents the doctrinal framework of fundamental tasks for which the unit was designed (its table of organization and equipment and table of distribution and allowances mission). METL proficiency enables the unit to adapt to unexpected situations during mission execution. Therefore, units strive to maintain mission-essential task readiness. The Department of the Army standardizes brigade and above METLs." 
73
With no METL associated with interdependence, it is up to the interpretation of the unit commanders on what and how to prepare for their RAF mission. As one officer reflected "What are we preparing for, our METL or Interdependence? METL will win out all the time as it is has tasks associated with training." 
74
Infantry Division (2/1), the first Armored Brigade Combat Team (ABCT) to deploy as a RAF.
To prepare for their mission 2/1 ABCT interpreted two mission sets "Globally Available Force able to support Geographic Combatant Commanders and then the Regionally Aligned Force that supports a specific COCOM." 
75
"We say regionally aligned, but we train to fight the Soviets." 76 There appear to have been conflicting messages being gleaned from 2/1's train up and its implications for future RAF units.
The concept was that a unit preparing to deploy in support of a Combatant Command would build partner capacity across numerous countries. The preparation the unit first had to complete was utilizing a METL (Figure 
1
Published on USASOC's website is the SOF truth "Most Special Operations require non-SOF assistance." 81 Although it was openly acknowledged that SF requires assistance to complete their missions, the perception among the officers interviewed here was that the relationship was one sided. Described by one officer, "Interdependence means that I am going to have to give to SF, it's a one way street. What do I get from it?" 82 This argument falls directly in line with the concerns regarding the unit's METL and its assigned mission. Officers on GWOT sense a lack of vision as to how CF and SF were to work interdependently with one another, other than providing SF with logistics and additional manpower for guard duty.
Identified during the course of the interviews was the value of personal relationships. It is fair to summarize the officers interviewed here expressed sanguinity on the ability for personal relationships to overcome much of the adversity faced during the GWOT. Conversely, the officers expressed a great deal of pessimism regarding the ability of the institution to continue to foster these relationships. "It is all about relationships, but how are we going to establish those relationships if we are not located on the same bases, do not have the funding to facilitate training and do not have specified tasks we have to train on?" 83 80 Interview 6.
81 "United States Army Special Operations Command: One Force Without Equal", accessed November 3, 2014, http://www.soc.mil/USASOCHQ/SOFTruths.html. You guys were in uniform every time you met with us, and that helped break down first impressions. Pre-surge of Anbar awakening it (SFs perceived mission) was DA, after the awakening there was much more intel sharing between SF and conventional and less emphasis on DA." 
86
Suggestions for Future Research "It is immensely important that no soldier, whatever his rank, should wait for war to expose him to those aspects of active service that amaze and confuse him when he first comes across them. If he has met them even once before, they will begin to be familiar to him." 
87
As an expeditionary force, it is vital that our military formations are as prepared as possible to win the first battle. In order to successfully achieve operational objectives, our military must be able to embrace the various and diverse capabilities of both conventional (first grammar) and special operations (second grammar) elements. The historical examples explained 85 Interview 10.
86 Interview 5.
87 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, Indexed Edition, ed. Peter Paret and Michael Howard (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989), 122. in this monograph have demonstrated the evolution of SF/SOF's ability to set conditions to allow the entry and proper application of large scale conventional formations. Linn describes our most recent success and failures with the two grammars as: American operational art had become exquisite at winning battles; that is, at war's first grammar; but it had not prepared enough for the possibility that competence in a second grammar would be needed. That is not to say that processes and protocols were not in place for establishing peace or, more precisely, for transitioning from decisive military operations to security operations and political and economic reconstruction, referred to in a joint operational doctrine at the time as phase IV. 
88
As already identified in TRADOC Pam 525-8-5, "Future Army leaders must develop means to formalize and synchronize special operations and conventional forces capabilities throughout the institutional force. Although unit leaders can help document some of the lessons from recent experiences, it is through the institutional force that the Army must incorporate lessons learned into the doctrinal framework with the tasks and systems in the engagement warfighting function." 89 During the oral history interviews, each interviewee was asked where they felt the interdependence was best incorporated. Based on their past experiences, most of the officers stated the brigade was the appropriate command element to champion interdependence with the remainder stated the division headquarters was the appropriate level. The reasoning behind their decision was due to the level of command, staffing capability and the fact that the Brigade Combat Team is the deployable force within the current Army construct. Another question asked during the oral history interviews was, based off each individual's experience, which element did they think had more success in establishing the relationships that lead to successful interdependence. Past experiences have shown that when SF came to the CF headquarters and established initial contact, the relationship between the two organizations experienced less friction, and more success.
Using the past experiences as a guide for future action, it might be a subject for future study to consider interaction at the brigade command team level in order to achieve maximum interdependence. In order to achieve this, a two-level, indirect approach should be used in order to fully incorporate interdependence between SF and CF. For example the graph below depicts two approaches, the first is to gain credibility among the operational level commands being the Division and Corps headquarters, using a top-down approach. The second approach is to work from the tactical level to gain buy-in to the capabilities provided by SF. The idea behind the approach is to fully empower the Brigade Commander to incorporate interdependence within his formation.  This necessarily leads to the question, how did SF gain credibility from the operational level command in the conventional force structure during the period in question. The doctrine of 2012 outlined the element for this duty as the Special Forces Liaison Element or SFLE, which is a unit designed to conduct "liaison between SF, US conventional forces, and HN or multinational forces." SFLEs are formed only as needed and they "conduct these functions when conventional forces or host or multinational forces have not practiced interoperability before the operation, when the forces do not share common operational procedures or communications equipment, or when a significant language or cultural barrier exists." 90 If the purpose of a SFLE is to reduce culture and language barriers and increase interoperability between CF and SF, why must it wait until a JTF is established before we begin to interact with one another? SFLEs should be established at all Corps and Division level headquarters and manned with quality officers. By 90 Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-05, Special Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 3-7.  establishing credibility in the operational force, through positive representation, Corps and Division commanders would be less resistant in allowing their brigades to pursue interdependence-type tasks with SF units.
The second approach recommended here is to gain buy-in from the tactical force. As described during the oral history interviews, on-post training between SF and CF forces established a very positive relationship. The difficulty in this approach is the lack of defined training objectives that both CF and SF could train. By conducting joint training, SF can counteract the stereotype that interdependence is a one-way street, in which CF merely provides support to SF. Identifying these training tasks would be a recommendation for another study and would allow future operations officers from both CF and SF to incorporate these tasks into the METLs. An identified requirement, the existence of which the author is not aware, would be either a formal or informal letter of partnership between Special Forces Groups or their Division counterparts. During the oral history interviews, many officers stated that having a Group to collaborate with, along with Direct Liaison Authority (DIRLAUTH) with the Group, would allow planners to take the initiative and reduce the time it takes to coordinate planning. Through constant interaction with the tactical force, SF can build positive relationships that will increase buy-in regarding the level of professionalism of SF, its ability to enhance conventional force capabilities, and reduce the stigma of unprofessional and immature SF soldiers. This buy-in will reinforce interdependence from the bottom up reducing the resistance of company and battalion level commanders to working with SF, and hopefully resulting in requests to brigade commanders for more joint training with SF.
Another topic for research is the role of PME. PME has always been an effective avenue for change, although resistance to changing PME can be high. The Prussians looked to PME as a way to inculcate change. As described by Paret, PME was used to "raise the educational level of officers, help them understand the army beyond the narrow confines of their unit and branch of service, and gradually introduce a common concept of operations." 
91
The US Army finds itself in a similar position to that of Clausewitz and Scharnhorst in 1806. Although we have not been defeated in battle, our institution realizes that it needs to fundamentally change the way it operates to face future threats, or it may set itself up for defeat.
Doctrine states that we need to incorporate change, monographs state that we need to change, and speeches from general officers state that we need to change. But will we change? The Prussians changed after 1806, and the result was the eventual defeat of Napoleon. Nevertheless, after the victories, they reverted to old practices because the institution never fully embraced the change.
As described by Paret, "[t]he victories over Napoleon between 1813 and 1815, which validated Scharnhorst's reforms and restored the power of the Prussian state, also restored the power of Prussian conservativism, which had never ceased to resist some reforms and bend others to its own advantage." 
92
10 Ronald H. Cole, Operation Urgent Fury: Planning and Execution of Joint Operations
Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President On ISIL, The White House, September 10, 2014, accessed September
30, 2014, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-pressoffice/2014/09/10/statement-president-isil-1.
General Raymond Odierno, "The U.S. Army in a Time of Transition: Building a Flexible Force," Foreign Affairs, May/June 2012, accessed January 29, 2015, http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/137423/raymond-t-odierno/the-us-army-in-a-time-oftransition.
Peter Huchthausen, America's Splendid Little Wars: A Short History of U.S. Military  Engagements, 1975-2000 (New York: Viking Adult, 2003), 28.   
Training and Doctrine Command, Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-3-0, The U.S. Army Capstone Concept (Fort Eustis, VA: Headquarters, United States Army Training and Doctrine Command, December 19, 2012), 38.
Huchthausen, 37.   
Richard W. Stewart, Operation Urgent Fury: The Invasion of Grenada, October 1983, CMH PUB 70-114 (Histories Division of the Center of Military History, 2008), 1
Cole,
3.
Richard W. Stewart, War in the Persian Gulf: Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm August 1990 -March 1991, CMH PUB 70-117-1 (Histories Division of the Center of Military History, 2004), 2.
Michael R.Gordon and General Bernard E. Trainor, The Generals' War:  The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf (New York: Back Bay Books, 1995), 241.
Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office 1986), 57.
Aaron Brown, "Information Paper: SOF-GPF Interdependence" (Fort Leavenworth,  KS)    
Siebold, 42.   
Interview 7, phone conversation with author, Fort Leavenworth, KS,December 12,  2014.   
Interview 14, phone conversation with author, Ft. Leavenworth, KS, February 13,  2015.    
Interview 7.   
Interview 15, phone conversation with author, Fort Leavenworth, KS, February 16,  2015.    
Joint and Coalition Operational Analysis, Decade of War, Volume I: Enduring Lessons from the Past Decade of Operations (Suffolk, VA: Joint and Coalition Operational Analysis, 2012), 22.
Headquarters Department of the Army (HQDA) Execute Order (EXORD), Regionally Aligned Forces (RAF) (U), 5.
Interview 14.   
Brian McAllister Linn, The Echo of Battle: The Army's Way of War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), 158.
Peter Paret, The Cognitive Challenge of War: Prussia 1806 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009), 9.
Paret, 103.   
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Both MG Sacolick and BG Grigsby share this perception in 2012:
In Iraq and Afghanistan, operational necessity drove battlefield synchronization and integration of the joint force founded on personal relationships. Integration that relies on personal relationships forged on the battlefield, however, is transient unless made operational, institutional, and instilled in our forces from the very beginning of professional military education and throughout all planning and training. The closure of the Iraq theater and the drawdown in Afghanistan will reduce the impetus behind current interdependence initiatives and limit opportunities for shared operational experience. Unless we start now to codify and expand interdependence in the force, we risk losing momentum and reverting to pre-9/11 mind-sets…. and its impact on Interdependence.
2. I understand that the recording [s] and any transcript resulting from this oral history will belong to the US Government to be used in any manner deemed in the best interests of the Command and General Staff College or the US Army, in accordance with guidelines posted by the Director, Graduate Degree Programs and the Center for Military History. I also understand that subject to security classification restrictions I will be provided with a copy of the recording for my professional records. In addition, prior to the publication of any complete edited transcript of this oral history, I will be afforded an opportunity to verify its accuracy.
3. I hereby expressly and voluntarily relinquish all rights and interests in the recording [s] with the following caveat: _____ None _____ Other: ______________________________________ _______________________________________ I understand that my participation in this oral history interview is voluntary and I may stop participating at any time without explanation or penalty. I understand that the tapes and transcripts resulting from this oral history may be subject to the Freedom of Information Act, and 