# ID: 54f8d1d77bad49cd9a866a737404629b
# Title: Sustaining the Gray Zone: An Operational Concept
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
In 1991, the United States emerged as the global superpower following the formal end of the Cold War. Since that time, the United States is responsible for maintaining the global order and international norms. This task is conducted through the overwhelming strength of the United States via its military, its economy, and its people. Adversaries, however, have watched and learned from the United States. Russia, China, Iran and others all employ acts of aggression designed to slowly erode the power of the United States to enforce the international norms that states labored so hard to create post 1945. This offensive is done while not crossing the threshold that will compel US leaders to order US military forces to engage in conventional, violent military warfare against a nation state adversary. Instead, each actor, while serving its own goals and intentions, slowly establishes new red lines for the United States, works to drive wedges between the United States and its allies, and ultimately erodes the faith of the world population in the United States to be the guarantor of the international standard.
Numerous volumes of literature define, classify, or apply historic standards to this occurrence indicating that the world is entering a time of accelerated unease. Such terms as political warfare, hybrid warfare, irregular warfare, cyber warfare, and others emerge as attempts to find the guiding light to remove this uneasy time and secure an American friendly future. All of these terms together hold truths, and all propose viable methods in part to achieve its goal. The cornerstone of combining all of these together as truths lead to the realization that regardless of America's desire, its adversaries wage war against it. By understanding that the United States is currently engaged in a multi-front war, it becomes apparent that an operational level to this war is missing and not defined. It is only through achieving this operational level and understanding, that the United States can maintain its comfort inside the gray zone and reverse the ever
It is not a secret that many believe the United States is failing at the prosecution of gray zone conflicts. 
1
Characterizing the gray zone as war, while contentious, produces a more digestible outcome than large-scale conventional war and it must be managed. The operational level of war in the gray zone transcends a purely military structure and must account for all elements of national power to create a necessary synchronization of these elements in time and space proactively against the enemies of the United States. This role emerges in the MMS after the thorough review of key concepts below. Once understood and applied, these measures ensure appropriate, continued management of the gray zone. In sum, US standing in the world continues to be a dominant and works to buttress international norms that serve the interests of all nations, not just America. This role is weakened by adversary adaptation to the US dictated gray zone reality. Further, US adversaries amplify this effort in a new form of total war, a gray zone war that requires an equal if not greater effort to combat holistically.
In order to achieve the operational level of war within the gray zone it is first necessary to look at the definitions of the gray zone, their similarities, and origins. All of the definitions are based on true premises. In fact, when combining these truths, the gray zone conflict becomes the gray zone war. Strategic thinkers such as Clausewitz, Sun Tzu, and contemporary political scientists and policy makers, confirm this gray zone war as part of the evolution of total war. The connection is key because it explains how adversaries such as China, Russia and Iran account for conflict today. These adversaries already consider themselves at war and design strategic thought and doctrine to account for this. China's Unrestricted Warfare and its three warfares are exemplified through their recent actions. Russia actively applies New Generation Warfare as seen in several case studies of Russian aggression against neighboring states.
Finally, Iran's post-1979 revolutionary state is founded on a warlike premise specifically directed against Western powers. Each of these approaches to gray zone conflict are presented and examined below.
All of the actions of Russia, China, and Iran combine in a non-deliberate synchronization that compounds the need for the United States to operationalize the gray zone at the national level to better counter these threats. Inaction fuels further aggression and adventurism that can only lead to an unwanted war where violence between nation states determines the outcome and leads to tremendous loss of life and property destruction. There is a bit of irony here. The total war in question stops well short of a conventional use of force; rather, the word "total" describes how all instruments of national power are utilized in coordination to advance policy goals.
The fundamental problem with defining the gray zone is that the step requires repurposing older concepts that are all accurate in some aspect. If all definitions hold true then it is necessary to look for the larger driving concepts instead of characterizing or defining individual conflicts.
There are three distinct patterns of thought that emerge within gray zone definitions. The first is born out of the context of political warfare, the second follows more closely with irregular warfare, while the third, hybrid warfare, serves to combine the previous two. All three can accurately characterize the environment where the United States currently finds itself. American diplomat and historian George Keenan is typically credited with the initial definition of political warfare and it could be called a logical application of Clausewitz's doctrine in time of peace. 
2
4
The second line of gray zone definitions is born out of irregular warfare. As defined in Joint Publication 1: "Irregular Warfare (IW) is a violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant populations." 
5
6
Finally, there are also definitions that account for both political warfare and irregular warfare. In a 2018 Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) panel discussion, the members defined the gray zone as "activities beyond steady state deterrence and assurance that attempt to achieve ones security objectives without the resort to direct and sizeable use of force, an actor seeks to avoid crossing a threshold that results in war." 
7
8
In order to best understand the current state of conflict, the American thought process must move past the purely military or purely non-military application of war. Traditionally war is defined in terms of violence and the application of conventional military power in order to achieve political ends 
9
There is little western understanding of the gray zone as a US created type of war that is total in nature including all elements of national power. This is the reason that all of the previous definitions of the gray zone accurately define individual instances of conflict, but fail in a holistic sense. It is only through an understanding of the totality of the conflicts plaguing the gray zone that war is realized. The context of adversary and U.S. actions as highlighted by the media, members of government, and political leaders alike concede this fact. Such terms as economic warfare are used in relation to China, political warfare when referring to Russia, proxy warfare for Iran, and cyber warfare for all. 
10
Clausewitz forecast this occurrence, the totality of war, and the necessity to look holistically: "But in war more than in any other subject we must begin by looking at the nature of the whole; for here more than elsewhere the part and the whole must always be thought of together." 
11
12
13
14
Casualties in this aspect are not necessarily deaths. Rather, the losses are the willpower of a nation and the faith of its people in its ruling institutions.
As seen in the above, there is trouble with identifying the gray zone, how to adapt to the gray zone, and ultimately what victory looks like within the gray zone. This is because the term itself undercuts the reality of the current situation. The concepts applied within Douhet's definition of total war accurately describe the current conflict as viewed from a United States perspective.
The issue is that this definition, this concept is not utilized which removes the proper context for how to sustain the gray zone war. A review of three adversary strategies will illuminate that China, Russia and Iran consider themselves at war. Their acceptance and prosecution of war lends to the new trend in how an adversary views and attacks the United States center of gravity which is defined as its population's trust of its own government and the will to fight back.
Adversaries of the United States within gray zone war are all "revisionist powers." Power transition theory indicates that a revisionist state is one that seeks to modify the status quo in its favor. In the gray zone this is the modification of western-based international norms. 
15
As John Arquilla highlights in Perils of the gray zone: "There is a world war under way, waged in hot, cold, and cool modes. The aggressors see no gray zone between war and peace.
They see all as war. So must we." 
16
In China, the practice of unrestricted warfare and the "three warfares" provide an example of the Chinese execution of the next generation of total gray zone war, short of conventional largescale military war. Chinese concepts of unrestricted warfare confirm the war-like nature of China's world view. Unrestricted warfare "proposes methods of warfare to enable countries like China to confront an opponent with superior military technology such as the US. Similar to the concept of hybrid warfare, unrestricted warfare involves the use of a multitude of means, both military and non-military, to strike back at an enemy during a conflict." 
17
18
19
20
22
Russia, however, appears on the opposite end of the conflict spectrum from those taken by China. Before diving into recent Russian actions, it is important to understand that Russia also considers itself at war with the United States. Where China adopted Unrestricted Warfare, Russian strategic thought has also progressed to a new understanding of warfare through "New Generation Warfare" that again avoids acts of military induced violence, but is defined as war from the Russian perspectives.
"New Generation Warfare" is most notably attributed to the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia, General Valery Gerasimov. In a March 2017 speech, General Gerasimov highlighted in his opening comments that, "In the 21 st century, we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between the states of war and peace. Wars are no longer declared and, having begun, proceed to an unfamiliar template." 
23
24
Russian rhetoric and doctrine do not speak in terms of gray zone conflict, they speak in terms of war and warfare. General Gerasimov continues in his speech highlighting the necessity to combat war as waged by the United States. Continued evidence is found of Russia's relation to its current war within New Generation Warfare. According to the Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, wars, together with armed conflicts, comprise the general content of military conflicts. 
25
26
27
Iran serves as the final example for this study of exploiting current international norms, challenges red-lines, and seeks similar strategic goals to Russia and China. The overarching goal is to mold the international standard to represent Iranian power and regional hegemonic desires. 
28
29
30
32
33
34
Because its aspirations are similar to those of Russia and China, Iran serves as another example of a state holistically adopting war as a continued process. Iran's use of proxies such as Lebanese Hezbollah and arguably Hamas and the Houthi brings that state the closest to traditional war against western interests, but still leaves it operating in the gray zone. Lebanese Hezbollah and Israel remain engaged since Hezbollah's creation in the early 1980s. That terrorist organization attacks western allies, predominantly Israel and US forces as seen in the U.S. embassy bombing in Beirut in 1983 and again in the June 25 th 1996 Khobar Towers bombing in Saudi Arabia. 
35
36
While there are many definitions for the gray zone, the primary western view is that the gray zone lies between traditional war and peace. From irregular or guerilla warfare, from kinetic to economic warfare, cyber warfare, and the other elements that define political warfare, all of these are part of a larger concept. That concept is an evolution of total war, where all elements of national power are combined to include the civilian spheres. 
37
It is important to not understate that the gray zone is a creation of the United States. Its overwhelming military superiority ensures that revisionist states act so as to not invoke that action of use of military force. Revisionist states, however, did not quit their war aims no matter this disadvantage. Key adversaries to the United States continue to evolve in their strategic thought. States like China, Russia and Iran are at war with the United States and utilizing all elements of national power. This is not suggesting that shots are never fired in the gray zone, only that the gray zone is the first priority if not the first course of action to achieve a desired end-state. The acceptance of war in this regard brings with it different approaches and aspects that are relevant to ensure the safety and sustainment of the gray zone, thereby reducing future possibilities of a large-scale conventional military war. This framework can suit US interests, a welcomed insight given that US force of arms does the most to create this situation.
The simultaneous effect of three major US adversaries is now apparent. In most analysis or discussions of the gray zone, each revisionist state, each aggressor, is viewed independently of each other. In some instances comparative illustrations are used, but only as attempts to better describe the gray zone, as seen in the findings of Nathan Freier's, Outplayed: Regaining Strategic Initiative in the Gray Zone. He concludes that, "There is neither an animating grand strategy nor 'campaign-like' charter to guide US defense efforts against specific gray zone challenges." 
38
First, it is necessary to understand the foundation of the operational level of war in history. The term operational level of war according to modern U.S. joint doctrine is: "the operational level of warfare links the tactical employment of forces to national strategic objectives." 
39
40
Although volumes of modern literature exist documenting the history of the operational level of war and its campaigns, a return to Clausewitz is the best starting point. In On War, Clausewitz discusses the operational level of war in Book Five, Chapter Two. He clarifies his concept in Two Letters on Strategy: "Tactically, every engagement…at the strategic level the campaign replaces the engagement and the theater of operations takes the place of the position.
At the next state, the war as a whole replaces the campaign, and the whole country the theater of operations." 
41
Political scientist Edward Luttwak continues to expand and summarize the significance placed on the operational level of war. In the article "The Operational Level of War," Luttwak writes, "In theater strategy, political goals and constraints on one hand and available resources on the other determine projected outcomes. At a much lower level, tactics deal with specific techniques. In the operational dimension, by contrast, schemes of warfare such as blitzkrieg or defense in depth evolve or are exploited." 
42
The operational level of war is not only applicable in the multi-domain occurrence of the gray zone war, but its mastery is essential to ensure that conventional military war remains suppressed. Defining this most critical level of war within the gray zone war is now possible given its war context. It is necessary in order to synchronize the totality of the US defense of international norms and the public's trust therein.
The three defined levels of war are the strategic, operational and tactical or the national, theater and individual engagement in Clausewitzian terms. In the gray zone, the national level remains unchanged in practice and goals. Specifically, this continuity is to "preserve peace, uphold liberty, and create an enduring advantage for the American people." 
43
"the modern role of the operational level of war is to link individual battles with national strategy, the campaign is the means to achieve the strategy." 
44
Although a combined government approach remains forefront in the National Security Strategies, its application remains policy (strategic) focused in implementation. The United States has made significant strides in the perfection of precision synchronization of military forces in declared theaters of active armed conflict. But within the gray zone, the level of synchronization as previously defined fails. This is likely the failure to accept the gray zone as war. To understand this, a brief discussion regarding the gray zone operational environment is necessary before determining its application to the operational level of war.
As previously stated, the totality of the operating environment encompasses a multi-front war against revisionist states. Each revisionist state that seeks to threaten or disrupt international norms represents a specific campaign. It is not the purpose here to link each revisionist state with each other against western powers. It is necessary to understand the causality of one gray zone act, its response, and the relationship that it shares in the calculus of other campaigns. An adversary's small success in one gray zone campaign directly enables success and further promotes adversary success in sister campaigns. Each success represents the erosion of the American center of gravity.
An example of this is Iranian cyber practices. Since STUXNET's discovery in 2010, Iran focused on cyber development and combined these capabilities. Initially, Iran used the Lebanese Hezbollah, where Marcin Piotrowski from the Polish Institute of International Affairs highlights that: "Hezbollah and Iran set forth a model for all actors not only in terrorism but in hybrid warfare to include cyber warfare." 
45
46
In regards to enabling and prompting other gray zone campaigns, a study released by the Mandiant cyber security firm, now Fireeye, shows a dual empowerment for China. Chinese cyber attacks show a significant increase following the utilization of STUXNET and the Iranian named operations. In the study, tracking only one hacker group, there was an approximate 62 per cent increase from 2010-2012 when compared to the preceding four years combined. 
47
48
When Russia is compared to Iran in cyber-based gray zone acts, a relationship seems to emerge. The Iranian cyber-attack OPERATION CLEAVER in 2012, was likely a first in largescale control systems attacks. CLEAVER gained access to numerous governmental and city systems. 
49
50
51
A second comparison highlights successful Chinese adventurism into the south China Sea. It is difficult to conclude that Russia did not take into account the recent Chinese aggression in the South China Sea and the Western-based responses when it sought to invade Ukraine and Crimea. The South China Sea poses a direct and definable threat to Western interests, allies, and partners with consideration to trade routes and freedom of navigation along key sea lines of communication. 
52
Each unchecked action lends to causality for accepted norms to be further tested by a separate campaign and systematically re-designs the international standard of state conduct. The definition of the operational level of war correlates to this gray zone conduct. The examples given happen in different times at widely different areas of the world. Each occurrence, if addressed is likely to be addressed by the United States in vastly different ways. These campaigns are linked, however, in their overall impact on the United States. If the role of the United States is to defend international norms and do so along the tenants highlighted in the National Security Strategy, then it is most important to understand what, on a larger scale, is being attacked within the United States above these individual acts of aggression.
The most determinate way to identify what is being attacked, and therefore what must be defended, is to consider the US center of gravity. Military planners consider centers of gravity analysis one of the most essential tasks during war. Clausewitz defines centers of gravity along the lines of mass and concentration. This is designed to seek the decisive point in any battle: "A center of gravity is always found where the mass is concentrated most densely. It presents the most effective target for a blow; furthermore, the heaviest blow is that struck by the center of gravity." 
53
54
55
International norms are the result of cohesion between the United States, its vast alliances and ability to mass. Therefore, in a Clausewitzian definition, the center of gravity for the United States in the gray zone is its alliances with other states. Sun Tzu also gives an informative approach to centers of gravity that ultimately provides a duality for the United States. In his analysis, Sun Tzu seems to account for a larger operating environment when considering war and centers of gravity. In Chapter Six of The Art of War, Sun Tzu considers centers of gravity when he writes: "To ensure taking the objective in an attack, strike positions that are undefended. To be certain of an impregnable defense, secure positions that the enemy will not attack." 
56
57
58
In this multi-domain, multi-adversary model, the center of gravity that must be defended is the concept of the United States itself as a global police force, protector of international norms, and perhaps more importantly, the faith of the world in its ability to do this. It is here that the definition of the operational level of war, the conduct of the United States adversaries, and the lack of an operational level itself, all converge to marginalize the faith of the world in the United States. The erosion can be documented through public opinion surveys. What the trend shows is that as US adversaries became more adventurous and aggressive, the people of the United States are losing faith in their government, as do many of the people of the world.
The Pew Research Center published results in December 2017 of their survey "Public Trust in Government: 1958-2017." This study highlights that currently, at the time of publication, "only 18% of Americans today say they can trust the government." 
59
60
61
62
63
Given the nature of gray zone war, it is also difficult to discern individual events that lead to significant shifts within the public opinion realm and this measure likely requires more investigation. It is certain though that in the recent past, and since the United States achieved superpower status, the faith and ability of the Untied States to sustain the gray zone is diminishing. Given the doctrine of war in the gray zone, the goals and methods, it is the combined impact of multiple gray zone actors acting at once that dramatically contributes to this negative trend. The decline of both domestic views of the US government as well as international views of the United States as a guarantor of international norms serves as a key indicator that the necessary US application of the operational level within the gray zone likely does not exist.
The lack of an operational level of war in the U.S. prosecution of the gray zone war stems in part from an inability to define the gray zone as war. The international community is not likely to allow the gray zone to formally be called war. However, the application of principles of the operational level of war are not only relevant but essential to the successful defense of the United States, its allies, and the gray zone itself. The national strategic level is trying to operationalize the gray zone through a "whole of government approach," to respond to the complex and dynamic situations of the modern world.
The whole of government approach to advancing national interests reportedly originated in the United Kingdom early into the Tony Blair administration in an attempt to break intergovernmental borders to form a more symbiotic and fluid government structure. 
64
65
66
From Sun Tzu through various US presidents, the understanding of the operational level of war is apparent save for its lack of application to the gray zone. The deficit is accepting that the gray zone amounts to an ongoing war. This understanding must be attained in order to apply the necessary logic of synchronization that generates from defining an operational level within the gray zone war. This is the failure to apply proven war-like techniques to a national strategy that directs it. The agencies within the United States are designed to work independently.
Although individual efforts are likely made to work together on specific issues, the gray zone war is not treated as such an issue, which requires a higher operational level to ensure synchronization in time and space. Therefore, the role of the operational level of war within a gray zone war is to synchronize all campaigns, as previously defined, in time and space, in the consolidated defense of international norms and American interests. The center of gravity that must be protected in this effort is the ability to execute the operational level of war itself in order to sustain the trust of the country and allies. As gray zone aggressors continue to make strides together, even while not overtly coordinated toward their objectives, over extended periods of time, the opportunity for the United States to operationalize its strategy continues to erode.
An obvious response to this concept is to hand the synchronization to the National Security Council. As highlighted in online White House archives: "The National Security Council (NSC) is the President's principal forum for considering national security and foreign operational approach in space and time against the adversaries listed in the National Security Strategy. This response will be intended to depict synchronization of all the elements of national power within a national defense against the named revisionist state powers. This is the most applicable recommendation as it provides expertise from the whole of government experts.
Further, it ensures cross pollination preemptively of all US capabilities in time and space.
The United States created the gray zone conflict by thwarting the global tendency for large-scale conventional warfare. This greatly benefits all of humanity, but must be managed and maintained as revisionist powers continue to seek their goals that threaten this equilibrium.
Three major adversaries, Russia, China and Iran, make the gray zone a war. Any target of a war cannot rightfully be denied the ability to wage it, regardless of the weapons used or the theories invoked. Since all of the attempted definitions of the gray zone are true, all of the elements ending in "warfare" are applicable to this fight, such as political warfare, hybrid warfare, cyber warfare, etc. This reality forces the United States to engage in a protracted gray zone war.
Further, the war is against multiple state actors whose non-synchronized actions combine together to attack the core center of gravity of the United States: its ability to perceive an operational level of gray zone war and the faith of the world in its ability to manage such a global conflict. Through this recognition the operational level of war in the gray zone is visible.
The goal is to synchronize all of the elements of national power. Although it is unlikely that the international community or the United States will allow the gray zone to be called an active war, the application of warlike techniques at the national level are not only applicable, they are necessary. The gray zone is the United States preferred war domain, and it has dominated national security since the world became unipolar in 1991. Without defending and sustaining the gray zone, acts of aggression will continue to test US resolve to enforce red lines thereby risking a much larger conventional war. Without ensuring the gray zone continues, reverting back to a traditional, shooting warfare risking vast global destruction is inevitable. In sum, the status quo represents a valued state of equilibrium, should the United States better manage its gray zone response.
Dr. Mathew J. Flynn
Thank you
policy matters with his senior national security advisors and cabinet officials. Since its inception under President Truman, the Council's function has been to advise and assist the President on national security and foreign policies. The Council also serves as the President's principal arm for coordinating these policies among various government agencies." 
67
Following this same reasoning, the CIA further develops strategic plans. Within the DoD the National Military Strategy and the National Defense Strategy begin to break down into some operational tasks and priorities but seemingly give the majority of the operational level tasks to the combatant commanders. Each combatant commander is responsible for a large portion of the world and troops deployed within it. Based off of this US national security architecture, it is appropriate to have the operational level of war within the gray zone above the agencies or departments and below the National Security Council. As stressed, the United States is facing at least three revisionist nation states that all wage war on the United States both in theory and doctrine. If, in fact, all three were actively shooting and attacking US soil, the recommended step would be taken to prosecute the war at the national level.
The following recommendations highlight options to operationalize the national level thinking to properly account for the multi-front, multi-campaign war that is waged against the United States. Without this action it is certain that revisionist states will continue to progress to a point where the only option to countering their aggression is conventional, violent, traditional war.
The first of course of action is to enable a gray zone Combatant Command. At first this may sound daunting. However, a command structure created that is designed to watch all gray zone actors together, will alleviate the burden of Combatant Commanders to operationalize and synchronize outside of their respective areas of responsibility. The gray zone combatant command will serve this function. Further, a gray zone combatant command must be comprised of all elements of national power, a leadership burden shared to ensure synchronization and equity of operations across all domains and elements. The gray zone combatant commander should not be a purely military function, rather fall outside or above the military structure, as it must all other domains.
The second course of action is to operationalize the senior level of the United States Government. As the National Security Council delivers policy, they must also synchronize operations against threats named in the National Security Strategy. Although a feasible recommendation, this is the least likely to take hold within the United States as it removes authority and power away from the agencies and departments.
The third course of action is potentially the most feasible as a developed operational approach. This response is to the National Security Strategy and in conjunction with each agency or department's strategy. The heads of all of the elements of national power should transmit back to the NSC a combined national level operational concept. The response is an