# ID: 557ea0bcbe7443919b09ae20785e352c
# Title: Tanks: Fulfilling a Role in Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1998.0
# Fulltext:
With the role of the US Army changing from exclusively fighting and winning the nation's wars to becoming more involved in support and stability operations, the potential to become entangled in urban combat has increased tremendously. Consequently, conducting Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) has developed into a serious issue that the United States military must confront.
Taking into account the nature of MOUT and the effects it has on armored fighting vehicles (AFVs), a concern has surfaced over the utility of AFVs in a MOUT situation. Specifically, does the United States main battle tank (M1A2) possess the necessary characteristics required to successfully accomplish tasks in MOUT operations?
The monograph reviews the evolution of the tank beginning in W.W.I to the present to establish that the current U.S. main battle tank was designed to defeat a Soviet structured heavy force on the open European terrain as opposed to operating in an urban environment. The nature of MOUT is then presented to identify the unique and complex factors that characterize military operations in an urban environment and how the nature of MOUT degrades the tank's effectiveness and increases its vulnerability. This is followed by an examination of three case studies of urban combat involving the use of tanks and other AFVs. These studies include Hue City,  Vietnam in 1968; Mogadishu, Somalia in 1993; and Grozny, Chechnya in 1994 -1995. The purpose of looking at these case studies is to determine what tasks tanks performed during the operations, whether the tanks contributed to the staying power of the force and to the success of the operations, and finally, if the tanks were effectively employed to conduct successful combined arms operations. A comparative analysis of these three battles provides evidence regarding the effective utilization of tanks in MOUT. This monograph concludes that the M1A2 does possess the necessary characteristics required to successfully conduct MOUT operations. However, this success is directly related to the level of training of the forces that make up the combined arms team conducting the MOUT operation. in
MOUT will consume a greater place in future military operations ... as early as the next century ... A military unprepared for urban operations across a broad spectrum is unprepared for tomorrow. 
1
Because of the increased likelihood of being involved in MOUT operations, the US Army faces a number of challenges in the future to prepare for urban combat. One challenge is to determine what role armored fighting vehicles (AFVs) can perform in MOUT operations. A second challenge is to determine what changes, if any, must be made so that AFVs can more effectively perform their role in a MOUT environment.
Taking into account the nature of MOUT and the effect it has on armored fighting vehicles (AFVs) attempting to operate in that environment, a concern has surfaced over the utility of AFVs in a MOUT situation. Specifically, does the United States main battle tank (M1A2) possess the necessary characteristics required to successfully accomplish tasks in MOUT operations?
The US Army's main battle tank is perhaps the best armored fighting vehicle in the world. Its design was predicated on meeting and defeating a Cold-War enemy mechanized force on the European battlefield. Relying on its heavy armament and its hi-tech weapon system, the tank was intended to close with and destroy the enemy using fire, maneuver and shock effect.2
Although the US main battle tank has recently been involved with Peace
Operations in Bosnia, it has not yet been challenged in a combat situation that required it to fight its way through a city. Therefore, it is necessary to draw upon similarities of other tanks utilized in MOUT operations to identify whether the M1A2 has the capabilities required to successfully accomplish tasks in this type of environment.
History has shown that armored fighting vehicles, when properly employed, can play an effective role in MOUT. However, history has also provided evidence that the improper employment of AFVs in an urban environment can result in disaster. There is abundant data on MOUT operations since 1939. The difficulty lies in selecting the historical cases that are most like the conditions that the US will face in future contingencies. In this regard, examples from World
War II and the Korean War are of limited use because most future US military operations will involve major constraints on the use of force.
This monograph looks at the role tanks have fulfilled in previous MOUT operations, what impact the nature of MOUT has had on the tank's performance, and how the tactical employment of tanks in MOUT has effected their success in accomplishing the mission. Also examined are the battles of Hue, Somalia, and Chechnya as three separate and distinct examples of MOUT operations involving tanks. Hue illustrates a scenario where extensive use of tanks and other AFVs encountered a formidable enemy force. Somalia illustrates a scenario that involved limited use of tanks and armored personnel carriers (APCs) against a determined enemy force. Chechnya illustrates a scenario that involved a mixed configuration of AFVs that resulted in failure. From these battles it is possible to identify what tasks tanks performed in both offensive and defensive operations as well as how those systems contributed to force protection. It is also possible to assess whether the presence of tanks contributed to the staying power of the force and contributed to the success of the operation. Lastly, it can be determined if the tanks were effectively employed to conduct successful combined arms operations.
A comparative analysis of these three battles provides evidence regarding the effective utilization of tanks in MOUT. This monograph utilizes three evaluation criteria. First, were the tasks required of the tank standard tasks that a tank or tank section should expect to perform in any military operation?
Second, did the presence of the tank contribute to the staying power of the force and the success of the operation? Third, was the tank effectively employed with other combat elements to effectively operate as a combined arms team? These criteria have been selected because they permit the tank to perform its intended purpose of closing with and destroying the enemy using fire, maneuver and shock effect.
Standard tasks are defined as those that appear in Army Training and Evaluation Program (ARTEP) 71-1-MTP, Mission Training Plan for the Tank and Mechanized_!nfantry C9^R^Dy^^^0J^^y-I^^l-3 T ' ne tasks that a PP ear in this manual are those tasks and supporting tasks that individual U.S. crews, vehicles (tanks), sections, and company teams must master to perform critical wartime missions. These tasks are therefore referred to as standard tasks.
Tasks that do not appear in ARTEP 71-1-MTP will be referred to as nonstandard tasks.
Staying power refers to the ability of the force to accomplish the mission as a result of the presence of tanks during the operation; would the absence of the tank have resulted in mission failure or a higher level of casualties?
This monograph discusses the evolution of the role of the tank to establish the environment and type of warfare the current US main battle tank was designed to operate, and why US forces can now anticipate operating in an urban environment. Next, a discussion about the nature of MOUT is presented to identify factors that characterize military operations specific to an urban environment, followed by a presentation of he aforementioned case studies.
Each case study consists of a brief overview of the battle followed by an analysis of the critical events that occurred during the battle involving tanks. The significance of these critical events is then discussed to determine what tasks were required of the tanks. Recommendations regarding how to improve the tank's ability to effectively operate in a MOUT environment are then presented.
Lastly, this monograph presents a concluding argument that the United States main battle tank (M1A2) possesses the necessary characteristics required to successfully accomplish tasks in MOUT operations if properly integrated into the combined arms team, assuming that adequate combined arms training has occurred.
CHAPTER 2
One of the words most commonly associated with the First World War is stalemate. The word conjures up images of tactical deadlock, of endless, muddy trenches, shell craters, barbed wire, absence of assailable flanks, and futile, bloody attacks. 
4
5
6
7
Realizing the significant contribution that tanks could produce on the battlefield, the German military invested heavily in designing and constructing a modern mechanized force during the inter-war years. "The best of the German tanks were good compromises of speed, range, protection, fire-power, and versatility, as suited their roles and missions." 10 On the eve of World War II, new technology and an improved theory of mechanized warfare, together with the fielding of several tank and mechanized (Panzer) divisions, provided the German military the capability to conduct quick and decisive combat operations.
Mechanized warfare from now on would assume a dominant role in the conduct in maneuver warfare.
The British, French and American high commands paid little attention to developing a force centered on armored, motorized warfare. 11 However, once it was seen how quickly the German mechanized forces defeated the Polish ground forces, a new interest in mechanized vehicles materialized. Fortunately for the Americans it was not too late to design and mass produce the M4 Sherman. Like the best of the German designs, the M4 Sherman was "a good compromise on speed, range, protection, firepower, and versatility." 
12
In order to destroy tanks and other mechanized vehicles at extended ranges, the M1 was developed to engage targets beyond 3,500 meters. It was constructed with a large caliber main gun designed to defeat Soviet main battle tanks, and constructed with sufficient armored protection to survive a frontal engagement from another tank. Its turbine engine provided the speed and quickness to bound from one covered position to the next and to exploit a penetration. To maximize its effects, the M1 was intended to fight as part of a combined arms team at company through brigade level. Fighting as part of a team would not only maximize the capabilities of the tank, but would also provide added security for its survival against other tank-killing weapon systems.
However, the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 ended the threat that the American military had been tailored to fight, and with it the need for America to maintain the large, heavy division structure.
In 1991 the US and other NATO forces employed their heavy divisions against Iraq and won a decisive victory, during which the M1A1 tank performed magnificently. The tank was able to maneuver over vast distances to close with and destroy enemy forces using fire, maneuver, and shock effect. The enemy will understand the benefits of enticing a better and more technological equipped adversary into the jungle of an urban area where he will utilize his knowledge of the terrain to lessen his enemy's capability. 
15
Among these are populated areas located on key terrain and cities in which major bridges or other vital crossings are located. Also, requirements to protect an exposed flank, to stage diversionary operations, to tie down enemy forces, and expanded urbanization preventing bypassing will also force our armored forces to conduct operations in an urban environment. 
16
America's military must now determine if the urban environment is where future conflicts will occur. If this is in fact so, then it must be understood that conducting operations in an urban environment will produce new challenges for our military's main battle tank. A combat vehicle that was designed primarily to
operate on the open plains of Europe must now be expected to cope with the vastly different environment created by urban terrain.
The nature of MOUT presents unique and complex challenges to army forces. It presents both the attacker and defender with numerous engagement conditions. 
17
One advantage that tanks frequently bring to any operation is their ability to engage and destroy targets at extended ranges. The M1A2 tank is capable of acquiring and engaging targets out to and beyond 4,000 meters. Unfortunately, when operating in a MOUT environment the ability to engage targets at extended ranges is often forfeited. Buildings and other man-made structures that make up the urban environment restrict the tank's ability to acquire and engage targets at long distances. Therefore, the extended line-of-sight capability that frequently exists in open terrain does not exist in the urban environment. In a MOUT environment line-of-sight varies from a few feet to several thousands of meters.
However, acquisition and engagement of the enemy are far more likely to be at the lower end of this spectrum. Only 5% of the targets in urban operations appear at ranges over 100 meters, with 90% of targets engaged at ranges of 50 meters or less. 
18
19
20
In addition to diminishing the tanks standoff range, the nature of MOUT provides the enemy force with shorter engagement ranges in which to fire upon friendly armored vehicles. These shorter engagement ranges offer a marked advantage to an enemy using low-tech, anti-tank weapon systems such as the RPG-7s that has a maximum effective range of 500 meters. Consequently, RPG-7s and other shoulder-fired anti-tank systems that have limited Many third-world urban areas consist of structures constructed out of light building material that tanks can readily drive a path through or, by utilizing its main gun, create a hole in. On the other hand, some of these urban areas will be characterized by structures constructed out of heavy building materials such as reinforced concrete. These structures can present a formidable obstacle for tanks. Tanks will be unable to create paths through these structures, forcing the armored vehicles to maneuvering along streets. The ability to create a hole in the side of one of these building is greatly reduced by the fact that firing main gun rounds into the side of a concrete building will cause the sabot round to ricochet, possibly causing injury to non-combatants or to friendly forces. Also, many such structures have basements that will present significant mobility problems for tanks attempting to create a path through those structures.
Urban operations create difficult moral dilemmas due to the proximity of large numbers of civilians. 
23
When fighting began in the afternoon of October 3,1993, the American troops knew they were in for the battle of their lives. When every civilian is a potential enemy, no fighting is easy. When every battleground is filled with hostile civilians -people you thought you were there to help -the fighting becomes not only difficult, it becomes nearly impossible. 
24
Consequently, it is virtually certain that in an urban environment there will be heavy casualties among both combatants and non-combatants, especially when tanks and other weapon systems are involved. Although casualties will occur, collateral damage and casualties must be kept to a minimum. Massive, indiscriminate use of firepower is unacceptable. 
25
26
27
As part of the 1968 Tet Offensive the North Vietnamese Republican Army (NVA) launched an attack on the city of Hue, Vietnam's second largest city.
Within two hours the enemy was able to seize the city, except for a small Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) camp located in the southern section of the city and an Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) HQ unit located within the Citadel in the northern section of the city. 
28
29
30
At the height of the battle the enemy force, consisting of two regiments with eight battalions, had seventy-five hundred soldiers made up of both Viet Cong and North Vietnamese soldiers. 
32
33
34
35
Between the combined efforts of the tanks and Marines, the relief force pushed through the ambush and conducted a link-up with the MACV camp.
Marines involved in this event and other similar situations during the battle in Hue routinely stated that, "[when] the enemy had taken up defensive positions, dismounts could not provide enough suppressive fire -however the tanks could." 
36
38
Shortly after the Marines arrived at the MACV camp they received orders to relieve an ARVN reconnaissance company that the enemy had encircled in the northern sector of the city. 
39
40
41
The lead squad went up the street -and was ambushed. The fire poured out from the houses ahead -B-40 rockets, AK-47 automatic weapons, machine guns, and recoilless rifles. Of the 150 Marines ... 50 were dead or wounded ... it was impossible to continue and the casualties were simply unacceptable. 
42
This second event reinforces the tasks that the tanks successfully accomplished. These tasks included providing shock action and firepower, performing actions on contact and providing support by fire. The tanks accomplished these tasks while neutralizing and suppressing enemy positions with main gun and automatic weapons, and suppressing identified sniper positions.
Due to the high rate of casualties suffered by American forces, aerial casualty evacuation was continuous. The nearest landing zone (LZ) available to the US forces was located 1 mile from the MACV camp. Unfortunately, the most direct route to the LZ was along a narrow street that zigzagged its way through the southern sector of the city. Along the way enemy sniper fire was routine. By the time medevac convoys arrived at the LZ the number of casualties and fatalities was always greater than when the convoy started out. To overcome this problem the tanks were tasked to create a direct path from the MACV camp to the LZ. Due to the power of the tank and the ability for it to survive fires from snipers, RPGs and B-40 rockets, the tanks quickly created a path through walls, buildings, houses, and other fortifications, creating a direct path to the LZ. The enemy did fire on the breach tank, but other AFVs overwatching the breach tank immediately and accurately neutralized enemy firing positions. 
43
44
These tasks were accomplished when the tanks were smashing through street Within minutes after departing on its mission the QRF entered a Somali ambush, resulting in the destruction of several of its vehicles. The QRF, unable to continue the mission, was "driven back by what was described as 'hails' of rifle and RPG fire." 
49
50
The Deputy Forces Commander (UNOSOM) directed Malaysian Mechanized Battalion assets and Pakistani tanks be made available to the QRF. 
51
52
53
During the second attempt to link-up with the Ranger company, the QRF, led by the M-48 tanks, quickly breached enemy roadblocks. The tanks also drove through several enemy ambush sites."... the tanks were ambushed by machine gun fire and RPG. Seven often RPGs were fired at the lead tank with little affect." 
54
55
56
57
58
59
There are a number of differences between this operation and the Marine operation in Hue City. First, tanks were not required to support house to house clearing operations in Somalia as they did in Hue. Secondly, due to the unique circumstances of this operation, dismounted infantry did not provide security to the tanks. Thirdly, a language barrier existed between the Pakistani, Malaysian, and American soldiers that inhibited effective communication, resulting in the American soldiers having difficulty conversing with the drivers of these vehicles.
Consequently, some vehicles did not maneuver along the selected routes and quickly became disoriented. Pakistani tanks, equipped with blades to breach obstacles, refused to maneuver at the front of the convoy where they would be most effective. Furthermore, the Americans quickly discovered that the APC drivers either reluctantly or totally refused to maneuver their vehicles where the potential of being engaged by Somali soldiers existed. Lastly, this operation occurred over a period of hours and during periods of limited visibility. Hue lasted a total of 26 days. However, even with these differences, the tanks were successful with providing mutual support for one another. Utilizing their shock effect and firepower, they successfully attacked through the city of Mogadishu to link-up with an encircled force. Once the link-up occurred, the QRF attacked back through the city while attempting to avoid enemy contact, performing many of the same tasks as those performed during the Hue operation. This operation further exemplifies the impact of shock effect, force protection and staying power that occurs as a result of integrating tanks into the combined-arms team.
In 1994 Russian Army forces deployed to Grozny as part of a military operation to prevent the Republic of Chechnya from gaining independence from Russia. President Boris Yelstin, unwilling to allow the province of Chechnya to secede, ordered a military operation designed to restore constitutional order and legality in the Chechen territory. 
60
Additionally, they believed that the Chechens would present little resistance against a seemingly robust Russian mechanized force. Utilizing limited ground forces, the Russian political leaders concluded that the military tasks of disarming and liquidating Chechen forces could be easily accomplished within two weeks. 
62
63
64
65
Before Russian military leaders had the opportunity to regroup and assess the battle, the Russian political leaders ordered another immediate attack.
However, to ensure success the political leaders stipulated that the Russian military leaders mobilize and employ regular Russian Army forces to conduct the second attack. 67 "Attempting to establish a credible force quickly, the Russian Army was forced to combine small units and send them [to Grozny] to fight."
As was the case with the rebel Chechen forces that conducted the initial attack, Russian forces conducting the follow-on mission consisted of a "rag-tag en collection of various units without an adequate support base."
Infantry fighting vehicles went to war with their crews, but with little or no infantry on board. In some cases, officers drove because soldiers were not available. 
70
71
72
73
74
Receiving significant losses, the Russian forces withdrew from the Chechen Republic." 
75
The Chechen forces, being familiar with the city, accurately anticipated which routes the Russian would use for the attack. The Chechens occupied RPG positions along the roofs and upper floors of the building that lined the Russian's approach. Additionally, the Chechens organized three-man, hunter-killer teams consisting of an RPG gunner, a sniper, and machine gunner. "[These] teams deployed at ground level, in second and third stories, and in basements.
Normally five or six hunter-killer teams simultaneously attacked a single armored vehicle." 
76
Chechen forces were prepared to fight as the Russian armored vehicles maneuvered toward the center of the city. When the armored vehicles maneuvered into the engagement area the Chechens initiated the ambush by destroying the lead and trail vehicles. 
77
78
79
80
First, once tanks become more involved with avoiding enemy RPG fire they lose their effectiveness to perform a role in MOUT. Secondly, although tanks and other AFVs bring a substantial amount of firepower to the operation, the tank is rendered practically useless if infantry soldiers are not securing the vehicle as they maneuver within the city.
During operations in Grozny the Russians discovered that Chechen forces were being supported with weapons and soldiers from villages on the outskirts of the city, resulting in Russian forces being tasked to seize these villages. Tanks tasked organized with other AFVs maneuvered to establish a cordon around the villages. The cordon prevented the villages from being reinforced from outside sources and prevented the enemy forces from within each village from escaping.
Once a village was surrounded, infantry, overwatched by tanks, was maneuvered forward to establish a foothold on the edge of the village. 
81
82
Once inside the village the tanks assisted with breaching obstacles and creating entry holes in the sides of structures. "The Russians came to rely heavily on the tank's 'bunker busting' rounds for engaging Chechens, primarily snipers, entrenched in buildings." 
83
Russian tank-mounted searchlights proved useful for night assaults. The searchlights not only designated targets for the infantry, but also temporarily blinded the night-vision equipment of the enemy. This technique produced a psychological effect upon the enemy while helping to reduce fratricide during the assault. 
84
The initial two attempts to seize Grozny proved disastrous for the Russian Army. However, they do support an extremely relevant observation -tanks operating in a MOUT environment without the support of infantry will not survive against a stubborn enemy armed with RPGs, ATGMs, and other tank-killing weapon systems. This observation is relevant regardless of the size and power of the armor force.
Another relevant observation is the city or village involved in the MOUT operation must be sealed-off to prevent forces from reinforcing the soldiers currently in the city or from allowing the enemy forces within the city to escape.
Tanks proved they are more than capable of accomplishing this task.
Additionally, attempting to seize a city from the march can prove disastrous for the attacking forces. The city must be taken successively, starting on the outskirts and working inward. Infantry must first create the secure condition that will allow the tanks to maneuver into an overwatch position. Furthermore, enemy forces cannot be bypassed. Chechen hunter-killer teams, when bypassed, were able to easily engage Russian tanks and other AFVs.
Once the Russians became more experienced with integrating the combined effects of armor and infantry, the tanks were able to fulfill their expected role.
Tanks were moved forward to breach obstacles, create holes through walls and into buildings, allowing Russian dismounts an entry into buildings occupied by the Chechens. 
85
These case studies reveal that regardless of whether tasks are standard or not, the nature of MOUT and the high level of combined arms training required can cause even the most simplest tasks to be difficult and complicated to execute.
Though very little can be done to modify the nature of MOUT, much can be done to prepare the unit to effectively conduct MOUT. In Vietnam the Marines were experienced jungle warfighters, not urban warfighters. Many of the successful tactics, techniques, and procedures involving tanks operating with dismounts were learned as the Hue operation progressed. "A few days of fighting together was all that was required" to begin operating effectively as a combined arms team.
In Grozny the Russian Army did not use a well trained and versatile combined arms force to conduct MOUT operations. Several senior military commanders were removed from command during this operation because they refused to take their soldiers into Grozny, knowing that their soldiers "had not received adequate training." 
87
The limited amount of infantry that was available had been thrown together at the last minute with some soldiers not even having weapons. Consequently, when the Russian's attempted to seize Grozny they essentially attempted to do so with tanks and IFVs but without enough supporting infantry. These armored vehicles, unprotected by dismounted infantry, were easy prey for the Chechens In contrast to the Russian Army in Grozny, the American force in Somalia was made up by some of the most highly trained units in the American Army. In an attack on the Chechen city of Grozny, the Russian Army completely underestimated the capabilities of the opposing force. They entered the city with 23,000 soldiers, 80 tanks, 208 APC/IFVs and 182 artillery pieces. 
91
In Somalia, American forces encountered similar problems when they underestimated the capabilities of Somali forces. During this operation General Mohammed Farah Aideed's forces did not possess hi-tech weaponry. Most of their weaponry consisted of AK-47s, RPG-7s, and some 106mm recoilless rifles.
However, they possessed no tanks, IFVs, or artillery. Once inside the city, the narrow streets surrounded by buildings on both sides allowed Aideed's clansmen to take maximum advantage of their short-range weapon systems. These clansmen were amazingly successful in establishing a series of aerial and ground ambushes. As a result of the American forces having underestimated the reactions of the Somali people and their ability to mass forces quickly, they
were not prepared or organized to conduct combined arms, offensive MOUT operations.
Lastly, essential to conducting successful MOUT operations is creating, implementing and executing detailed plans for defeating the enemy in a three dimensional environment. Detailed planning will include the identification of decisive points, objectives, avenues of approach, lines of communication, and lines of operation designed to support the success of the mission. It will also template likely enemy ambush sites and strongpoints and assist with the identification of the infrastructure that will provide the enemy the capability to fight a three dimensional fight. Furthermore, detailed planning identifies the tasks and the required TTPs that soldiers must know to have a productive rehearsal. Detailed planning and rehearsals are critical for conducting successful MOUT operations.
In Grozny the Russian Army used an ill-conceived plan during their attack on the city. The detailed planning required by the Russian forces never occurred.
As a result, the Russians attempted to attack Grozny from the march. The lack of planning prevented the Russians from developing a reconnaissance plan to identify enemy obstacles, locations, and disposition. Rehearsals were not conducted, resulting in the infantry not knowing where to dismount the APCs.
Contingency plans were not addressed, nor were the actions to be taken when enemy contact was made. At a minimum, rehearsals would have prepared the solders for the operation. As a result, the Chechen forces defeated the initial Russian force, forcing them to break contact, fall back and conduct deliberate planning prior to conducting another attempt at seizing the city. 
94
95
96
When the first attempt to link-up with American forces failed, the QRF attempted to task organize with Pakistani and Malaysian mechanized forces. Once again, a lack of rehearsals and coordination with these allied forces significantly hampered the second rescue attempt. Because the QRF did not have the time to plan for a combined arms contingency mission with allied forces, command and control of the operation suffered, resulting in unnecessary casualties.
The nature of MOUT complicates the tank's ability to perform tasks to standard. 
97
are not integrated into a MOUT operation and the immediate effects gained when tanks are integrated into the combined arms team. The Grozny operation demonstrated the negative impact that occurs when tanks attempt to maneuver in MOUT without the support of dismounted infantry and, like Somalia, the positive effects gained when tanks, infantry, and other AFVs operate effectively as a combined arms team. In all cases armor contributed to the success of the operation. Yet simply having the tank available in each of these operations did not always make a positive difference.
In addition to concluding that tanks fulfill a number of critical roles in MOUT, it is also important to state that each task and supporting task identified in this analysis are listed in ARTEP 71-1-MTP, The Tank and Mechanized Infantry
Company and Company Team. Therefore, this monograph also concludes that the tasks tanks performed in these case studies and those tasks that tanks may anticipate performing in future MOUT operations can be considered standard ARTEP tasks that a tank crew or tank section should be expected to perform in any given operation.
Though the M1A2 provides tremendous combat power, it is vulnerable to a number of weapon systems available to the enemy. Furthermore, the nature of MOUT can severely limit the ability of the tank to operate in such an environment. Thus, the tank should never function alone in urban terrain. It will be the responsibility of the infantry and other combat systems to provide the essential security and assist with providing situational awareness in order for the tank to close with and destroy the enemy using fire, maneuver and shock effect.
There have been a number of recommendations of how to improve the tank to operate more effectively in an urban environment. Recommendations that range from modifying the weapon systems of the tank in order to fire a wide variety of ammunition, developing electromagnetic and explosive reactive armor, to completely developing new MOUT specific AFVs and deleting the M1A2 from participating in MOUT. However, in a MOUT operation, "the bulk of the tactical firepower will need to come from large-caliber, protected, direct fire weapons. To fulfill this firepower requirement will call for a tank, or future systems descended from the tank." 98 Additionally, "the US does not plan to field a new-generation main battle tank before 2015 at the earliest. This is partly due to the lack of a clearly defined threat since the end of the cold war." 99
Although improvements can be made to increase the lethality and survivability of the tank, the level of training that exists between the combined arms team will determine the success of the operation as the three case studies have shown. To truly be successful in any operation our forces must learn how to leverage the full capabilities of the tank and other weapon systems of the combined arms team to maximize their utility at accomplishing the mission. This can best be achieved by training as those forces intend to fight.
The old saying 'live and learn' must be revised in war, for there we learn and live; otherwise we die. It is with this learning, in order to live, that the Army is so vitally concerned. 100
The purpose of this monograph was to determine if the United States main battle tank (M1A2) possesses the necessary characteristics required to successfully accomplish tasks in MOUT operations. Its is evident that the M1A2 does in fact possess those characteristics. Although the M1A2 has never been tested in urban combat, the case studies provide clear evidence that the tank is fully capable of accomplishing critical tasks commonly required in MOUT.
Additionally, when integrated into a combined arms team, it provides the other elements of the combined arms team with direct fire support, shock effect, maneuverability, and the staying power necessary for mission success.
However, the success of the tank in MOUT is dependent upon the training level of all the elements that make up the combined arms team.
The purpose of analyzing the battles of Hue, Somalia, and Chechnya was to identify those tasks that tanks were expected to perform in three separate MOUT operations. Next was to determine if the tanks were successful in accomplishing those tasks, followed by a determination whether tanks have a role in MOUT.
The battle of Hue demonstrated the positive results obtained when tanks and infantry operate together. Hue also demonstrated the ineffectiveness and shortcomings that occur when infantry conduct MOUT without tank support.
Somalia demonstrated the disastrous consequences that may occur when tanks