# ID: 55a3259e05ce4690bd33e7267c4e8c5c
# Title: Military Review: The Professional Journal of the US Army, September-October 2008
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
By 1 February 2002, planners saw Operation Boa as a large force operation requiring significant coordination, integration and synchronization of the unique capabilities of each combined force component.
Most important, with the first large-scale use of conventional ground forces, CJTF Pinnacle and the component commanders clearly understood the need for comprehensive joint planning and execution, the likes of which had not yet been required in OEF.
The first step was to identify requirements. (
Counterfactual.
23 February 2002 was the first time the CFACC was briefed on the extent of the air component support required for Anaconda, scheduled to begin five days later on 28 February 2002.)
 Two narratives influenced CJTF planners in the requirements phase.
First, allied Afghan ground commanders relayed stories about the Soviet Union's experience in Shah-i-Kot, where the mujahedeen drew 200 to 250 Russian soldiers into close combat and stoned them to death.
To avoid this scenario, planners wanted to use overwhelming force from air and ground forces.
CJTF Pinnacle planners estimated that 200 SOF, 1,600 conventional ground troops, and 1,000 allied Afghan troops supported by 24/7 close air support (CAS) coverage were needed for Boa.
The introduction of 12 A-10s and 24 AH-64s, along with 1600 conventional troops would strain the old Soviet base and its support structure to the limit.