# ID: 564d39a4df6149a99a360412d3676594
# Title: Proclaiming Airpower: Air Force Narratives and American Public Opinion from 1917 to 2014
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
This report examines the evolution and interaction of U.S. Air Force narratives and popular attitudes toward civil and military aviation over the past century ??? from the "golden age" of aviation in the first half of the 20th century, when flight and airpower captured the American public's imagination, to 2014, when aviation had long since become taken for granted. The study first examines the social currency of aviation and airpower, drawing on a historical review, the frequency with which airmen appeared on the cover of Time magazine during the period, and the frequency with which airpower and aviation concepts appeared in books. It then examines Air Force narratives, including the Air Force's origin story as well as the dominant ideas uniting the organization at various points in its history. Finally, drawing on polling data from more than 50 opinion surveys conducted over the past 80 years, the study traces the evolution of the American public's attitudes toward the Air Force since 1935. The American public today does not view airpower or the Air Force with the same fascination and enthusiasm that it did during the "golden age" of aviation, but the report concludes that shortcomings in Air Force narratives are not to blame: Airpower's enormous social currency during the first half of the 20th century was due to real-world events and technological advances, not narratives. However, the report emphasizes that an effective narrative is still important as a means to help the public and key decisionmakers understand the contributions that airpower makes to U.S. national security today, and offers recommendations for the Air Force in this regard.
iii
The U.S. Department of Defense is entering a period of fiscal austerity that could last decades, which would be unprecedented in the past 70 years. In addition to its potential duration, the coming age of defense austerity also promises to be unusually challenging for the U.S. Air Force (USAF) because it is following a decade of wartime operational tempo and two decades in which relatively little modernization took place. The combination of high and continuing operational demands with a hiatus in modernization has greatly stressed the USAF as nearterm readiness increasingly competes for funds with programs needed to meet future challenges.
To address these and related policy issues, the USAF Quadrennial Defense Review Office (HAF/CVAR) commissioned a RAND Project AIR FORCE Fiscal Year 2014 study. The sponsoring office was particularly interested in help with two problems: (1) measuring the benefits of high readiness levels across the USAF and (2) gaining deeper insights into the relationship between USAF narratives and public attitudes toward the service. To offer empirically based insights on those issues, the RAND study identified four questions for analysis: (1) What has been the historic demand for joint force and USAF responsiveness over the past 60 years? (2) What are the responsiveness demands associated with current U.S. strategy, operational plans, and planning scenarios? (3) What lessons can be learned from the New Look Era, when airpower was widely viewed as the cornerstone of U.S. national security? and (4) How have USAF public narratives and popular attitudes toward airpower evolved over the past century?    Against the Sunni Insurgents in Iraq? Do You Feel That Way Strongly or Somewhat?" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130 
After seeing the advanced state of European military aviation during World War I, American airmen returned home determined to build a modern and capable air force. Stymied by Army leaders who saw aviation as a supporting arm, congressional limitations on spending, and a general pacifist mood, prominent airmen proclaimed
1
Seeking to ride the exceptional early 20th century wave of public enthusiasm for aviation as well as guide its direction, airmen developed narratives making the case for new air-centric military strategies and organizations. They did this most visibly from the early 1920s to the mid-1950s. By 1960, the public's emotional connection to aviation had largely ended, although airpower still loomed large in its understanding of U.S. military strategy. Although aviation has lost its central place in the American imagination, airmen have continued to seek public support through an evolving narrative centered on the themes of advanced technology, airmindedness (a unique perspective on time and space), and innovation. The evolution of this narrative over the past 100 years and its relationship to American popular attitudes toward airpower and the Air Force is the subject of this report.
Research findings and recommendations are presented below.
Public opinion toward the Air Force was most favorable when aviation was at the center of popular culture and the public's imagination was captured by "the limitless future of the sky." The fascination with flight was arguably the first mass cultural phenomenon in the United States, enabled by the new media of radio and film. Dramatic rises in the social currency of aviation can be quantified as occurring between 1900 and 1920, well before American airmen began presenting their first public narratives (see Chapter Two). Average people identified with flight and aviators, they routinely discussed aviation matters with friends and family, they avidly sought and shared information about aviation, and many became aviation advocates. In short, aviation had exceptional social currency in the first half of the 20th century; during those years, the public was predisposed to give airpower friendly answers in polls.
To be fair, energetic outreach by airmen and airpower advocates nurtured, sustained, and focused public support, but it was publicity about real-world events and concrete accomplishments-improvements in aircraft, world-record flights, and performance in combat-that gave airpower its great social currency, not narratives, however carefully constructed.
Ironically, as many of the aviation dreams became reality (e.g., safe, reliable, global travel by air), flight lost its mystery, adventure, and glamor. Other dreams became muddled or morphed into nightmares.
In Korea and Vietnam, for example, the public perceived airpower as vital but not decisive. And with the Soviet development of a large nuclear bomber and missile force, the nightmare of nuclear attack on the homeland became a real possibility, never fully removed by the strategy of deterrence. As aviation and airpower drifted away from the center of the public's consciousness or moved in darker directions, popular attitudes toward the USAF became more complex, mixed, and nuanced. There have been spikes of public enthusiasm for airpower since the end of the Cold War, but the consistently high interest that the USAF once could take for granted has long passed. As a consequence, airpower has become routinized; the USAF is highly respected along with the other services but is no longer viewed as revolutionary or particularly newsworthy. Airpower's social currency today is primarily a function of its visibility in ongoing military operations and popular interest in new technologies, such as drones, both of which are largely outside of USAF control.
When airmen come together to discuss the USAF's relative position among the services, its budget share, and its role in national military strategy, a common refrain is that the Air Force fails to "tell its story" in an effective manner. It is typical in such gatherings for earlier airpower narratives to be held up as exemplars of how the USAF should educate the public today. Usually implicit, but at times explicitly articulated, is the belief that if airmen would only proclaim airpower as boldly and unapologetically as General William "Billy" Mitchell that public opinion would follow. There is no evidence in the public opinion data to support the view that the decline in the number of survey respondents choosing the USAF as the "most important branch" can be attributed primarily to narrative failings. Public opinion toward the USAF peaked during the years when its social currency was highest and declined as airpower's social currency waned, not because of changes in narrative. The public perception of the USAF as the dominant service declined in the 1950s even though the narrative did not change. After the 1991 rout of Iraq and multiple successes in the Bal-kans, airmen presented an updated version of the "Victory Through Air Power" narrative; this was dominant from 1991 to 2003. But the new narrative did not bring polling back up to 1960s levels and was unable to resist the change in social currency brought about by 9/11 and, later, by the Iraqi insurgency. The USAF dropped in the polls in 2002, then plunged in the 2004 poll despite airmen largely holding to the new narrative and well before "We Are Critical Enablers" became the official narrative in 2008. These changes were driven by what the public was observing in these ground-centric conflicts, not by what airmen were saying. This isn't to say that narrative is unimportant, but at most it can capitalize on external conditions when they are favorable and, perhaps, mitigate their effects when they are unfavorable.
The American Public Is Less Inclined to Distinguish Among Service Branches
The most striking and important trend in American public opinion toward the military services is the convergence in views between 1949 and 2014. In 1949, airpower was strongly associated with the Japanese surrender and with the emerging concept of strategic nuclear deterrence. In a July 1949 Gallup poll, there was an 80 percentage point difference between those selecting the Air Force as the "most important service" and those selecting the Army. By 1960, this gap was still large but below 60 percentage points. When Gallup returned to this question in 2001, the gap had dropped to 30 percentage points. It declined steadily in the 2002, 2004, and 2011 polls. By 2014, the  gap-now between the Army at top and Navy at bottom-was 9 percentage points, a remarkable change from 1949. This convergence began during the air-centric 1950s and has held constant during the ground-centric 2001-2014 period. In keeping with this convergence, the survey answers are in some cases now falling within the sampling error, suggesting that the public is now divided almost equally in its service preferences.
One possible path to increased social currency would compare civilian technologies that are getting the most buzz in tech circles (as well as the broader public) to USAF research and development programs. The idea would be to identify those USAF programs that are most closely aligned with civilian technologies possessing high social currency and promote them in USAF media channels. This would leverage the greater visibility of civilian technologies in the same way that early airmen capitalized on public interest in flight to advance military aviation. USAF leaders are already emphasizing advanced technology in outreach efforts, including the new "Breaking Barriers: America's Airmen" initiative that teams the USAF with Wired and Scientific American and offers a website focused on airmen pushing technological and operational frontiers; the research and development/civilian tech comparison would be a complement to such efforts. Another path to increased social currency would rethink how the USAF presents information about its role in ongoing and recent operations. There are significant policy and security constraints on Air Force actions in this area that greatly limit USAF outreach options. Nevertheless, this may be a place where innovative approaches, such as animations, might better convey to the public what is happening or what happened in air operations than traditional reporting and targeting pod videos.
An effective airpower narrative must begin with a problem that matters to the nation. The classic airpower narratives all did this, presenting vexing problems that the public cared deeply about, whether it was avoiding another war in the trenches or preventing World War III. If the public is not interested in the problem as defined in the narrative (perhaps because it is overly narrow or abstract), then it will not be interested in the solution offered by the Air Force. As discussed in Chapter Three, a strong airpower narrative (1) presents a difficult and important problem, (2) offers a big idea that describes how airpower can solve the problem, ( 
3
Use Long-Term Public Opinion Trends to Inform the USAF Narrative
Whether simply divided in its preferences or moving toward an "equally important" perspective, the American public is much less inclined to see one service as dominant (see Chapter Four). This is a powerful trend that is unlikely to be reversed anytime soon. However much airmen may wish for a return to earlier times when airpower was viewed by the public as the dominant military instrument, those times are gone. Narratives that are built on an out-of-date understanding of public opinion will fall flat. Given this environment, how should the USAF engage the public? The USAF already articulates its unique contributions within a joint context, so more jointness is not necessarily the answer. Nor is a return to "Victory Through Air Power" likely to work with a divided and more skeptical public. Is there a third way? The current direction of USAF outreach themes emphasizing advanced technologies and innovation offers promise. It avoids the extremes of parochialism and bland jointness and is likely to resonate with a public that strongly associates the USAF with advanced technologies. 
2
Airpower narratives have served multiple and varied purposes over the life of the Air Force. Some have sought to describe the foundations of Air Force culture, others have offered a CEO-style perspective on the structure and purpose of the institution. The best-known (and most controversial) narratives offered to solve a difficult national security problem through the innovative use of aerospace technologies.
This study sought to understand whether these public narratives drive public opinion. This analysis found that they have less impact than typically believed by airmen and airpower advocates. Rather, the social currency of airpower-affected most powerfully by high-visibility technological advances and ongoing military operations-has more impact on public attitudes toward the USAF.
Given this, does public narrative matter? The answer is an unequivocal yes, for several reasons. First, there are other influence pathways that this analysis did not assess, in particular the impact of public narratives on opinion elites, senior government officials, and elected representatives. Although public narratives appear to have marginal influence on public opinion, they may have much greater sway with these other audiences who are more directly involved in policy, programming, and budgeting decisions. Second, healthy organizations must have a logical, coherent, and inspiring explanation for new personnel acculturation as well as organizational pride and esprit. Nowhere is this more important than in military organizations, where the scale of sacrifice is potentially extreme. Finally, as Samuel P. Huntington noted 60 years ago, every governmental agency in a democracy has a responsibility to present a compelling case explaining why the public should devote scarce resources to funding its mission. What problems is it offering to solve? What unique contributions does it make on behalf of the nation? Aren't there alternative and potentially more efficient ways to accomplish these tasks? Those questions can only be answered through a narrative that links what the institution does to what the nation needs.
xix
After seeing the advanced state of European military aviation during World War I, American airmen returned home determined to build a modern and capable air force. 
1
2
3
Seeking to ride the exceptional early 20th century wave of public enthusiasm for aviation as well as guide its direction, airmen developed narratives making the case for new air-centric military strategies and organizations. They did this most visibly from the early 1920s to the mid-1950s. By 1950, the public's emotional connection to aviation had largely ended, although airpower still loomed large in its understanding of U.S. military strategy. 
4
A possible objection to this line of research must be answered up front: Is it appropriate for a military service to have a public narrative? Isn't narrative just public relations and marketing to advance a narrow purpose? Although narrative can have those aspects, it is much more than that. A clear and compelling narrative is both essential to the internal health of a military service and a duty in a democracy. Regarding the first point, Paula Thornhill argues that in a healthy organization members have a clear understanding of their shared purpose, values, and, for government organizations, unique contribution to the public good. 
5
4
3
Press, 2002, pp. 135-137. 5
6
President Harry Truman appears to have shared this view. He awarded the Medal for Merit in 1946 to Alexander de Seversky, who was second only to Billy Mitchell in the stridency and visibility of his airpower advocacy. In the citation accompanying the medal, President Truman lauded de Serversky, who as Special Consultant to the Secretary of War, served as advisor on air matters and contributed to the formulation of a sound public opinion through the medium of his writings from September, 1939 to September, 1946. . . . He also devoted himself to presenting to the public an appeal for support of a vigorous air arm which ultimately made an inestimable contribution to the final victory. Mr. de Seversky's aerial knowledge, his singleness of pur-pose, and his aggressive presentation of the beliefs he entertained were of great assistance to the successful prosecution of the war. 
7
8
9
The USAF policy problem that this paper seeks to address is how to craft a compelling narrative describing the contributions of airpower that is well suited for the conditions of the early 21st century, including the diminished social currency of airpower and aviation (relative to the 20th century), a public that is largely divided in its service loyalties, and a Defense Department that expects service arguments to be framed within a joint context.
Although drawing heavily on public opinion data, this study is primarily qualitative in method, for two reasons. First, data limitations prevent a statistical analysis of the relationship between narrative (the independent variable) and public opinion (the dependent variable). There are no quantitative metrics to measure narrative variables (e.g., strength, breadth, depth, originality, social currency). Second, public opinion data explicitly measuring public attitudes across services are incomplete, missing for the 1917-1935 period (modern polling began  in 1935), sporadic for 1935-1949, and missing entirely for 1960-2000.  For these reasons, this report assesses changes in public opinion from historical and strategic perspectives with an emphasis on social currency of airpower ideas, public narratives, and ongoing military operations.
This report presents a historical and analytical assessment of USAF public narratives over time and their relationship to changes in public opinion toward airpower and the USAF. It is intended to help USAF leaders articulate the contribution of airpower to American national security by offering insights on three topics: the role of social currency as a multiplier or constraint on narratives, the essential components of a compelling USAF narrative, and long-term trends in American attitudes toward the military services.
Chapter Two traces changes in the social currency of aviation and airpower from the early 20th century to today. Chapter Three defines narrative, explores the various influence pathways for the USAF public narrative, and looks at examples of how USAF narrators presented the airpower ideas to the public over six narrative periods. Chapter Four describes and assesses changes in American public opinion toward the military services and airpower between 1935 and 2014. Chapter Five presents study conclusions and recommendations.
Social currency measures the visibility of a topic within a community or social network. It is defined as the propensity of individuals to find utility in, advocate for, identify with, share news, or seek information about anything, in particular ideas, products, people, events, organizations, and technologies. 
1
This chapter explores the rise and fall of aviation and airpower in American popular culture. 
2
Aviation historian Richard Hallion observed that "from the dawn of time people around the globe have expressed the dream of flight, emphasizing the incredible and depicting aerial powers as an element of religion, mythology or war." 
3
4
5
6
3
Press, 2003, p. 3. 4 Hallion, 2003, pp. 8, 11, and
47. 5
8
Long dreamt about, enshrined in fable and myth, the miracle of flight, once achieved, opened vistas of further conquests over Nature that excited people's imagination and appeared to guarantee the coming of a New Age. The irony is that in comparison with other technologies, such as electricity, the telephone, the automobile, the cinema or radio, the airplane had little or no immediate or direct impact on the way that most people lived their lives; yet its invention nonetheless inspired an extraordinary outpouring of feeling and gave rise to utopian hopes and gnawing fears. 9
Similar sentiments are expressed in the second verse of the Air Force official song.
Gave us wings, ever to soar! 
7 Corn, 2002, p. 31. 8 Charles Lindbergh, Of Flight and
Life, New York: Scribner, 1948, p. v. 9
The cinema quickly established itself as the most exciting and most popular form of leisure activity yet devised and, in the process, became a remarkably effective channel for the dissemination of ideas, attitudes and the qualities that a society deemed most worth preserving. . . . Initially, films about flying provided the film makers with ideal scenarios for their developing repertoire of trick photography and for exciting or comic stories, but they soon came to reflect the credo of the 'Winged Gospel,' that air transportation would bring about a golden age of progress, that flying was the ultimate technological achievement, and portrayed the airman as a romantic and chivalric figure . 11 By World War I, aviation was also increasingly the focus of newspapers, magazines, and books. 
12
10 Paris, 1995
, p. 7. 11 Paris, 1995, p. 8. 12
13
14
15
Already a famous racecar driver, Captain Eddie Rickenbacker returned from World War I as America's most successful fighter pilot; with 26 confirmed kills, he was the "Ace of Aces." Rickenbacker's 1919 book Fighting the Flying Circus could be considered a proto-narrative, setting the foundation for more complex airpower narratives to come. 
14
15 Paris, 1995, p. 25
16
Public interest in aviation was sustained in the early postwar years by near-constant news coverage of technology advances and interservice controversies, including the 1918 start of airmail service, the 1921 air-naval tests pitting aircraft (under the command of Billy Mitchell) against a variety of captured German Navy vessels (from submarines to battleships), the first aerial refueling in 1923, and the court-martial of Billy Mitchell in 1925. 
18
16
17
Flight, Chicago: Time Life Books, 1980. 18
19
The introduction in the United States of the Boeing 247 and DC-3 in the 1930s (which made commercial passenger flights more than a novelty), the 1935 first flight of the B-17 bomber, and Amelia Earhart's attempt to fly around the globe in 1937 are among the aviation events and advances that sustained public interest through the interwar years. Military airmen saw a strong link between military and civil aviation. Billy Mitchell sought to build air bases and airways around the world, believing "that if military airways were set up to pave the way, commercial air expansion would quickly follow with a resultant exchange of passengers, goods and services." 
20
21
One of [Andrews] most dramatic acts was ordering three B-17s to intercept the Italian luxury liner Rex, which doubled as an "enemy aircraft carrier" in a May 1938 exercise, 750 miles in the Atlantic from New York City. Andrews had an NBC radio crew on one of the bombers who broadcast the intercept live to millions of listeners, as well as an ace photographer whose picture of two B-17s flying past the Rex at mast-level appeared on page 1 in hundreds of newspapers around the country. 
22
23
24
25
26
27
The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki gave pause to many civilian and military observers, reigniting turn-of-the-century anxieties associated with aviation's potential as a destructive force. More will be said on this in Chapter Three; for now, consider Charles Lindbergh's observations in his 1948 book Of Flight and Life. After spending his life devoted to advancing aviation technologies, Lindbergh became convinced that technology was now run amok:
We are in the grip of scientific materialism, caught in a vicious cycle where our security today seems to depend on regimentation and weapons which will ruin us tomorrow. I believe the values we are creating and the standards we are now following will lead to the end of our civilization, and that if we do not control our science by a higher moral force, it will destroy us with its materialistic values, its rocket aircraft, and its atom bombs-as it has already destroyed large parts of Europe. 
28
27
The devastation that could be wrought by an Atomic Age war is too appalling to be fully realized. The vision stuns our imagination. But if present trends continue, it is only a question of time before such a war will come. . . . We know that Russia is arming, that she is exerting every effort to gain our knowledge of atomic energy and to build atomic bombs. . . . If the present armament race continues, it is only a question of time before Russia and the United States have assembled weapons with which they can destroy each other. 
29
29 Lindbergh, 1948, pp. 30-32. 30
34
31
Spires, 2002
, pp. 16-21. 32 Spires, 2002, p. 19
33 Lambeth, 2003, p. 37. 34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
41
42 Call, 2009, p. 135.
43
The trends in attitudes toward airpower were, of course, part of larger societal changes that convulsed the country during the 1960s and early 1970s, undermining public support for the military as an institution. Although the military rebounded from those years, aviation and airpower did not regain the prominence they enjoyed during the "golden years."
Today, flying is largely taken for granted. As will be seen below, the social currency of aviation peaked somewhere between 1945 and 1960. Commercial aviation-which has achieved impressively high levels of passenger volume, safety, and reliability-ironically generates little buzz or enthusiasm among flyers. The general public is more likely to complain about a late flight or the hassles of air travel than to wax poetic about the latest aviation advance. The one area where there is significant public interest is in hobbyist and commercial drones. The FAA, however, has been slow to approve their use, due to concerns about potential collisions with commercial airliners. In short, the "sky as frontier" era of adventure and romance has long since been replaced by the highly routinized, regulated, and domesticated modern air transportation system. 
44
Future advances, especially personal flight technologies, may change that, but there is nothing on the near-term horizon likely to fundamentally alter this assessment. Furthermore, within the modern Defense Department any truly revolutionary technological advance will most likely be placed in a joint command. In this environment, a jaw-dropping air or space power innovation would bring prestige and increased social currency to the USAF, but it would not create the kind of institutional power that the Strategic Air Command enjoyed in the 1950s, a period when the USAF had a monopoly on long-range nuclear weapons, a central place in U.S. national security strategy, and the budget to show for it.
It also is the case that aviation grew up in a period of technological utopianism in which "the machine became not only the symbol of social change but, in the eyes of many, the primary agent of change." 
45
46
47
48
These fundamental changes in the social currency of aviation have profound implications for our understanding of how airpower narratives and public opinion about the USAF have evolved over the past 100 years. In short, the success or failure of USAF public narratives must be considered within the context of contemporary social currency (including ongoing military operations).
This section considers two measures of the social currency of airpower and the USAF as an institution: (1) the frequency with which airmen appear on the cover of Time magazine and (2) the frequency with which airpower and aviation concepts appeared in books.
A striking measure of the social currency of military aviation during the first half of the 20th century is the appearance of airmen on the cover of the national magazine Time. 
49
2
Google's Ngram Viewer website offers a powerful tool to track cultural trends over long periods. 
50
49
50
Figure 
2
51
2
51
Although airpower experienced extreme changes in social currency during the 20th century, lesser changes are common across all cultural phenomena. Th at is, most topics experience periods of growth and decline in interest. New technologies, in particular, appear to share similar "buzz curves," with a steep increase in interest initially followed by a plateau then a drop to a new, lower plateau. Th is analysis plotted Ngram curves for roughly four dozen USAF-related technologies and 52 Th e technology terms and phrases were air-launched cruise missile, airborne sensors, atomic bomb, cheap access to space, directed energy, laser and particle beam weapons, GPS, hypersonic fl ight, ICBM, JDAM, jet engines, nuclear weapons, precision strike, Predator unmanned aerial vehicle, satellite communications, space plane, Single Stage to Orbit, supersonic aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicles, stealth bombers, and stealth fi ghters. Th e airpower concepts were air off ensive, Army Air Service, Army Air Corps, long-range bombing, nuclear air off ensive, strategic bombers, strategic bombing, air and space power, air campaign, air superiority, air dominance, air force, airpower, airpower was decisive, aviation, coercive airpower, decisive airpower, airmindedness, space power, space warfare, strategic air command, technology and airpower, USAF, airmen, and victory through airpower. 
53
This chapter sought to make the case that the success of airpower narratives in the 20th century was driven more by the exceptionally high social currency of aviation and airpower at the time than by the specific arguments or narrative elements that airmen presented to the public. If that assessment is correct, it has significant implications for USAF leaders and others who wish to convey airpower arguments to the public. First, it suggests that a prospective narrative must begin with an understanding of the recent, current, and likely near-term social currency of the ideas. Although none of the services have much direct control over social currency, there may be new ways to raise their visibility (beyond the day-to-day public affairs efforts using social media, television ads, and the like). In the case of the USAF, the service most associated with advanced technologies,
54
The next chapter will discuss the evolution of USAF narratives over the past century, identify the structural elements found in the more compelling airpower narratives, and explore how USAF narratives can adapt to an environment in which the social currency of airpower is relatively low.
From the end of World War I to today, U.S. airmen have reached out to the American public to advocate on behalf of military airpower. Billy Mitchell, after unsuccessful attempts to advance his vision of aviation within the government, wrote that "Changes in military systems come about only through the pressure of public opinion or disaster in war." 
1
Mitchell and other early airmen sought to educate, inspire, and mobilize public support to achieve several goals: (1) expand investment in military aviation to achieve technological dominance, ( 
2
4
2
3
4
5
3
4
5
Thornhill's narratives were intended to capture the "Air Force culture that Airmen think they joined." 
6
This chapter uses Thornhill's five narratives as a framework to understand the USAF public narrative between 1917 and 2014. For each narrative period, a principal public narrator is identified and their writings explored. The evolution of airpower theory is discussed only to the extent it is necessary to explore public narratives. There is a large and rich literature on airpower theory that need not be reproduced here. 
7
It is worth noting that airpower narratives have been not only overlapping but also often in intense competition. Within the service, developing aviation as an important branch. Neither was a public advocate of independent "strategic" uses of airpower. See Robert P. White, Mason Patrick and the Fight for Air Service Independence, Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institute Press, 2001. 
6
8
9
10
Mitchell was Assistant Chief of the Army Air Service during his most active period of outreach, but he was often at odds with his superiors (including Generals Charles T. Menoher and Mason Patrick and Secretaries of War Newton D. Baker and John W. Weeks) over fundamental questions such as service independence and strategic bombing and published his key writings without their approval. 11 Alexander de Seversky, although an advisor to the War Department, acted solely as a private citizen in his airpower advocacy activities. Furthermore, both presented airpower narratives in ways that service leaders-responsible for maintaining civil relations with the Navy and with superiors in the War Department-at times found unhelpful.
Another example of an unofficial airpower narrative is found in the 1943 ad campaign "Air Power Is Peace Power" that public relations firm Hill and Knowlton conducted on behalf of the aircraft manufacturers trade organization. Their assignment was to "increase public support for air power, which would translate into federal spending on research and development and military procurement." Hill and Knowlton "prepared radio programs, polished congressional testimony and sent mass mailings to the 800,000 member American Legion." 
12
13
14
For this report's purposes, a narrative is a coherent story told with the intention of creating an effect in a particular audience. 
15
16
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, airmen developed public narratives because they believed there was a causal relationship between what they said and the outcomes they desired. The implied causal chain is (1) USAF public narrative influences public opinion, (2) a supportive public makes their views known to elected representatives, and (3) elected representatives reflect constituent views in their support for USAF budgets, independence, and major programs. 
17
What about the assumption regarding the link between public opinion and policy outcomes? We have more, although contradic-tory, evidence on that score. In a statistical analysis of the relationship between constituent views and congressional votes, Glazer and Robbins found that U.S. congressmen are responsive to public opinion, observing that "an appreciable amount of responsiveness" occurs "when the prevailing opinion in their district changes."
18
19
There are, of course, other possible influence pathways. The USAF narrative may influence opinion leaders, particularly by framing their understanding of military problems, which could lead to favorable news coverage, op-eds, speeches, books, and movies. 
21
22
23
The commercially published book was (along with articles in popular periodicals) the most direct and visible means used by airmen to reach the American public prior to the Internet and social media era. 
24
23
Press, 2009. 24
The remainder of this chapter follows the evolution of the USAF public narrative through Thornhill's six eras. This will be done through the voices of the principal narrators and others who supplement or contest those views. This is by no means a comprehensive treatment of all competing narratives since 1917. The reader is likely to find a former Secretary of the Air Force, Chief of Staff, other senior airman, or airpower For example, secretaries of the Air Force and chiefs of staff play a large role in presenting the USAF to the public through congressional testimony, speeches, and interviews. The CEO responsibilities of their jobs, however, make it difficult for them to present focused narratives. Typically, these leaders speak publicly about the full range of issues they confront as managers: manpower and personnel, acquisition and logistics, force employment, and airpower strategy. They must represent the entire institution, and even the most innovative and forward thinking must use much of their narrative capital dealing with crises of one sort or the other. For that reason, the reader is likely to find Air Force secretaries and chiefs of staff playing a smaller role in these narratives than might otherwise be expected. 26
Thornhill's first two USAF cultural narratives-"Over Not Through" and "Give Me Liberty"-largely overlapped during this period. ONT, the idea that airmen could strike directly at enemy capacity and will to fight by overflying the enemy's naval "line of battle" and ground forces-was first embraced by American airmen during World War I (most notably by then Colonel Billy Mitchell), although the war ended before U.S. forces had the capacity to execute deep attacks against German industrial and population targets. U.S. efforts to implement ONT were limited to tactical strikes at forces in rear areas.
ONT, the first public narrative presented by American airmen, spoke directly to a problem very much on the mind of American and European publics, civilian leaders, and military professionals. The 26 General John Jumper is a good example. Jumper was an able and energetic spokesman for the USAF and airpower, particularly while serving in key positions during two critical periods. Jumper was commander of U.S. Air Forces in Europe (USAFE) during Operation Allied Force in 1999 and became chief of staff five days before 9/11, serving until September 2005. Jumper was a strong proponent of airpower and presented themes consistent with Victory Through Air Power, but like most chiefs of staff he was more concerned about representing the entire institution and working effectively with joint partners than in presenting a narrower narrative.
problem was how to avoid a repeat of the slaughter and indecision of the Great War, in which ground maneuver was largely replaced by an established and fortified front that moved rarely and only then at great cost. Military professionals were desperate for a concept and technology that returned to warfare "the attribute which had made it endurable, its capacity to produce decisions at a tolerable cost." 
27
28
29
30
31
32
1. Enemy airpower poses a severe threat to the United States. 2. This threat can only be defeated by U.S. mastery of the air. 3. The capabilities required to master the air can only be developed if the nation's most gifted and dedicated aviators, engineers, and other airpower experts are brought together in an institution solely and fully dedicated to the development of integrated commercial, civil and military airpower.
In these themes, one can see the outlines of both the ONT and GML narratives, as well as the foundations for 20th century American airpower theory: the decisive nature of airpower, the importance of population and industrial centers as targets, the critical role of the air force to defend the nation, and the necessity of an independent organization dedicated to advancing aviation. Given Mitchell's personal commitment to and historic association 33 with the creation of an indepen-dent air force, one might argue that is the single most important theme in the book. Although the independence argument is a major part of the book, it is presented only after the case is made for the revolutionary nature of airpower. By itself, the independence case would make little sense unless the public had already embraced the preceding arguments about airpower.
We don't have any direct evidence regarding the immediate public reaction to Mitchell's first foray into airpower theory. Certainly there was great interest in military aviation, and, as noted earlier, concerns about air attacks on population centers were commonly expressed in popular writings. The public also closely followed the air-naval tests that culminated in the sinking of the German battleship Ostfriesland in July 1921 and especially the Mitchell trial in 1925, where the issue of air force independence became front-page news.
In his 1921 book, Mitchell did not articulate a vision of American airpower striking at enemy industrial centers, even though he had described the concept in internal Army papers. 
34
35
Aircraft do not need to pierce the line of either navies or armies. 
36
34 Hurley, 1975
, pp. 178-179. 35 Hurley, 1975, p. 56
36
37
38
Rather, it was Trenchard, B. H. Liddell Hart, Douhet, Caproni, and Mitchell who embraced the strategic bombing concept and helped institutionalize it in their respective air forces. 
39
37 Mitchell, 1925, pp. 126-127. 38
39
The airmen contended that a clash of armies, with its subsequent slaughter, was unnecessary to fight and win future conflicts. Instead, the truly vital ingredients of modern war-the essential industries that produced weapons and fuel, key communications centers, and lines of transportation-were vulnerable to attack from the air. The loss of those installations would not only wreck a nation's ability to fight, it would also sap the will of the populace, because the same facilities needed to wage modern war were also necessary to sustain normal, day-to-day life. 
40
41
The advent of air power which can go straight to the vital centers and entirely neutralize or destroy them has put a completely new 
40 Clodfelter, 2010, p. 3.
42
43
45
42 Mitchell, 1930
, pp. 255-256. 43 Mitchell, 1930, p. 263
46
In summary, Billy Mitchell became the primary narrator for both the "Over Not Through" and "Give Me Liberty" narratives. 
47
48
Three other airmen made important contributions to the public narrative in this period. Major General Mason Patrick, as chief of the Army Air Service, spoke frequently and wrote articles in popular publications. He focused on educating the public about aviation broadly and military aviation specifically, seeking to build public support for a larger and more advanced aviation branch. He largely stayed away from the debate over independence and said relatively little about strategic uses of airpower. Mason's book The United States in the Air (1928) was published after his retirement and is a memoir of his years as chief of the Army Air Service and Army Air Corps. 
49
46 "Mitchell Calls It 'Whitewash,'" New York Times, July 24, 1934, p. 6. 47
48
49
50
Finally, Newton Baker was an important voice during this period, primarily in contesting the ONT narrative. Baker was Secretary of War from 1916 to 1921, then in 1934 headed an aviation committee (the Baker Board) that was tasked to address criticisms that the Army Air Corps was underresourced and badly managed and, more broadly, to advise on the future of civil and military aviation. Baker first expressed moral objections to ONT in a 1918 memo, warning that the United States would never wage "war upon a defenseless civilian population" 
51
The idea that aviation can replace any of the other elements of our armed forces is found, on analysis to be erroneous . . . the Army with its own air forces remains the decisive factor in war . . . the ideas that aviation, acting alone, can control the sea lanes, or defend the coast, or produce decisive results in any other general mission contemplated under our policy are all visionary, as is the idea that a very large and independent air force is necessary to defend our country from attack. 
53
The interwar airpower debates took on new meaning as World War II began with devastating uses of modern airpower: the Germans integrating air and ground forces in their Blitzkrieg offensive concept in Europe, and the Japanese in their air-ground campaign in China as well as air-naval attacks on Hawaii and the Philippines. ONT and GML did not so much go away as become integrated into a new public narrative focused on achieving victory in the war against Germany and Japan.
"Victory Through Air Power" is the Air Force narrative popularized by Alexander de Seversky during World War II, first in newspaper and magazine articles, then in a 1942 book by that name. Meilinger describes de Seversky: "Fighter ace, war hero, aircraft designer, entrepreneur, stunt pilot, writer and theorist . . . [he] . . . was one of the best known and most popular aviation figures in America during World War II." 54 De Seversky was an airpower narrator second only to Mitchell in his zeal to reach the public, writing over "one hundred major articles and several hundred lesser ones" in the course of his life. 55 "His passion was airpower and his mission was to convince the American people that airpower had revolutionized warfare, becoming its paramount and decisive factor." 
56
57
• "No land or sea operations are possible without first assuming control of the air above. • Navies have lost their function of strategic offensive.
• The blockade of an enemy nation has become a function of airpower. • Only air power can defeat air power.
• Land-based aviation is always superior to ship-borne aviation.
• The striking radius of airpower must be equal to the maximum dimensions of the theater of operations. • In aerial warfare, the factor of quality is relatively more decisive than the factor of quantity. • Aircraft types must be specialized to fit not only the general strategy but the tactical problems of a specific campaign. • Destruction of enemy morale from the air can be accomplished only by precision bombing. • The principle of unity of command, long recognized on land and on sea, applies with no less force to the air. • Air power must have its own transport." 58 55 
Meilinger, 1997
, p. 267. 56 Meilinger, 1997, p. 239.
58
59
60
Disney was so taken by the book that he teamed with de Seversky to create a film with the same title. Released in 1943, Disney's film combined brilliant animations with professorial yet conversational narrations by de Seversky expounding the logic of strategic bombing. As narrative, the film was superior to the book, presenting a more accessible and vivid case for strategic bombing. 
61
62
59
60
Meilinger, 1997, p. 251 and 256. 61
62
Although few airmen disagreed with the VTAP core arguments, 64 de Seversky had many detractors. Hap Arnold, in particular, considered de Seversky's constant criticism of the Army and War Department handling of aviation as harmful to the air force. 65 Indeed, Arnold sought to limit de Seversky's influence, for example, refusing to see the Disney film version of "Victory Through Air Power" until circumstances gave him no choice. 66 Although Arnold doesn't critique de Seversky in public or present an alternative to VTAP, his approach to public outreach could not be more different. This is evident if we compare de Seversky's 1942 book to Arnold and Eaker's 1941 book Winged Warfare.
Winged Warfare was Arnold's third aviation primer, providing an update to his earlier two books, published in 1926 and 1936. Again we see Arnold, not as airpower theorist, but as a pilot, airpower organizer, and leader (he was chief of the Air Corps at the time of publication). In these books, Arnold and Eaker sought to educate the public about aviation and airpower in the broadest sense. Winged Warfare is written at two levels: (1) the tactical/technical and (2) the CEO/institutional. There is relatively little discussion of strategy or theory. When theory is addressed, it is in a cautious, understated, and matter-of-fact way, with few of the bold claims of a de Seversky or Mitchell. Arnold and Eaker steer far clear of controversial topics or attacks on other services. Indeed, they demur on whether an independent air force is nec-63 Quoted in James K. Libbey, Alexander P. de Seversky and the Quest for Air Power, Washington, D.C.: Potomac Books, 2013, p. 208. 
64
Meilinger, 1997, p. 274, footnote 52. 66
Many feel that eventually the defensive air component of the nation will be given a status co-ordinate and commensurate with that of the Army and Navy. When that time will come, if it does come, is not yet clear. . . . The Army and Navy, the older services, deserve great credit for the tremendous strides they have made in the development of military and naval aviation. 
67
68
69
It is generally accepted that bombing attacks on civil populace are uneconomical and unwise. . . . The most economical way of reducing a large city to the point of surrender, of breaking its will to resist, is not to drop bombs in its streets, but to destroy 67 H. H. Arnold and Ira C. Eaker, Winged Warfare, New York: Harper and Brothers, p. 244. 
68
70
Human beings are not priority targets except in certain special situations. Bombers in far larger numbers than are available today will be required for wiping out people in sufficient numbers to break the will of a whole nation. 
71
The "Peace Is Our Profession" narrative era is distinct in that non-airmen, including the nation's political leadership, civilian strategists, and academics, played large roles in the development and socializing of key ideas, particularly those related to deterrence. These various perspectives are explored in the following pages.
PIOP did not become the official Strategic Air Command slogan until 1958. 
72
70
71
The atomic bomb's awesome destructiveness meant than an enemy surprise attack could decide a war because there would be no time for mobilization. The United States must, therefore, maintain a strategic bombing force in being capable of either "smashing an enemy air offensive, or launching a formidable striking force." In short, the Air Force "on the alert" was to be America's new first line of defense-and offense-in the future. 
73
74
It is our obligation, now and in the future, to organize our armed forces with the most modern weapons to secure the most powerful striking force at the least expense to the taxpayer. We must do this, not to prepare for another war, because such a catastrophe would almost certainly throw the whole world back for centuries if, indeed, it did not destroy our present civilization. We must do this to prevent another war-to perpetuate peace. 
75
76
77
Spaatz, Novato, Calif.: Presidio Press, 1988, p. 315. 75
76
Arnold, 1946, p. 160. 77
The reason for this is that we can no longer follow our traditional procedure of relying entirely on the Navy as our force in being in peacetime." • ". . . new weapons which can be delivered through the air make it vital that we protect ourselves from attack by way of this new element. An air attack could be so terrible that we must at once create the best conceivable defense against it." • "This means an air force in being, strong, well equipped and modern, not only capable of meeting the attack when it comes but, even more important, capable of dealing a crushing counteroffensive blow on the aggressor." • ". . . the hope is that by serving notice that war with the United
States would be a most unprofitable business we may persuade the nations of the world to work for peace instead of war." 
78
79
A deterrent force is one that is large enough and efficient enough that no matter what the enemy does, either offensively or defensively, he will still receive a quantity of bombs or explosive force that is more than he is willing to accept. 
80
81
The nation was shocked, for now the image of an aerial attack devastating the United States was more than just science fiction or air power rhetoric. In a curious twist of fate, at the very time air power advocates were striving to reassure Americans that the bomber would always get through, they faced a public desperate for reassurance that Soviet bombers could not. 
82
For while there would be considerable public clamor for effective air defense of North America, air power advocates would insist that no air defense, no matter how extensive, could stop a major-80 LeMay testimony before Senator Symington's subcommittee on airpower, April 1956. Quoted in 
Futrell, 1989, p. 445. 81
Hopkins and
Goldberg, 1986, pp. 63, 80, and
274. 82 Call, 2009, p. 79.
83
84
Air power holds catastrophe-and the hope of peace. How long the fear of retaliation of strategic bombing will restrain the Russians from plunging the world into chaos is something only the masters of the Kremlin know. But every day statesmen confer is a reprieve for civilization, sustaining the prayer that all hope will not vanish in atomic dust. 
85
86
The Korea and Vietnam Wars presented a problem for the USAF PIOP narrative, since SAC's strategic nuclear capabilities had failed to deter lower-level aggression by either North Korea or North Vietnam. In the case of Korea, Alexander de Seversky inserted a last-minute forward in his 1950 book Air Power: Key to Survival arguing that it was not a "real war," that the United States risked being weakened by a series of peripheral conflicts designed to attrite U.S. forces, and that, therefore, the United States should not intervene militarily. For de Seversky, There are no genuine strategic targets in Korea. The sources of North Korean war-making capacity lie elsewhere, in Manchuria and Russia. . . . Control of the air would be decisive if it gave us access to the enemy's heart: his industries, fuel, transportation, communications. But Korea's "heart" is located in Manchuria and Russia, well beyond its frontiers, where it is completely shielded by the cloak of a bogus neutrality. 
87
88
During the early and mid-1950s, most of us failed to recognize the effects that would result from the replacement of our strategic monopoly by the more limited advantage of strategic superiority. Our superiority still made general war too dangerous for an aggressor, but as the USSR developed a nuclear capability, nuclear war became too dangerous a response for us to make automatically to limited aggression. Hence limited war became the more likely form of conflict. 
89
We now have, or are on the verge of having, tactical forces that can be deployed within a few hours time and supported on a world-wide basis by our global airlift. It seems likely to me that this capability eventually will increase to the point where it may become an effective deterrent to what we might classify as "limited wars"-that is war on the scale of Korea or perhaps Vietnam, as it is today. 
90
91
92
93
96
98
99
The rapid and relatively low-cost defeat of the Iraqi military in 1991, in particular the large and visible role that airpower played, led to a reprise of the Victory Through Air Power narrative. 
102
The essence of the new narrative was that with the end of the Cold War, the U.S. Air Force could achieve air dominance against any regional aggressor, and with that dominance conduct parallel attacks against the foundations of enemy political, military, and economic power. With stealth, precision munitions, and great advances in information collection and dissemination, the USAF could conduct these operations in a low-cost, efficient, and decisive manner. Ideally, these capabilities would deter conflict and, that failing, would make it possible to either defeat the adversary immediately, compel an aggressor to relent and withdraw from friendly territory, or, if necessary, make possible rapid and low-cost ground offensive action.
General Michael Dugan, the USAF Chief of Staff, was the first to reintroduce the VTAP narrative. About six weeks after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 and in the midst of the massive 100 For more on advances in American airpower from the Vietnam War through the 1990s, see Lambeth, 2000.   101 See Worden, 1998, for a history of the "rise of the fighter generals." deployment of U.S. force to the Persian Gulf, General Dugan gave an extended interview to reporters accompanying him on a trip to the Middle East. In the interview, Dugan reportedly claimed that the U.S. war plan would seek to decapitate the Iraqi leadership by targeting Saddam Hussein, his family, and military leaders. Dugan said that "air power is the only answer available to our country in this circumstance" and "I don't see us making a big invasion of Kuwait." Finally, although not consistent with the decapitation strategy, but very much in the spirit of Douhet and early airpower theorists, Dugan described the logic of the attack as attempting "to convince his population that he and his regime cannot protect them. If there is a nation that cannot defend its people against these intruding foreigners-protect their lines of communication, their means of production, their cities-that brings a great burden for their ruler."
103
104
105
106
107
108
It is imperative to remember that all actions are aimed against the mind of the enemy command or against the enemy system as a whole. Thus, an attack against industry or infrastructure is not primarily conducted because of the effect it might or might not have on fielded forces. Rather, it is undertaken for its direct effect on the enemy system, including its effect on national leaders and commanders. . . .The essence of war is applying pressure against the enemy's innermost strategic ring, its command structure. 
109
Although John Warden was the airman most consistently and visibly associated with the reprise of VTAP, others played important roles in developing and sustaining this narrative. In particular, Secretary of the Air Force Donald Rice and two key members of his staff-Lieutenant Colonel David Deptula and Dr. Christopher Bowie-presented an airpower narrative in a higher-level strategy document called Global Reach, Global 
Power. 114
General Merrill McPeak, USAF Chief of Staff during ODS, also contributed to the USAF public narrative, particularly through his postwar briefing known as "The Mother of All Briefings," a satirical reference to Saddam Hussein's claim that the war would be "The Mother of All Battles." In the briefing, McPeak presented a VTAP narrative, arguing that "This is the first time in history that a full army has been defeated by air power." 
115
116
The combination of stealth and precision redefines the concept of mass. Mass, in the sense of an agglomeration of a large number of forces, is no longer required to achieve a devastating effect upon a system of forces, infrastructure, government or industry. No longer do large numbers of surface forces require movement, positioning, and extensive preparation before we can achieve dominant effects over an enemy. Surface forces will always be an essential part of the military, but massing surface forces to overwhelm an enemy is no longer an absolute prerequisite to impose control over the enemy. 
117
What is direct attack? Broadly stated, [direct attack] consists of air operations conducted to render the adversary's military capabilities ineffective outside an established land area of operations (AO) or when surface forces are operating in a supporting role to air forces. Although this is a working definition, it captures why a new mission category may be of value and how that could change the way we think about, organize, and conduct counterland operations. 
118
119
120
121
Thornhill's final narrative "We Are Critical Enablers" captures a perspective that many airmen began to embrace as the Iraq occupation morphed into a nasty counterinsurgency campaign:
During this era, some airmen conceptualized their role as national policy's 'critical enablers' . . . providing persistent intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance; inter-theater and intra-theater mobility; medical evacuation; space and cyberspace expertise; individual augmentees to support convoys, provincial reconstruction teams, host-nation training, and command staffs; and close air support to the land operations. 
124
125
127
128
129
125 Thornhill, 2012, p. 7. 126
June 6, 2008. 127
Think about it: an Airman's perspective is, by definition, multidimensional, global and strategic. We instinctively address problems in a comprehensive, three-dimensional, nonlinear manner, and we intuitively factor in the fourth dimension: time. Our way of thinking starts at the top, with the first-order, overarching determination of desired effects. We systematically work our way through the ensuing tasks and second-and third-order consequences. We size up situations, integrate seemingly disparate data points, seize on opportunities, and act decisively. . . . The mission of the United States Air Force is "to deliver sovereign options for the defense of the United States and its global interests . . ." 
130
When General Schwartz became chief of staff, his challenges included restoring faith in the USAF's handling of nuclear weapons, repairing damaged relations with the Secretary of Defense, and rebuilding Air Force morale. Schwartz's first speech to the annual Air Force Association meeting in September 2008 emphasized expanded remotely piloted vehicle operations in Iraq (consistent with Secretary Gates's guidance) and sought to increase respect for that mission within the USAF. 
131
132
133
Let there be no doubt-we, in your Air Force, are "all in." . . . Our priority is to partner with the Joint and Coalition team to win today's fight. . . . We are taking every feasible initiative to serve as a trustworthy partner in delivering game-changing capabilities with precision and reliability. Whether it is serving alongside ground forces in convoys or in Joint Terminal Attack Controller roles, or providing game-changing Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance capabilities with unmanned aerial vehicles, or helping our wounded warriors with life-saving medical care and aeromedical evacuation, or providing rapid and precise strike capabilities in counterinsurgency or close air support roles, hear me loud and clear when I say that we are all in. This is our priority as an Air Force.
And our Airmen know exactly what must be done and how to do it in a way that works for our brothers and sisters in arms. Because, in short, this game is all about trust-and we build that trust in a way that can be summed up with a word: Performance. We will deliver on our promise as a reliable partner, and we will prove our priorities with our performance. 
134
135
With the end of OIF and drawdown of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, Secretary of the Air Force Deborah James and Chief of Staff General Mark Welsh appear to be embarked on a reset of the USAF public narrative. It is not yet clear what this narrative should be called, perhaps "Innovative Airmen Go Over Not Through Problems," "Strategic Agility Through Air Power," or "Air Power Gives the Nation Global Vigilance, Global Reach, and Global Power." All three themes are found in new USAF documents and speeches.
Recent documents and speeches have shifted from a focus on support to ground operations in counterinsurgency to a more balanced presentation encompassing the full range of USAF capabilities and missions. The USAF 2013 vision emphasizes the history of airmen as innovators who go "over not through" problems:
The story of the Air Force is a story of innovation. Airmen, using their unique perspective, have long stood for and pioneered innovative ways to win the fight while shaping the future. Airmen characteristically view security challenges differently-globally, without boundaries. Whereas pre-Kitty Hawk warriors relied on breaking through fortified lines on the ground, Airmen have always sought to go over, not through, those fortifications, to achieve victory. By recruiting innovative people and making them Airmen, we capitalize on their inherent creativity to find better and smarter ways to approach and solve our Nation's security challenges. Now, more than ever, we need bold leaders at every level who encourage innovation, embrace new thinking, and take prudent risks to achieve mission success. 
136
137
Building upon "who we are" and "what we do," this Strategy provides a general path of "where we need to go" to ensure our Air Force meets the needs of our great Nation over the next 30 years. This is an aspirational document, providing an "over the horizon" sight picture and delivering strategic vectors that describe how the Air Force needs to look and act as we move towards a dynamic future. 
138
139
USAF Colonel Jeffrey Smith makes a case for a new narrative along these lines in his 2014 book Tomorrow's Air Force: Tracing the Past, Shaping the Future. For Smith, the USAF is "suffering from an identify crisis centered on the adolescent perspective of independence." Smith's narrative might be termed "You can't leave home without us," a slogan that General Robert Rutherford was fond of using when he led Air Mobility Command. 
141
In fact, it is the realization of 'dependence' that will propel the USAF in terms of credibility and relevance. The message for the service is that airpower is necessary in nearly all contexts . . . from humanitarian to total war. All of these contexts require the attributes that airpower brings, and therefore nearly all engagements are dependent on airpower . . . there is no conceivable context where U.S. military operations could succeed without the prerequisite of airpower control. . . . Given airpower dominance (air, space, cyber), all services can provide their important and core capabilities synergistically. In other words, airpower is necessary, and most operations are dependent upon airpower's capabilities . . . but this fact does not mean that air power is sufficient. This simply suggests the importance of describing national security operations within the profession of arms as dependent on airpower over the more fractured argument regarding the independence of airpower. . . . The idea of 'dependence' rather than independence is significant and cannot be understated. It should and must define airpower's capability and ultimately its identity. (italics in original) 
142
This chapter has explored USAF public narratives spanning a century of airpower-from those developed when airmen flew cloth-covered, open-cockpit biplanes to today's airmen seeking to integrate effects across cyber, space, and air domains in a global battlespace. Although these narratives were created to address vastly different problems, most have endured because they have featured elements essential to compelling narrative. As noted at the beginning of this chapter, an effective airpower narrative must present a problem, offer a plausible means to resolve the problem, and describe the desired end state. The ONT, VTAP, PIOP, and VTAP reprise narratives all contained these elements. Each
• described a vexing problem that the public cared about.
• offered a bold (but plausible) new idea as a solution.
• emphasized innovative uses of technology.
• offered an aspirational and hopeful vision of the future. Table 
3
3
There are a variety of possible answers. Those that come most naturally to airmen will likely be attractive within the institution and may have great value for internal purposes (e.g., education, inspiration). It is much harder, however, to develop a compelling public narrative.
To do that, one must move from looking at the world through the airman's sight picture (as we have done in this chapter) to one that begins with public attitudes and perceptions.
One way to make that shift in perspective is to consider the findings from public opinion polls taken by organizations like Gallup. Over the past 80 years, polling organizations have conducted more than 50 polls exploring popular attitudes toward the Air Force, sister services, and ongoing operations. This is a treasure trove of information that can be mined for insights on popular attitudes at particular points of time and, more importantly, allows trends to be seen not just over years, but over many decades. The next chapter describes and analyzes the results from these surveys within and across the narrative periods, seeking to identify both where public attitudes are enduring and where and how they have changed.
This chapter traces the evolution of American public attitudes toward the Air Force from 1935 to 2014. This analysis is primarily qualitative, although informed by polling data from more than 50 opinion surveys conducted over the past 80 years. It is qualitative in that it seeks to understand the survey results in the context of USAF narratives, social currency, contemporary operations, and broader strategy discussions, rather than using statistical techniques to explore, for example, the relationship between social science variables (e.g., gender, age, education, income, veteran status, ethnicity) and attitudes toward the USAF. 
1
1
This analysis is structured around the narrative eras presented in Chapter Two. It will present and discuss survey results for each era, then consider some long-term trends and cross-era issues.
This period covers the "Over Not Through" and "Give Me Liberty" narratives.
Although there is much evidence of public enthusiasm for aviators and aviation during World War I and the early interwar years, there are no survey data for 1917 to 1934. In 1935, Gallup began to conduct surveys using modern sampling techniques, and from the start it asked many military-related questions. Between 1935 and 1939, Gallup asked a series of similar questions about the potential expansion of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. 
2
The first question, asked in 1935, was "Do you think that army, navy, air force appropriations . . . should be greater, smaller, or about the same as they are now?" Roughly half the respondents supported increased spending on the Army (54 percent) and Navy (48 percent), but nearly three-quarters of respondents supported more spending on the air force (74 percent).
During the late 1930s, public support for a larger military increased dramatically. Figure 
4
• "Should the United States build a bigger army, navy, air force?" (1937) • "Should the United States enlarge the army, navy, air force?" (1938) • "Do you think the United States should increase the size of the army, navy, air force?" (1939)
As Figure 
4
3
This next period captures American attitudes during World War II. This period corresponds with the "Victory Through Air Power" narrative. Gallup asked two similar questions regarding resource-allocation choices among the services during the war (in June 1941 and October 1942), as can be seen in Figure 
4
• "From what you have read, which of our armed services needs strengthening most at the present time-our Air Force, Army or Navy?" (1941) • "If there is a shortage of raw materials for manufacture of War goods, which branch of the service do you think should have first claim on materials-the Army, Navy or Air Force?" (1942)
Gallup also polled the public in 1942 and 1943 on the question of an independent air force. The issue-which had dominated discussion of airpower in the early 1920s-was not a priority in the midst of a global war, with only 44 percent of respondents saying that they had read or heard of the discussion. 
4
• "Do you think the air force should be made a separate branch of our armed forces?" (May 1942) • "Do you favor or oppose the idea of a separate air force (coequal with the army and navy)?" (August 1942) • "Would you approve or disapprove of a separate air force for the United States?" (July 1943)
As can be seen in Figure 
4
This period corresponds with the "Peace Is Our Profession" narrative.
As noted in the previous chapter, although PIOP as a slogan did not appear until the 1950s, its seeds were clearly planted in "Air Power Is Peace Power" themes of the late 1940s. Public and elite opinion were strongly aligned in their mutual recognition of the threat of longrange bombers armed with nuclear weapons. A Gallup 1946 poll asked the fundamental question: "With which branch of military forces do you think a foreign country could do the U.S. the most harm if they attacked us-a particularly strong Army, strong Navy or strong Air Force?" The results in Figure 
4
In 1949, Gallup began a series of polls that are particularly helpful in tracking public preferences for the services. In these surveys, respondents were asked which service would be "most important" in the event of another major war. The questions varied some in specific wording, but all were focused on the theme of major conflict. Figure 
4
• "If the United States should get into another World War, which branch of the Armed Forces do you think would play the most important part in winning the war-the Army, the Navy or the Air Force?" (1949) do you think will be most important-the Army, the Navy, or the Air Force?" (1955) • "In the event of another World War, which branch of the Armed Forces do you think will be most important-the Army, the Navy or the Air Force?" (1960)  2-7, 1949; August 3-8,  1951; October 9-14, 1953; March 3-8, 1955; October 18-23, 1960 In July 1949, 84 percent of the respondents selected the Air Force as "most important," with the other services scoring in the single digits, reflecting the early Cold War view that air-delivered nuclear weapons were and would continue to be the dominant military instrument. It also is possible that the phrase "winning the war"-which appears only in this one poll-brought to mind the role that Air Force-delivered nuclear weapons played in ending the war with Japan four years earlier.
Although later scholarship 
5
6
5
6
Gallup, The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion 1935
-1971
, Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 1972, pp. 869-870. 7
In any event, the next poll was not until August 1951, over a year into the Korean War. This 1951 poll most likely reflects a public focus on the ground war there rather than more abstract concerns about the Soviet nuclear weapons program. The Korean War appears to have caused about a 10 percent swing in favor of the Army and a corresponding drop for the Air Force. The next poll in 1953 saw a rebound for the Air Force and a drop for the Army, most likely caused by public frustration with the stalemate in ground operations and weariness after three years of war, particularly since there appeared to be no decisive military option to end the conflict. Whether the increase in those who chose the Army as the most important branch was caused by the Korean War or some other factor, the bounce did not last. By 1955, the Army was back to 4 percent in the polls, the same standing it had in 1949.
The most dramatic change from 1953 to 1960 was the significant increase in those who saw the services as equally important, accounting for all but 2 percent of the 17 percent drop in those choosing the Air Force. The Air Force, however, remained the dominant service, with 62 percent selecting it in 1960 and the other services polling in the single digits. The drop may have been a natural "reversion to the mean" following what could be seen as an unsustainable period of airpower enthusiasm that placed unrealistic expectations on airpower. The Korean War likely contributed to this shift since airpower did not produce a decisive victory, but since no other service did any better, the former Air Force votes shifted to "equally important" rather than to another service. It also is possible that the decline from 1955 to 1960 reflects the pessimism and overall dark mood that followed the launch of Sputnik in 1957. Finally, as noted in Chapter Two, historians identified the mid-1950s as that period when popular culture began to explore darker themes associated with nuclear weapons, Strategic Air Command, and the Cold War more broadly. These factors likely combined to produce the shift in public opinion away from the view that the Air Force was uniquely important to U.S. national security.
Unfortunately, Gallup did not continue its "most important service" poll. Indeed, it waited 41 years before a similar series of questions was asked.
American involvement in the war in Southeast Asia spanned more than a decade, saw peak deployments of over 500,000 troops, involved an exceptionally wide range of military missions, and was conducted in four countries. Given the scale and length of the conflict and the bitter divisions within the United States over its purpose and execution, it is odd that there was relatively little detailed public opinion polling about the conflict. Gallup did conduct surveys throughout the conflict measuring public support for the war effort, but none exploring public attitudes toward the individual services or the relative value of air, ground, and sea power.
The only measure of public attitudes toward the USAF is an indirect one regarding support for the bombing of North Vietnam. In his seminal work on public support for the Vietnam War, John Mueller compiled Gallup data from 1965 to 1968 and arrayed questions about the bombing of North Vietnam on a binary "favored bombing"/"opposed bombing" scale. 
8
4
Mueller notes that those who support national leaders tend "to reject proposals for escalation and de-escalation in the abstract since they imply an alteration of 'our' present course, but once the President has adopted the new policy many in the group will follow his lead." 
10
11
12
These broader attitudes toward the war provide important context for the polls taken in 1972 during the North Vietnamese "Easter Offensive." 13 President Nixon ordered a major air effort to counter the North Vietnamese offensive. This effort ran from the end of March almost to the end of October. In addition to the continued strikes by tactical aircraft, President Nixon also ordered a coercive bombing campaign using B-52s against North Vietnamese targets throughout May (Linebacker I). The first survey, conducted in April (one month before the Linebacker I bombing campaign), asked "Do you favor or oppose the stepped-up bombing of North Vietnam?" It found a split public, with 45 percent favoring, 45 percent opposing, and 11 percent with no opinion. The second survey, conducted in September (roughly three months after Linebacker I began and one month before its end), asked a slightly different question: "Do you approve or disapprove of the bombing of North Vietnam?" The results were nearly identical, with 41 percent approving, 45 percent disapproving, and 11 percent with no opinion. 
14
The United States sent U.S. Marines into Lebanon as part of a multinational peacekeeping force that was initially intended to oversee the withdrawal of Palestine Liberation Organization and Syrian troops from Beirut. The mission was, however, poorly defined, and the United States-rather than being a neutral party-overtly supported the pro-Israel Lebanese government, including naval gunfire support from the U.S.S. New Jersey and other ships. This led to attacks on American forces, including the October 23, 1983, suicide bombing of the Marine Corps barracks that killed 241 U.S. troops. As the conflict escalated, President Reagan ordered a naval air strike (on December 4) on three Syrian military sites east of Beirut that resulted in the loss of two U.S. aircraft. 
15
16
17
18
Operation Eldorado Canyon (OEC) was launched at 0200 April 15, 1986 (Libyan time), after a series of Libyan provocations, culminating in the terrorist bombing of the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin and the death of several U.S. service members. 
19
20
OEC-related polling occurred immediately prior to the attack, shortly after the attack (in April and May), and finally in September 1988. Figure 
4
This period corresponds to the Victory Through Air Power (reprise) era that was initiated in 1991 by airpower's highly visible and successful role in Operation Desert Storm. Airpower, and the Air Force specifically, gained great social currency as a result of ODS. This was the result of new military technologies and a new media business model-the 24/7 cable news network. The military technologies produced compelling targeting pod videos of precision strikes against Iraqi strategic and tactical targets. CNN made these videos available to the public day and night as part of its around-the-clock news coverage. Stealth aircraft, laser-guided bombs, tank plinking, and concepts such as air superiority became part of everyday conversations.
Between 1991 and 2003, there were three sets of surveys and three individual polls that offer some insight on public attitudes toward the services. The three sets of surveys were taken during (1) Operation Desert Storm in January/February 1991, (2) the Balkan Conflict from 1992 to 1995, and (3) Operation Allied Force in the Spring of 1999. The individual surveys were taken in 1998, 2001, and 2002. The 1998 survey asked which service branch should be "built up." The 2001 and 2002 surveys asked which military branch was "most important for national defense," an update of the "most important" service question asked between 1949 and 1960. Each of these surveys will be discussed in turn below, but first a few caveats regarding the limitations of the surveys taken during the three conflicts.
In each conflict, surveys asked whether respondents supported air strikes and, in Operations Desert Storm and Allied Force, they also were asked whether airpower alone would be sufficient or whether ground forces would be required. Respondents were not asked which military instrument (e.g., air, ground, or naval power) or combination of instruments would be most effective in a given situation. Thus, there are no head-to-head comparisons across all services in the surveys. A few surveys did offer respondents choices such as "Military air strikes will be enough" or "Will have to send in ground forces." Most surveys asked only whether the respondent favored or opposed air strikes. Support for air strikes could indicate confidence in airpower or a preference for the Air Force, but it could just as easily reflect a willingness to go along with policies already announced or support for any military action. The same can be said for any lack of support. It could reflect skepticism about airpower, a preference for other services, or more general opposition to a given administration's policies. Unfortunately, the surveys are insufficiently detailed to answer these questions.
The discussion now turns to an exploration of the various surveys, beginning with those conducted during ODS.
The next opportunity to explore public attitudes toward alternative military instruments was during ODS. Exactly three weeks after the start of the air campaign, Gallup asked "Do you think the United States and allies should begin a ground attack soon to drive the Iraqis out of Kuwait or should we hold off for now and continue to rely on airpower to do the job?" As can be seen in Figure 
4
21
22
If this were the only poll, one might also have speculated that the public either strongly believed that airpower could coerce Saddam Hussein into withdrawing Iraqi forces from Kuwait or was at least cau- RAND RR1044-4.9
tiously optimistic that this might happen. An ABC/Washington Post poll conducted on February 8-12 (immediately after the Gallup poll) dispels that possibility. The survey asked "Just your best guess, do you think the air war will be enough to force Iraq out of Kuwait or do you think it will take a ground war?" Despite the impressive display of allied airpower and the general sense that the air war was going well, 82 percent of respondents still said that a ground war would be required (see Figure 
4
23
24
25
26
27
There is limited information on public attitudes toward the USAF between 1991 and 1999. The available survey data are focused on the use of coercive airpower in the Balkans from spring 1992 to late 1995. In 1992, Gallup began a series of surveys related to the Serbian siege of the Bosnian capitol of Sarajevo (which lasted from April 1992 to February 1996), seeking to understand whether the public supported air strikes to force a Serb withdrawal. Figure 
4
• "If Serbian forces continue to block relief efforts to Sarajevo, do you think the U.S. should take the lead in seeking United Nations-backed air strikes against the Serbians or not?" (Gallup, July 1992) • "If Serbian forces continue to block relief efforts to Sarajevo, do you think the U.S. air units should participate in air strikes against Serbian forces in Bosnia (former Yugloslav Republic) or not?" (Gallup, August 1992)   27 Richard Hallion, Control of the Air: The Enduring Requirement, Bolling AFB, D.C.: Air Force History and Museums Program, 
September 8, 1999, p. 40. 28
The first two Gallup polls (taken within a ten-day period) contradicted one another, perhaps reflecting limited American interest in or knowledge of Balkan affairs. Sobel reports that "interest in the Bosnia issue was initially low, with only a third to a half of Americans following the situation closely, but it grew to a substantial majority following the crises in the summer of 1995." 
29
30
31
32
1998 Survey: Which Service Should Be Built Up?
We found no service preference polling for 1996 or 1997. The next poll was taken in 1998; Gallup asked which service branch should be "built up" along the lines of earlier questions asked in the 1930s and 40s (see Figures 4.1 and 4.2). Figure 
4
33
33
demands on the USAF that decade were heavy, requiring some shifting of resources to sustain capabilities.
The next opportunity to explore public opinion toward the USAF and airpower was during Operation Allied Force in 1999. Several polling and news organizations (including Gallup, Pew, PSRA/Newsweek, and CBS) conducted frequent polling during the conflict. The CBS News polls shown in Figure 
4
Support for the air strikes remained relatively high throughout this period, varying between 49 percent and 59 percent. On the other hand, support declined consistently between April 13-14 and the May 11 survey, ending 10 percent below the peak. Also, on the three occasions when surveys asked whether air strikes would be enough to achieve U.S. and NATO objectives, few respondents expressed that view. Roughly 70 percent of respondents in all three polls said that The final data for the period 1991-2003 are two Gallup surveys from 2001 and 2002 that ask an updated version of the 1949-1960 "most important military branch" question, specifically: "Which of the five branches of the armed forces in this country would you say is the most important to our national defense today?" Note that the Marine Corps and Coast Guard are now included explicitly as choices, not just the Army, Air Force, and Navy, as was done in the polls between 1935 and 
34
4
4
This section considers changes in public attitudes toward the services during Operations Enduring and Iraqi Freedom. Although the focus is the period associated with the "We Are Critical Enablers" narrative (mainly 2004 to 2011), changes in attitudes regarding the "most important branch" from 2001 to 2014 are plotted to provide a broader context.
As can be seen in Figure 
4
35
Gallup did not ask this question for another seven years. By 2011, almost a year after the end of U.S. combat operations in Iraq, the public view that ground forces were most important had not softened, perhaps because of ongoing combat operations in Afghanistan. In this 2011 poll, the Army remained at 25 percent and the Marine Corps went up 1 percent point to 24 percent. The Navy also went up slightly. The Air Force dropped another 6 percent to a historic low. Finally, "equally important" went up from 12 to 16 percent.  ing the opening phases of OEF and OIF) in which "ground forces have now come to do most of the shaping and fixing of enemy forces, with airpower now doing most of the actual killing of those forces." 
39
4
• "As you may know, the US (United States) military and other countries have begun cruise missile and air strikes in Libya in 
39 Lambeth, 2013, pp. 36 and 42 (italics in original)
4
Returning to the series of Gallup polls on the "most important" service branch, consider the May 2014 survey, displayed in Figure 
4
The Army/Air Force, the Air Force/Marine Corps, and Marine Corps/ Navy are all within sampling error of one another. 
40
4
As Figure 
4
41
4
When this research began in 2013, it was unclear whether or when Gallup would ask the "most important branch" question again. To supplement the 2011 and earlier Gallup data, a RAND American Life  2-7, 1949; August 3-8, 1951; October  9-14, 1953; March 3-8, 1955; October 18-23, 1960; May 18-20, 2001; April 22-24,  2002; May 21-23, 2004; June 9-12, 2011; May 8-11, 2014  • "Which of the five branches of the Armed Forces in this country would you say is most important to our National Defense today-the Air Force, the Army, the Navy, the Marines, or the Coast Guard?" • "Which of our armed services do you most associate with advanced technologies-the Army, the Navy, the Marines or the Air Force?"
As illustrated in Figure 
4
War with China or Russia Air Force polled significantly higher than the other services, although well below "equally important."
The ALP result should, however, be treated with caution. In Gallup polls over the past decade, only 9 percent to 16 percent of respondents chose "equally important." Why such a difference with Gallup's results? Most likely this is the result of survey design: Gallup required respondents to volunteer "equally important" for it to be recorded, while ALP offered it as a choice.
Although Gallup's approach may have led to slight undercounting of the "equally important" view, limiting "neutral response" options is generally the preferred approach in public opinion surveys. Previous public opinion research has demonstrated "that people are much more likely to select a middle response alternative on an issue when it is explicitly offered to them as part of the question than when it must be spontaneously volunteered."
44
45
What about Americans with strong personal ties to specific branches? Is it possible that partisan supporters of individual services are driving the Gallup 2014 results? Roughly 7 percent of Americans are veterans, and another 1 percent currently serve in active duty, reserve, or civilian DoD positions. 
46
47
48
The ALP also asked which service respondents most associated with advanced technology. This was an important question for the USAF, because its narratives typically emphasize technology, portraying the service as one that is constantly innovating and pushing frontiers. Whether it is a successful narrative or for other reasons, the public does strongly associate the Air Force with advanced technologies. Fifty percent of respondents chose the Air Force, with "no opinion" as the second place answer and the Navy in third place at 17 percent (see Figure 
4
The final survey results presented in this study are from the summer of 2014. Washington Post/ABC News polling displayed in Figure 
4
50
This chapter covered considerable ground, from 1935 surveys regarding the possible expansion of the U.S. armed services to 2014 air strikes in Syria. In this admittedly quick treatment of almost 80 years of USAF history, public enthusiasm for aviation and airpower was reflected in public opinion toward the USAF in the 1940s and 1950s. It is fair to say that the public did see airpower as the dominant military instrument in those days. Even as late as 1998 and 2001, the Air Force polled much higher than the other services, although the gap had shrunk considerably. That said, Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom caused a fundamental shift away from this air-centric view toward one that emphasized ground operations. It remains to be seen how the public will view military operations in coming years. The most pow-erful trend in perceived importance of the respective branches of the armed forces was the steady convergence of views resulting in the services scoring almost equally in the 2014 polls.
Regarding public attitudes toward air strikes during ongoing operations, this review found that when American presidents ordered air strikes, the public was typically quite supportive. This was true in Vietnam (recall that the low support for air strikes was either prior to Rolling Thunder or after President Johnson had ordered a bombing halt), Operation Desert Storm, the Balkans between 1992 and 1995, Operation Allied Force, and Iraq/Syria in 2014. In those few cases where the public was asked whether the United States should send ground forces (or in the case of ODS, initiate the ground campaign), public support for the ground option was typically much lower. On the other hand, in those cases when surveys asked whether airpower would be sufficient by itself to achieve U.S. objectives or whether ground forces would be needed, the public consistently said that ground forces would ultimately be needed.
This suggests a fairly sophisticated and nuanced public view of airpower's role. The public recognizes that great utility of airpower as an independent, flexible, and low-risk military option and is much less hesitant to use it than to send ground forces. Yet, the public also recognizes that there are limits to what can be achieved exclusively by airpower (or any other single military instrument) and that more ambitious objectives usually require additional military capabilities, either provided by partner nations or by the other American military branches. Somewhat surprisingly, almost 30 years after the Goldwater-Nichols legislation forced a joint approach to warfare, public opinion polls have yet to explore popular attitudes toward jointness. "Equally important" selections may reflect a joint perspective, but that conclusion can't be supported until attitudes toward jointness are explicitly addressed in surveys.
This study sought to understand the relationship between Air Force public narratives and popular attitudes toward airpower and the USAF. The preceding four chapters explored this relationship through three lenses: (1) the social currency of aviation and airpower, (2) Air Force narratives, and (3) public opinion toward the military services. We began by considering how flight captured the public's imagination in the early 20th century, describing the "golden age" of flight and documenting the rise and fall of aviation in popular culture. We then explored how Air Force narratives evolved over the past century, looking at the writings of the most prominent airmen and identifying key components of strong narratives. Finally, the study brought together 80 years of public opinion research to identify long-term trends in public opinion toward the military services.
Research findings and recommendations are presented below.
Public opinion toward the Air Force was most favorable when aviation was at the center of popular culture and the public's imagination was captured by "the limitless future of the sky." The fascination with flight was arguably the first mass cultural phenomenon in the United States, enabled by the new media of radio and film. Dramatic rises in the social currency of aviation can be quantified between 1900 and 1920, well before American airmen began presenting their first public narratives. Average people identified with flight and aviators, they routinely discussed aviation matters with friends and family, they avidly sought and shared information about aviation, and many became aviation advocates. In short, aviation had exceptional social currency in the first half of the 20th century; during those years the public was predisposed to give airpower-friendly answers in polls. To be fair, energetic outreach by airmen and airpower advocates nurtured and sustained positive public attitudes toward the USAF, but it was publicity about real-world events and concrete accomplishments-improvements in aircraft, world-record flights, and performance in combat-that gave airpower its great social currency, not narratives, however carefully constructed. In short, airpower narratives rode the wave of popular enthusiasm; they did not create it.
The popular obsession with flight did not last. Ironically, as many of the aviation dreams became reality (e.g., safe, reliable, global travel by air), flight lost its mystery, adventure, and glamor. Other dreams became muddled or morphed into nightmares. In Korea and Vietnam, for example, the public perceived airpower as vital, but not decisive. And with the Soviet development of a large nuclear bomber and missile force, the nightmare of nuclear attack on the homeland became a real possibility, never fully removed by the strategy of deterrence. As aviation and airpower drifted away from the center of the public's consciousness or moved in darker directions, popular attitudes toward the USAF became more complex, mixed, and nuanced.
There have been spikes of public enthusiasm for airpower since the end of the Cold War, but the consistently high interest that the USAF once could take for granted has long passed. As a consequence, airpower has become routinized; the USAF is highly respected along with the other services but no longer is viewed as revolutionary or particularly newsworthy. Airpower's social currency today is primarily a function of its visibility in ongoing military operations and popular interest in new technologies such as drones, both of which are largely outside of USAF control.
When airmen come together to discuss the USAF's relative position among the services, its budget share, and its role in national military strategy, a common refrain is that the Air Force fails to "tell its story" in an effective manner. It is typical in such gatherings for earlier airpower narratives to be held up as exemplars of how the USAF should educate the public today. Usually implicit, but at times explicitly articulated, is the belief that if airmen would only proclaim airpower as boldly and unapologetically as Mitchell that public opinion would follow.
There is no evidence in the public opinion data to support the view that the decline in the number of survey respondents choosing the USAF as the "most important branch" can be attributed primarily to narrative failings. Public opinion toward the USAF peaked during the years when its social currency was highest and declined as airpower's social currency waned, not because of changes in narrative. The public perception of the USAF as the dominant service declined in the 1950s even though the narrative did not change. After the 1991 rout of Iraq and multiple successes in the Balkans, airmen presented an updated version of the "Victory Through Air Power" narrative; this was dominant from 1991 to 2003. But the new narrative did not bring polling back up to 1960s level and was unable to resist the change in social currency brought by 9/11 and, later, by the Iraqi insurgency. The USAF dropped in the polls in 2002, then plunged in the 2004 poll despite airmen largely holding to the new "Victory Through Air Power" narrative and well before "We Are Critical Enablers" became the official narrative in 2008. And that narrative fared no better: The USAF dropped again in the 2011 poll. These changes were driven by what the public was observing in these ground-centric conflicts, not by what airmen were saying. That isn't to say that narrative is unimportant, but at most it can capitalize on external conditions when they are favorable and, perhaps, mitigate their effects when they are less favorable.
The most striking and important trend in American public opinion toward the military services is the convergence in views between 1949 and 2014. In 1949, airpower was still riding high, strongly associated with the Japanese surrender and with the emerging concept of strategic nuclear deterrence. In a July 1949 Gallup poll, there was an 80 percentage point difference between those selecting the Air Force as the "most important service" and those selecting the Army. By 1960, this gap was still large but below 60 percentage points. When Gallup returned to this question in 2001, the gap had dropped to 30 percentage points. It declined steadily in the 2002, 2004, and 2011 polls. By 2014, the gap-now between the Army at top and Navy at bottom-was 9 percentage points, a remarkable change from 1949. This convergence began during the air-centric 1950s and has held constant during the ground-centric 2001-2014 period. The trend started during the "Peace Is Our Profession" narrative era, continued through the reprise of "Victory Through Air Power," through "We Are Critical Enablers," and into today's new (yet to be named) narrative era.
In keeping with this convergence, the survey answers are in some cases now falling within the sampling error, suggesting that the public is now divided almost equally in its service preferences. The steady convergence in views during both air-centric and ground-centric periods indicates an enduring trend away from a focus on any one type of military power that is well beyond the power of narrative to change. Although the Air Force could poll higher if, for example, there were a prolonged conflict or exciting new capability that showcased airpower, it is unlikely that the Air Force will ever again experience the levels of public enthusiasm associated with airpower's "golden age."
As noted above, the USAF's social currency is driven primarily by real-world events, such as technological breakthroughs or military successes-not by the writings of strategists, theorists, or military leaders. Social currency ultimately is about whether the public resonates with new technologies or capabilities and whether USAF contributions to ongoing operations are visible and appreciated. Neither is directly under USAF control. That said, there may be steps that the USAF can take to marginally increase the social currency of airpower and, in so doing, increase public receptivity for Air Force narratives.
The USAF already makes good use of contemporary outreach technologies, including a polished website; frequent tweets of stories, photos, and videos; and highly professional recruiting videos shown during NFL games and other prime-time events. In an informationrich society, however, it is not easy to break through the background noise and capture the public's attention, let alone its imagination.
One possible path to increased social currency would compare civilian technologies that are getting the most buzz in tech circles (as well as the broader public) with USAF research and development programs. The idea would be to identify those USAF programs that are most closely aligned with civilian technologies possessing high social currency and promote them in USAF media channels. This would leverage the greater visibility of civilian technologies just the way that early airmen capitalized on public interest in flight to advance military aviation. USAF leaders are already emphasizing advanced technology in outreach efforts, including the new "Breaking Barriers: America's Airmen" initiative that teams the USAF with Wired and Scientific American and offers a website focused on airmen pushing technological and operational frontiers; the research and development/civilian tech comparison would be a complement to such efforts.
Another path to increased social currency would rethink how the USAF presents information about its role in ongoing and recent operations. There are significant policy and security constraints on Air Force actions in this area that greatly limit USAF outreach options. Nevertheless, this may be a place where innovative approaches, such as animations, might better convey to the public what is happening or what happened in air operations than traditional reporting and targeting pod videos.
Even if such efforts do not pan out, they would be valuable as part of a broader USAF effort to understand popular culture and public opinion-a critical foundation for an effective public narrative.
An effective airpower narrative must begin with a problem that matters to the nation. The classic airpower narratives all did this, presenting vexing problems that the public cared deeply about, whether it was avoiding another war in the trenches or preventing World War III. If the public is not interested in the problem as defined in the narrative (perhaps because it is overly narrow or abstract), then it will not be interested in the solution offered by the Air Force. As noted earlier in this report, a strong airpower narrative (1) presents a difficult and important problem, (2) offers a big idea describing how airpower can solve the problem, ( 
3
4
It is most natural for institutions to build narratives inside-out, beginning with the most cherished internal themes and traditions. This makes for compelling internal narrative but often falls flat with outside audiences. A purely outside-in approach to narrative building is unsatisfactory as well, since it would be market-driven, unlikely to capture the entire airpower story, and would have little acceptance within the USAF. The early narratives, such as "Over Not Through," offer a useful model in how to integrate these competing imperatives into arguments that are compelling to both internal and external audiences.
Although valuable as models, airmen should not seek to duplicate the early narratives. No USAF public narrative can recreate the unique cultural conditions of the early to mid-20th century. Nor can earlier narratives be recycled for a contemporary audience; the style and substance are a poor fit for an information-rich society. A modern narrative can, however, help the public understand the contributions that airpower makes to U.S. national security today. To do that effectively, the narrative will need to be tailored to a popular culture that bears little resemblance to that of aviation's golden age.
Whether simply divided in its preferences or moving toward an "equally important" perspective, the American public is much less inclined to see one service as dominant. This is a powerful trend that is unlikely to be reversed anytime soon. However much airmen may wish for a return to earlier times, when airpower was viewed by the public as the dominant military instrument, those times are gone. Narratives that are built on an out-of-date understanding of public opinion will fall flat.
Given this environment, how should the USAF engage the public? The USAF already articulates its unique contributions within a joint context, so more jointness is not necessarily the answer. Nor is a return to "Victory Through Air Power" likely to work with a divided and more skeptical public. Is there a third way? The current direction of USAF outreach themes emphasizing advanced technologies and innovation offers promise. It avoids the extremes of parochialism and bland jointness and is likely to resonate with a public that strongly associates the USAF with advanced technologies. Narratives that reinforce these themes are ideal because they are deeply rooted in Air Force history and traditions, are consistent with the current USAF vision, are plausible to the public, and offer the hope of breakthroughs that would matter greatly to the nation.
Airpower narratives have served multiple and varied purposes over the life of the Air Force. Some have sought to describe the foundations of Air Force culture, others have offered a CEO-style perspective on the structure and purpose of the institution. The best-known (and most controversial) narratives offered to solve a difficult national security problem through the innovative use of aerospace technologies.
This study sought to understand whether these public narratives drive public opinion. This analysis found that they have less impact than typically believed by airmen and airpower advocates. Rather, the social currency of airpower-affected most powerfully by high-visibil-ity technological advances and ongoing military operations-has more impact on public attitudes toward the USAF.
Given this, does public narrative matter? The answer is an unequivocal yes, for several reasons. First, there are other influence pathways that this analysis did not assess, in particular the impact of public narratives on opinion elites, senior government officials, and elected representatives. Although public narratives appear to have marginal influence on public opinion, they may have much greater sway with these other audiences who are more directly involved in policy, programming, and budgeting decisions. Second, healthy organizations must have a logical, coherent, and inspiring explanation for new personnel acculturation as well as organizational pride and esprit. Nowhere is this more important than in military organizations, where the scale of sacrifice is potentially extreme. Finally, as Huntington noted 60 years ago, every governmental agency in a democracy has a responsibility to present a compelling case explaining why the public should devote scarce resources to funding its mission. What problems is it offering to solve? What unique contributions does it make on behalf of the nation? Aren't there alternative and potentially more efficient ways to accomplish these tasks?
Those questions can only be answered through a narrative that links what the institution does to what the nation needs.
111 See Scott D. West, 112 David Mets, 114 Donald Rice, The Air Force and U.S. National Security: Global Reach, Global Power, Washington, D.C.: Headquarters, U.S. Air Force, 1990.
RAND
RAND
According to Webster's, to proclaim is "to declare publicly, typically insistently, proudly, or defiantly and in either speech or writing." This is an apt description of what airmen have done via public narratives over the history of the USAF and its predecessor organizations. See Merriam-Webster Dictionary, online.
See Chapter Four for survey details.
For more on the internal Army battles over the future of the Army Air Service, see David E. Johnson, Fast Tanks and Heavy Bombers: Innovation in the U.S.Army, 1917
-1945
According to Webster's, to proclaim is "to declare publicly, typically insistently, proudly, or defiantly and in either speech or writing." This is an apt description of what airmen have done via public narratives over the history of the USAF and its predecessor organizations. See Merriam-Webster Dictionary, online.
Alexander P. de Seversky, Air Power: Key to Survival, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1950, full citation reproduced in photo plates between pp. xvi and xvii.
See Mari K. Eder, Leading the Narrative: The Case for Strategic Communication, Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press, 2011.
  9  Service narratives can be found on their websites; in the publications of service associations (U.S. Naval Institute's Proceedings, Army Magazine, Air Force Magazine, and the Marine
The Vivaldi Partners "Social Currency Wheel" consists of six dimensions: affiliation, conversation, utility, advocacy, information, and identity. VP is a strategy consulting firm best known for its application of social currency to measuring brand visibility in social networks via its annual Social Currency reports. See the Vivaldi Partners website for details. Jonah Berger offers a broader treatment of related concepts in Contagious: Why Things Catch On, New York: Simon and Schuster
, 2013. 2 For scholarly treatments of aviation and American popular culture, see Michael Paris, From the Wright Brothers to Top Gun: Aviation, Nationalism and Popular Cinema, Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 1995; David T. Courtwright, Sky as Frontier: Adventure, Aviation and Empire, College Station, Tex.: Texas A&M University Press, 2005; Dominick A. Pisano, ed., The Airplane in American Culture, Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 2003; Steve Call, Selling Air Power: Military Aviation and American Popular Culture After World War II, College Station, Tex.: Texas A&M University, 2009; and Corn, 2002.
For more on 19th and early 20th century public attitudes toward aviation, see Michael Paris, "The Rise of Airmen: The Origins of Air Force Elitism, c.1890-1918," Journal ofContemporary History, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 1993, pp. 123-141;
Paris, 1995;
and Corn, 2002.
Winston Groom, The Aviators: Eddie Rickenbacker, James Doolittle, Charles Lindbergh and the Epic Age of Flight, Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society,
2013, p. 238.   20  Henry H.Arnold, Global Mission, Blue Ridge Summit, Pa.: TAB Books, 1989, p. 93  (originally published in 1949).21  DeWitt S. Copp, Frank M. Andrews: Marshall's Airman,Washington, D.C.: Air Force  History and Museums Program, 2003, pp. 4-5.   
Personal communication, January 14, 2015. For more on the event, see Mark Clodfelter, Beneficial Bombing: The Progressive Foundations of AmericanAir Power, 1971-1945, Lincoln,  Neb.: University of NebraskaPress, 2010, pp. 67-70.    
Copp, 2003, p. 7.   
See Groom, 2013, for more details on the airmail service. A good history of the role of airmen during President Roosevelt's first two terms is Jeffrey S. Underwood, The Wings of Democracy: The Influence of Air Power on the Roosevelt Administration: 1933-1941, College Station, Tex.: Texas A&M Press, 1991. Underwood's chapter "Early Attempts to Influence Public Opinion" is particularly pertinent to this discussion.
The issue of whether strategic bombing generally, or the nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki specifically, were decisive remains controversial to this day. Some of the key works challenging the decisiveness argument and/or exploring the roots of the early postwar consensus are Robert Pape, "Why Japan Surrendered," International Security,Vol. 18,  No. 2, Fall 1993, pp. 154-201; Robert Pape, Bombing to Win: Air Power and  Coercion in War, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1996; Gian P. Gentile, How Effective Is Strategic Bombing? Lessons Learned from World War II to Kosovo, New York: New York University
Press, 2001;
and Biddle, 2002.
See Howard E. McCurdy, Space and the American Imagination, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011.
Corn, 2002, p. 142-143.    
See Corn, 2002, pp. 142-152, for more on why the "gospel of space" had limited appeal.
This was five months before Risner was shot down and taken prisoner in North Vietnam. He remained a prisoner for over seven years and received the Air Force Cross for courage and leadership while a prisoner of war.
Corn, 2002, p. 47.   
This has spawned a whole literature on moral, ethical, and legal aspects of unmanned military operations. See, for example, Bradley Jay Strawser, Killing by Remote Control: The
See Chapter Four for supporting evidence.
See Carl Builder, The Icarus Syndrome: The Role of Air Power Theory in the Evolution and Fate of the U.S. Air Force, New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 1994.
See Robert T. Finney, History of the Air Corps Tactical School: 1920-1940, Washington,  D.C.: Center for Air Force History, 1998, pp. 75-78.    
See Mike Worden, Rise of the Fighter Generals: The Problem of USAFLeadership, 1945
- 1982
Courtwright, 2005, p.  124. See also Karen Miller, "'Air Power Is Peace Power': The Aircraft Industry's Campaign forPublic and Political Support, 1943-1949," Business History  Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, Autumn 1996, pp. 297-327.  
  13  Colin Gray discusses the contested nature of airpower in Airpower for Strategic Effect, Maxwell AFB, Ala.: Air University Press,
2012.14 Scholarly reassessments of airpower theory and airpower's contribution in past conflicts include
Sherry (1987)
Clodfelter (1989)
Pape (1996)
Gentile (2000)
and Biddle (2002)
December 9, 2011. 15 This is consistent with Harold Lasswell's five questions that define an act of communication: Who? Says what? In which channel? To whom? With what effect? See Harold D. Lasswell, "The Structure and Function of Communication in Society," in Lyman Bryson, ed., The Communication of Ideas, New York: Cooper Square Publishers, 1964 (originally published in 1948), p. 37. For a discussion of narrative in national security analysis, see Lawrence
Freedman, The Transformation of Strategic Affairs, Adelphi Paper 379, New York: Routledge, 2006, especially pp. 22-26. 16 For more on theories of narrative, see H. Porter Abbott, The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2008; and Rick Altman, A Theory of Narrative, New York: Columbia University Press, 2008.17 Although a representative democracy, the United States model has always contained a significant popular element through which citizens influence policy not just by voting but also by expressing their views on policy issues to elected officials. SeeDavid Held, Models of  Democracy, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2006.   
Amihai Glazer and Marc Robbins, "Congressional Responsiveness to Constituency Change," American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 29, No. 2, May
1985, p. 259.   19  Alan D.Monroe, "Consistency Between Public Preferences and National Policy Decisions," American Politics Quarterly, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 1979, p. 3.   20  Martin Gilens and Benjamin I. Page, "Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens," Perspectives onPolitics, September 2014, Vol. 12,  No. 3, pp. 564-581.   21  For more on conceptual framing, see Pippa Norris, Monague Kern, and Marion Just, eds., Framing Terrorism: The News Media, the Government and the Public, New York:Routledge, 2003.   22  For a discussion of airpower advocacy in American popular publications and film after World War II, see
Call, 2009.
Phillip S. Meilinger, "Alexander P. de Seversky and American Airpower," inMeilinger,  1997, p. 256.   
Russell Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana UniversityPress, 1977, p. 223.    
Alfred F. Hurley, Billy Mitchell: Crusader for Air Power, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana UniversityPress, 1975, pp. 26-28; and Weigley, pp. 223-228.  
  29  Cited inClodfelter, 1997, p. 85.   
The other books are Winged Defense
(1925
( ), Skyways (1930))
William Mitchell, Our Air Force:  The Keystone of National Defense, New York: E. P.Dutton and Company, 1921, p. 14.    
See Waller, 2004.   
Finney, 1998, p. 68.   
H. H.Arnold and Ira Eaker, This Flying Game, New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1936,  p. 129.   
Quoted in Robert Frank Futrell, Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine: Basic Thinking in the United  States Air Force, 1907
-1960
Phillip S. Meilinger, Hoyt S. Vandenberg:  The Life of a General, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana UniversityPress, 1989, p. 63.   
For more on NATO air doctrine, see Maris McCrabb, "The Evolution of NATO Air Doctrine," inMeilinger, 1997, pp. 443-484.    
de Seversky, 1950, p. xxi.   
John M. Broder, "U.S. War Plan in Iraq: 'Decapitate' Leadership: Strategy: The Joint Chiefs Believe That the Best Way to Oust the Iraqis Would Be Air Strikes Designed to Kill Hussein," Los Angeles Times, September 16, 1990.
John M. Broder, "Air Force Chief Fired by Cheney: Gen. Dugan Used 'Poor Judgment' in Discussing Possible Iraq Targets, the Defense Secretary Says," Los Angeles Times, September18, 1990.  
  105  For an excellent biography of Warden, see John Andreas Olsen, John Warden and the Renaissance of American AirPower, Washington, D.C.: Potomac Books, 2007.   
John A. Warden, "The Enemy as a System," Airpower Journal, Spring 1995. The idea of parallel attack is best articulated in John A. Warden, "Success in Modern War: A Response to Robert Pape's Bombing toWin," Security Studies, Vol. 7, No. 2, 1997, pp. 172-190.    
Warden first developed this idea in his 1989 book The Air Campaign, then refined it in later writings.
Warden, 1995.
Dan Fesperman, "War Won Early with Air Power, General Says," Baltimore Sun,  March 16, 1991.    
Deptula would go on to become a lieutenant general and deputy chief of staff for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), retiring from the USAF in 2010. Deptula is currently dean of the General Billy Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies and is arguably the most active and visible American airpower theorist today.
117 David Deptula, Effects-Based Operations: Change in the Nature ofWarfare, Arlington, Va.:  Air Force Association, 2001, p. 18.   
David A. Deptula, Gary L. Crowder, and George L. Stamper Jr., "Direct Attack: Enhancing Counterland Doctrine and Joint Air-Ground Operations," Air andSpace Power Journal,  Winter 2003.   
"Oral History: Charles Horner, The Gulf War," 1996.
Ronald R. Fogleman, Air Power and the American Way of War, presented at the Air Force Association Air Warfare Symposium,Orlando, Florida, February 15, 1996.    
Lambeth's arguments from his 2000 book are updated and expanded in Benjamin S. Lambeth, "Lessons from Modern Warfare: What the Conflicts of the Post-Cold War Years Should Have Taught Us," Strategic Studies Quarterly, Fall 2013, pp. 28-72.
Phillip S.Meilinger, 10 Propositions Regarding Air Power, Washington, D.C.: Air Force  History and Museums Program, 1995, pp. 1-2.    
Thornhill, 2012, p. 7.   
Robert Gates, Duty: Memoirs of a Secretary at War, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2014, pp. 239 and 248; John Tirpak, "Gates Versus the Air Force," Air Force Magazine, March 2014.
Noah Shactman, "Robert Gates:  Overhaul the Pentagon," Wired Magazine, September 21, 2009.
Michael T. Moseley, "Airmen and the Art ofStrategy," Strategic Studies Quarterly, Fall  2007, pp. 15-17.    
Some observers consider the establishment of a strong remotely piloted vehicle community in the USAF Schwartz's greatest legacy. See Tom Bowman, "Air Force Chief Leaves Legacy in the Sky: Drones," Morning Edition, National Public Radio, August 10, 2012.
132 Colin Clark, "Divided AF Reacts toSchwartz Speech," DOD Buzz, September 22, 2008.   
General Schwartz has also made the case that airpower can be decisive when used independently. See Charles A. Blanchard and Norton A. Schwartz, "Opinion: No Air Force? No Way!" Aviation Week and Space Technology, August 25, 2014.
  134  Norton Schwartz, Pride in Service, Heritage, speech to American Legion 49th Annual Washington Conference,
March 3, 2009.
Schwartz, 2009.
Jeffrey J. Smith, Tomorrow's Air Force: Tracing the Past, Shaping the Future, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana UniversityPress, 2014, p. 227.   
Gallup did not treat the Marine Corps as a "major branch" of the military in most polls conducted between 1935 and 2000. We found only two polls(one in 1947 and one in 1955)   that explicitly asked about the Marine Corps. Both of these were regarding which service parents would want a child to enlist in. As late as 1998, Gallup polls asked "about the three major branches of the military, the Army, the Air Force and the Navy." See, for example, the November 20-22, 1998, poll regarding raising taxes to support a larger military.
As noted earlier, Gallup polls have sampling errors between +/-3 to 5 percent. Since we don't have sampling error data for these polls, we are treating any results within 5 percent as statistically equivalent.
Gallup survey, August 15-20, 1942. National adult sample of 1,500. Data from the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
John E. Mueller, "Trends in Popular Support for the Wars in Korea and Vietnam," American Political ScienceReview, Vol. 65, No. 2, June 1971, pp. 358-375. See also Philip E. Converse and Howard Schuman, "'Silent Majorities' and the Vietnam War," Scientific American,Vol. 222, No. 6, June 1970, pp. 17-25
.9  The classic critique of U.S. air strategy in Vietnam is Mark Clodfelter, The Limits of Air Power: The American Bombing of North Vietnam, New York: FreePress, 1989.   
Mueller, 1971, p. 369. For more on presidents and public opinion, see Richard Brody, Assessing the President: The Media, Elite Opinion, and Public Support, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford UniversityPress, 1992.  
  11  For more on elite cueing, see John R. Zaller, The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge UniversityPress, 1992.   
See Eric V. Larson and Bogdan Savych, American Public Support for U.S. Military Operations from Mogadishu to Baghdad, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-231-A, 2005.
  13  For details on the U.S. air response, seeClodfelter, 1989, pp. 151-163.   
Gallup national adult sample of 1,556 conducted April 21-24, 1972, and Gallup national adult sample of 1,505 conducted September 22-25, 1972. Data provided by the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
Micah Zenko, "When America Attacked Syria," Council on Foreign Relations, February 13, 2012; Bernard Trainor, "'83  Strike on Lebanon: Hard Lessons for U.S., New York Times,
August 6, 1989;
Louis Harris and Associates, December 8-12, 1983. National adult sample of 1,249. Data provided by the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
Gallup, December 9-12, 1983. National adult sample of 1,510. Data provided by the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
Louis Harris and Associates, February 9-11,
National adult sample of 1,262. Data provided by the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut 19Lambeth, 2000, p. 100.   
See Eric V. Larson, Casualties and Consensus: The Historical Role of Casualties in Domestic Support for U.S. Military Operations, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MR-726-RC, 1996, p. 39. See pp. 30-38 for a detailed assessment of public attitudes toward casualties during ODS.
   22  See Patrick E. Tyler, "Best Iraqi Troops Not Badly Hurt by Bombs, Pentagon Officials Say," New York Times,February 6, 1991, p. 1.   
Andrew Rosenthal, "Bush Doubts Air War Alone Will Defeat Iraqi Military: Bombings Continue: Powell and Cheney Sent to Gulf to Assess Need for a Ground War," New York Times,February 6, 1991, p. 1.    
Richard P.Hallion, Storm over Iraq: Air Power and the Gulf War, Washington, D.C.:  Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992, pp. 219-223.   
Richard Sobel, "Portraying American Public Opinion Toward the Bosnia Crisis," Harvard International Journal ofPress/Politics, 1998, 3:16, p. 17.  
  30  See "Clinton Deploys Vowels to Bosnia; Cities of Sjlbvdnzv, Grzny to Be First Recipients," The Onion, December
1995.31  In contrast, an August 13-18, 1993, Harris poll found only 38 percent favoring air strikes with 50 percent opposing. The Harris poll is, however, an outlier; most of the other polls conducted between 1992 and 1995 found higher support for air strikes. For example, Sobel found that 58 percent of polls he analyzed showed "majority or plurality support for U.S. air strikes."See Sobel, 1998
, p. 21.32  This was the only poll we found comparable to those regarding air strikes. This February 10, 1994, Time/CNN/Yankelovich Partners poll (national sample of 500) asked, "If air strikes don't make the Serbs withdraw their forces from around Sarajevo, do you favor or oppose sending U.S. and NATO ground troops into Sarajevo to protect the civilians there?" Data from the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
Adam J. Hebert, "Libya: Victory Through Airpower," Air Force Magazine, December 2011, AFA online. Air Force Magazine published two articles in the midst of Operation Odyssey Dawn/Operation Unified Protector, but both focused on operational details rather than a higher-level narrative about airpower. See John A. Tirpak, "Bombers over Libya," Air ForceMagazine, July 2011, pp. 36-39; and Amy McCullough, "The Libya Mission," Air  Force Magazine, August 2011, pp. 28-32.    
For more on the Libyan intervention, see Christopher S. Chivvis, Toppling Qaddafi: Libya and the Limits of Liberal Intervention, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UniversityPress, 2013.    
Eric Schmitt, "U.S. Gives Its Air Power Expansive Role in Libya," New York Times, March 28, 2011.
The "war with China or Russia" question was intended to capture the demands of conflict with a major power. One reader of an earlier draft noted, however, that respondents who have more knowledge of military affairs might have found the question problematic, since the relative importance of the services would arguably vary in a more ground-centric conflict with Russia as opposed to a more air-naval-centric conflict with China.
George F. Bishop, "Experiments with the Middle Response Alternative in SurveyQuestions," Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 51, 1987, pp. 220-232.   
American journalist Steve Sotloff was beheaded on September 9, after the Washington Post/ABC News poll was taken.
I thank project sponsors 
Lt Gen Steven Kwast
Maj Gen David Allvin
Mr. Sam Szvetecz
USAF, Air University, and Pacific Air Forces
Program of 
RAND
AIR FORCE
RAND
AIR FORCE (PAF
RAND Corporation
U.S. Air Force
Force Modernization and Employment
Manpower, Personnel
FA7014-06-C-0001
Additional information about PAF is available on our website: http://www.rand.org/paf. This suggesting that RAND conduct a public opinion survey on this topic, to 
Paula Thornhill
Diana Malouf
American Life Panel team
Mark Clodfelter
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Ethics of an Unmanned Military, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2013; and Daniel  Brunstetter and Megan Braun, "The Implications of Drones on the Just War Tradition," Ethics and International Affairs, Vol. 25, No. 3, 2011, pp. 337-358. 
47
Although the USAF public narrative in 2011 still centered on the "We Are Critical Enablers" theme, events in Libya that year offered an opportunity to showcase other strengths of airpower, strengths more in keeping with traditional USAF narratives. Indeed, a December 2011 Air Force Magazine editorial assessing the operation was titled (not surprisingly) "Libya: Victory Through Airpower," evoking the most ambitious and inspirational USAF narrative to date. 36 Thus, it is worth taking a moment to consider the impact (if any) of the Libyan intervention on public attitudes toward the USAF and airpower.
On March 19, 2011, U.S. and NATO air forces began air strikes against Libya, initially to protect civilians from attack by government forces and ultimately to help rebel forces overthrow Colonel Muammar Qaddafi's regime. The U.S.-led Operation Odyssey Dawn (OOD) ran from March 19 to March 31, at which point NATO took command under Operation Unified Protector (OUP). OUP ran until the end of September, when the last loyalist cities fell to the rebels. 
37
9 7 8 0 8 3 3 0 9 0 1 4