# ID: 5654e764b8024515b4dc7bba109bb6fb
# Title: The Panacea and the Square Peg: Strategic Fallacies of the Air, Undersea, and Cyber Domains
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Strategic thought about new domains can fall victim to logical fallacies. In the interwar period between WWI and WWII, the exhilarating idea of invulnerable bombers beating opposing nations into submission masked significant miscalculations inherent in Allied air power theory and led strategist to view this new capability as a panacea. For the undersea domain, strategists ignored both the teclmicallimitations that prevented submarines from performing traditional maritime warfare roles and the unique possibilities presented by the elements of stealth and surprise. The square peg fallacy illustrates the strategic effect of wedging submarines into the dominant naval strategy of major fleet engagement.
Current thought on the use of cyber power appears susceptible to both fallacies.
Mirror imaging the potential effects of a cyber-attack on the US leads some strategists to overestimate the strategic effects of cyber power and envision the domain as a panacea through which to dominate future conflicts. The Air-Sea Battle Concept demonstrates the square peg fallacy in how it advocates cyber operations as a method to defeat air defenses, a problematic approach that fails to consider significant technical limitations. Based on historical analysis, recommendations for future cyber strategy include: conducting defensive cyber operations under the joint function of protection to more realistically view US capabilities and vulnerabilities, controlling offensive cyber operations in a manner similar to special operations (a construct that more closely matches its potential battlefield effects}, and utilizing cyber power' s unique advantages against non-state actors.  The opportunity to exploit a new domain of warfare presents a blank canvas to military strategists. But the relative freedom of unexplored territory can just as easily yield a costly mess as a strategic masterpiece. This creative process played out in the evolution of strategic bombing for the air domain and unrestricted submarine warfare during the interwar period between World War I and World War II. In the air domain~ the exhilarating idea of invulnerable bombers beating opposing nations into submission masked significant miscalculations inherent in Allied air power theory. Strategists overestimated the operational effect of fighting in the air and viewed this new capability as a panacea to cure the stalemate of World War I. For the undersea domain~ strategists attempted to work submarine power into the dominant naval theory of concentrating forces for a decisive battle. This concept ignored both the technical limitations that prevented submarines from effectively participating in that strategy and the unique possibilities presented by the elements of stealth and surprise.
Eventually~ submarines would influence the war through a strategy of dispersion~ avoiding opposing naval forces and attacking the enemy's economy by sinking commercial vessels. This action only became possible when strategists realized that the submarine was a square peg that would not fit into the round hole of established naval strategy. Effective exploitation of both air and undersea domains required overcoming fallacies in strategic thought.
The divergent development of air and submarine strategies prior to WWII provides an instructive example to guide cyber strategy as it develops to meet future threats. Current thought on the use of cyber power appears susceptible to the fallacious logic represented by the ideas of the panacea and square peg. Some theorists envision the cyber domain as the predominant battlefield for future conflicts, or even the only battlefield.
1
The balance of this chapter provides the theoretical basis and starting point for this argument. It defines domains and their place in joint doctrine and introduces the unique challenges of developing strategy for a new domain. The narrative continues by relating the constructs of the panacea and square peg to established logical fallacies. The chapter ends with an introduction of how each of the fallacies influenced early strategy in the air and undersea domains.
The definition of an operational domain becomes more complex as technology introduces new types of warfare into the joint world. Joint doctrine specifies four physical domains (land, maritime, air and space) and includes cyberspace as a domain of the information environment. 
3
5
The idea of a panacea, or cure-all, derives from mankind's conception of both hope and fear. The hope comes from the promise of a better life and the fear results from thoughts of suffering and death. The thought that military operations in a new domain might promise a quick end to wars and deliver the nation from terrifying consequences is an example of the logical fallacy of appealing to emotion. Specifically, an appeal to emotion is an attempt to arouse the emotions of the audience to gain acceptance of a conclusion. 
6
While the panacea fallacy assigned fantastic new possibilities to the air domain, square peg thinking relegated undersea warfare to just "more of the same". Early thought on the use of submarines concentrated on how the world's navies could integrate them into existing naval theory. This unimaginative thinking was symptomatic of the fallacy of division. This fallacy asserts that if a whole has certain qualities, all parts of the whole have the same qualities. 
8
In 1939, the US naval doctrine publication Current Doctrine, Submarines mandated: "The primary task of the submarine is to attack enemy heavy ships. A heavy ship is defined as a battleship, a battle cruiser, or an aircraft carrier."
9
The disruptive effect of new domains comes from the possibility of negating underlying assumptions of strategy. The mobility of an aircraft and the absence of opposing lines of battle or geographic barriers led early theorists to assume that air power's defining characteristic was unstoppable offense. But the exhilarating possibilities of this newly-accessible third dimension kept theorists from understanding what an air defense system might look like. Early air power theorist Giulio Doubet understood this new technology to require a wholesale revision of strategic thought. Unfortunately, his influence steered initial air strategy towards the panacea fallacy.
Although submarines only became useful as warships towards the very end of Alfred Thayer Mahan's life, neither, influential naval theorist, he nor his adherents saw any reason that operations under the waves would be much different strategically than operations on the surface. Submarines of that era had significant technical limitations. Their weapons systems did not have the striking power or accuracy necessary to sink top of the line warships, and their submerged speed was not sufficient to position themselves to attack steaming formations of warships. These limitations did not allow submarines to be a part of massive fleet-on-fleet action. The submarine's strength lay in the very antithesis of this idea. The lack of innovative thinking drove undersea domain strategy towards the square peg fallacy.
Theories on the use of cyber power have exhibited errors on both extremes. Some thinking tends to emphasize offensive cyber operations and advocates it as an alternative to traditional warfare. Some authors even compare cyber operations to nuclear weapons due to their perceived unstoppable offense capability. 10 Other strategists view cyber warfare in the combined arms construct, as a tool for each combatant commander to use alongside conventional forces. This approach ignores the stealth and secrecy aspects that cyber shares with undersea operations. The Department of Defense continues to prioritize funding for cyber operations, instituting an 8.5% increase to $5.1 billion in 2015 despite implementing significant cuts in most other spending. 11 In an era of diminishing defense budgets, it is vital that senior defense leaders have a better understanding of the strengths and weakness of the cyber domain to make resource decisions that are unclouded by fallacious ideas.
The enduring power of logical fallacies comes from their ability to simplify complex issues into comfortable generalizations. The panacea fallacy tapped into the disgust and horror 10 Matthew D. prevalent in western nations after WWI and presented air power as a wholly separate alternative containing none of the problematic issues of land warfare. The square peg fallacy put off any serious consideration of the disruptive effects of submarine operations in favor of the widely accepted conventional wisdom of the day. Poor strategic assumptions on operations in the air and undersea domains led strategists in WWII to make decisions that were extremely costly in both equipment and human lives. By recognizing these assumptions as the result of logical fallacies, strategists can avoid making similar mistakes when planning for operations in the cyber domain. The Bomber Will Always Get Through
The bloody conclusion ofWWI left all sides looking for a new way of war that would avoid the ghastly attrition of trench warfare. Industrial-scale bombardment from the air held the promise of resolving conflicts quickly. Air power advocates asserted that air warfare would make all other forms of combat obsolete, an appealing concept that would reappear over the next hundred years with the advent of nuclear weapons and even cyber power.
In his influential work on early air power theory, Giulio Doubet argued that it was now possible to invade the enemy's territory without breaking through his defensive lines on the ground. He combined this idea with the notion that "nothing man can do on the surface of the earth can interfere with a plane in flight, moving freely in the third dimension." 1 These ideas were problematic, even given what was known about air warfare at the time. WWI air combat showed that once aircraft invaded the enemy's territory, defensive counterattacks by the enemy's aircraft could complicate things immensely. Doubet also assumed that there would be significant breakthroughs in aircraft technology, while ground-based anti-aircraft systems would largely remain ineffective. Finally, his theory of the offensive dominance of air power was based on the notion that the enemy could not defend all areas from air attack continuously.
Doubet firmly believed that attacking a nation's civilian population and wartime economy from the air would destroy the will to wage war quickly. As the Allies discovered in WWII, however, it was possible to establish an effective air defense around vital infrastructure, and there were vast areas of each country that, if bombed, would not harm the nation's ability to wage war in the least. But Allied war planners embraced his ideas, assigning strategic bombing as the dominant role for air power in WWII.
Doubet's theories contained an important and ultimately quite costly corollary: if ground-based air defenses were ineffective in stopping bombing attacks, so too were enemy defensive fighters. This, the bomber, in formation, would provide its own defense and be unstoppable. This concept became a founding idea for Allied air power doctrine and supplied the context for the oft-repeated quote by Tory leader Stanley Baldwin in 1932 that proclaimed to the man in the street that "there is no power on earth that can protect him from being bombed. Whatever people may tell him, the bomber will always get through ... "
2
Army Air Forces (USAAF), specifically the Eighth Air Force, translated this concept into unescorted daylight bombing raids over Germany only to suffer heavily from Luftwaffe flak and defensive fighter swarms. The "Mighty Eighth" suffered horrific losses during the Combined Bomber Offensive, including over 50% of airframes on October 12, 1944, the "Black Thursday" raid over Schweinfurt. Sadly, it took such losses to convince air commanders that this theory was tragically false. Only with the introduction of drop tanks and the P-51 Mustang long range fighter escort did the Allies fend off Luftwaffe defensive counterair attacks sufficiently to continue offensive bombing operations. 
3
For Doubet, Billy Mitchell in the U.S. and Hugh Trenchard in Britain, it was vitally important that air forces achieve independence and recognition as a separate armed service. Strategic bombing provided a powerful justification for this arrangement. An independent air force would concentrate on bombing targets far from any associated ground troops towards independent objectives. The Air Corps Tactical School provided another layer panacea thinking by concentrating on the economic effects of bombing. The doctrine they developed in the Interwar period thought of the enemy society as an "industrial web" susceptible to collapse by targeting key nodes. 
4
Once the idea of strategic bombing as a panacea took hold, it dominated the thinking of air strategists throughout WWII. However, the initial U.S. war planning did not reflect this outlook. Rainbow 5, the Allied war plan in place at the time of U.S. entry into the war, directed "weakening the enemy's war-making powers by blockade and strategic bombing" only as preparation for an eventual invasion by land forces.
5
USAAF leadership would rally against any strategy that planned otherwise. Thus, the USAAF Despite the initial instructions in Rainbow 5, advocates of strategic bombing would not cede its place as the preeminent idea in air power. At the Casablanca conference in January 1943, the Allies agreed to commence long-range bomber operations from the U.K. Two main points drove agreement on the Combined Bomber Offensive (CBO). That the Africa campaign was drawing to a close and there were not yet sufficient forces in England for the planned cross-channel invasion. The CBO seemed like the best, perhaps the only way, to keep pressure on Gennany and provide a second front, relieving the beleaguered Russian Army. The implementing direction to Allied air commanders contained the wording that moved air power in the direction envisioned by Doubet and Mitchell: "Your primary object will be the progressive destruction and dislocation of the Gennan military, industrial and economic system, and the undennining of the morale of the Gennan people to a point where their capacity for anned resistance is fatally weakened." 7 It was with this guidance that the greatest test of air domain theory began.
The CBO began with hopes of bringing Gennany to its knees without conducting a cross-channel invasion. This hope fell away quickly. The anticipated morale degradation and governmental paralysis from widespread bombing of cities never materialized, either from Gennan bombing of London or Allied raids into Gennany. The emphasis then shifted to bombing industrial targets, with the intent of grinding industry to a halt and destroying the enemy's war economy. This approach presented its own difficulties due to the imprecise nature of analyzing what industrial facilities were important. Gennan machine tools, vital to industrial production, were quite numerous (greater than 2 million) and built solidly enough to withstand most bombing except a direct hit. Their storage locations had no obvious identifying characteristics visible from the air and as a result, Allied planes never bombed the vast majority of Gennan buildings that housed them. 
8
7 Jacobs, "Strategic Bombing and American National Strategy 1941-1943," 137. The CBO then shifted its target to gasoline and oil supplies. Although there is some debate about whether strategic bombing of oil production facilities or Allied occupation of Romanian oil fields was the decisive factor, it is safe to say that the CBO significantly degraded German oil production. 10 But this decrease alone did not have a decisive strategic effect. Analysis of the CBO ultimately credits it with causing brutal attrition of Luftwaffe pilots as they attempted to defend against the bombing onslaught, reducing combat strength by 40% in 1944 from its peak at the beginning of the war. Even this reduction was related to organizational choices by the Germans, who prioritized increasing tank crew numbers 300% during this same period in a similarly demanding discipline requiring comparable training time to aviation. 11
The historical scorecard eventually credited the CBO with attrition of German pilots and reduction in oil industry capacity, resulting in anemic opposing air power during the landings at Normandy. The CBO is also credited with snarling the road and rail links to the battlefield, degrading Germany's ability to bring reinforcements to the front. Although important to the overall war effort, this is a far cry from the decisive results envisioned by early air power theorists. Once promising to do away with the bloody attrition of the trenches, the CBO just moved the attrition a few thousand feet upward with heavy losses of men and aircraft on both sides.
It is not difficult to see why Doubet thought that air power would change war forever.
Without advances such as radar and integrated air defenses, it would be exceedingly difficult to stop inbound bombers. If one nation could maintain a substantial edge in aviation technology 10 Paramore, 73.
11 Harvey, II.
for an extended period, they would have a sizeable military advantage over their opponent.
But a recurring theme in the exploitation of new domains is that after an initial success by one side, competition soon follows. In the end, the ability to bypass land forces and strike inside an enemy's territory was only as good as the air forces' ability to evade or defeat the enemy's defenses, select the right targets, and strike them accurately with enough force to destroy them.
Air forces in WWII experienced varying degrees of difficulty achieving some or all of these requirements. With each added layer of complexity, the hope of a panacea receded further.
The Panacea Fallacy in the Cyber Domain: A Gateway to Quick and Efficient Victory?
As was the case with air power, the cyber domain affords the opportunity to attack adversaries and defend against attacks by them in a completely new setting. The unique characteristics of the domain (most of the action takes place within computer networks) lead some to believe that accomplishing the political objectives of war is possible primarily through that domain without the wholesale death and destruction that has accompanied war throughout history. This appeal to hope in place of reason is the heart of the panacea fallacy.
The thought of cyber power as a panacea derives considerable strength from mirror imaging. Former Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta asserted that the vulnerability of U.S.
infrastructure to cyber-attack could lead to a "cyber-Pearl Harbor". 
12
Clarke plunges the US into an apocalyptic nightmare, complete with gas refinery explosions, trains crashing into each other, and economic collapse due to the hypothetical actions of Chinese hackers. 
13
All of this serves to enhance the perceived power of the cyber domain. If the US was this vulnerable, could the military use the same vulnerabilities against potential adversaries?
The thought of turning off all electrical power and stopping all telecommunications in an adversary nation is indeed appealing. By using the cyber domain, it is theoretically possible to achieve effects that previously required weeks of bombing or a full scale invasion. But even while ignoring the significant technical challenges associated with achieving that far-reaching result through cyber power, several problems remain. The cyber-attack has answered the question of"ways", but what of the "ends"? Even if the enemy achieves this effect, the loss of power and communication are likely to be temporary, on the order of hours or days instead of weeks.
14
Remaining hopes for a rapid, bloodless victory through cyber power center around deterrence. Some theorists compare cyber capabilities to nuclear weapons and propose using them to create a "mutually assured cyber-destruction" balance of power to promote peace. 
15
16
Attribution poses a problem as well. The frequently anonymous nature of cyber-attacks prevents the assured retaliation necessary for deterrence to work. This environment makes it unlikely that US cyber power can even deter other nations from using cyber weapons, much less any other sort of aggressive action.
The December 2014 cyber-attack against Sony Pictures illustrated several major flaws in the idea of cyber power as a panacea. Attribution was initially a problem, with the US waiting several weeks to accuse North Korea of orchestrating the attacks and North Korea subsequently denying responsibility. 17 President Obama publicly announced that the US would issue a "proportional response" and North Korea then completely lost its limited Internet connectivity for over nine hours with sporadic failures after that. North Korea blamed the US for the outage, but the US did not claim responsibility. 
18
cyl?er-deterrence arguments increasingly hard to justify. Even finding an accurate way to describe the event is challenging.
Defining this cyber-attack as warfare presents problems. President Obama classified the attack as "cyber vandalism". 
19
20
The two prominent naval theorists prior to WWI, Alfred Thayer Mahan and Sir Julian Corbett, centered their strategic thought on the concept of control of the seas. 1 While they differed on key ideas such as the relative importance of concentrating naval forces and the dominance of defense versus offense, they both generally emphasized large scale fleet action as the method to achieve control of the seas for warfare and commerce while denying it to the enemy. 
2
3
Although submarines had been in various stages of development and experimentation since David Bushnell' s hand crank-powered Turtle in 1776, it was not until 1910 that the submarine emerged an effective warship. In that year, the German Navy launched the U-9, which had an operational range of 1 000 nautical miles, could remain on station for five days, and carried six fairly reliable torpedoes. 
4
This development was lost on the naval theorists of the day. Mahan died in 1914 and would not live to see submarines used against warships and commercial shipping in WWI. Corbett analyzed the German unrestricted submarine warfare campaign of 1917-1918 in his history of WWI and concluded that it provided further evidence that commerce raiding was not a warwinning strategy. 
5
Ironically, it was a leading land power theorist that offered a strategy that, when applied to submarine warfare, would prove devastatingly effective. The undersea domain presented an opportunity for a variation on B. H. Liddell Hart's "indirect approach". Opposing forces had no reliable way of detecting a submerged submarine. Even the most advanced sonar equipment developed during WWII was ineffective beyond a few thousand yards. This opened up avenues of attack that moved under lines of warships and straight to commercial shipping, a different portion of the "vital centers" so beloved by early air power theorists. But at the time, the critical capability was still thought to be enemy warships. Contemporary naval strategists thought of the stealth and surprise offered by the undersea domain only in terms of exposing avenues to attack the opposing fleet. But the technical limitations of submarines would undermine this approach. The vast open spaces of the sea made it difficult to translate Liddell Hart's maneuver warfare maxim of"avoiding strong defensive positions to attack weaker ones" to war at sea. In naval warfare the "positions" are relative to the numbers and capabilities of surface warships and frequently shift over time. The strong maritime defensive positions were the warships themselves, and the vast, unprotected flotilla of ships ferrying war material across the ocean's surface represented the weak defensive positions. But before strategists could embrace the indirect approach of attacking the weaker merchant shipping, they had to realize that the technical limitations of submarines made the direct approach infeasible.
Attacking a warship with a submarine presented several challenges. The first was finding the target. The view from a periscope or even a surfaced submarine provides a line of sight that extends only about 1 0 miles, and the rudimentary passive sonar systems available at the time did not provide direction-finding capability beyond a few thousand yards. The next issue was achieving firing position, about 1000-2000 yards away and shooting at the warship's beam (center when viewed from the side) to give the torpedo the largest possible target to hit.
Battle fleets typically travelled at 2-3 times the speed of a submerged submarine. If the submarine spotted a warship in the distance, it had no way to make up ground unless the warship was already traveling on a course that would cause it to interact with the submarine.
So many potential encounters were over before they began and the submarine crew left frustrated as the target ships steamed over the horizon. 
6
When the Germans first attempted unrestricted submarine warfare in WWI. it was out of a sense of desperation more than anything else. The British Royal Navy had bottled up the German High Seas Fleet in the North Sea after the Battle of Jutland ( 1916). leaving Germany no way to weaken the British blockade. In 1917, Germany commenced a commerce raiding campaign and sunk an average of614,000 tons of British shipping over a six-month period in an attempt to knock Britain out of the war before the US could enter the conflict. 7 This effort was derailed by raw numbers: Germany had a total of330 submarines available during the war, and the allies had over 43 million tons of available shipping in their entire fleet before the war broke out and produced I 0 million tons more during the war. In total, German submarines sunk 19.9% of all Allied shipping employed in WWI. meaning 80.1% of it arrived at its destination. This was not nearly enough to cut off the sea lines of communication to 
Britain. 8
In the Interwar period prior to WWII, both naval powers that eventually conducted unrestricted submarine warfare downplayed the role of submarines as commerce raiders.
Germany's wartime U-boat commander, Admiral Karl Doenitz, cited a naval strategy designed to counter the navies of neighboring continental powers (France and Russia) as the reason for building a balanced fleet with a small U-boat contingent, despite his own early efforts to 
7
Warfare 1901
Warfare -2001," 112. 8 ," 112. 8
promote his version of commerce raiding which he referred to as "cruiser warfare".
9
Although German submarines where among the best available in the word~ the raw numbers were even worse for them than in WWI.
Since the Germans evaluated the WWI commerce raiding campaign as a failure~ they had few submarines available when it became their strategy in extremis in WWII. When Donitz ordered the U-boat fleet to commence wolf pack tactics in November 1940, the Germans averaged only 10 submarines at sea each month.
10
In the United States, the Navy had given no significant thought to submarine operations against anything other than warships. From 1940-1941, 35 of 36 major exercises involving submarines directed the U.S. subs to conduct attacks on groups of warships. Although at high levels, some of the fleet leadership had speculated that unrestricted submarine warfare might come into play against Japan, the fleet had never trained for it. In the immediate aftermath of Pearl Harbor, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Harold Stark, ordered the service to "Execute against Japan unrestricted air and submarine warfare." That concept was so far removed from U.S. doctrine that many of the submarine commanders were tmclear as to what the order meant.
12
Analysis of warfare in the tmdersea domain shows that the most successful strategy was tmconventional in several ways. First, the geopolitical situation on land can be the dominant factor in the success or failure of strategy tmder the sea. Unlike air power which was assumed to be dominant everywhere, the participation of an industrial giant like the U.S. made the tmdersea campaigns against the U.K and Japan completely different. Germany was never successful in cutting off Britain because the combined U.S.-U.K. shipping fleet was too large and the capacity to replenish sunken vessels was too great. Convoy tactics and airborne reconnaissance and attack focused on decreasing the number ofU-boats and lowering the effectiveness of their attacks. This tmdoubtedly helped maintain Britain's lifeline, but the U.S. crash program to increase shipping capacity (the Liberty Ship program) also had the significant effect of overwhelming the German submarine force's destructive capability. Despite horrific losses and intense effort, German submarines only sunk 17% of available Allied merchant ships, and the allies built more shipping tonnage during the course of the war than they had on hand at the outset. Japan, on the other hand, had a shipping fleet about l/8th the size of the allies, was heavily dependent on importing war materials, and had very limited capacity to replace sunk merchant shipping. This situation allowed the US submarine force to destroy 50% of their shipping and significantly degrade the Japanese war economy.
13
Additionally, the traditional idea of concentrating the fleet does not apply well to the undersea domain. In order to maximize the probability of ambushing a merchant ship, commanders spread their forces to cover the greatest area. Even the feared German wolf packs started out from a picket line position dispersed across a wide front. Once one of the pack members detected a convoy, the captain would call in the others for a simultaneous attack. A strategic dispersal would give way to short periods of tactical concentration.
14
15
Finally, the undersea domain provided a route to attack a different center of gravity in a different way. Commerce raiding set the enemy's economy as the center of gravity, and any interaction with an opposing warship was counterproductive. Unlike the decisive fleet-on-fleet engagements envisioned by Mahan and Corbett, unrestricted submarine warfare worked through attrition over a vast area and a long period of time. Like bombing campaigns against industrial targets, the overall strategic effect was hard to quantify. But the undersea domain provided greater opportunity to distinguish targets of industrial significance. The distinctive silhouette of a merchant vessel on the trade route to Japan viewed from a periscope was a strong indicator of the industrial value of that ship, unlike a nondescript large building in the center of a city viewed from high altitude. There was also fairly strong evidence of success or failure, as many US submarines were able to watch their targets sink below the waves.
Conversely, battle damage assessment from aerial bombardment remains challenging to this day.
The CBO also targeted the enemy's morale and will to continue fighting. Unrestricted submarine warfare never had this aim. In theory, attacks on shipping by U.S. submarines could destroy food imports bound for Japan and starve the population. But Japan's major constraints were industrial in nature (petroleum and raw materials). The nation's petroleum supply was so limited prior to the war that further restriction risked significantly degrading their military capability. The perception among military leaders that Japan had to strike before the loss of fuel crippled their armed forces was a major factor in the decision to bomb Pearl Harbor. 
16
17
Unlike air power, the increased strategic options provided by submarines were never the necessity to defend US rear echelon forces. 
21
The "area" portion of A2/ AD is not particularly relevant to defensive cyber operations.
The interconnected nature of the domain essentially invalidates the idea of a rear echelon force from the defensive perspective. A computer network onboard an aircraft or ship is not significantly more secure from cyber-attack off the coast of Florida than it would be off the coast of Iran. The underlying goal described in Air-Sea Battle is that computer networks associated with military units will operate securely and be highly resistant to intrusion, which is the goal of US cybersecurity as a whole. The cyber domain represents a route for adversaries to degrade the effectiveness of US forces in an indirect manner, far from the front lines and without direct kinetic attack. But acknowledging that an adversary might take this route to make power projection more difficult is no more significant than acknowledging that they might intercept and try to decode radio transmissions to anticipate ship movements, a tactic dating back almost one hundred years. Dealing with potential cyber-attacks is now one of the basic prerequisites for operating a computer network, and associating this continuously ongoing process with attempts to deny access to a specific geographic area confuses the issue.
Air-Sea Battle's concept of offensive cyber operations presents additional problems.
When discussing the need for cross-domain integration, the writers state that "cyber or undersea [as in Tomahawk Strike] operations can be used to defeat air defense systems ... ".
22
While this statement could potentially be true, the results and probability of success are vastly different between a cruise missile strike from a submarine and a cyber-attack targeting air defense networks. Equating the two is a prime example of the square peg fallacy. Assigning the role of protecting attacking US fighter aircraft to cyber forces is a mission for which they are not necessarily ready or suited for, much like assigning WWII submarines to fleet-on-fleet engagements. This strategy ignores both the drawbacks and unique strengths of operations in the cyber domain.
The method the Air-Sea Battle concept advocates for disrupting air defenses (or other A2/AD weapons) using the cyber domain would most likely be a zero day vulnerability, defined as a software vulnerability that is unknown to the system user or manufacturer.  since the infected computers (hots) are difficult to detect and can be reconstituted using completely different machines for subsequent attacks. This makes correcting the vulnerability very challenging, even when the user knows it is there. The stealth versus persistence considerations lead to significant issues when integrating offensive cyber operations into overall strategy.
The objective of Air-Sea Battle is to mitigate the threat of anti-access weapons and allow high value units to operate in all areas required. But the offensive cyber capabilities required to degrade these weapons would need to have high stealth (to prevent the enemy from immediately deploying other measures once the A2/ AD system is compromised) and high persistence (to remain dependable for planning purposes). The unpredictable nature of zero day vulnerabilities can mean that an attack method that is devastatingly effective one day can be rendered useless the next by a simple software update. In the "ends-ways-means" equation, this particular means can be effectively taken away without the commander's knowledge. Like the use of submarines in major fleet engagements, inclusion of offensive cyber operations into the overall strategy is a mission for which the force is not ready.
Contemporary strategic thought on the cyber domain demonstrates aspects of the square peg fallacy. The concepts of stealth, persistence, and the inapplicability of geography-based ideas are domain-specific complexities easily glossed-over by the fallacy of division.
Although it is easier to translate assumptions from old domains to new, strategists must thoughtfully consider the benefits and drawbacks of operations in cyberspace to avoid falling prey to fallacious logic.
This chapter provides a perspective on how the panacea and square peg fallacies are at work in the cyber domain, and recommendations on how to counter their negative influence on strategy.
The vast majority of US cyber operations are defensive in nature. Instead of incorporating this defensive effort into a concept like Air-Sea Battle, its logical classification is as a part of the joint function of Protection. Resistance to cyber-attack is just another way of preserving the joint force's fighting potential. The service-specific cyber components are responsible for protecting their networks. This should be thought of as an ongoing process similar to force protection.
US cyber strategy should draw a distinction between military and civilian network defense. Although these networks interconnect at thousands of points, the military's primary responsibility should be to defend military capabilities. Critical infrastructure like power organization designed to fulfill this need.
1
The U.S. government currently controls offensive cyber operations in a manner similar to the release authority for nuclear weapons, a relic of the "mutually assured cyber destruction" concept derived from the panacea fallacy. This unwieldy process consumes significant time and resources from senior leadership. A more efficient command and control system exists in the world of special operations. Theater commanders can approve special operations in an active conflict {e.g., high-value target raids in Afghanistan), whereas covert operations in other nations like the Bin Laden into Pakistan raid must gain approval from the highest levels of government. The Department of Defense should also provide tiered approval levels for the range of cyber operations to allow theater commanders to use cyber power efficiently as a part of the overall war effort.
Much of the focus in cyber warfare has been its application in major state-on-state conflicts. The same factors that make cyber operations difficult against modem adversaries (stealth and persistence) are uniquely suited to countering terrorists and non-state actors. In the ongoing conflict against the Islamic State, the cyber domain has been used to distribute propaganda (decapitation videos) and to provide funding from states and individual donors.
The networks facilitating these transactions are susceptible to distributed denial of service and other highly persistent means. US cyber power would be quite effective in interdicting these transactions. Additionally, cyber means are effective against geographically dispersed opponents (i.e. individual members of a terrorist cell connected via the internet) in ways that traditional methods like air power are not. These efforts are most likely in progress behind the scenes, but a clear strategic focus on this line of effort would serve to bring the disparate government organizations (both in and out of the military) together towards a common purpose. By thinking of the cyber domain as analogous to the other domains and looking for its application in future state-on-state wars, the military is missing opportunities to further the goals of the nation in the present conflicts against transnational threats.
Logical fallacies continue to haunt strategic thought because of the sheer difficulty of strategy itself. The multitude of variables and considerations inherent to strategy development make it quite appealing to pick one concept as supremely dominant over all others. This appeal to emotion is exemplified by the panacea fallacy. Similarly, it is much easier to assume that what works in one domain will work in related areas of a different domain. The square peg fallacy evens out those troublesome differences by mistakenly seeing discrete portions of the strategic environment as identical parts with the same properties as a homogenous whole.
Some assumptions are necessary for strategy development, but fallacious logic can obscure key factors that represent the difference between victory and defeat.
From a strategic perspective, both the use of Stuxnet and the Sony Pictures hack can be classified as actions taken by governments against civilians in another nation to achieve an indirect effect. This type of action was analogous to strategic bombing and unrestricted submarine warfare. In the cyber domain, the effect of Stuxnet was to set back or slow the Iran nuclear program. For Sony, the effect was raising the relevance ofNorth Korea and reinforcing the regime's power over its people. In the air domain, strategic bombing never lived up to expectations that it would make land operations obsolete. In the undersea domain, the strategy of unrestricted submarine warfare saw action as a second choice three times in history and worked once. Neither of these domains ended up being the definitive in which to solve strategic problems. Even general effectiveness and contribution to overall success is highly variable based on situationally dependent factors (e.g., intelligence for cyber and air, geography for commerce raiding).
Cyberspace must serve as a venue for attack and defense in future conflicts, but in the end it is not a panacea, only another place to fight. On the one hand, the US could be caught chasing the elusive "cyber solution", an optimistic concept that eventually over~promises and under-delivers. On the other hand, forcing cyber concepts into existing military strategies could marginalize the unique aspects of cyber warfare. One side may have the advantage over the other in cyber, but in war the overall winner emerges from the results of conflict in all domains.
vi CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
potential of cyber power. The electronic links between geographically distant systems and the near-instantaneous transmission of information render cyberspace essentially place-less, which tends to complicate strategic thought. While air and undersea operations introduced a third dimension to warfare (depth and altitude), cyber operations see essentially no difference between networked computers in the same building and networked computers separated by 2000 miles. A more comprehensive idea of what constitutes a domain may serve to bridge the gap.
potential of cyber power. The electronic links between geographically distant systems and the near-instantaneous transmission of information render cyberspace essentially place-less, which tends to complicate strategic thought. While air and undersea operations introduced a third dimension to warfare (depth and altitude), cyber operations see essentially no difference between networked computers in the same building and networked computers separated by 2000 miles. A more comprehensive idea of what constitutes a domain may serve to bridge the gap.
Common sense would dictate that this cyber-attack demands a much different response than if North Korea bombed the Sony building, and calling the hacking incident an act of war confuses the issue. It is difficult to call something a warwinning weapon if its use does not necessarily correspond to a state of war.
23  
23  
David J. Lonsdale, The Nature of War in the Information Age, (New York: Frank Cass Publishing,
2004), 2. Lonsdale describes the views of several leading theorists, with prolific technology writer Winn Schwartau taking the most extreme view of future cyber dominance. Admiral William Owens' "system of systems" view of ba«lespace awareness and Martin Libicki's "mesh" construct further emphasize the role of cyberspace in military operations. 2 E. Lincoln Bonner III, "Cyber Power in 21 11 Century Joint Warfare," Joint Forces Quarterly, 74, (3nl Quarter 20 14): 72. Bonner advocates the idea of"cyber superiority" and "cyber interdiction", geographic concepts that associate cyber operations with traditional warfare roles. 3 US Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operations Planning, Joint Publication 3-0, (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, II August 2011), IV-I, http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp3_0.pdf(accessed January 28, 2015).
US Joint Chiefs of Staff, Information Operations, Joint Publication 3-13, (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 27 November 2012 incorporating Change 1 of20 November 2014) 1-5, http://www .dtic.milldoctrine/new _pubs/jp3 _13 .pdf (accessed January 28, 20 15).
Commander Submarine Forces, Undersea Watfighting, (Norfolk, VA, July 20 II), 8.
T. Edward Darner, Attacking Faulty Reasoning: A Practical Guide to Fallacy-Free Arguments (Seventh Edition),(Boston, MA: Wadsworth, 2013), 44-56.    
Philip Meilinger, editor.  The Paths of Heaven: The Evolution of Airpower Theory, (Maxwell AFB, AL: Air University Press, 1997), 470.
Darner, Attacking Faulty Reasoning, 151.   
Randy Papadopoulos, "Between Fleet Scouts and Commerce Raiders", Undersea Warfare, 1, no.4 (Spring 2005): 26.
Paul Kennedy. Engineers of Victory, (New York: Random House, 2013), 85.
Allan R. Millet and Williamson Murray, A War To Be Won, (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press), 312-313.
Mellinger, The Paths of Heaven, 476.
W. A.Jacobs, "Strategic Bombing and American National Strategy 1941-1943", Military Affairs, SO, no. 3  (July, 1986): 133.   
Ibid., 136.   
Elisabeth Bumiller and Thorn Shanker, .. Panetta Warns of Dire Threat ofCyberattack," New York Times, October II , 20 12.
Richard Clarke and Robert Knake. Cyber War, (New York: HarperCollins, 2010), 64.
Erik Gartzke, "The Myth ofCyberwar'', International Security, 38, no. 2 (Fall2013): 58. "Colin S. Gray, Making Strategic Sense ofCyber Power: Why the Sky is Not Falling (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, April2013): 5.
Eric Bradner, CNN.com, December 21  
http://www .cnn.com/20 1 4/ 1 2/21 /politics/obama-north-koreas-hack-not-war-but-cyber-vandalism/ (accessed January 2, 20 15) 20 Ibid.
A.T. Mahan, The Influence ofSea Power Upon History 1660•1783, (New York: Dover Publications, 1987). Julian S. Corbett, Some Principles of Maritime Strategy, Classics of Sea Power Series, (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1988).
Karl Lautenschlager, "The Submarine in Naval Warfare 1901-2001," International Security, 11 , no.  
(Winter,   1986(Winter,    -1987): 1 00.3 William Spruance, "The Russo-Japanese War: The Emergence of Japanese Imperial Power," Journal ofMilitary  and Strategic Studies, 6, issue 3 (Winter 2004): 2.
Lautenschlager, "The Submarine in Naval Warfare 1901-2001," 103.    
J. J . Widen, Theorist of Maritime Strategy: Sir Julian Corbett and his Contribution to Military and Naval Thought, (Surrey, England: Ashgate Publishing, 2012): 142.
Lautenschlager, "The Submarine in Naval Warfare 1901-2001," 106.   
Karl Donitz, "The Conduct of War at Sea", Division of Naval Intelligence: Washington, DC, I 946, I.
Lautenschlager, "The Submarine in Naval Warfare 1901-2001,"  
  11  Kennedy. Engineers of Victory, 50.
Papadopoulos, " Between Fleet Scouts and Commerce Raiders", 28.   
Lautenschlager, "The Submarine in Naval Warfare 1901-2001," 122.   
Ibid., 121.    
Eugene Fluckey, Thunder Below, (Chicago, IL: University ofChicago Press, 1992), 234. This WWII memoir describes the typical operating pattern of a U.S. submarine in the Pacific. Flucky's narrative that spanned five war patrols rarely included operating with another vessel of any type.
Scott Sagan, "The Origins of the Pacific War'' The Journal of InterdisciplinaryHistory, 18, no. 4 (Spring,  1988): 897.
Lizzie Collingham, Taste ofWar: World War II and the Battle for Food (New York: Penguin, 2011), 228.
Kennedy, Engineers of Victory, 12.   
In January
2015, the Joint Staff changed the name "Air-Sea Battle Concept" to "Joint Concept for Access and Maneuver in the Global Commons (JAM-GC)" to remedy the perception of excluding the Army and the land domain. The concept remains the same and will be referred to by its previous name for ease of reference and clarity.20  Air-Sea Battle Office, Air-Sea Battle: Service Collaboration to Address Anti-Access & Area Denial Challenges. (Washington, DC, May 2013), 2. 21 1bid., I.
Air-Sea Battle Office, 5.
Dustin Volz, "What a New $35 Million Agency Is Expected to Do for US Cyber Defense", Defense One Online, February I 0,
2015, http://www.defenseone.com/technology/2015/02/what-new-35-million-agency-expected-dous-cyber-defense/105048/ (accessed February 13, 2015).
I would like to thank 
Dr. Bryon Greenwald
Colonel Doug Golden
Mr. Jeffrey Turner
Lieutenant Commander John Witte is a career submarine officer. He was commissioned in 2000 following graduation from Iowa State University. LCDR Witte's first assignment at sea was as a division officer on the fast attack submarine USS ALBUQUERQUE 