# ID: 56c585c625874501af75c94b23b4ffda
# Title: Changing character of war: recommendations for competing with Russia in the information age
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
In the Information Age, nation-states compete in the space between peace and declared conflict. The most significant instrument of national power in this space is information. Russia is more able to dynamically operate in the Information Environment (IE) than the United States. Russia leveraged the information instrument of national power in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine to set conditions for overt military action. Russian New Generation Warfare activities in Ukraine from 2013-2017 frame threats the United States faces from Russia in the IE, both in the gray zone and in the event of large-scale combat operations. The fundamental problem facing the Department of Defense ability to support a whole-of-government approach to competition with Russia in the IE is a misunderstanding of information operations and the IE. Some areas in which capability gaps exist that contribute to this misunderstanding are doctrine, organization, and leadership education. Reforms in these three areas can significantly improve the defense enterprise's understanding of information and operating in the IE.
[The] Information age is changing the essence and content of modern war. 
1
There has never been a time in our history when there was so great a need for our citizens to be informed and to understand what is happening in the world. The cause of freedom is being challenged throughout the world today and propaganda is one of the most powerful weapons they have in this struggle. Deceit, distortion, and lies are systemically used by them as a matter of deliberate policy[.] 
2
The United States Department of Defense (DoD) is in the midst of a military revolution fueled by globalization, advancements in technology, and expanded access to information. The Information Age has recast society, the military, and the operational environment in which states fight wars. It has also changed how people view power.
Traditional measures of military force, gross national product, population, energy, land, and minerals have continued to dominate discussions of the balance of power. These power resources still matter, and American leadership continues to depend on them as well as on the information edge. 
3
4
Amidst this military revolution, many of United States' adversaries seized the initiative in the information environment. In his memorandum, Secretary Mattis specifically addresses that "Russia has violated the borders of nearby nations and seeks veto power over the economic, diplomatic, and security decisions of its neighbor." 
5
6
To achieve advantages in the IE, the DoD must bridge gaps in synchronization of information efforts, develop mechanisms to promote unified action in the IE, foster a shared understanding of Information Operations (IO), and embrace changes caused by the Information Age military revolution. This reform will require changes to policy, military doctrine, organizational structures, training, and leadership education of military personnel across the defense enterprise. To support this thesis, the researcher aimed to understand the evolution of IO doctrine, current organizational structures, and education on IO to identify capability gaps and make recommendations for change in these three areas.
The 2014 Ukrainian crisis stems from historical Russian involvement in the area since the mid-17th century. The arguable catalyst for the 2014 downward spiral of the Ukrainian situation was the decision by Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych not to sign an association agreement with the European Union that would lead to membership.
Russian economic pressure placed upon Yanukovych influenced this decision. 
7
6
7
To set a common understanding of terms used in this thesis, below are three significant terms that must be codified at the beginning to mitigate confusion: Information Environment. The aggregate of individuals, organizations, and systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act on information. The IE consists of three dimensions: physical, informational, and cognitive. 
8
Instruments of National Power: Diplomatic, Informational, Military, Economic.
These terms represent the U.S. instruments of national power. 10 8 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-13, Information Operations, change 1 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), ix. 9 Ibid. 
10
Governments are employing smart power when conducting statecraft today which is the balanced combination of hard and soft power to achieve national objectives. Much of this statecraft demonstrated by Russia borders on warfare, especially conflict within the "gray zone," pre-war space in the spectrum of military conflict. According to Alexander Velez-Green, a researcher focused on Russian military doctrine and though, Russia already views itself as being at war with the U.S, using a whole-of-nation approach and use of securitized media.
11
12
In support of a broad U.S. whole-of-government effort, the DoD must be trained, equipped, and prepared to counter such activities in this uneasy, steady-state environment traditionally referred to as phase zero. 
13
Source: Created by author.
Joseph Nye stated that he developed the term smart power to, "counter the misperception that soft power alone can produce effective foreign policy." He continued, "smart strategies that combine the tools of both hard and soft power" are necessary. 
14
15
[Russian] military aggression. 
18
19
20
United States values, laws, and Constitution preclude the military from leveraging information related capabilities in a manner that can dynamically compete with and defeat Russia in the IE. This adherence to democratic values will not change as freedoms of speech and of the press [information] are founding principles of the United States.
The aim of this research is to answer the following question: Are DoD reforms necessary to support a whole of government approach to competition with Russia in the IE? This question is vital to determine how the U.S. defense enterprise can address Russian threats as part of the broader United States' Government (USG) effort.
To arrive at a satisfactory answer to this question, additional research must first also answer two secondary questions that will highlight the threats in the IE and focus analysis on DoD gaps in addressing threats:
1. How did Russia leverage the information instrument of national power in conjunction with the military in Ukraine? Information operations are an important component of military operations and in all phases of an operation or campaign, including shaping activities in the steadystate. The ability to monitor, characterize, and analyze the IE, and the ability to plan and integrate IO activities in coordination with other joint operations, are critical competencies for the Joint Force.
All conventional military and Special Operations Forces must understand the requirements to shape pre-conflict environments in phase zero and how operations in the IE contribute to an overall strategic effort. Additionally, peer adversaries are unlikely in the near future to pursue open conflict with the U.S. so DoD leadership must understand how the USG and military must evolve to counter threats dynamically. The DoD must find ways to regain proactive dominance in the information environment as it relates to the battlefield. Information interlopes across all the instruments of national power, and it provides leverage for diplomatic, military, and economic efforts to achieve national security objectives. The author seeks to inform the evolution of the DoD's approach to Unified Action in future conflicts and implementation of the DoD Strategy for Operations in the Information Environment.
Given GEN Breedlove's statements about the U.S. ability to deal with Russia, one can assume that the U.S. is currently unprepared to mobilize and effectively synchronize the information instrument of national power across the USG in conjunction with the other instruments at the same level demonstrated by Russia. Russia and other adversary states have state-controlled media and the ability to influence domestic and international narratives, which is also unlikely to change.
Russia will continue to employ its Information Security Doctrine to achieve military and political objectives using NGW. Supporting this assumption is the fact that Russian President Vladimir Putin signed strategies and concepts from the new Information Security Doctrine into Russian law. 
23
While there was a shift in foreign policy under Dmitri Medvedev between 2008 and 2011 that leaned toward the West, Vladimir Putin reverted to previous anti-western foreign policy when he became president again in 2012. 
24
The author focused on Russia's smart power projection in Ukraine leading up to their 2014 incursion into Crimea, implications for the U.S. and NATO, and how the U.S. should respond as it refocuses its force to prepare for large-scale combat operations.
Russian NGW, composed of irregular warfare and information warfare activities in Crimea and Donetsk (Donbas) are the geographic and operational boundaries of this analysis. This research explores the weaponization of social media to affect cultural and social change to support Russia's NGW strategy.
23 Timothy L. Thomas, Kremlin Kontrol: Russia's Political-Military Reality (Fort  Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2017), 231. 
The author only considered unclassified open source information for this thesis.
Details about the Russo-Ukrainian War presented an issue of classification for a more indepth understanding of Russian activities, Russian intentions and capabilities to inform conclusions about United States evolution. Also, possible intelligence oversight regulations limited the depth of analysis conducted by the investigator of aspects of social media use for propaganda and deception. Unfortunately, many valuable primary sources about Russian policy and activities in Ukraine are in Russian. The author relied on secondary sources or translated copies of Russian primary source documents.
This thesis will not delve into Russian activities outside of Ukraine and Crimea nor will it address the activities of the other primary adversaries of the U.S. which are China, North Korea, Iran, and Violent Extremist Organizations. 
25
For the analysis of U.S. military capability gaps, the author only analyzed the doctrinal, organizational, and leadership education aspects of DOTMPLF-P. While policy, training and material aspects of this question remain important, other qualified researchers have either explored the technology aspect of information related capabilities including cyberspace operations, electronic warfare, and other special technical operations, or specific aspects of those IRCs are classified. Additionally, the author examined activities in the "gray zone" before open conflict erupted but did not discuss activities U.S. Special Operations Forces nor those of the Central Intelligence Agency and other agencies within the USG. Finally, the focus of analysis remained at the strategic and theater strategic level to mitigate the risk of collateral spillage.
The analysis of Russian NGW in Ukraine established a template for the successful employment of strategy, doctrine, and tactics in the IE. This research explored gaps in the DoD's ability to counter Russian operations within the IE and proposed mitigations to support a synchronized USG approach to competing with Russia. The author framed the problem of countering Russian Gray Zone aggression by looking at Russian national and military strategic objectives and methodology, then narrowed the focus to operational and tactical level examination of activities in Ukraine.
The next chapter, "Literature Review" presents relevant literature to set the context and identify gaps for the analysis that is presented in Chapter 4, "Analysis." Chapter 3, "Methodology" details the mixed methodology employed to conduct the research and explains the analytical framework that shaped chapter 4. From there, chapter 5 presents conclusions and recommendations for the DoD to adopt in the areas of doctrine, organization, and leadership education.
The research focused on Russia because the author assessed Russia as the greatest military threat in the IE based off evidence presented in the 2017 National Defense Strategy. The U.S. must compete in the IE with Russia now to influence at-risk or moderate audiences from becoming victims of Russian dis-information and disruption.
Competition with Russia in the IE should focus on building an integrated wholeof-society approach if it is to be successful. Based on delimitations, the author focused specifically on the military instrument of national power and the DoD's ability to operate in the IE as a step toward building a future unified approach. The last aspect to consider is the need not only for a whole-of-government approach developed by the U.S. but the inclusion of allies and partners in a strategic initiative in line with their national caveats and abilities.
Russia is never as strong as she looks, but Russia is never as weak as she looks.
-Russian Proverb
The author intends to define the DoD's critical capabilities, illustrate gaps in the planned execution of these capabilities, and propose mitigations to compete with and defeat adversaries in the IE. Academia and the military are replete with scholarly works on the current Russo-Ukrainian War and Russian international relations, but literature is sparse regarding unclassified IO doctrine, organization, and leadership education. The first section of this research provides context on Russian strategic and regional objectives and how it leverages the information instrument of national power to achieve progress towards those national objectives specifically in Ukraine. Included in this section is how Russia leveraged digital and social media for use in social change through active measures as part of its NGW strategy. Finally, the DoD's abilities to conduct operations within the information environment as an aspect of the military instrument of national power comprises the last section of the literature review.
To address recommendations for operations in IE, one must first understand how the adversary thinks about the problem. While there is a plethora of published information on this topic, two authors have current works in these areas that stand out: Timothy Thomas and Marcel Van Herpen. This section of the literature review will focus on their works and then transition to a refined look at the strategy employed in the IE to support operations in Ukraine. Given that NGW is a whole-of-nation strategy, there are multiple facets to it including information warfare, traditional warfare, political warfare, and economic warfare. Russia leverages these military and non-military activities in a synchronized manner to execute the strategy. The characteristics of NGW led the U.S. to coin various terms to describe Russian strategy such as "hybrid warfare" and NGW. In their study of the Russo-Ukrainian War, army officers Amos Fox and Andrew Rossow ascribe to Robert Leonhard's description of hybrid warfare in their Land Warfare paper:
27
Hybrid operations are characterized by the undeclared action that combines conventional and unconventional military operations, while coupling military and nonmilitary actions in an environment in which the distance between strategy and tactics has been significantly reduced and where information is critically important.
However, Thomas argues that the term "hybrid warfare" is a Western appellation and that according to Russian doctrine, their strategy is simply named "new-type warfare." In this thesis, the author refers to this concept as NGW. Figure 
1
28
3
3
an extension of a country's politics that consists of purposeful, comprehensive, and methodical informational impacts against foreign information targets in order to achieve political, economic, territorial, national, religious and other goals with minimal loss of life and physical damage and without occupation of foreign soil while protecting its own information sources. 
29
30
Specific 
Mattis expanded the language from his guidance memorandum to the DoD in his description of the Russian threat that essentially matches strategy for NGW: Russia seeks veto authority over nations on its periphery in terms of their governmental, economic, and diplomatic decisions, to shatter the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and change European and Middle East security and economic structures to its favor. The use of emerging technologies to discredit and subvert democratic processes in Georgia, Crimea, and eastern Ukraine is concern enough, but when coupled with its expanding and modernizing nuclear arsenal the challenge is clear. 
33
One of these mechanisms was active measures, a Soviet-era term used to describe information, psychological, or political means conducted to advance Soviet foreign policy goals and extend influence throughout the world. 
34
• Undermine the Western political narrative and trans-Atlantic institutions;
• Sow discord and divisions with countries • Blur the line between fact and fiction. 
35
36
A complex of undertakings aimed at concealing troops (forces) and assets from the enemy and deceiving it regarding the presence, disposition make-up, state, actions, and intentions of troops (forces), as well as the plans of the command; a type of battle (operational) support. 
37
42
40
41
42 Jolanta Darczewska, "Russia's Armed Forces on the Information War Front: Strategic Documents" (OSW Studies, Warsaw, June 2016), 47.
Literature abounds on the Russo-Ukrainian War regarding Russian gray zone activities, IW, and leverage of social media to set conditions for military activity. Many scholarly works exist on political warfare, active measures, influence via social media, and tactical employment of information capabilities. These various academic works address many aspects of information activities of NGW in Ukraine at strategic, operational, and tactical levels.
At the strategic level, Russia exerted economic and political pressure on Ukrainian President Yanukovych which led to the crisis in 2014. Echoing Thomas's conclusions, Leonhard concludes that the Russian efforts in Ukraine:
[Were] [d]riven by a desire to roll back Western encroachment into the Russian sphere of influence, the current generation of Russian leaders has crafted a multidisciplinary art and science of unconventional warfare. Capitalizing on deception, psychological manipulation, and domination of the information domain, their approach represents a notable threat to Western security. The new forms of Russian unconventional warfare challenge the structure of the NATO Charter, because they obviate the appearance of "armed invasion." 
43
The RAND Corporation published a study in 2018 on Russia's use of social media in Europe. Entitled Russian Social Media Influence: Understanding Russian Propaganda in Eastern Europe, this study reviewed the 40 most relevant articles found through keyword searches on Google and Google Scholar to determine the themes and methodology used by Russia in Ukraine and other European states. Of the study's objectives, two are relevant to this paper's primary and secondary research questions. The RAND researchers sought to understand the nature of Russia's social media propaganda and they sought to understand challenges for Western policy-makers to mitigate Russian influence in the region. 
44
45
46
A triple role is envisaged for EW units in the Russian land forces. The first is the disruption of enemy command-and-control networks and communications channels. The second is countering an adversary's intelligence, reconnaissance and surveillance activities with active and/or passive radar-based techniques. The third is defending friendly forces against enemy artillery, missile and air-dropped munitions. 
In this section, the author focused on DoD policy, joint and service doctrine, and scholarly writing regarding the organization and education of IO as it relates to military officer education. Reinforcing a reason for the misunderstanding of IO, Paul Scharre proffers that one of the three main obstacles to adaptation to future warfare is "cultural resistance within elements of the military to new paradigms of warfighting." 48 While a plethora of published literature exists on the material aspects of IO, specifically with cyberspace operations and electronic warfare, there is limited published information s on the education of IO in the DoD. The majority of published material that does exist is generally is more than ten years old with some notable exceptions from IO officers Lieutenant Colonel Christopher Lowe, Colonel Maxwell Thibodaux, and Colonel Mark Vertuli.
Before reviewing doctrinal definitions, let's define the dimension of the IE and explain how IO achieves effects in the environment and how gaps and misunderstanding can exist due to its complexity. Physical, informational, and cognitive dimensions comprise the IE. First, the physical dimension consists of the tangible things in the realworld like "[command and control (C2)] systems, key decision makers, and supporting infrastructure that enable individuals and organizations to create effects." 49 Some things included in this dimension of the IE are humans, end-user devices like cellular phones 48 Paul Scharre, "Readying the U.S. Military for Future Warfare" (Testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, 30 January 2018), accessed 23 March 2018, https://www.cnas.org/publications/congressional-testimony/paul-scharretestimony-before-hasc-2.
49 Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 3-13, Information Operations, I-2. and laptops, computer servers, radio broadcast towers, transmitters and receivers, and Command and Control (C2) locations. Next, the informational dimension is the unseen realm of "where and how information is collected, processed, stored, disseminated, and protected." 50 It is the command and control of entities and milieu of commander's intent.
Finally, the cognitive dimension: encompasses the minds of those who transmit, receive, and . . . act on information. It refers to individuals' or groups' information processing, perception, judgment, and decision making . . . this dimension constitutes the most important component of the [IE]. 
51
The integrated employment, during military operations, of information-related capabilities [IRCs], in concert with other lines of operation, to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp the decisionmaking of adversaries, or potential adversaries, while protecting our own. 
52
Information Operations is the integration, coordination, and synchronization of all actions taken in the information environment to affect a target audience's behavior in order to create an operational advantage for the commander. 53 50 Ibid., I-3. Joint doctrine defines IRC and the application framework of them: IRCs are the tools, techniques, or activities that affect any of the three dimensions of the information environment. The joint force (means) employs IRCs (ways) to affect the information provided to or disseminated from the target audience (TA) in the physical and informational dimensions of the information environment to affect decision making. 
54
IRCs are those capabilities that generate effects in and through the information environment, but these effects are almost always accomplished in combination with other information-related capabilities. Only through their effective synchronization can commanders gain a decisive advantage over adversaries, threats, and enemies in the information environment. While capabilities such as military information support operations, combat camera, military deception, operations security and cyberspace operations are readily considered informationrelated, commanders consider any capability an IRC that is employed to create effects and operationally-desirable conditions within a dimension of the information environment. 
55
56
While the need for tactical deception will be critical in the event of large-scale combat operations, the land forces are not proficient in it. 
57
Four main subordinate units comprised the 23rd Special Troops: a signal deception company, an engineer camouflage battalion, a combat engineer company, and a sonic deception company. 
58
59
60
61
Administrative data served as the context for analysis and identification of possible trends amongst the services and branches, but the data was not used to present stratified data of survey responses. The author only presented the numbers of each type of response for the Likert Scale and multiple-choice questions in chapter 4. The instrument did not collect any other data as it could be collated and reveal personally identifiable information that would violate the intent of participant anonymity. Further, the author redacted any free responses to the survey that could potentially lead to deductive identification of the respondent from formal analysis.
Chapter 4, "Analysis," presents survey data in tables depicting the Likert scale responses broken down by raw numbers of respondents, the multiple-choice responses by percentage-highlighting the correct responses, and the open-ended responses were only used to address trends or reinforce assertions, as long as doing so did not increase risk to the participant's confidentiality. Due to a small return rate of the survey instrument, the generated data would not be valuable as discrete evidence to support the author's assertions. However, the triangulation of the survey data, interviews, and document reviews still support a stronger argument, as a whole.
Protection of participants was paramount during research involving interaction with personnel. Before execution of interviews and the online survey, an Institutional Review Board reviewed the research instruments to ensure that the risk to subjects was mitigated and that the instruments were both valid and would contribute to the research.
The author gained documented informed consent from interviewees and notified them that their responses would remain secure and remarks attributed as they desired. All interviewees had the opportunity to read the transcripts of the interviews to add, edit, or redact content and review the final draft of this research to issue final consent to include and attribute their responses. If an interviewee did not want a particular response attributed, the investigator determined whether the information was critical to the research. If the information was critical, the investigator presented the information in a manner that did not identify the interviewee, referencing a generic job title or "senior official," for example. If the information was not critical, the investigator sought other sources for the information or removed it from the thesis. Each interviewee had the option to withdraw consent at any time before publication. Survey respondents issued consent by their participation in the survey.
For interviews, the investigator informed the interviewee of the research purpose and the steps taken to protect their confidentiality to gain signatures on the consent form.
The author transcribed audio recordings obtained with permission from the interviewees.
Upon completion of transcription, the investigator destroyed the audio recordings to mitigate additional risk to the participant's confidentiality when desired.
For surveys, the only administrative data collected was the participant's branch of service, career field or control branch, and functional area, if applicable. Additional information included the number of years each participant served at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels, as well as previous experience with IO. The instrument collected this information to inform a better qualitative analysis of the newly generated data. No party collected additional demographic information from the participants during this research. The author waived documented informed consent to add an additional layer of protection to participants as the signed consent forms would be the only identifiable 
Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia and Ukraine engaged in competition that began as information warfare but in 2014 escalated to kinetic operations.
First, Russia exacerbated political and social unrest by leveraging diplomatic, informational, and economic instruments of power in an undeclared conflict with Ukraine. Then Russia shaped the operational and information environments domestically by garnering the support and will of the Russian people; regionally, by demonstrating power and perception of legitimacy--at least to ethnic Russian audiences outside Russia; internationally, by doggedly pursuing a perception of legitimacy and demonstrating the capacity to be an influential power globally. Finally, Russia executed overt military operations beginning with the seizure and annexation of Crimea in 2014 followed by the invasion into eastern Ukraine by taking control of the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. The information strategy supporting these operations included employment of multiple IRCs including psychological operations, deception, electronic warfare, cyberspace operations, public affairs, and intelligence.
To execute this information strategy, Russia used various themes designed for specific audiences to actively or passively support future Russian activities. The government centrally created their themes, and subordinate entities-military and nonmilitary, in accordance with NGW-executed information warfare in a decentralized manner. Russian intelligence and special operations personnel executed this shaping in Ukraine through the use of digital and social media for propaganda purposes under the guise of social activism and change as well as by the development of proxy and surrogate networks. Initially, these activities were covert. However, Russian soldiers posted selfies to social media and inadvertently helped expose Russian military involvement in Ukraine. 
64
Consistent with the Russian way of war, the strategic approach to the information component of their NGW is aggressiveness and brute force that is bold, opportunistic and dynamic, and unconstrained by the truth. Another characteristic that gives Russia's information strategy strength is the decentralized execution of centralized themes without a cumbersome bureaucratic approval process. 
65
To better understand how Russia implemented NGW in Ukraine, this paper uses the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of warfare as lenses. At the strategic level, Russia's capacity for mass delivery of content online and via traditional media outlets like television, radio, and print is significant. Putin has consolidated information efforts 64 James M. Davitch, "Open Sources for the Information Age: Or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Unclassified Data," Joint Forces Quarterly, no. 87 (4th Quarter 2017): 21. across multiple vectors to deliver disinformation to internal and external populations. For the near-external populations, mostly Russians in frontier countries, Russian media is the only information that caters to their language instead of the local media. If audiences only have access to one vector of information, they base their perceptions upon that narrative.
They are also less likely to question the portrayed narrative or view alternate narratives.
Russia may employ violence to achieve information effects. For example, armed men seized the television and radio stations in areas of Ukraine, replacing Ukrainian channels with Rossiya 24, a Russian news channel. 
66
At the operational level, use of surrogates and proxies to facilitate information warfare activity is another tool Russia employed. Local proxies provided credibility to the narrative, such as the Russian theme of "Novorossiya" or "New Russia" as a moniker for Eastern Ukraine. Also, Russia used paramilitary contractors in Ukraine to add a level of deniability to their activities. While many of these contractors could be prior service military or military-trained, their status as independent contractors allows more options within the geopolitical realm. For example, the recent deaths of Russian contractors in Syria who facilitated attacks on U.S. uniformed forces allowed both Russia and the U.S. 
66
to refrain from overt military escalation due to the non-official capacity of the contractors.
At the tactical level, Russia employed technological capabilities in Ukraine for electronic warfare that can disrupt unit operations and enable friendly maneuver. These 
Source: Created by author.
Ultimately, the threats identified in the case study are gray zone activities with surrogates and proxies, exploitation of social media, the EW and counterintelligence threat at the tactical level. These tactical threats include communication and navigation disruption, targeting of emissions with intelligence sensors that cue artillery barrages and airstrikes, PSYOP delivery via text message on personal devices, and foreign intelligence entity threats collecting on servicemembers via social media. This list is not all inclusive but serves as a basis against which to analyze DoD capability gaps within doctrine, organization, and leadership education to address these threats in the IE. Whether in the gray zone or large-scale combat operations, the DoD must be prepared to overmatch or counter these threats as part of its deterrence strategy and operations planning.
IO is a capability on par with the other IRCs rather than a planning function to synchronize the discrete activities of the IRCs.
The USG must adopt a more effective whole of government or whole of nation approach to compete in the IE. The DoD must modernize and adapt to support synchronized unified action across the instruments of national power. Within the DoD, gaps exist in doctrine, organization, and education that present opportunities for reform to compete with Russia in the IE.
While change 1 to JP 1-0 introduces "Information" as a new joint function, it does not define it well with regard to its use. Unconventional Warfare, including sensitive activities and covert action, are covered in JP 3-05. Army IO doctrine is the most prevalently influential of the services and appears to provide the bulk of input to joint IO doctrine. Army doctrine spread information related capability tasks across multiple Warfighting Functions. Except for FM 3-13 Information Operations, multiple Army manuals confuse IO and IRCs, perpetuating confusion amongst servicemembers. For example, Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 6-0 Mission Command lists staff tasks and additional tasks in the mission command warfighting function: synchronize information-related capabilities, conduct cyber electromagnetic activities, conduct military deception, and conduct civil affairs. 
72
activities detracts from the force's understanding of IO. This oversight also fosters a misconception that IO is "themes and messages" and that "cyber" is something unique and discrete from IO.
In this section, the author traces the evolution of definitions and doctrine through the emergence of IO in policy and doctrine from the mid-1990s to the current generation.
Notable in figure 
4
The joint and service-specific doctrine for IO is consistent and clear but the capstone, operational and tactics doctrine, sows confusion on IO through incorrect diction.  The degree of information superiority that allows the possessor to use information systems and capabilities to achieve an operational advantage in a conflict or to control the situation in operations short of war, while denying those capabilities to the adversary. 
74
This field manual highlights two lines of effort: the inform line of effort and the influence line of effort. The manual delineates the functions between inform and influence. As a result of the Global War on Terrorism and the heavy focus for the Army on counterinsurgency doctrine, much of the focus for IO in this version of FM 3-13 became population-centric, rather than adversary decisionmaker-centric in purpose.
Soldier-Leader Engagement/Key Leader Engagement emerged as an IRC, and commanders of tactical units relegated the FA30s to that role. 
75
Commanders have responsibility to conduct public affairs operations that inform U.S. audiences about their military operations to the fullest extent possible. Using information-related capabilities such as public affairs, MISO, civil affairs operations, and others enables the commander to also inform foreign audiences and to provide Army support to strategic communication. Commanders balance informing audiences about Army operations with the responsibility to protect those operations and their troops through OPSEC. 
76
IIA enable commanders in integrating and synchronizing the various means of influence to support operations. U.S. forces strictly limit their influence activities to foreign audiences. Influence activities typically focus on persuading selected foreign audiences to support U.S. objectives or to persuade those audiences to stop supporting the adversary or enemy. To accomplish operational objectives effectively, commanders may direct efforts to shape, sway, or alter foreign audience behaviors. 
77
This omission may have been a deliberate decision in an attempt to split IO into Inform and Influence Activities and Cyber Electromagnetic Activities.
In figure 
5
76 Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-13, Inform and Influence Activities (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), 1-2. 77 Ibid. The 2008 version of the Army's capstone doctrine, FM 3-0 Unified Land Operations, was significant to IO. It brought information and civil support tasks to the force on par with the offense and defense. 
78
78
2017 Version of FM 3-0, Operations This manual directs significantly more attention to the IE and IO than previous incarnations. The manual does not confuse IO with IRCs. Figure 
6
6
Given that figure 
6
79
80
In addition to the conflicting terminology with regard to IO and IRCs, a current disconnect exists between joint doctrine, which has Information as a Joint Function, and Army doctrine, which has information as an element of combat power. Therefore, Army doctrine does not yet align with joint doctrine. Implications for information not becoming a Warfighting Function is that there are not dedicated resources like a Center of Excellence to act as the proponent of the function, set the education of its professionals, and to codify its specific doctrine.  With regard to Service policy and organization, the Army places the function of the IO professional under the Operations, or S/G3 staff directorate. In the past, it stood alone as the S/G7 directorate. The lowest echelon at which an IO professional serves is the division-level in conventional Army units. With the loss of IO professionals at the brigade level, commanders and staffs do not realize how they could leverage information related capabilities to enable large-scale combat operations, or recognize and respond to threats at the tactical level.
Navy policy on IW resides in the N2 and N6, intelligence and communications staff directorates, respectively, under the umbrella of "information dominance." Navy IO focuses predominantly on EW and Cyberspace IRCs. In the context of Lowe's monograph, it makes sense that the Navy's approach to IO is more focused on the original functional design of IO from the Cold War that targeted ability to disrupt adversary command and control. The other land component force that interacts with the human terrain in operations is the Marine Corps. While the Marine Corps does not have a dedicated career field for IO, the Marine staffs place their planner with responsibility for IO in the future operations cell of the S/G3. 
81
Of the five "IO commands" in the defense enterprise, three of them are under the operational control of the service component cyber command. The Army's 1st IOC, located at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, is subordinate to Army Cyber (ARCYBER) and the The Naval Information Operations Center, located in Norfolk, Virginia is under Fleet Cyber Command. The Air Force's 688th Cyber Wing, located in San Antonio, Texas is subordinate to 24th Air Force, the Air Force cyber component. The 688th's mission is to "operate, integrate and win in the cyberspace, electromagnetic spectrum and space domains."
82
The Joint Information Operations Warfare Center (JIOWC) is subordinate directly to the Joint Staff as a Chairman's Controlled Activity. In years past, the JIOWC provided trained and ready IO planning capacity to joint operational forces, but recently the JIOWC refocused its efforts to directly supporting the Joint Staff. 
83
There are two functional combatant commands that have significant potential relevance to information operations and the information environment: USCYBERCOM and United States Special Operations Command. The USCYBERCOM has responsibility for conducting operations in the cyberspace operational domain and is wholly focused on the IE. The United States Special Operations Command has 11 doctrinal core activities of which nearly all impact the IE including IO, MISO, Unconventional Warfare, and Civil Affairs Operations, Foreign Internal Defense, Foreign Humanitarian Assistance and Security Force Assistance. These activities could create opportunities for strategic and operational advantages during pre-conflict periods, or the "gray zone."
The CJCSI 3210.01C states, "PME institutions are responsible for IO-focused education for members of the general military population and the [Joint IO Force]." 
84
Information operations planners often hear, "just go do some IO," or "what is IO doing about this?" Many do not even understand that the FA30/IO Officer is merely a staff officer charged with the coordination and integration of the activities of the IRCs in a synchronized manner to best support the commander's operations. An IO Officer does not have authority to direct execution of activities, nor does he or she own the capability that does execute. PME has stagnated, focused more on the accomplishment of mandatory credit at the expense of lethality and ingenuity. We will emphasize intellectual leadership and military professionalism in the art and science of warfighting, deepening our knowledge of history while embracing new technology and techniques to counter competitors. PME will emphasize independence of action in warfighting concepts to lessen the impact of degraded/lost communications in combat. PME is to be used as a strategic asset to build trust and interoperability across the Joint Forces and with allied and partner forces.  In table 4, the CJCSI outlines the rank and education requirements for Joint IO billets at the various echelons of headquarters. Figure 
8
At the Joint Forces Staff College in Norfolk, Virginia, the personnel selected to attend the Joint Information Operations Planner Course spend four weeks delving into joint information operations with a curriculum based on joint doctrine and with additional 88 LTC Amy Burrows, interview by the author, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 24 April,  2018.  emphasis placed upon Joint IO, Joint OPSEC, and Joint MILDEC. However, attendance is primarily for personnel currently assigned to Joint IO billets or identified for that role in a future assignment.  directorate of a headquarters. 
89
The paradox of war is that an enemy will attack any perceived weakness. So we in America cannot adopt a single preclusive form of warfare. Rather we must be able to fight across the spectrum of conflict.
-Secretary of Defense James Mattis, attributed to Colin Gray In conclusion, Russia found initial success in its strategy in Ukraine but this success hinged on two factors: deniability of its involvement and the unpreparedness of Ukrainian forces to operate on par with Russian forces in the operational and information environment. As intelligence experts exposed Russian involvement to the international community, Russia lost some freedom of action in the IE and lost legitimacy to international audiences. However, to domestic and some regional audiences' acceptance of the Russian identity narrative, the strategy gained legitimacy as ethnic Russians actively or passively supported Russia actions. Additionally, once Ukrainian forces adapted to Russian tactics of employing electronic warfare and other information capabilities in conjunction with kinetic activity, Russia lost the initiative and the Russo-Ukrainian war devolved into a "frozen conflict."
A question arises from this analysis: Can Russia replicate this success? The answer will likely depend on geography, ideological similarities, and military capability.
Russia may only find success with NGW in frontier states because of the ethnic, religious, and language ties. The most likely venue in which NGW could occur in the future is the Baltic states. South American and Middle Eastern audiences will likely not be receptive to the Russian identity narrative, so Russia will have to modify its  The second organizational recommendation is to reactivate an army tactical deception unit akin to the 23rd Special Troops from World War II. This establishment or reactivation would set conditions for future large-scale combat operations against an adversary like Russia. While this unit would require additional capabilities to account for advanced technology on the battlefield, the concept remains valid. The theater army should control this unit, and the theater commander would provide the unit with priorities of support for subordinate units. Inherent in the new capabilities would be social media exploitation and authority to conduct operations in the IE within the theater commander's intent The third organizational recommendation is to add an FA30 back into brigade combat teams or modify to unit tables of organization and equipment of maneuver brigades to add a requirement for certain positions in the operations and intelligence staff directorates have the IO qualification. There are multiple Information Capability Specialists organic to an army brigade, but no professional IO officer to coordinate and integrate their employment in support of the commander's plan. It is ludicrous to proffer that a staff officer without formal IO training from the operations staff section would assume the duties of the IO officer in addition to what their billet calls for-especially with the complexity of the IE and the potential strategic ramifications of a misstep at the tactical level. Further, the officers in that section are likely from CGSC or the Captain Career Course and are not educated adequately to understand operations in the IE. The MISO, PA, or EW officers organic to brigades that might fill the role of IO officer are more likely to have a better understanding than maneuverists, but might tend toward their IRC specialty rather than on maximizing the breadth of capabilities that could be brought to bear.
Finally, more emphasis on education must be a priority. Formally train operations and intelligence personnel in IO to generate a better understanding of IO in the across the warfighting functions, and to improve interoperability with IO planners on unit staffs to better plan and assess the effectiveness of operations in the IE. Education on IO cannot simply be an offered elective, but an ingrained part of the curriculum. 
94
95
While none of these recommendations are near-term solutions to addressing threats in the IE, that is the nature of IO. It takes time to see effects from IO and changing a military culture of technology and firepower to appreciate the implications of the IE is no different. If the DoD adopts any of these recommendations of doctrine, organization, and education reform, there will be a marked improvement of the force to compete with 
95
Even during this research, evidence emerged about Russian involvement in U.S. election meddling via social media campaigns on Twitter and Facebook. This reporting indicates that Russia will continue to wage NGW against the U.S. in a manner that is low cost with high return on investment. This approach would allow Russia to continue eroding U.S. military operational advantage by detracting from the political and military 96 Michael Jackson, Congressional Information Paper: Russia Information Group (RIG), (White Paper, March 14, 2017). readiness through gray zone activities, which is simply steady state information warfare for Russia. Through greater understanding of the IE, the military, the government, and society can better work in a unified manner towards securing national interests and develop a more resilient society against the disinformation campaigns of Russia and other adversaries.
Active Measures. Soviet-era term used to describe information, psychological, or political means conducted to advance Soviet foreign policy goals and extend influence throughout the world.
Capabilities-Based Assessment. Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leader Education, Personnel, Facilities, and Policy (DOTMLPF-P). These terms are aspects of the analysis process to identify capabilities gaps as part of the DoD Force Management Process.
Covert action. Activity or activities of the United States Government to influence political, economic or military conditions abroad, where it is intended that the role of the United States Government will not be apparent or acknowledged publicly.
Global Engagement Center. A forward-looking, innovative organization that can shift focus quickly to remain responsive to agile adversaries. The GEC leverages data science, cutting-edge advertising technologies, and top talent from the private sector. With detailees from across the interagency, the GEC coordinates messaging efforts to ensure they are streamlined and to eliminate duplication.
Gray Zone. Competitive interactions among and within state and non-state actors that fall between the traditional war and peace duality.
Information Environment. The aggregate of individuals, organizations, and systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act on information. The IE consists of three dimensions: physical, informational, and cognitive.
Information Operations. The integrated employment, during military operations, of information-related capabilities, in concert with other lines of operation, to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp the decisionmaking of adversaries, or potential adversaries, while protecting our own.
Information Warfare. The use of technical and influential means to influence an adversary to act against their own interests.
Information Related Capabilities. Tools, techniques, or activities employed within a dimension of the information environment that can be used to create effects and operationally desired conditions.
Informational instrument of national power. Information remains an important instrument of national power and a strategic resource critical to national security. Previously considered in the context of traditional nation-states, the concept of information as an instrument of national power extends to non-state actors-such as terrorists and transnational criminal groups-that are using information to further their causes and undermine those of the USG and our allies. DOD operates in a operating through or with an underground, auxiliary, and guerrilla force in a denied area.
U.S. Information Agency. Cold War era agency responsible for monitoring and influencing opinion abroad of the United States and its objectives.
Survey Question 1 Results ...............................................................................71 CHAPTER 1
Van Herpen argues that three components, mimetis, rollback, and invention comprise the new Russian "soft-power offensive." Declaring invention the most important, he defines it as, "a strategy to invent new soft-power strategies, making ample use of the possibilities offered by the open Western societies." 31 This soft-power offensive and the idea of "soft power in a velvet glove" similarly describes what the National Endowment for Democracy's Christopher Walker and Jessica Ludwig coined as "sharp power." 32 These analyses continued to demonstrate that Russian aggression is problematic and will be deceptive and coercive. 30 Scott Harr, "Expanding Tolstoy and Shrinking Dostoyevsky," Military Review (September-October 2017): 45.
Van Herpen argues that three components, mimetis, rollback, and invention comprise the new Russian "soft-power offensive." Declaring invention the most important, he defines it as, "a strategy to invent new soft-power strategies, making ample use of the possibilities offered by the open Western societies." 31 This soft-power offensive and the idea of "soft power in a velvet glove" similarly describes what the National Endowment for Democracy's Christopher Walker and Jessica Ludwig coined as "sharp power." 32 These analyses continued to demonstrate that Russian aggression is problematic and will be deceptive and coercive. 30 Scott Harr, "Expanding Tolstoy and Shrinking Dostoyevsky," Military Review (September-October 2017): 45.
90  
90  
92 COL Mark D. Vertuli, interview by the author via telephone, Leavenworth,
92 COL Mark D. Vertuli, interview by the author via telephone, Leavenworth,
В.К. Новиков, С.В. Голубчиков, Вестник, Вестник, 3 (60),
2017, стр. 10-16. [V. K. Novikov and S. V. Golubchikov, "Color Revolutions in Russia: Possibility and Reality," Vestnik, 3 (60) (2017): 10-16]. 2 Harry S. Truman, "Address on Foreign Policy at a Luncheon of the American Society of Newspaper Editors," 20 April, 1950, accessed 29 April, 2018, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=13768.
Joseph S. Nye and William A. Owens, "America's Information Edge," Foreign Affairs, March 1996, accessed 25 April, 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/ united-states/1996-03-01/americas-information-edge.
Secretary of Defense, Guidance from Secretary Jim Mattis (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, October 2017), 1.
Ibid.   
Alexander Velez-Green, "The United States and Russia Are Already at War," Small Wars Journal, accessed 26 April, 2018, http://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/theunited-states-and-russia-are-already-at-war.
12 James Dubik and Nic Vincent, America's Global Competitions: The Gray Zone in Context (Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of War, 2018),
9.13 Department of Defense, Strategy for Operations in the Information Environment (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016), 5.
U.S. Congress, House, Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act of 2016, H.R.5181.
Department of Defense, Strategy for Operations in the InformationEnvironment.
Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 3.
Department of Defense, Strategy for Operations in the Information Environment, 6.
President of the United States, National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House, 2017), 25.
Thomas, Kremlin Kontrol, 54.    
Amos Fox and Andrew Rossow, Making Sense of Russian Hybrid Warfare: A Brief Assessment of the Russo Ukrainian War (Arlington, VA: Institute of Land Warfare, 2017), 3.
Scott Boston and Dara Massicot. The Russian Way of Warfare: A Primer (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 9.
В.К.Новиков, С.В. Голубчиков, 10-16.   
Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America, 2.
Scott Marler, "Russian Weaponization of Information and Influence in the Baltic States" (Master's Thesis, Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2017), 69.
Van Herpen, Putin's Propaganda Machine, 34.   
Christopher Lowe, "From 'Battle' to 'Battle of Ideas': The Meaning and Misunderstanding of Information Operations" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2010), 45.
Mark D. Vertuli, "A Myth Retold: The Army's MILDEC Program in the 21st Century," IO Sphere (Fall 2015): 19.
Johnathan Gawne, Ghosts of the ETO: American Tactical Deception Units in the European Theater ofOperations 1944-1945 (Havertown, PA: CASEMATE, 2002), 305.
MAJ Jerome Petersen, interview by the author, Fort Leavenworth,KS, 27  April, 2018.   
Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 100-6, Information Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, August 1996), 1-9.
MAJ Jerome Petersen, interview by the author, Fort Leavenworth,KS, 27  April, 2018.   
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3210.01C, Joint Information Operations Proponent (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), E-2.
U.S. Fleet Cyber Command, "Homepage," accessed 29 April, 2018, www.public.navy.mil/fcc-c10f/Pages/home.aspx.
MAJ Jerome Petersen, interview by the author, Fort Leavenworth,KS, 27  April, 2018.   
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, CJCSI 3210.01C, Joint Information Operations Proponent, A-8.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, CJCSI 3210.01C, Joint Information Operations Proponent, D-4.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2006), xv.
Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America, 8.
Department of Defense, Strategy for Operations in the Information Environment, 14.
Vertuli, interview by the author via telephone, Fort Leavenworth,KS, 25 April,  2018.   
dynamic age of interconnected global networks and evolving social media platforms. Every DOD action that is planned or executed, word that is written or spoken, and image that is displayed or relayed, communicates the intent of DOD, and by extension the USG, with the resulting potential for strategic effects.
Instruments of National Power: Diplomatic, Informational, Military, Economic. These terms represent the U.S. instruments of national power.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
The author employed mixed methods research design methodology to answer the primary and secondary research questions: a qualitative case study on Russian strategy and activities in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine from 2013 to 2017 through compilation and analysis of scholarly research. The author attained additional information on the Russo-Ukrainian War from semi-structured interviews with United States European Command personnel into the analysis of Russian activities. Additionally, the author conducted interviews with IO personnel to gain perspective on current information operations doctrine and decision making affecting IO. Additionally, the author conducted a partial DOTMLPF-P review of current and historical joint and service doctrine, the DoD IO enterprise organizational structure, and Professional Military Education (PME) curricula.
Within the case study, the author reviewed Russian strategic objectives and its employment of capabilities in support of NGW to demonstrate how Russia employed information to support military and national objectives. For qualitative and quantitative analysis of DoD capabilities, the author conducted interviews, compiled and analyzed documents and survey data on U.S. doctrine, organization, leadership education relating to information operations and operations in the information environment comprised the documentation review to identify gaps in U.S. capability to respond to Russian threats. Specific to doctrine review, the author sought to identify inconsistencies in terminology and contradictions across the service and joint manuals to best understanding why the joint force has a fundamental misunderstanding of IO and to proffer recommendations. procedure after reading the purpose of the study and explaining the protection of their personally identifiable information.
The mixed methods approach to this research using a case study and qualitative analysis sought to provide a more holistic view of the problem and the use of interviews and surveys served as an attempt to triangulate and attain a more comprehensive foundation of knowledge on which to base recommendations. With the methodology outlined in this chapter, the next chapter comprised analysis of each secondary question and analyzed subcomponents of the questions to arrive at answers to synthesize into an answer for the primary research question about DoD reform to support a whole-ofgovernment approach to competition with Russia in the IE.
The DoD Strategy for Operations in the Information Environment, published in 2016, outlined near; mid; and long-term outcome for the strategy. The near-term, between six and 18 months, focused on the "rapid, prioritized, high-impact changes to existing policy, doctrine, and professional military education and assessment efforts." 
68
69
70
71
The author proffers three recommendations for organizational reform exist as a result of this research. The DoD should request legislation to change USCYBERCOM to United States Information Command (USINFOCOM) at Fort Meade, Maryland, as organizational change may force cultural change in thinking; reestablish tactical deception units, which can support theater efforts against near-peer adversaries in declared conflict; and modify brigade tables of organization and equipment to include a Functional Area 30-IO officer, or recode some maneuver and intelligence officer billets to include IO qualification requirements for that billet.
First, while this idea may sound heretical and onerous, reorganization of USCYBERCOM to be responsible for DoD Information Operations might provide the impetus to unify service efforts in the IE to best support a whole-of-government approach commander of the joint cyber component commander, the Deputy Commanding General-Cyber, depicted in figure 
10
Military Information Support Operations. Planned operations to convey selected information and indicators to foreign audiences to influence their emotions, motives, objective reasoning, and ultimately the behavior of foreign governments, organizations, groups, and individuals in a manner favorable to the originator's objectives.
Perception Management. Actions to convey and/or deny selected information and indicators to foreign audiences to influence their emotions, motives, and objective reasoning; and to intelligence systems and leaders at all levels to influence official estimates, ultimately resulting in foreign behaviors and official actions favorable to the originator's objectives. In various ways, perception management combines truth projection, operations security, cover and deception, and psychological operations. (Joint Pub 3-13; 1998)   Propaganda. An activity within the range of covert action; political technique of disseminating information that has been created with a specific political outcome in mind; used to support individuals or groups friendly to one's own side or to undermine one's opponents; can also be used to create false rumors of political unrest, economic shortages, or direct attacks on individuals.
Reflexive Control. A means of conveying to a partner or an opponent specially prepared information to incline him to voluntarily make the predetermined decision desired by the initiator of the action.
Sharp Power. The deceptive use of information for hostile purposes; a type of hard power which pierces, penetrates, or perforates the political and information environments in the targeted countries.
Social Media. Means of interaction within the cyber domain among users in which they create, share, and exchange information and ideas in virtual communities and networks.
Soft Power. A persuasive approach to international relations, typically involving the use of economic or cultural influence to change behavior through attraction, distinct from overt diplomatic or military coercion.
Unconventional Warfare. Activities conducted to enable a resistance movement or insurgency to coerce, disrupt, or overthrow a government or occupying power by APPENDIX A
"This survey will provide data on possible gaps in Information Operations (IO) capabilities with regard to doctrine, organizations, training, and leadership education via Professional Military Education. Your input and feedback will be valuable to identifying gaps and informing possible solutions to improve overall efforts in the operational and information environments to support commanders. This survey is voluntary and anonymous. The requested personal information will provide context to your response but will not identify you. Provision of this information is voluntary but will enhance the analysis of responses. This personal data will not be shared outside of this study and will be destroyed upon its completion. The researcher will not make any attempt to identify you from your administrative data or your responses.
Do not discuss For Official Use Only or classified information in this survey. All responses must be unclassified.
By clicking "Next" you affirm your consent to participate in this survey and will adhere to the conditions stated above.
If you have any questions regarding this request for consent and this survey, contact CPT Nicholas Kane at nicholas.j.kane6.mil@mail.mil" Q1: The formal instruction I received on Information Operations at Professional Military Education has been sufficient. Why? Likert Scale: Strongly Disagree, Disagree, Neutral, Agree, Strongly Agree Free Response: Q2: The addition of Information as a Joint Function in JP 3-0 is clearly defined. Why? 