# ID: 570d63b6c23045ca9d9e1648eeb6cd91
# Title: Russian Forces in the Western Military District
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
In this CNA Occasional Paper, Konrad Muzyka provides an in-depth assessment of Russia's Western Military District, which consists of robust forces spanning regions including St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kursk, and Kaliningrad. Muzyka's analysis provides an up-to-date overview of the current force structure and posture of this military district, which underwent deep structural reforms between 2013 and 2019 to better address Western threats. These forces include the 6th and 20th Combined Arms Armies, the 1st Guards Tank Army, three airborne divisions, the 6th Air and Air Defense Army, and a self-sufficient force in the Kaliningrad exclave. Muzyka also discusses the Zapad-17 military exercise, and provides assessments of ongoing modernization in the district.
Between 2013 and 2019, Russian forces in the Western Military District (MD) underwent deep structural and organizational reforms to ensure that they are able to respond to a range of contingencies on Russia's western borders. Yet, there is little verified information in open sources on the full structure of units deployed to guard the Russian western flank. What has driven reorganization and rearmament in the Western MD? Where are the units deployed? What missions are assigned to front-level and operational-level units? How have reforms affected the ability to conduct all-arms warfighting operations?
In 2012, the Russian ground force presence in the western parts of the country was scant. Land forces fielded the 6th and 20th Combined Arms Armies, with the latter one deployed in Mulino, 350 km (217 miles) east of Moscow. These two operational-level units generated field four motor rifle brigades (MRBs) and two tank brigades. 
1
These deficiencies stemmed from a rather benign view on threats to the Russian military security, which did not assume any immediate threats. The expansion of military presence in the Western MD and its reorganization commenced with the departure of the deeply unpopular minister of defense, Analoty Serdiukov, in 2012. The advent of Sergei Shoigu as Serdiukov's replacement paved the way for a gradual reintroduction of more robust forces into the district, which manifested in the reestablishment of the 1st Guards Tank Army in 2013. Since then, modernization and reorganization processes have swept across the district, also largely as a consequence of the Russian military involvement in Ukraine.
Since 1991, main organizational reforms seem to have concluded and Russian forces in the Western MD have never been more capable. This is seen through the deliveries of new equipment, increased readiness, expanded force structure, combined-arms exercises, and enlarged and improved combat support service and logistics. Although the defense of the homeland seems to be the primary mission, forces in the Western MD have a plethora of capabilities to engage in offensive operations in Russia's neighborhood and quickly deliver a preponderance of power to deliver a swift victory. This, combined with the willingness to use force in order to achieve foreign policy objectives (Georgia, Ukraine, Syria) have raised concerns in NATO as to the real goals of Russian military modernization in general, and in the Western MD in particular. This was particularly evident in the run-up to the 2017 iteration of the Zapad strategic-operational exercise. 
2
We obtained data on locations of military bases and units from a variety of Russian sources. These included business registries, regional and city-level news outlets, Russian Orthodox Church websites, regional eparchies (in particular), and the registry of trial proceedings. To confirm unit identity and subordination, we used an analysis of badges and insignia worn on soldiers' sleeves or displayed on military events.
Information about maintenance work on power grids, water, and sewage systems also provided high-quality confirmation about the location of military units, as did tenders for planned construction works at military facilities. Another source was regional enlistment offices, which publish information about units that require contract servicemembers; they provided the unit number and the name of the city where the unit is based.
Google Street View, and its Russian equivalent, Yandex Panoramas, also provided recent views of military facilities, predominantly in urban areas, which helped pinpoint the location of military bases and facilities.
Finally, we checked every location using commercially available satellite imagery, to confirm whether there was movement within bases and thus whether the base was still "active." All this helped confirm the existence of around 200 units in the Western Military District. This number excludes military storage facilities, Strategic Rocket Forces' bases, and units belonging to Long-Range and Military Transport Aviation, which, because of their capabilities and ranges, can conduct operations across the entire country.
Out of all the military districts, Russia's Western Military District (MD) fields the most robust, most numerous, and most capable fighting forces. Strengthening the western operational direction remains the priority for Moscow: it considers threats emanating from the west to be the most severe threats that can ultimately endanger the military security and thus the existence of the Russian state. 
3
1
Units stationed in the district are capable of conducting military operations across the entire spectrum of warfare, from low-level peacekeeping missions to high-tempo maneuver operations supported by long-range air-launched and ground-based missile strikes. At any time, these can be supported by a (indirect) threat to employ nuclear weapons in order to showcase Russian determination and resolve. This was done in the days leading up to the Russian takeover of Crimea in early 2014. 
4
Since 1991 Russia has lost almost all of its strategic depth to NATO. With the current political turmoil in Belarus, it is plausible that in the next few years all the countries on Russia's western border will be openly hostile to Moscow. As a result, forces in the Western Military District are constantly being augmented with new or modernized equipment and organizational reforms pursued since 2012 seek to prepare the state to address various scenarios and contingencies. In the Western MD, Russia fields two combined arms armies (CAAs) that can conduct selfsustaining combat operations in their areas of responsibility. In terms of echelonment, an army group is an intermediate organizational structure between the Joint Strategic Command (JSC)/ military district command, on the one end, and brigades/regiments on the other.
Because those CAAs differ significantly in terms of size and capability, the roles assigned to them indicate the areas that the Russian General Staff considers to be most threatened. A Russian CAA does not seem to have a fixed maneuver composition, and its structure depends on the roles and missions the army is tasked with, as well as the theater to which the army is deployed. 
5
Farther south, the 20th CAA is headquartered in Voronezh. The unit's core composition is starkly different from that of the 6th CAA. Instead of motor rifle brigades, it features two motor rifle divisions; this indicates the prime focus given to Ukraine, and the need to have a heavy motorized and tank force present near the border with Ukraine that can immediately deliver a preponderance of power against opposing forces. Current force prepositioning within the 20 th CAA also makes it suitable to undertake combat operations in Belarus.
A lot of attention is paid to the 1st Guards Tank Army (GTA), which is predominantly deployed on the outskirts of Moscow. It has a tank division and a motor rifle division, augmented by a motor rifle brigade, a tank brigade, and other combat support units. The present location of the 1st GTA makes it suitable only for defense of Moscow. Substantial logistics efforts would be needed to move the entire GTA to Russia's western borders; such a move would be visible to NATO planners and likely to the open-source intelligence (OSINT) community as well. The current defensive positioning of the tank army does not mean that it will not conduct offensive operations. Indeed, during the 2017 iteration of the Zapad strategic-operational exercise, its elements were engaged in both defense and offense.
A further breakdown of those armies and divisions shows different compositions. These compositions, again, indicate threat levels and areas where significant, conventional capabilities will be needed. Although some brigades have been converted into larger divisions in recent years, Russia will maintain a mixed force structure. This diverse force application has its own advantages and drawbacks, but Russia employs the brigades and regiments/divisions in different roles to ensure that it can respond to different scenarios in its neighborhood. Also directly reporting to the MD commander are those units that provide supplementary support at selected axes. Specifically, the MD commander orders two Spetsnaz and two electronic warfare brigades that back front-level operations. That said, most of the units directly subordinated to the MD are those that logistically support combat operations. These include repair and evacuation regiments, railway troops, and engineer forces. Interestingly, the Western MD also has a unit dedicated solely to concealment and maskirovka (military deception) operations.
Out of the four airborne divisions in the Russian armed forces, three (one air assault, two parachute) are based in the Western MD, confirming the priority of maintaining a heavy presence of airborne forces (Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska: VDV) in the western operational direction. These forces have high readiness levels; they are the best trained and best equipped forces in the entire ground component of the Russian armed forces. Their role, however, is not limited to airborne operations behind a line of contact. In Ukraine, they were utilized in infantry roles, and the addition of tank battalions to each division can place them directly on the front line. This, coupled with increased readiness, means that the General Staff will continue to rely on VDV units for quick-alert operations, both as a standalone force and as an additional component that can tip the balance in Russia's favor in direct combat engagements. Ground operations will be supported by the 6th Air and Air Defense Army (AADA). It combines all air (fixed-and rotary-wing) assets on its territory as well as air defense regiments and divisions with their surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and early warning systems. 
6
A self-sufficient fighting force has been established in the Kaliningrad Oblast. Units based there can undertake both defensive and offensive operations. However, without reinforcements, their main role seems to be maintaining pressure on NATO forces based in the region and ensuring that the alliance's combat potential is first engaged in combating Kaliningrad-based units. Forces based in the oblast can be divided into three main parts: the Baltic Sea Fleet; the air and air defense components, which include the 44th Air Defense Division and the 132nd Mixed Aviation Division; and the 11th Army Corps. The addition of naval infantry provides expeditionary capability, albeit limited by the state of the fleet's assets. Ground and naval forces equipped with ballistic and cruise missiles provide long-range strike capability that can engage high-value targets almost everywhere in Europe.
The 1st Guards Tank Army was stood up in late 2014 (announced in mid 2015). 
7
2
8
The core of the 1st GTA is formed by two divisions: the 2nd Motor Rifle Division and the 4th Tank Division.
The 2nd Motor Rifle Division is based in Kalininets, around 50 km (31 miles) west of Moscow. It fields two motor rifle regiments, one tank regiment, and artillery and air defense regiments. Battalion-level formations (one logistics and one engineer-sapper) support combat operations, and a reconnaissance battalion provides forward intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and target acquisition for the maneuver forces. Given the number of various VDV and Spetsnaz units in the Western MD, it is unlikely that the 1st GTA reconnaissance is tasked with operations deep behind enemy lines. Hence, the key issue lies in the operability levels between special operations forces and units tasked with front-line operations, and the extent to which 1st GTA operations can be linked to missions conducted by special forces on an operational level.
The 4th Tank Division, based in Naro-Fominsk, 65 km (40 miles) west of Moscow, has two tank regiments and one motor rifle regiment. It is supported by a self-propelled howitzer (SPH) regiment for additional strike options. It also possesses an organic air defense regiment that provides area divisional-level air defense capability. In contrast to the 2nd Motor Rifle Division, the regiments of the 4th Tank Division are mostly equipped with T-80U and T-80BVs rather than T-72s or T-90s. 9 T-72B3s are fielded in a tank battalion of the motor rifle regiment. Thus, both divisions field almost all tank types that are available to the Russian ground forces. This mix of deployed tasks has several possible explanations. First, when the brigades were being converted into divisions, the General Staff withdrew the least used main battle tanks (MBTs) from storage facilities and placed them in front-line units. This was a mixture of tanks, from T-72B3s to T-90s. Second, albeit costs associated with maintaining different training and logistics services are significant, should security situation deteriorate, Russia would be able to ramp up production/modernization of various tank types across UralVagonZavod factories relatively quickly. Also, those reservists who undertook service in tank subunits would not need to be trained to operate a new tank type and instead could be quickly deployed to the front line. Not without significance is the fact that those factories employ thousands of employees and additional thousands of subcontractors, whose lives often depend on the scale of state contracts. Restricting the number of tank types to just one, such as T-90M Proryv-3or, in the long term, the T-14 Armata-would negatively impact public sentiments and undermine support for the regime. Consequently, although the goal is still to harmonize training and logistics, a continuous expansion of the land forces' armored capabilities will force Russia to maintain different tank types in its front-line units, which will be based on the combination of T-72B3/T-80/T-90 MBTs and BMP-2/3 IFVs.
Just as in the long term the GTA is prioritized for the delivery of new-generation hardware, in the short term the unit's armor fleet is prioritized to receive modernized MBTs. In April 2020, the 2nd MRDiv received its first upgraded T-90M Proryv-3 MBTs. Plans call for modernizing 120 T-90s to the M-variant with an additional 10 newly built models,
10
11
12
The 1st Tank Regiment of the 2nd Motor Rifle Division is also slated to be the first to receive the T-14 Armata new-generation MBT 
13
14
Additional ground units under the command of the Tank Army include the 27th Motor Rifle Brigade (light), 
15
16
17
18
The author assesses that the tank army is also supported by the 112th Missile Brigade (MB), deployed at Shuya. The brigade was converted from Tochka-U to the OTRK operational-tactical missile system (Operativno-Takticheskiy Raketnyy Kompleks-OTRK) Iskander in 2016. The system is designed to engage high-value targets at a short range of up to 500 km, although the introduction of a new missile has reportedly increased the range of the system. Iskanders are designed for deep-strike operations against stationary and movable targets, such as SAM and ballistic missile sites, air bases, ports, command and control (C2) facilities, factories, and hardened targets. A standard Iskander brigade comprises 12 launchers and 12 transportloading vehicles; this translates to three battalions, each with two batteries. In late 2019 Russian media reported a possible expansion of the existing Iskander-equipped brigades with an additional battalion, which could include the INF-prohibited missile. 
19
The 20th Nuclear, Chemical, Biological (NCB) Defense Regiment is also an integral part of the 1 st GTA. This GTA is a direct result of reforms pursued post-2012, which envisaged the establishment of an NCB defense regiment in each of the field armies. Despite their name, the role of these "NCB regiments" is much more robust than typical CBRN protection and mitigation when nuclear or chemical/biological weapons are used. The NCB defense regiments field flamethrower elements in order to enhance close combat capabilities. The 20 th NCB Regiment also fields at least one company of TOS-1A Solntsepyok heavy flamethrowers equipped with 24 thermobaric munitions that can effectively engage targets at 6,000 meters and can cover an area of up to 10 acres. 
20
21
The regiments are also tasked with providing concealment and maskirovka on an army level to prevent units from being detected and being engaged by precision-guided munitions and artillery shells, and to hide troop concentrations.
The discussions regarding deployment of the GTA to Belarus surfaced in the months and weeks leading to the Zapad-17 quadrennial operational-strategic exercise when the Russian MoD announced a tender for 4,162 wagons for the implementation of rail transportation to Belarus and back for 2017. However, because of Zapad, the entire year was marked with an increase in the exercise tempo of the Russian units deployed in the Western JSC and within Belarus. Between May and August, Russia and Belarus conducted joint exercises to test their electronic warfare (EW), logistics, engineering, C2, CBRN, and air defense capabilities, which prepared the ground for further testing during Zapad in September. According to Pavel Kovalev from the Belarusian Military-Political Review, even with all the exercises conducted in 2017 between Russia and Belarus, only 1,254 railcars were earmarked for Zapad-17, which was akin to the 2013 figure. 
22
23
24
3
4
25
According to Depczyński, one lesson learned during Zapad-17 was that even though a force the size of the 1st GTA is insufficient to reach the Vistula-Wieprz line 26 , it is adequate to seize the Baltic States, especially if additional support comes from air mobile forces and Kaliningradbased naval infantry units.
One of the less pronounced reorganization decisions that was pursued after 2012 pertains to the logistical support system that would allow the main components of the land forces to be continually engaged in military operations across a wide spectrum of military operations. One lesson learned during the "Centre-2011" strategic-operational exercise was that the CAA-level logistics brigade was inefficient in supporting army operations, because it was able to service five to eight brigades (or 2 x motor rifle/tank divisions and 2 x motor rifle/tank brigades). 
27
In a classical sense, the Russians assess that they need to possess at least a force ratio of 3:1, preferably 4:1, to defeat a US division (three brigade combat teams) in an open battle. Naturally, the outcome of a battle also depends on asymmetrical means of combat, such as electronic warfare; however, in terms of force correlation, Moscow would like to possess enough fire superiority in the initial period of war to ensure an immediate breakthrough of front lines. Before 2012, the Russian Land Forces would have required at least seven to nine combined arms brigades just to defeat a US division. As a result, and given the complexities of commanding combined arms brigades, a decision was made to return to the pre-Serdyukov model of C2 of regiment-division-army to match NATO's potential in the western operational direction. 
28
29
Additional combat support is provided by Luga-based 9th Artillery Brigade. Also based in Luga is the 26th Missile Brigade, which was the first ground forces unit to convert from the OTR-21 Tochka-U to the 9K720 Iskander ballistic missiles complex in 2011. 
30
6
The 6th CAA is the least developed combined arms army in the Western MD; its structure resembles a division rather than a combined arms army. There are several possible explanations as to why the 6th CAA has not been prioritized in terms of receiving new equipment and expanding its units. First, an increase of the army's combat potential (addition of new brigades and expansion of existing ones) would be perceived by NATO as a hostile act, and would force the alliance to respond in kind by forward deploying additional assets to the Baltic States. Second, despite the post-2014 breakdown in relations between NATO and Russia, the latter chose not to escalate further by increasing its presence on NATO's doorstep. Finally, post-2014 modernization priorities forced the army staff to focus on developing combat potentials near Ukraine in order to deter Kyiv from conducting any significant counteroffensive operations in the Donbas. During Zapad-17, the core task of the 6th CAA was to cover the right flank of the advancing 1st GTA, keep NATO forces engaged in Estonia and Latvia, and safeguard northern approaches into Western Russia. As the initial push into Belarus was held by the joint Russo-Belarusian task force, the counteroffensive pushed NATO forces back into the Baltic States. The 6th CAA was likely involved in conducting operations both in Estonia and in Latvia. As stated earlier, with its current structure the army does not allow for combined arms operations. For this reason, the army could be supported by airborne forces, presumably the Pskov-based 76th Airborne Division, as well as the heavy combat helicopter presence near St. Petersburg.
For 
After its operations in Ukraine, Russia needed to strengthen its units in the border regions. Therefore, in 2015, the headquarters of the CAA was relocated from Nizhny Novgorod back to Voronezh, where it had been stationed between 1994 and 2010. Figure 
7
Wide, open battlespace favors deployment of motor rifle divisions for combined theater operations. To this end, and because there was no military infrastructure near Ukraine, a decision was made to establish two new motor rifle divisions. The army now covers the northern part of Ukraine (it can ultimately conduct an offensive straight into Kyiv) and the eastern Russian-Ukrainian border; it likely serves as a quick-reaction force to cover the Russian proxy units in the Donbas. On a strategic level, the role of the CAA is to protect the left flank of the 1st GTA. Given the vicinity of its maneuver units to Belarus, elements of the 20th CAA could also be tasked with quick-reaction operations in the country, should such a need arise.
The 20th CAA is composed of two motor rifle divisions. The 144th Motor Rifle Division is headquartered in Yelnya. It is a six-regiment division consisting of two motor rifle regiments (488th and 254th), two tank regiments (228th and 59th), and an artillery regiment (856th), as well as a likely, yet unconfirmed, air defense regiment. The full structure of the division is also unclear, although it is safe to assume that other elements of the 144th Motor Rifle Division have also been stood up and include logistics, antitank, communications, and reconnaissance battalions, and an engineer-sapper regiment.
Whereas the above-mentioned division was developed from the 28th Motor Rifle Brigade, previously deployed in Yekaterinburg, the 3rd Motor Rifle Division was developed from the elements of the 9th and 23rd Motor Rifle Brigades as well as the 262nd Weapon Storage Base. It also has two motor rifle regiments (252nd and 752nd), but only one tank regiment (237th), reinforced by the 99th Artillery Regiment, and an as-yet-unidentified air defense regiment.
Open-source information also gives a clearer picture of the support structure of the division. It includes the 16th Engineer-Sapper Regiment, and the 692nd Independent Communications Battalion, the 84th Independent Reconnaissance Battalion, the 16th and 159th Antitank Battalions, and the 911th Logistics Battalion.
On an army level, the Kursk-based and Iskander-equipped 448th Missile Brigade provides deep-strike capability, and air defense capability is provided by the 53rd Air Defense Brigade. The latter received the Buk-M3 medium-range air defense system in late 2017.
A September 2018 Google Street View image from Nizhny Novgorod also indicates that the 96th Independent Reconnaissance Brigade is subordinated to the 20th CAA. Although the reference to the 20th CAA disappeared from Yandex Street View (dated 2019), it is unclear whether the subordination changed as well or whether it was just the poster that was replaced.
During full peacetime, the 20th CAA fields four motor rifle regiments and three tank regiments.
Assuming that a motor rifle regiment in a standard configuration deploys three motor rifle battalions (3 x 41 BMPs) and a tank battalion (1 x 31 T-72B3s), and that a tank regiment has one motor rifle battalion (1 x 41 BMPs) and three tank battalions (3 x 31 T-72B3s), the army can deploy around 600 BMPs and 400 MBTs.
Apart from the two combined arms armies and one tank army, approximately 23 units are subordinated to the Western MD commander; they mostly serve in combat support roles. They include the 1st Engineer-Sapper Brigade (Murom), 45th Engineer-Sapper Brigade (Nakhabino), and 45th Engineering-Camouflage Regiment (Inzhenernyy 1).
Also in Murom is the 28 th Pontoon-Bridging Brigade, which is solely dedicated to the provision of bridging capability on a front level; however, it is reportedly subordinated to the General Staff
33
Railway transport, which is absolutely key for long-distance troop mobility on a district level, is provided by the 29th, 34th, and 38th Independent Railway Troops Brigades, based in Bryansk, Ryazan, and Yaroslav, respectively.
Also subordinate to the General Staff are the 2nd and 16th Spetsnaz Brigades, stationed in Pskov and Tambov, respectively. The units are tasked with conducting long-range reconnaissance, target acquisition, and diversionary operations behind enemy lines (especially against high-value targets). Despite their subordination to a higher echelon, in times of war the brigades are tasked with conducting special operations within the Western MD areas of responsibility.
An additional force multiplier comes in the form of the 15th and 16th Independent EW Brigades (Stroitel and Kursk). They have proved their effectiveness, or Russian EW capability, in the conflicts to which their personnel have been deployed. Consequently, EW assets have been integrated into land forces at every echelon: combined arms brigades, divisions, corps, and military districts. Just as air defense brigades at the district and army levels provide a flexible response to air threats, the EW brigades could also be utilized on a strategic level to protect front-level operations at selected locations. EW brigades are tasked with eavesdropping and denying communications and degrading opposing forces' information superiority. EW brigades field some of Russia's most powerful systems-such as RB-109A Bylina, Krasukha, Leer-3, Moskva, and Murmansk-BN-which offer ranges of several hundred miles. 
34
Since 2016 the land forces have also been growing their repair and evacuation capabilities. To this end, repair and evacuation battalions were set up in each of the military districts, and are now being converted into regiments. One such regiment was established in Mozhaysk, west of Moscow. The 5th Repair and Evacuation Regiment is composed of two battalions, one tasked with evacuation and one with equipment repair and restoration. Plans reportedly call for a reconnaissance company to be established within such regiments. 
35
36
37
Ясинский, Направление деятельности 15-ой отдельной бригады радиоэлектронной борьбы (Верховного Главного командования) в области радиоэлектронной борьбы, Радиоэлектронная борьба в Вооруженных Силах Российской Федерации -2015, p. 44.
be expanded with the delivery of the new 2S35 Coalition and will feature 24 guns, 
38
39
It is equipped with the 9K515 300mm Tornado-S MLRS, which is designed to replace the BM-30 Smerch, and to conduct counterbattery fire or engage armored and infantry groupings, command posts, airbases, or other facilities of operational importance. It is equipped with GLONASS satellite navigation, automated fire control, and 9M542 long-range precision-guided munitions with a range of up to 120 km. With one volley, the Tornado-S can cover 67 hectares. 
40
41
42
Figure 
8
Out of four airborne divisions in the Russian armed forces, three (one air assault, two parachute) are based in the Western MD, and an additional one is in the Southern MD. This confirms the priority given to maintaining a heavy VDV presence in the western and southern operational directions. Figure 
9
43
44
45
46
In Tula, 170 km (105 miles) south of Moscow, the VDV fields the 106th Airborne Division (parachute). It is composed of two parachute regiments, and organic air defense and artillery regiments, and is supported by reconnaissance, engineer, and logistics battalions. In 2016, tank companies started appearing across VDV formations to increase the firepower of ground components in maneuver operations. These were subsequently expanded to battalion-level formations by 2020. 
47
Another parachute division in the Western MD, the 106th Airborne Division, is in Ivanovo, 250 km northeast of Moscow. It is also composed of two maneuver regiments supported by air defense and artillery regiments.
The sole air assault division, the Pskov-based 76th Air Assault Division, fields three airborne regiments, artillery and air defense regiments, and a tank battalion, as well as three support battalions (logistics, engineer, and reconnaissance).
In Kamyshin, near Moscow, the VDV deploys to the 56th Air Assault Brigade. The unit is a light tactical formation, which, thanks to its mobility and flexibility, can undertake reconnaissance tasks independently deep behind the front line. In 2014, it received a battalion set of BMD-2s. Two years later, another battalion converted from UAZ 3151s to BMP-2 IFVs. The third battalion (ultra-light) also replaced its UAZ 3151s with UAZ 3163 Patriot light vehicles, which further adds to its maneuverability, especially in raid missions. Consequently, two out of the brigade's three battalions could be airlifted. 
49
Since 2014, the VDV has been undergoing expansion, which again is linked to its role in combat operations in Ukraine-particularly in Donbas. The addition of tank battalions, along with organic helicopters, is coupled with an increase in the size of the force. Plans from post-2014 called for doubling the size of the force, to 72,000 personnel, by 2020. VDV divisions were slated to grow from two maneuver regiments to a traditional three-regiment configuration. This goal is unlikely to be achieved in the long term. 
50
51
52
53
54
55
Airborne troops will form the backbone of the new Russian rapid-reaction forces in the coming years. The new forces will be able to maintain operations as self-sufficient units and as part of the land force on a separate attack axis.
A VDV regiment comprises three air assault or parachute battalions, an artillery battalion, a reconnaissance company and tank companies, an antitank battery, an air defense battery, a signal company, and an engineering company. Offensive operations rest on the first three battalions and the newly established tank company. On a battalion level, they utilize a mix of 31 BMD-4M airborne infantry fighting vehicles and 16 BTR-MDMs. The former are equipped with 100mm guns, which generate sufficient firepower to enable an airborne regiment to undertake independent operations without the need for additional supporting units. The vehicle is designed to engage targets of a similar kind (APCs, IFVs). For bigger threats, the VDV is testing the Sprut-SDM1 lightweight tank. Based on a BMD-4M's chassis, the vehicle will feature a 125mm smoothbore gun and will thus be able to destroy main battle tanks.
The BMD-4M/BTR-MDM duo has been delivered to the Airborne Forces since 2016. As of mid 2020, eight battalion sets and one company set have been delivered, which indicates that around 320 BMD-4Ms and 180 BTR-MDMs have been handed over. 
56
1
In 2012, Shoigu reverted Serdyukov's reforms and returned to the regiment-division-army organization and the regiment-airbase concept of basing of air force assets. All seven 1st grade air bases, along with their subordinated air groups, were disbanded and converted into aviation division headquarters. Consequently, a regiment was again the main combat unit of the air force, a structure that had been in place since the late 1930s and changed only briefly when Serdyukov managed the MoD.
In August 2015, the Russian Air Force merged with Aerospace Defense Troops, creating the Aerospace Forces (Vozdushno-Kosmicheskiye Sily: VKS). This move served to integrate air assets responsible for air defense under one unified command, in order to increase readiness and force cohesion, and improve information sharing across the forces responsible for air defense of Russia. At the same time, the regiments' dispersal increased the general readiness of the air forces to respond to various threats in different theaters and increased their survivability in case of a surprise armed attack (because fewer assets were stationed at one base).
The creation of air and air defense armies followed as a result. Such an army combines all air (fixed-and rotary-wing) assets on its territory as well as air defense regiments and divisions with their SAM and early warning systems. 
57
Figure 
10
57
The main combat unit of the army is the 150th Composite Aviation Division (Smeshnnaya Aviatsionnaya Diviziya: SAD), headquartered at Voronezh-Baltimor. It consists of four aviation regiments and one aviation squadron.
First, the 14th Fighter Aviation Regiment ((Istrebitelnyi Aviatsionnyi Polk: IAP) is based in Kursk Vostochny/Khalino. It fields 24 Su-30SM fighters (two squadrons), which were delivered between 2017 and 2018. 
58
The 47th SAP's home base is Voronezh Malshevo; however, since 2013 it has been redeployed to Buturlinovka while the former is undergoing modernization. The renovation of the base was to conclude in 2015, but it has been regularly postponed. 
59
60
The northernmost regiment belonging to the 6th AADA is the 159th IAP, deployed at Besovets, Karelia, 300 km (186 miles) north of St. Petersburg. Its location makes it responsible for the provision of air attack capability along the Finnish border. It can also support the defense of St. Petersburg and provide additional strike capability to the Northern Fleet's 45th AADA. The regiment began receiving Su-35S airframes in 2016. The process concluded in 2018, when two full squadrons were fully re-equipped. An additional squadron of Su-27SMs is also deployed at the airbase, which therefore houses at least 36 combat aircraft. 61 58 Центр АСТ, 14-й гвардейский истребительный авиационный полк в Курске получил еще один истребитель Су-30СМ, 1 Dec. 2019, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/3436686.html. 
59
60 SVIK-TV, Воронежский военный аэродром «Балтимор» откроют осенью 2020-го, 14 Dec. 2019, http://xn----ctbbwk3bl.xn--p1ai/voronezhskij-voennyj-aerodrom-baltimor-otkroyut-osenyu-2020-go.
61 A total of 60 aircraft are deployed at the base, although it is unclear how many, apart from the above-mentioned three squadrons, are operational.
Khotilovo Air Base hosts the 790th IAP. It is equipped with two squadrons of modernized MiG-31BM interceptor aircraft as well as at least one squadron of Su-27/SMs. The latter is being replaced by Su-35Ss, nine of which had been delivered to the unit as of mid 2020. 
62
63
The army aviation has been subordinated to the air force since 2003. Although there are voices that call for at least a partial reversal of this decision, 66 rotary-wing assets play a key role in the provision of close air support for maneuver ground forces, and they increase its flexibility and readiness to respond to quickly materializing threats.
One intrinsic feature of the Baltic States battlespace is the heavy presence of Russian army aviation assets, which include one regiment and one brigade. The reason behind such force prepositioning is the ground terrain around the Baltic States, which, because of its large number of lakes, rivers, and generally boggy terrain, does not favor maneuver warfare. Consequently, combat helicopters would be used to soften defensive lines in order to limit the need to maneuver, and to attack targets behind enemy's lines in order to delay reinforcements. Airlift adds additional flexibility and provides maneuver space where necessary.
Russia continues to modernize its fixed-wing aviation fleet, although the pace of this modernization seems to have reached a plateau. Combat aircraft deliveries to front-line units reached their peak in 2014, when a total of 88 airframes were handed over. After that, delivery numbers gradually decreased, with 2019 marking the lowest number since 2009. 
67
68
undertake cooperative engagements, which depends on the fusion of various (seaborne, airborne) radar sensors to provide target engagement data to S-400 battle management system (BMS) systems and thus nullify effects caused by the curvature of the earth. However, there are reasons to assume that Russia has not yet acquired the latter capability, which significantly decreases its ability to engage aerial targets in over-the-horizon mode. 
71
For this reason, each air division is also composed of additional radio-technical regiments 72 that, when placed away from batteries, provide additional data collection capability that can be used later for target engagement. The 36D6 Tin Shield is one of the acquisition components of S-300/S-400 SAM systems and is used as "a general-purpose medium/high altitude search radar." 
73
Farther south, the 32nd Air Defense Division is scattered between Vladimirsky Lager, 60 km north of Pskov, to Voronezh. It fields three radio-technical regiments (the 335th, 336th, and 337th) and two air defense regiments (the 42nd and 108th).
The 1544th Air Defense Regiment is equipped with two S-400 battalions, received in early 2018. 
74
75
The 42nd Air Defense Regiment is equipped with two batteries of S-300PS/PMs. It is located 200 km northwest of Tver. Both regiments are tasked with the provision of air defense for the Central Economic Region, which is located in the central area of the European part of Russia. It is the most populous, urbanized, and industrialized region of Russia and houses approximately 20 percent of the Russian population.
Also, note that each S-400 battalion is guarded by up to six Pantsir-S1 air defense missile-gun systems, which are designed to engage tactical aircraft, UAVs, and precision-guided munitions at ranges up to 40 km. 
76
It is unclear whether it was only target practice or whether the Pantsir-equipped units could also be tasked with providing indirect fire against ground targets.
77
For many years, the Russian forces stationed in the Kaliningrad Oblast presented a mixed picture of capabilities. On the one hand, between 2007 and 2014, the Baltic Sea Fleet received four Project 20380 Steregushchiy-class corvettes; on the other hand, the subsurface force relied on two antiquated Kilo-class submarines. The oblast-based strategic S-300 SAMs began to be replaced by S-400s in 2012, and the process is mostly completed (more on that below); however, air assets deployed in the Kaliningrad Oblast are still a mix of Su-27Ps and Su-24M/MRs. They have had only a limited increase in capabilities since 2016, through the delivery of eight Su-30SM fighters.
Except for the 336th Naval Infantry Brigade, ground components were significantly underdeveloped until recently, especially in terms of armor and ability to conduct long-range artillery (both missile and shell) strikes. This was particularly evident when comparing ground capabilities of those in the oblast to those in mainland Russia: in the latter, modernization was steady, whereas in Kaliningrad it was uneven and rudimentary.
However, over the last few years, forces in the oblast have undergone a significant expansion and reorganization, to ensure that they are capable of conducting and maintaining offensive ground operations in the theater. At the same time, should a conflict break out, these forces would maintain pressure on NATO assets deployed in the region and would "occupy" the alliance's military potential during initial stages of the conflict. The control of the land components by the 11th Army Corps was re-established in 2016, as an additional C2 structure between brigades/regiments and the Baltic Sea Fleet command.
Figure 
11
The army corps now fields a self-sufficient fighting force that can conduct medium-intensity combat operations along two axes of advance.
Until 2018 the forces in the oblast fielded just one tank battalion, as a part of the 79th Motor Rifle Brigade based in Gusev. Although it has not been officially confirmed, it appears that the tank battalion was detached from the brigade, which resulted in the brigade being converted into a regiment that has three BMP-2-equipped battalions.
The above-mentioned detached tank battalion served as a basis from which the 11th Tank Regiment was stood up in 2018, also in Gusev. This move increased the number of MBTs deployed to the oblast from around 30 to 90 (excluding naval infantry); thus, it increased offensive capability, especially vis-à-vis those NATO forces stationed in Orzysz in northeastern Poland. In late 2018 the regiment also received a battalion set of 2S19M1 Msta-S SPHs. 
78
79
Support elements of the 11th Army Corps include the 2nd Air Defense Regiment and the 244th Artillery Brigade, both stationed in Kaliningrad. The latter's capabilities have also been a subject of modernization in recent years, after it received BM-27 Uragan and BM-30 Smerch heavy MLRSs. Smerch can fire its 12 rockets in 38 seconds, after which the reload time is about 25-35 minutes, depending on how well trained the crew is. The BM-30 increases the area covered by one launcher, and it offers a significant range expansion as well, especially compared to other MLRS systems. One Smerch launcher can cover 67 hectares, compared to 4 hectares for BM-21 and 29 hectares for BM-27. One battery of eight launchers can disorganize the opposing force's division-level operations. Three launchers can provide a level of destruction comparable to that of two Tochka-U-equipped brigades.
The BM-30 battalion could be the basis upon which a brigade will be formed to create a fully developed reactive artillery brigade. In such a case, a BM-30 brigade would deploy three battalions, each with two batteries of four launchers, which equals 24 launchers per brigade.
In times of war, the number of battalions could be increased to four, the number of batteries to three, and the number of launchers per battery to six. This would equal a total of 72 BM-30 launchers per brigade, and a single salvo of 864 missiles. 
78
79
12
The army corps also has the 148th Repair and Recovery Battalion, which provides repair and recovery services to ground units in Kaliningrad.
The Baltic Sea Fleet commander also manages coastal defense forces, which are composed of the 336th Naval Infantry Brigade, the 25th Coastal Missile Regiment, the 561st Naval Reconnaissance Centre, the 69th Naval Engineering Regiment, and the 841st EW Centre. The army corps also has the 148th Repair and Recovery Battalion, which provides repair and recovery services to ground units in Kaliningrad.
The Baltic Sea Fleet commander also manages coastal defense forces, which are composed of the 336th Naval Infantry Brigade, the 25th Coastal Missile Regiment, the 561st Naval Reconnaissance Centre, the 69th Naval Engineering Regiment, and the 841st EW Centre.
The 336th Naval Infantry Brigade is the most combat-ready ground force/naval infantry unit in the oblast. Its personnel were deployed to operations in Eastern Ukraine in 2014 and Syria in 2016. This confirms that at least some of the personnel from the brigade have gained combat experience-some, possibly in two theaters-which has undeniably increased the overall professionalism levels within the unit.
Locally, personnel from the brigade train extensively, usually at the Khmelevka training range, although these exercises are rather limited in mission scope and size (company level). Within the first two months of service, enlisted servicemembers spend an average of three weeks at the range.
The brigade is a heavily mechanized force. It fields around 60-80 BTR-82s (two battalions). One battalion, the 879th, has jump status, which is confirmed by social media posts. The battalion could, therefore, be earmarked for airborne assault operations. Its personnel train with the VDV and are likely linked to them on an operational level. Interoperability between Western VDV forces (most likely the 76th Airborne Division) and the 336th Brigade, is also presumably higher than interoperability between other units stationed in the oblast.
This means that in times of crisis or war, personnel from the brigade could be employed with VDV servicemembers, using the latter's transport aircraft in coastal areas to clear them from opposing forces and allow for amphibious landings. The brigade possesses organic artillery capability in the form of an artillery battalion.
The 25th Coastal Missile Regiment operates out of Donskoye. It is equipped with a battalion of one 3K60 Bal and, presumably, one K-300P Bastion-P coastal defense system. 
81
At least one company-the 69th Naval Engineering Regiment-is at full readiness status to conduct demining tasks across the Kaliningrad Oblast. However, apart from such missions, the unit is also responsible for the provision of camouflage and deception capabilities for some of 
81
the forces stationed in the oblast. Also, it has a pontoon-bridging battalion that provides bridging capabilities for ground forces operating in and from the oblast.
Electronic warfare capability on a fleet level is provided by the 841st EW Centre, which may consist of two battalions and a company. The first battalion undertakes strategic EW tasks, and the second is responsible for the provision of EW capability on a tactical level. 
82
83
84
As of mid 2020, the Baltic Sea Fleet fielded 52 surface combatants and one subsurface combatant, with an average age of 24 years. These assets are grouped into two naval bases: Leningrad (Kronstadt) and Baltyisk. In Kronstadt, the fleet deploys the 3rd Submarine Brigade
85
In the future, the fleet may obtain modern submarines in the form of the Project 636. . In 2016, Russia redeployed two Project 21631 Buyan-M artillery ships from the Black Sea Fleet to the Baltic Sea. These vessels epitomize the "Kalibrization" of the Russian Navy, which seeks to provide the Russian Navy with as many cruise missiles as possible. Indeed, one of the most significant surface ship developments has been the fitting of the Kalibr capability to the Project 21631 Buyan-M corvettes. The ships' eight-cell 3S-14 VLS launcher has been used to fire missiles on a number of occasions during combat operations in Syria. What is most striking in this development is the proven ability to fit a long-range land-attack punch to even relatively small surface platforms, and for these platforms to have a demonstrable impact on shaping events ashore. With a reported range of 1,500 km (932 miles), these missiles can effectively engage targets across Western and Northern Europe. However, the Buyan-M's weakness is a lack of air defense, given that it comprises two Komar launchers with 9M39, 9M313, or 9M342 Igla missiles, which can only engage targets up to 6 km (3.7 miles). This means that Buyan-Ms also need to operate under a more robust air defense umbrella provided either by larger-class vessels, such as Steregushchiy-class, or by land-based systems.
Initially, the inclusion of Buyan-Ms in the Baltic Sea Fleet inventory served as a power projection tool, but its psychological effect on regional countries could not be underestimated-it was akin to that of the Iskander deployment threat before 2018. It remains to be seen how Russian "missile posturing" will change with the demise of the INF and whether operationally, low-displacement vessels will be augmented with land-based medium-range missiles. These Buyan-Ms were augmented by two Project 22800 Karakurt-class small missile ships delivered in 2018-19, thus further saturating the fleet with long-range strike capability.
A particular focus is being placed on mine warfare forces. Altogether, the Baltic Sea Fleet deploys 11 minesweepers of three classes (Project 12700, Project 1265, and Project 10750). The latest addition is the Alexandrit-class (Project 12700) fiber-hull minesweeping vessel.
Figure 
13
Russia has deployed and developed a robust network of strategic-and tactical-level SAM capabilities that fall under the command of the 44th Air Defence Division. The division comprises the 183rd Air Defence Regiment, the 1545th Air Defence Regiment, and the 81st Radio-Technical Regiment.
In early 2019 the 1545th Air Defence Regiment was rearmed with a regimental set (two battalions) of the S-400s, which are stationed just north of Gvardeysk. The 183rd Regiment fields four S-400 battalions, which are deployed in the western parts of the oblast, 86 and two S-300PS battalions just north and south of the Chernyakovsk Air Base. 
87
In terms of aviation, in 2018 Russia opened the airbase in Chkalovsk, which was closed for modernization in 2013. The works involved extending the runway, replacing its surface, increasing the apron's size, and installing new navigation and communication systems. Surprisingly, imagery intelligence (IMINT) shows that the resurfacing concluded in 2016 and no construction works occurred at the base for two years. It is unclear what caused the delay, but one would expect an airbase modernization to take less than five years, especially given the deteriorating security environment after Russia's seizure of Crimea and its operations in Eastern Ukraine. Currently, aircraft at Chkalovsk are parked in the open air, because no new shelters have been built.
It remains to be seen whether the Chernyakhovsk airbase will undergo a similar upgrade or whether it will be used as a reserve airbase. As of mid 2020, fixed-wing combat assets were stationed in Chkalovsk. 
86
88
89
90
The ASW capability is provided by a squadron of Ka-27(M)s, Ka-27Ps, and Ka-29s that are deployed at the Donskoye airbase.
Another helicopter squadron, also at Donskoye, provides close air support and tactical aircraft for ground forces and is equipped with Mi-24VP and Mi-8T helos. This squadron will likely be converted into an army aviation regiment in the medium term.
The independent transport squadron provides VIP airlift for Baltic Sea Fleet personnel as well as tactical airlift for ground forces.
conflict with NATO is possible, although unlikely, and that, given the alliance's expansion towards Russia, Moscow needs to be prepared for large-scale operations using regiments and divisions as its main maneuver forces.
The predominant developments focus on the creation of heavy forces that can engage a nearpeer adversary close to Russian borders and that can deliver a preponderance of power in the initial stages of conflict and thus bring it to a swift conclusion, or at least place Russia in a favorable position for negotiation. That said, lessons learned from the Syrian campaign also seem to be incorporated into the armed forces. The creation of light and ultra-light battalions seeks to further enhance mobility and maneuverability of land force sub-units, especially in areas where other formations seem to be too heavy or require significant logistics support.
NATO, however, is not the sole enemy "at the gates." The push to establish new regiments, divisions, and armies around Ukraine since 2014 clearly indicates concerns about possible conflict escalation in this southwestern strategic direction. At the same time, these forces could be redeployed to Belarus or farther north near the Baltic States, if required, in order to create favorable correlations of force ratios in targeted battlespaces.
Expansion of divisions, within both the ground and airborne forces, is stymied by a lack of manpower, appropriate equipment, modernization priorities, and-perhaps the most important-financial considerations. The process of expanding VDV to a historic threeregiment configuration is slow. The 1 st GTA has two maneuver divisions, whereas its Cold War predecessor had three. Similarly, each division was to have six regiments, but it only fields five.
It is Russian policy to build up and maintain forces to fight a conventional war in its neighborhood and sustain enough capability to achieve the immediate deterrent effect through the peacetime location of military units and capabilities that go with them. This pertains not only to strictly offensive operations but to defensive ones as well. A surge in air defense assets deployed in the Western MD in recent years will significantly hinder air operations of any conventional opponent. Long-range assets also ensure that Russia can deliver high-precision strikes on strategic assets to cripple an opposing force's command and control.
To support such operations, in recent years Russia has grown its logistics and support capabilities to provide a constant flow of materiel into the battlefield, evacuate and repair equipment when necessary, and undertake deception operations in terms of movement and assembly of Russian units.
The reorganization of the units stationed in the Western Military District has largely concluded.
Although some tactical-level innovations based on combat experiences could be implemented across ground forces, the main fighting and support components are established. There nevertheless are weak areas that will demand addressing. Restructuring of Russian assets in the Kaliningrad Oblast is ongoing, but the pace is sluggish.
Although St. Petersburg is heavily defended with multiple SAM sites, ground force elements would need to be significantly reinforced even if they were to conduct effective defensive operations-and much more so if they were to undertake offensive missions in the Baltic States.
In August or September 2021 Russia and Belarus will conduct the quadrennial Zapad-21 strategic-operational exercise. This will provide insights into how Russia's threat assessment has changed in the last four years and how it plans to fight a war with a near-peer adversary on its borders. The political crisis that erupted following the August 2020 presidential elections in Belarus and statements coming from the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, blaming NATO and the EU for political upheaval, 
91
92
31 В. И. Александров, А. М. Кабаченко, В. В. Куликов, А. Н. Леунов, И. В. Пестроухов, Мотострелковая (Танковая) Бригада В Основных Видах Боя Часть 1, Учебное Пособие, Московский Государственный Институт Международных Отношений (Университет), Moscow, 2011, p. 142.
31 В. И. Александров, А. М. Кабаченко, В. В. Куликов, А. Н. Леунов, И. В. Пестроухов, Мотострелковая (Танковая) Бригада В Основных Видах Боя Часть 1, Учебное Пособие, Московский Государственный Институт Международных Отношений (Университет), Moscow, 2011, p. 142.
Simon Saradzhyan, "100,000 troops will engage in Russia's Zapad-2017 war games," Washingtonpost.com, 13 Sept. 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2017/09/13/100000-troops-willengage-in-russias-zapad-2017-war-games.
Александр Пешков, Шойгу: западное стратегическое направление остается наиболее угрожаемым для безопасности РФ, Телеканал «Звезда», 20 May 2020, https://tvzvezda.ru/news/vstrane_i_mire/content/20205201559-UbNe3.html.
Konrad Muzyka, When Russia Goes to War: Motives, Means and Indicators, International Centre for Defence and Security (ICDS), Tallin, Jan. 2020, https://icds.ee/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/ICDS_ Analysis_When_Russia_Goes_to_War_Konrad_Muzyka_January_2020_cor.pdf, p. 12.
Note, however, that each combined-arms army now fields an Iskander-equipped brigade to provide long-range strike options against high-value targets. Other fixed elements include artillery, logistics, air defense, NCB (nuclear, chemical, biological), and engineer-sapper brigades/regiments.
The VKS commander manages direct reporting units. These include the Long-Range Aviation Command and Military Transport Aviation, both of which are operationally subordinated to the Supreme High Command of the Russian Armed Forces. The former is tasked with providing nuclear deterrence and power projection in out-ofarea operations, and the latter provides strategic and operational airlift.
Роман Крецул, Россия закрывает «черную дыру» на границе с Украиной, Взгляд, 1 June 2015, https://vz.ru/society/2015/6/1/748541.html.
The "Smolensk Gate" is the area between the Dnieper and Dzwina Rivers in eastern Belarus. Moscow could be directly threatened if this area were controlled by hostile forces. Historically, all major offensives both eastward and westward came through the gate.
Центр АСТ, Танки Т-80БВ в Кантемировской танковой дивизии, 19 Sept. 2017, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/2855984.html.
Центр АСТ, 2-я гвардейская Таманская мотострелковая дивизия получила первые танки Т-90М, 13 Apr. 2020, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/3965326.html.10  Центр АСТ, Танки Т-80БВ в Кантемировской танковой дивизии, 19 Sept. 2017, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/2855984.html.
Интерфакс АВН, Первая танковая армия усилена Севастопольской мотострелковой бригадой, Интерфакс АВН, 05.06.2020 https://www.militarynews.ru/story.asp?rid=1&nid=532977&lang=RU.
Николай Сурков, Алексей Рамм, Евгений Андреев, Таманская «дивизия будущего», Известия, 22 Feb. 2018, https://iz.ru/708875/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm-evgenii-andreev/tamanskaia-diviziia-budushchego.
Михаил Ходаренок, Идеология боевой системы будущего, Газета.Ру, 21 July 2016, https://vpk.name/news/159847_ideologiya_boevoi_sistemyi_budushego.html?new#new.
Subordination of the 27th Motor Rifle Brigade to the 1 st Guards Tank Army has been a subject of debate for years, mainly due to the role the brigade has played in Soviet and then Russian domestic politics. Historically, it served "as a last reserve for the Soviet (and then Russian) government in a national emergency," according to Igor Sutyagin. (See Igor Sutyagin and Justin Bronk, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations and Implications for International Security (Routledge Journals, 2017), p. 98.) That said, in June 2020 the Western MD press service reported that the 27th Motor Rifle Brigade had become a part of the 1st Guards Tank Army, thus expanding the capability and mission envelope of the tank army. Due to the large number of BTR-82A in service, the brigade is considered "light."
Центр АСТ, Поставки военной техники в Вооруженные силы России в 2019 г. , 22 Mar. 2020, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/3965326.html.
Александр Лузан, Проблемы борьбы с ракетами средней и меньшей дальности и некоторые пути их решения, 13 June 2019, Воздушно-космическая сфера, https://www.vesvks.ru/vks/article/problemy-borby-sraketami-srednei-i-menshei-dalnos-16433.
  19  Алексей Рамм, Богдан Степовой, Ракетное объединение: бригадам «Искандеров» увеличили огневую мощь, Известия, 16
Dec. 2019, https://iz.ru/952462/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/raketnoe-obedineniebrigadam-iskanderov-uvelichili-ognevuiu-moshch.
Igor Sutyagin and Justin Bronk, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations and Implications for International Security p. 65.
Алексей Рамм, Богдан Степовой, Система выжигания: в армии создадут батальоны тяжелых огнеметов, Известия,
Oct. 2019, https://iz.ru/928820/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/sistema-vyzhiganiia-v-armiisozdadut-batalony-tiazhelykh-ognemetov; Дмитрий Попов, Батальоны дают огня, Армейский стандарт, 19 Nov. 2019, https://armystandard.ru/news/t/2019118124-6UKVY.html.22  Belvpo, Западные страшилки или мифы о российских вагонах, 10.08.2017, https://www.belvpo.com/85537.html/.
Michael Sadykiewicz, Soviet-Warsaw Pact Western Theater of Military Operations (Sant Monica, CA: RAND, 1987), p. 92.
Lieutenant Colonel Dr. Marek Depczyński, Zasadnicze Parametry i Przebieg Strategicznego Ćwiczenia Dowódczo -Sztabowego Zachód 2017, Akademia Sztuki Wojennej, Warszawa, 2017.
In Poland, the Wieprz River has its sources near Tomaszow Lubelski, some 40 km (25 miles) from the border with Ukraine. It flows into the Vistula River 50 km (31miles) south of Warsaw. The line forms a natural obstacle for any mechanized/armored forces pushing from Belarus towards southern and central Poland.
Marek Depczynski, Ewolucja Rosyjskich Sił Lądowych, Przegląd Sił Zbrojnych, Warsaw, 3/2018, p. 114.
The number of tanks in a Russian motor rifle tank battalion varies. A standard number is 31; however, this can increase to 42, depending on the unit and role assigned to it. See Московский Государственный Институт, Международных Отношений (Университет), Мотострелковая (Танковая) Бригада В Основных Видах Боя, Москва 2011, p. 11.
During Zapad-17, a 700-meter-long (2,300-foot) brigade was set up over the Volga River. Centre-19 saw the setting up of at least four bridges, the longest of which was 3,500 meters (2.1 miles). The capability exists to restore 3,700 meters of bridge crossings per day. Журнал «Материально-техническое обеспечение Вооруженных Сил Российской Федерации» 1/2020, pp. 7, 18, 19.
Алена Романова, Под Муромом выбрали победителя конкурса "Открытая вода", Владимирские ведомости, 10 July 2019, https://vedom.ru/news/2019/07/10/35847-pod-muromom-vybrali-pobeditelyakonkursa.
  34  Roger N. McDermott, Russia's Electronic Warfare Capabilities to 2025, ICDS, Sept. 2017, p. 7, https://icds.ee/wpcontent/uploads/2018/ICDS_Report_Russias_Electronic_Warfare_to_2025.pdf; and Анатолий Аркадьевич
Кирилл Рябов, Ремонтно-эвакуационные полки в России. Формирование продолжается, 26 July 2019, topwar.ru, https://topwar.ru/160550-prodolzhaetsja-formirovanie-remontno-jevakuacionnyh-polkov.html.
Дмитрий Витальевич Булгаков, Современное состояние и перспективы развития системы материально-технического обеспечения Вооруженных Сил Российской Федерации, Материальнотехническое обеспечение Вооруженных Сил Российской Федерации, 1/2020, p. 7.
  37  Тасс, Российская армия получила одну из самых мощных в мире самоходных пушек после модернизации, Тасс, 16 Apr. 2020, https://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/8256869.
Олег Грозный, Кого возьмут в спецназ?, Красная Звезда, 22.10.2017,
Центр АСТ, ВКС России получили первые три истребителя Су-35С постройки 2019 года, https://bmpd.livejournal.com/3713121.html, 22 July 2019.
Piotr Butowski, Flashpoint Russia: Russia's Air Power: Capabilities and Structure (Vienna: Harpia Publishing, 2019), p. 70.
Взгляд, В ВВС России решено сформировать 14 бригад армейской авиации и вертолетных полков, Взгляд, 26 July 2014, https://vz.ru/news/2014/7/26/697375.html
Previously, the 332nd Helicopter Regiment with just one squadron was deployed at Pribylovo, whereas the
th Independent EW Helicopter Regiment was at Pushkin. These were merged into the 549th Regiment and their previous structures were disbanded.66  Алексей Рамм, Алексей Козаченко, Богдан Степовой, Константин Валентинов, ВДВ окрыляют: десантники получат собственную авиацию, Известия, 19 Feb. 2019, https://iz.ru/847090/aleksei-rammaleksei-kozachenko-bogdan-stepovoi-konstantin-valentinov/vdv-okryliaiut-desantniki-poluchat-sobstvennuiuaviatciiu.67  In 2019, six Su-35Ss were handed over to the 790th IAP and six Su-34s were handed over to the 2nd SAP deployed at Chelyabinsk Shagol in the Central MD. Another two Su-34s were handed over to the air force in December, but it is unclear where they were sent.68  Евгений Подзоров, Сбалансированный бюджет позволяет реализовать все планы по развитию Вооружённых Сил, Красная Звезда, 27.19.2019, http://redstar.ru/sbalansirovannyj-byudzhet-pozvolyaetrealizovat-vse-plany-po-stroitelstvu-i-razvitiyu-vooruzhyonnyh-sil/.
Altyn73, Сразу Четыре дивизиона С-400 получил один полк, 25 Feb. 2020, https://altyn73.livejournal.com/1426325.html.
According to http://militaryrussia.ru/blog/topic-558.html, the exact number of Pantsir units deployed to defend a S-400 battalion depends on the threat environment and the number of other short-range air defense assets employed to defend strategic SAM systems.
"Russia: Pantsir-S1 anti-missile systems in Kaliningrad drills," Ruptly Channel, 21 Mar. 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g_p_Dw-4yn4.
Jonas Kjellèn, Russian Electronic Warfare. The role of Electronic Warfare in the Russian Armed Forces, FOI, 04.10.2018, p. 37, https://www.foi.se/rapportsammanfattning?reportNo=FOI-R--4625--SE.
Андрей Резчиков, «Самарканд» превратит армии НАТО в войско дикарей, Взгляд, 28.10.2018, https://vz.ru/society/2018/10/28/674524.html.
Лидия Мисник, Гроза Европы: в Калининграде развернули «Мурманск-БН», Газета.ру. 26.04.2019, https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2019/04/26/12323509.shtml. This deployment is also confirmed by satellite imagery (54.831422, 19.957723).
The brigade fields one Kilo-class patrol submarine -Project 877EKM (487 Dmitrov, commissioned in 1986). It was under repair between 2014 and March 2018, when it was transferred back to the Baltic Sea Fleet. In the meantime, the second submarine of the fleet, Project 877 (469 Vyborg, commissioned in 1983), is understood to have been decommissioned in November 2018.
A June 2020 Krasnaya Zvezda report stated that rotary-wing aviation assets operating in the Kaliningrad Oblast are subordinate to the 34th SAD. No mention of the 132nd SAD was made therein. It is possible that the 132nd SAD has indeed morphed into the 34th SAD. However, neither has this information been officially confirmed, nor has the author confirmed the veracity of this claim from other openly available sources.
This report is part of a series generously funded by a grant from the 
Carnegie Corporation of New York
CNA's Occasional Paper series is published by CNA, but the opinions expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of CNA or the 
Department of the Navy
The 6th Combined Arms Army is headquartered in St. Petersburg and is composed of nine brigades and regiments. Figure 
5
There is also a gradual decrease in defense spending, which impacts both the state defense order (SDO) and the way that funds within it are managed, as well as which programs receive priorities. Fixed-wing aircraft do not seem to be prioritized, which could denote a gradual decrease in obtaining such aircraft. (See Table 
2
As part of its role, the 6th AADA also provides strategic-level early warning and air defense coverage for units stationed in the Western MD. divisions, described in Table 
3
70
However, the effectiveness of such attacks depends on the extent to which SAM batteries will obtain incoming targets, process them, and release missiles into them. To support the entire engagement cycle, an S-400 battery is supported by the following: a 92N6 target engagement radar (six to 10 simultaneous engagements); a 96L6 target acquisition radar, with an acquisition range of 300 km (186 miles); and a 91N6 battle management radar, with an acquisition range of 600 km (372 miles). It is equipped with a 48N6E3/48N6DM interceptor missile that has a nominal range of 250 km (155 miles). It is to be augmented with a 40N6 missile, which reportedly has a range of 400 km (248 miles). These nominal ranges, for both missile and radar systems, are restricted by two factors: first, the radar horizon, which effectively limits how much a radar horizon can "see"; and, second, by Russia's ability to
The current composition of conventional components of the Russian armed forces deployed in the Western Military District presents a force that is capable of conducting operations across all domains and the entire spectrum of warfare. Table 
4
CNA is a not-for-profit research organization that serves the public interest by providing in-depth analysis and result-oriented solutions to help government leaders choose the best course of action in setting policy and managing operations. 