# ID: 57182b477215438ea74af4381ff08c36
# Title: Diplomats at war: a critical analysis of American and Confederate diplomacy, 1861-1862
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
France was secondary, and other European nations, except for Russia, based their diplomacy regarding the American Civil War on that of Great Britain and France.
To that end, the United States and Confederate States realized this dynamic and directed their efforts primarily to Great Britain and France.
Therefore, this study limits the scope of investigation to that of the foreign offices of Great Britain and France.
Second, the President and Secretary of State of the United States worked closely in developing foreign policy.
A difficulty in assessing effectiveness, more specifically organizational effectiveness, lies in the determination of the primary constituents.
The assumption that the President and Secretary of State acted as the primary foreign policy developers resolves this issue.
The third assumption is that the President and Secretary of State of the Confederate States acted as the primary policy developers for the Confederacy.
The fourth assumption states that the task of the Confederate State diplomacy was one of more difficulty than that of the United States.
This assumption plays a role in chapter 6 in providing allowances for the Confederate States when determining diplomatic effectiveness.
Due to travel, financial constraints, and access to archives, primary source material is limited to that of the Leavenworth, Kansas area.
Finally, this study will be limited to the diplomatic efforts from fall of 1861 to winter of 1862.
This delimitation is based on the likelihood of European intervention in the Civil War.
European intervention proved most likely from winter of 1861 to fall of 1862.