# ID: 57182b477215438ea74af4381ff08c36
# Title: Diplomats at war: a critical analysis of American and Confederate diplomacy, 1861-1862
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The period from winter of 1861 until fall of 1862 proved pivotal in the Civil War. There were key victories and defeats on the battlefield, there was political change, there was debate over slavery, and, often overlooked, there was diplomatic maneuvering. Concerning diplomacy, the task for the Confederacy was to convince European powers that it was in the vital interest of those nations to intervene in the war. Intervention, by way of recognition, mediation, or temporary armistice, would be a major success for the Confederacy. If recognized as legitimate by other major powers, the Confederacy would gain the right to negotiate alliances, acquire loans to finance the war, and call on allies to challenge the legality of the blockade. The task for the United States proved more simplistic. Its task was to prevent European powers from recognizing the Confederacy. The aim of this study is to examine the effectiveness of the application of the diplomatic instrument of power by the United States and Confederate States from the winter of 1861 to the fall of 1862. Specific events this study evaluates during that time period include the Trent Affair, the Blockade, the Second Battle of Bull Run, and Battle of Antietam.
CHAPTER 1
The period from winter of 1861 until fall of 1862 proved pivotal in the Civil War.
There were key victories and defeats on the battlefield, there was political change, there was debate over slavery, and, often overlooked, there was diplomatic maneuvering.
Concerning diplomacy, the task for the Confederacy was to convince European powers that it was in the interest of those nations to intervene in the war. Intervention, by way of recognition, mediation, or temporary armistice, would prove a major success for the Confederacy. If recognized as legitimate by other major powers, the Confederacy would gain the right to negotiate alliances, acquire loans to finance the war, and call on allies to challenge the legality of the blockade. The task for the United States proved more simplistic. Its task was to simply prevent European powers from recognizing the Confederacy.
The Confederate States made intervention, specifically through recognition, a top priority from the outset of war. As early as March 16, 1861 the Confederacy attempted to gain recognition. Confederate Secretary of State Mr. Robert Toombs instructed Confederate commissioners sent to Europe to state that, "The Confederate States, therefore present themselves for admission into the family of independent nations, and ask for that acknowledgement and friendly recognition which are due to every people capable of self-government and possessed of the power to maintain their independence." 1 United States Secretary of State William H. Seward, realized the potential detrimental effects of Confederate recognition. The policy and approach of the United States concerning foreign recognition proved aggressive and straightforward. In a letter to United States Foreign Minister to England Charles Francis Adams, Seward wrote: "You may even assure them promptly in that case that if they determine to recognize, they may at the same time prepare to enter into an alliance with the enemies of this Republic." 
2
All of those events influenced how European nations viewed intervention. The way Union and Confederate diplomacy shaped that view was crucial to the decision to intervene or not.
The aim of this study is to examine the effectiveness of the application of the diplomatic instrument of power by the United States and the Confederacy from the winter of 1861 to the fall of 1862. Ultimately, this study concludes that the United States diplomats performed more effectively than the Confederate diplomats during the Trent affair and the blockade debate and the Confederate diplomats performed more effectively than the United States diplomats during the battles of the summer and fall of 1862 and up to the period of time shortly after Lincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation. Lastly, the study states that from winter of 1861 to fall of 1862 the United States diplomats performed more effectively than its Confederate counterparts.
Chapter 1 defines the term effectiveness and offers a means in determining diplomatic effectiveness. This chapter also presents assumptions, limitations, and delimitations. Additionally, chapter 1 briefly reviews the relevant secondary literature that bears on this study.
Chapter 2 reviews the key actors who assisted in framing the foreign policy of the United States, the Confederate States, and European nations in 1861. This appraisal includes government officials at home and diplomats sent abroad. Additionally, chapter 2 inventories the long-term strategic goals of the United States, Confederate States, and European nations constructed in the initial stages of the war. By examining the actors of 1861 and long-term strategies set in 1861, the stage is set to critically evaluate diplomacy from the winter of 1861 to fall of 1862 and to successfully determine the associated effectiveness.
States vis-à-vis short-term and long-term goal accomplishment takes place in chapter 3, chapter 4, and chapter 5. Furthermore, those chapters also assess the internal processes of the United States and Confederate States diplomatic organizations. Chapter 3 focuses on the time period during winter of 1861 and 1862. Chapter 4 addresses the time period of the winter and spring of 1862. Chapter 5 covers the summer and fall of 1862. A conclusion comparing the diplomatic effectiveness between the United States and Confederate States occurs in chapter 6. Additionally, chapter 6 provides areas for future research.
Prior to determining the level of United States and Confederate States effectiveness in the application of the diplomatic instrument of power, the term effective requires definition. Merriam-Webster defines effective as producing a decided, decisive, or desired effect. 
3
4
To help further define the term, an examination of the organizational effectiveness construct, to include the various models, is required and a construction of a model to specifically apply to the study of diplomacy is necessary.
In the past, organizational effectiveness was a primary method in measuring the success of organizations. In 1957, Basil S. Georgopoulos and Arnold S. Tanenbaum defined it as "the extent to which an organization as a social system, given certain resources and means, fulfills its objectives without incapacitating its means and resources and without placing undue strain upon its members." 5 Over the course of the following decades, due to conceptual questions, such as what to measure and how, organizational effectiveness models were replaced by models that emphasized quantifiable factors. 
6
Therefore, with close examination of the various organizational effectiveness models, the conceptual issues of what to measure and how are answered. Furthermore, by reviewing the models, a specific model to measure the diplomatic instrument of power is constructed.
In describing the organizational effectiveness models, Kim Cameron identified the four most widely used in scientific investigation. The goals model is outcome driven and focuses on goal accomplishment. The resource dependence model ties the ability to 
5
6 Kim Cameron, "Organizational Effectiveness: Its Demise and Re-emergence through Positive Organizational Scholarship," in Handbook of Management Theory: The Process of Theory Development, eds., Michael A. Hitt and Ken G. Smith (London:  University Press, 2005), 304-330; Joseph R. Matthews, "Assessing Organizational Effectiveness: The Role of Performance Measures," The Library Quarterly 81, no. 1 (January 2011): 83-110, http:://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/657447 (accessed August  10, 2013). acquire needed resources to organizational effectiveness. The internal processes model centers on the means to accomplish objectives; that is, organizational effectiveness is linked to internal functioning. Lastly, the strategic constituency model tackles the issue of multiple parties within the organization defining success differently. It states that effectiveness lies in satisfying the dominant constituency and all other constituencies are at least minimally satisfied. 
7
To measure diplomatic effectiveness during the Civil War from the winter of 1861 until the fall of 1862, this study submits an organizational effectiveness model that addresses both the means and the ends; a hybrid model combining the goals model and internal processing model. By merging elements of the goals model and the internal processing model, the outcome of diplomacy and the process of diplomacy will be addressed. Basil S. Georgopoulos and Arnold S. Tannenbaum submit that "organizational effectiveness must take into consideration these two aspects: the objectives of organizations and the means through which they sustain themselves and attain objectives." 
8
Georgopolous and Tannenbaum propose the following for general criteria in measuring organizational effectiveness: intra-organizational strain or conflict, or lack thereof, flexibility, and productivity. 9 This study loosely uses that criteria and focuses on three major areas to measure effectiveness in the form of three questions:
1. In terms of internal processing, was there clear guidance and vision communicated to diplomats and did those diplomats carry out that guidance? Additionally, did the diplomats communicate to their respective secretaries of 8 Georgopoulos and Tannenbaum. 
9
10
By constructing a model specific to diplomacy that contains an outcome assessment and an internal processes assessment, including appropriate criterion, the effectiveness of United States and Confederate States diplomatic efforts can more accurately be judged.
The examination of the effectiveness of the United States and Confederate States diplomatic organizations contains assumptions, limitations, and delimitations. First, as for European powers, this study assumes that Great Britain held the majority of power, 
10
France was secondary, and other European nations, except for Russia, based their diplomacy regarding the American Civil War on that of Great Britain and France. To that end, the United States and Confederate States realized this dynamic and directed their efforts primarily to Great Britain and France. Therefore, this study limits the scope of investigation to that of the foreign offices of Great Britain and France. Second, the President and Secretary of State of the United States worked closely in developing foreign policy. A difficulty in assessing effectiveness, more specifically organizational effectiveness, lies in the determination of the primary constituents. The assumption that the President and Secretary of State acted as the primary foreign policy developers resolves this issue. The third assumption is that the President and Secretary of State of the Confederate States acted as the primary policy developers for the Confederacy. The fourth assumption states that the task of the Confederate State diplomacy was one of more difficulty than that of the United States. This assumption plays a role in chapter 6 in providing allowances for the Confederate States when determining diplomatic effectiveness. Due to travel, financial constraints, and access to archives, primary source material is limited to that of the Leavenworth, Kansas area. Finally, this study will be limited to the diplomatic efforts from fall of 1861 to winter of 1862. This delimitation is based on the likelihood of European intervention in the Civil War. European intervention proved most likely from winter of 1861 to fall of 1862.
When examining diplomacy in the Civil War, three sides require evaluation: the United States, the Confederate States, and the European nations the United States and Confederate States attempted to influence. Fortunately, for purposes of this study, many works exist regarding these inter-relationships. Additionally, for purposes in defining effectiveness, many studies and books address the task of defining effectiveness. This section inventories the literature examined in conducting research for this study. It first discusses the literature applicable to effectiveness and then discusses significant literature from the different national perspectives of the three national groupings already identified.
To assist in defining the term effectiveness, this study uses an organizational effectiveness construct. Works that directly influenced this thesis include "A study of Organizational Effectiveness" written by Basil S. Georgopolous and Arnold S. Seward, edited by George E. Baker (1890). These primary sources directly address the longterm goals of the United States' foreign policy makers as well correspondence concerning critical events. One of the most famous multi-volume biographies that attempts to bring understanding to the life of President Abraham Lincoln is Abraham Lincoln: A History, written by Lincoln's personal secretaries John G. Nicolay and John   Hay (1886). Due to their personal relationship with Lincoln, Nicolay and Hay are afforded an opportunity to offer unique perspective on Lincoln's role in diplomacy. An additional valuable resource in describing Lincoln's role in diplomacy is Jay Monaghan's   Diplomat in Carpet Slippers: Abraham Lincoln Deals with Foreign Affairs (1945). This resource helps identify and describe foreign diplomats working abroad during the Civil War including Ambassador to Court of St. James (Britain) Charles Francis Adams and Foreign Minister to France William L. Dayton.  Seward's Foreign Policy, 1861 (1976)   Davis, edited by   Lynda Lasswell Crist (1971-1997), aids in understanding Davis and his diplomatic views. Judah P. Benjamin played a significant role in foreign affairs and Eli N. Evans' Judah P. Benjamin: The Jewish Confederate (1988) addresses this.
Many works address British and French involvement in the diplomatic affairs of the Civil War. Ephraim D. Adams ' Great Britain and the American Civil War (1925)   evaluates how England perceived the war and how they constructed policy. Private and Confidential: Letters from British Ministers in Washington to the Foreign Secretaries in London, 1844-1867, edited by James J. Barnes and Patience P. Barnes (1993), is a fine primary source inventorying correspondence from British diplomats relating to the Civil War. Regarding key British foreign policy makers, a review of Howard Jones' Union in   Peril: The Crisis over British Intervention in the Civil War (1992), which specifically focuses on Britain's role in the Civil War, is suggested. Concerning French involvement, Dean Mahin does an admirable job in examining the French and their role in the Civil War in his survey, One War at a Time: The International Dimension of the American Civil War (1999). An additional resource in evaluating France's relationship to the Confederacy and their probability of intervention is John Bigelow's France and the Confederate Navy: 1862-1868 (1888).
As can be adduced from the literature review just conducted, historians have spent much effort evaluating diplomacy during the Civil War. However, historians have never applied an organizational effectiveness model comparing the efforts of the United States and Confederate States. This study aims to do that. CHAPTER 2 BACKGROUND Prior to examining the events that shaped diplomacy from the winter of 1861 to the fall of 1862, the likelihood of intervention requires explanation. Additionally, an inventory of the diplomats and statesmen from the United States, Confederate States, and European nations who possessed roles at the beginning of the period necessitates review.
A thorough review of diplomats assists in examining the internal processes of an organization. Lastly, the long-term goals diplomats attempted to achieve entails definition. Long-term goals vis-à-vis foreign policy speaks to the productivity of an organization.
The reason for investigating the period from the winter of 1861 to the fall of 1862 is based on the likelihood of British and French intervention. Prior to the winter of 1861, the chances of intervention proved low for a number of reasons. First, European nations took a "wait-and-see" approach in attempt to evaluate the war.
11
12
13
The probability of intervention from the winter of 1861 to the fall of 1862 increased. Reasons for the increase were numerous: seizure of Confederate emissaries off British mail packet Trent by the United States in November of 1861, European economic woes due to the United States blockade of Confederate ports limiting the cotton supply, humanitarian concerns over the duration of the war, and significant battlefield successes and failures. 
14
In examining the statesmen who influenced United States foreign policy during the Civil War, one must first observe President Abraham Lincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward. When Lincoln received the Republican nomination for president in 1860, he was not well known outside the United States. Lord Richard Lyons, British Ambassador to the United States, wrote to his home office the following: "He is, I understand, a rough farmer who began life as a farm labourer and got on by a talent for 
13
14
16
18
Throughout the late 1850s, Seward led the Republican Party. In some ways, many primary voters assumed Seward to be the 1860 Republican Presidential nominee. To that end, during the first round of balloting at the 1860 Republican National Convention, Seward, in fact, received 173 and a half votes to Lincoln's 102. 
19
15
16
18
20
21
22
23
"There is but one vote in the cabinet and that is cast by the President . . . The President is the best of us all." 24 20 Jones, Blue and Gray Diplomacy, 21. 
21
Monaghan,
25. 22
23
24
At the beginning of the Civil War, many thought that Seward alone would handle foreign affairs and Lincoln would focus on domestic issues. 
25
Lincoln clearly understood the direct relationship of domestic and foreign affairs and ensured that he remain involved in all issues abroad. Lincoln instructed Seward to handle foreign diplomacy with the order that the President retained final approval. This is evident in many early dispatches from Seward that noted the President's approval of their contents. 
26
27
25
26
27
28
Dayton. Dayton, a former United States Senator, Attorney General of New Jersey, and presidential nominee, held a keen grasp on politics. 
29
30
31
32
33
28
29
30
31 Burton Hendrick, Statesmen of the Lost Cause: Jefferson 
Davis and His Cabinet (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1939), 42. 32 Ibid., 16, 42, 51. 33
38
34
35 James Morton Callahan, The Diplomatic History of the Southern Confederacy (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1901), 89. Davis' inability to foster relationships with cabinet members is further evidenced by the turnover rate among cabinet portfolios. For example, by March of 1862 three men had already held the post of secretary of state. 
36
Hendrick,
186. 42
43
44
46
47
49
45 Hendrick,
141. 46
47
48
49
50
51
However, French Foreign Minister Edouard Thouvenal tempered this enthusiasm.
Thouvenal, a lawyer and diplomat, held the role of Foreign Minister until late 1862. 
52
Mercier sympathized with the Confederacy, although, for most of the war he concealed his feelings from American diplomats. 
53
The primary diplomatic objective for the United States and Confederate States centered on recognition and intervention. The differences in approach defined the strategies of the warring nations. Abraham Lincoln's primary goal in all deliberations, both foreign and domestic, focused on the preservation of the Union. 
54
51 Mahin,
96. 52 Ibid.,
96,
97. 53
54
55
Seward, like Lincoln, also preached non-intervention. His non-intervention stance bore from his experience as a Senator. In an 1856 speech he clarified his thoughts:
We are the centre of one system, an American one; Great Britain is the centre of another, a European one. Almost in spite of ourselves we are extending and increasing our control over these continents. Notwithstanding her tenacity, she is constantly losing her dominion here. This is within the order of nature. It was for three hundred years the business of European nations to colonize, discipline and educate American nations. It is now the business of these nations to govern themselves. 
56
57
58
59
60
61
57
Seward,
5:232. 58
59
60
61
The Confederate States produce nearly nineteenth-twentieths of all cotton grown in the states which recently consisted of the United States. There is no extravagance in the assertion that the gross amount of yield of the manufactories of Great Britain from cotton of the Confederate States reaches 600,000,000. The British Ministry will comprehend fully the condition to which the British realm would be reduced if the supply of our staple should suddenly fail or even be considerably reduced. 
62
When recognition did not occur as quickly as expected, the Confederacy adjusted its strategy. In a letter to diplomats, Hunter, who had since replaced Toombs, provided guidance and direction. First, he instructed diplomats to portray the Confederacy as a victim of the United States and as a nation forced to take up arms in its own defense. He desired to demonstrate that the Confederacy had no choice but secession from the United States' oppression. Second, he ordered diplomats to focus on moral reasons for intervention. He wrote, "If the recognition of our independence must finally come, and if it be only a work of time, it seems to be the duty of the nations of the earth to throw their moral weight of their recognition into the scale of peace as soon as possible; for to delay will only prolong the suffering of war." Third, he instructed diplomats to continue highlighting economic reasons. However, instead of directing a focus on the lack of cotton, he urged diplomats to spotlight the importance of economic relationships with the Confederate States. A relationship with the Confederate States equaled a relationship with a country abundant in cotton. Lastly, he required diplomats to challenge the legality of the blockade of Confederate coasts by the United States. He wrote, "You will be furnished with abundant evidence of the fact that the blockade of the coasts of the Confederate States has not been effectual, or of the character as to be binding according to the declaration of the conference at Paris." 
63
64
65
65
66
67
68
69
66
67
71
72
73
74
71
72
73
74
Barnes and Barnes,
250. 75
John Russell and the British Foreign Ministry Office never sent official correspondence.
They viewed the proclamation as a message to British citizens to warn them of a de facto war. 
76
Due to political and military contexts in Europe, other nations looked to Great Britain and France to set their own policies concerning the American Civil War. Spain possessed the reputation of a non-interventionist power and lacked the will to take a lead in recognition. Similar to France, it possessed plans for expansion into North America and feared risking war with the United States. 
77
Outside of Russia, other European countries did not possess requisite military power to effect change.
Russia, former opponent to France and Great Britain in the Crimean War, held military power to affect the war. However, due to the neutrality the United States had displayed during the Crimean War, Russia felt it necessary to repay the United States by remaining neutral towards affairs in America. 
78
76
77
78
2. The neutral flag covers enemy's goods, with the exception of contraband of war.
3. Neutral goods, with the exception of contraband of war, are not liable to capture under enemy's flag.
4. Blockades, in order to be binding, must be effective; that is to say, maintained by a force sufficient really to prevent access to the coast of the enemy. 
82
83
84
85
83
91
92
93
94
95
96
For the Government of the United States must be fully aware that the British Government could not allow such an affront to the national honor to pass without full reparation . . . namely, the liberation of the four gentleman and their delivery to your Lordship, in order that they may again be placed under British protection, and a suitable apology for the aggression which has been committed. 
98
97
98
99
100
101
102
Secondly, he assured a visiting British official that America did not want any quarrel with Great Britain. 
103
102
103
104
107
109
110
111
112
Point Two in the Declaration of Paris stated that "The neutral flag covers enemy's goods, 
106
107
109
110
111
112 Monaghan, 171.  with the exception of contraband of war." 113 Based on this declaration, the only possible argument the United States government held was that the envoys constituted "contraband of war." However, never before had a human being been considered contraband. 
114
115
116
117
118
114
115
116
117
118
native-born Americans. 
119
121
122
123
By the time Seward wrote correspondence to Lord Lyons concerning the release of the prisoners, over seven weeks had passed since the San Jacinto's confrontation with the Trent. In the official note to Lord Lyons addressing the Trent affair, Seward attempted to salvage American honor yet accede to Great Britain. He did so by "concealing America's surrender in a fog of legal arguments." 
124
125
126
127
128
Nicolay and Hay,
5:38. 126
127
Seward,
5:308. 128
The leaders of the Confederacy also displayed marked enthusiasm over the Trent affair, but for different reasons than the United States' citizens. 
129
130
131
132
The Confederate Commission had remained relatively quiet since August when Russell informed the Commission of Great Britain's intentions to remain neutral. 
133
134
129
130
131
143
144
145
146
148
149
On January 1, 1862 barracks guards released Mason and Slidell from Fort Warren, Massachusetts. The two men travelled under escort to Cape Cod and transferred via tug to British warship Rinaldo. 
150
151
152
154
Mahin,
80. 151
Mahin,
80. 153
154
155
156
First, the affair proved that the restoration of the Union was of highest priority and "in pursuit of this objective [Seward] was but seeking to make clear to European nations that the United States was still powerful enough to resent foreign interference." 157 Second, the British Foreign Office's decision to decline a meeting with the Confederate Commission indicates that Seward's objective to deny Confederate envoys the right to meet with foreign secretaries was taking hold.
The Trent affair offered a prime opportunity for the Confederate Commission to make progress vis-à-vis recognition. The fact that progress, in actuality, stalled may not have been due to lack of effort by the Confederate Commission. Perhaps, the fear of a diplomatic break with the United States simply proved too great for the British Foreign Office to justify meeting with the Confederate Commission. Furthermore, obviously damaging to the Confederate cause, the reparations Seward yielded to Great Britain were sufficient in the eyes of Russell. 
158
155
165
166
167
168
169
177
Benjamin held a reputation as an intelligent, well-travelled, and respected leader. 
178
179
180
181
176
177
178 Ibid., 153; Evans, 155-156. 
179
180 Evans,
155. 181
along the Mississippi River to cut off critical transportation and communication routes. 
188
189
Seward. 190
191
193
188
Nicolay and Hay,
4:307. 189
190
191
192
193
194
195
197
198
199
200
201
202
First, in late 1861, to assist in funneling traffic in and out of southern ports, the United 197 Adams, 1:246. 
198
199
200
201 Ibid. 
202
States filled vessels with stone and sunk them in and around waterways. 
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
211
212
214
The pressure upon the industrial interests of France had increased until at last, in certain of their manufacturing districts and cities, the wants of their suffering population are so great that neither the government nor the private subscription can provide for them. All this destitution is attributed to the Civil War in America and the consequent closing of Southern Ports. They seem to think that the removal of the blockade would relieve their difficulties; that it would meet at once their two great wants-cotton and markets. 
215
211
212
213 Ibid. 
214 Monaghan,
[195]
[196]
[197]
Owsley,
149.
The United States and the Blockade In early 1862, Seward's strategy to address the blockade and economic impact proved threefold. First, he instructed his diplomats to "circumvent" the topic until the Union scored more successes on the battlefield. 
216
217
218
219
216 Owsley,
[227]
[228]
218
219
220
The Confederate blockade strategy proved difficult. Davis, as well as other Confederate leaders, believed that a European cotton famine was the best way to incite foreign intervention (King Cotton-discussed in chapter 2). 
221
222
223
224
Outside the beginning stages of the war, the Confederate Commission made only minor attempts to oppose the blockade during 1861. 
225
226
227
228
246
247
248
249
245
246
247
254
255
256
Specifically, the ports, the shipbuilding industry, and the munitions industry all witnessed increased demand; thus, off-setting many negative effects of the cotton famine. 
257
We have the details of the . . . disastrous affair at Fort Donelson. I need not say how unfavorable an influence these defeats, following in such quick succession, have produced on public sentiment. . . . [we] must expect that the declaration of the inefficiency of the blockade, to which I had looked forward with great confidence at no distant day, will be indefinitely postponed. 259 254 Adams, 1:265-268. 
255
256
257
258 Owsely, 228. 
259
260
Although further diplomatic attempts to debate the legality of the blockade were made throughout the rest of the war, few attempts made as much progress as the ones in early 1862. Reasons for this proved twofold. First, as the war progressed so did the effectiveness of the blockade. The numbers of blockade runners captured by the blockade over the course of the war are as follows: one in 10 in 1861; one in eight in 1862; one in four in 1863; one in three in 1864; and one in two in 1865. 
261
262
Along with a renewed interest in linen output from the British Isles, Great Britain and France turned to Egypt and India for increased output of cotton. When Egypt and India positively responded to the demand, the dependence on Confederate cotton lowered and the King Cotton strategy suffered a severe blow. 
263
261
262
263
Britain and France to intervene in the war and it handcuffed diplomatic attempts to argue the ineffectiveness of the blockade. For the time being, Russell's and Thouvenal's decisions to avoid interference appeared set; the blockade debate subsided.
Similar to the Trent affair, according to the model, the United States diplomats performed more effectively than the Confederate diplomats concerning the blockade debate. On the subject of the internal processes criteria, it appears that Seward's instructions to his diplomats relating to a strategy of delay were clear and logical and Adams and Dayton proved able in delivering them to their British and French counterparts. As for the second criteria, human relations, Dayton appeared to have made progress with Thouvenal and perhaps proved influential in swaying Thouvenal to take a non-interference stance on the blockade. Concerning the goals criteria, the United States achieved its short term goal to prevent foreign interference in the blockade. Seward's strategy of delay, specifically, proved successful. With that strategy, Seward provided the United States Navy sufficient time in order to build a more effective blockade. This, in turn, made it difficult for the British and French Foreign Offices to argue ineffectiveness. Days Battle. 
268
267
268
Slidell, to his credit, took advantage of the victory and achieved a meeting with Thouvenal. As a result of the meeting, Thouvenal instructed Slidell to write him a letter which he would in turn pass to the Emperor. In the letter, Slidell attempted to play to the Emperor's liberal sensibilities by claiming that the Union was attempting to "subjugate the people of the Confederate States and to govern them as conquered people." 
275
276
277
If we happen to fail in one of several combined military enterprises, as every belligerent power is subject to . . . it is pronounced abroad to be conclusive against the success of the whole war. If, on the other hand, we gain victory upon victory with rapidity and upon scale such as only the campaign of the First humanitarian reasons for closure to the war was also highlighted in previous dispatches to diplomats, including his letter to Slidell on April 12, 1862.
Emperor of France exhibited, the refusal of the insurgents to render instant and universal submission to the Federal authority renders these successes in foreign eyes ineffectual and valueless. 
278
279
280
281
282
simply "hinder" Union Major General John Pope and the newly formed Army of Virginia. However, when it became apparent that McClellan was slow to mobilize his defeated force, Lee and most of his remaining men also headed north and changed the objective from hinder to the defeat of Pope and his Army of Virginia. 
294
295
Similar to his letters written after the victory at the Seven Days Battle, Benjamin again drafted correspondence promoting Confederate superiority on the battlefield. He 
294 Macdonald,
48. 295
296
297
298
300
The contrast between our present condition and that which existed ninety days ago seems almost magical. Instead of having the invader in the heart of our country, with our capital closely invested by an arrogant and confident foe, our entire frontier from the Atlantic to the Mississippi, with a few insignificant exceptions, is reposing in peace behind the protection of our victorious forces. The cry of "On to Richmond" . . . is changed into a discordant clamor for protection. 
301
302
299
303
304
305
Seward,
307
308
309
310
312
313
315
After the remarkable victory at Bull Run, Lee desired to maintain momentum and set out north to invade Union territory. He wrote to Davis that, "the present seems to be the most propitious time since the commencement of the war for the Confederate Army to enter Maryland." 
316
313
314
315 Mahin,
128;
Adams,
2:38. 316
317
318
329
330
332
333
334
335
336
337
333
334
335 Mahin,
129. 336
337 Mahin,
133;
Jones,
Union in Peril,
179;
Adams,
British Cabinet Meeting(s) and the French Proposal Leading up to the October 23 meeting, Russell made attempts to convince Cabinet members and various London political parties, including the Opposition Party, of the value of a proposed armistice. 
338
339
341
338 Mahin,
133. 339 Ibid.,
134. 340
341
That lack of enthusiasm, as well as possessing an opposition view to the French governments' role in Italy, eventually led to Thouvenal's surprising resignation in the middle of October. 
349
350
351
353
Perhaps due to the momentum halt caused by the debate leading up to the October 23 meeting, the plan gained little traction. To finally put an end to the idea of intervention, the British Cabinet met on November 11 to vote on the proposal and it was heavily rejected. 
354
365
To Napoleon III, a divided America would allow French-controlled Mexico to "eventually incorporate Texas." 366 Throughout 1863, Napoleon continued to try to advance intervention plans, but like previous attempts, these too failed. 367 By early 1864, perhaps fearing a United States reprisal for violating the Monroe Doctrine, Napoleon finally dropped his pursuit for intervention. 
368
Unlike the Trent Affair and the blockade debate, the Confederate diplomats clearly outperformed their United States counterparts during the summer and fall of 1862.
The way the diplomats linked Confederate successes on the battlefield to diplomatic momentum proved impressive. Looking at the criteria to judge effectiveness, the Confederate diplomats performed well on all accounts. Concerning the internal processes criteria, Benjamin was perhaps at his best during this time period. He clearly articulated his arguments and he provided current information to Mason and Slidell at a constant pace. Of particular note, his correspondences directly after the Seven Days Battle and 
365
366 Jones,
Blue and Gray Diplomacy,
294. 367 Ibid.,
Second Bull Run were well stated and may have had significant effect on Palmerston's and Russell's changing perceptions of the affairs in America. In regards to the second criteria, human relationships, it appears Slidell performed well in Paris. As evidence, Slidell's letter to Napoleon III via Thouvenal after the Seven Days Battle may have been a catalyst in achieving diplomatic momentum throughout the summer. Additionally, the fact that Slidell achieved a meeting with the Emperor in late October, when the Emperor was abundantly busy regarding affairs with Italy and Thouvenal, was also quite impressive.
Concerning the goals criteria, the Confederate diplomats did not achieve their overall goal of intervention. They did, however, achieve a lesser goal of advancing the debate to a vote. In diplomacy, timing is everything. To that end, perhaps intervention did not fail due to Confederate diplomatic effort but instead due to timing. If the French Foreign Office and the Emperor were more organized in late September and early October and had engaged the British Foreign Office with their proposed mediation plan prior to the October 23 meeting, then perhaps Palmerston would have resisted his return to a cautious approach and he would have more strongly supported Russell's motion to intervene.
Turning to the United States diplomats, they uncharacteristically performed poorly during the summer and fall of 1862. In regards to the first criteria, internal processes, Adams entirely failed to carry out Seward's instruction to threaten counterparts in the case of a proposed joint intervention. Although this may be due to miscommunication regarding Seward's instruction to only deliver the threat in the event that Adams was approached with a mediation offer, Adams should have recognized the an easier task; it simply had to argue that the Confederacy had failed to meet the burden of proof. As long as the Confederacy was viewed as a "belligerent," and not as an "independent" nation, the Confederacy's ability to achieve long-term and short-term goals would be significantly hindered. 
The following section contains the stated diplomatic effectiveness criteria from chapter 1, the associated questions contained within the criteria, and an appraisal of the United States and Confederate performance vis-à-vis that criteria. First, did the leadership provide clear guidance and vision to diplomats and did those diplomats carry out that guidance? Second, did the diplomats communicate to their respective secretaries of state about issues in Great Britain and France?
For the majority of the study, Seward and his diplomats communicated often and efficiently with one another. Seward proved effective in drafting correspondences that contained logical and well-crafted arguments; specifically, his correspondence regarding Confederates, on the other hand, attempted to appease their foreign counterparts and downplay the issue of slavery. This proved a delicate matter that required effective diplomacy. Further research, using the diplomatic effectiveness model, would prove beneficial in evaluating the efforts of both the United States and the Confederacy and their attempts to influence the British and French Foreign offices of their stated views. To that end, an additional analysis of the diplomat's effort during the time period between November 1862 and February 1863, as the proclamation was implemented, would also be of interest.
Lastly, a further analysis of the inner-workings of the cabinet relationships of the United States and the Confederacy would be of value. Also, an examination of the Anglo-French relationship would be of interest. Particularly, issues regarding Palmerston's and Russell's view of Napoleon III and his North American ambitions require further study.
To that end, a closer look at Russia's role, as a pro-Union country, and its effect on the Anglo-French decision to withhold mediation proposals would prove beneficial.
Diplomacy: William H.
William H. Seward to Charles Francis Adams, April 10, 1861, in The Works of William H.Seward, ed. George E. Baker (New York: Houghton , Mifflin, and Co., 1890),  5:207.   
Merriam-Webster, "Effective," http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ effective (accessed May 19, 2014).
Ibid.   
Cameron, "Organizational Effectiveness."   
Francis M. Carroll, "The American Civil War and British Intervention: The Threat of Anglo-American Conflict," Canadian Journal of History 47, no. 1 (March 2012): 5, http://www.thefreelibrary.com/_/print/PrintArticle.aspx?id=294193705 (accessed November 7, 2013); Howard Jones, Union in Peril: The Crisis over British Intervention in the Civil War (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992), 21.
Frank Owsley, King Cotton Diplomacy: Foreign  Relations of the Confederate States of America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1931), 146-147; Howard Jones, Blue and Gray Diplomacy (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010),
Abraham Lincoln, "First Inaugural Address: March 4, 1861" in A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents: 1789-1897, ed. James D. Richardson (Washington, DC: Government Printing Press, 1897), 6:5.
Baker, The Works of William H. Seward, 33.   
Richardson, A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Confederacy, 2:7,8.
Mahin, 70.   
Mann convinced Yancey to not reply to Russell's "insult." Yancey to Davis, December 31, 1861, in Jefferson Davis, The Papers of Jefferson Davis, eds. Lynda Crist
Brendan Wolfe, "Anaconda Plan," Encyclopedia Virginia, May 9, 2011, http://www.Encyclopediavirginia.org/Anaconda_Plan#start_entry (accessed February 24, 2014).
Nicolay and Hay, 4:307.   
Adams, 1:250; Norman B. Ferris, Desperate Diplomacy: William H. Seward's Foreign Policy, 1861 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press,1976), 90.
Adams, 1:244.    
Ibid., 1:252.   
Seward, General Dispatch to Diplomats March 17, 1862, in Baker, The Works  of William H. Seward, 5:50.    
Although many, including Benjamin, argued the advantages of commercial treaties with foreign countries, Davis elected to not engage in commercial negotiations concerning the trade of cotton.Callahan, 86.    
Ibid.
Davis, 8:35.    
Slidell to Hunter, February 11, 1862, in  Richardson, A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Confederacy, 2:181; Owsley, 282.
Slidell to Thouvenal (to be fwd to Napoleon III), July 21, 1862, in Richardson, A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Confederacy, 2:286.
Ibid.
Slidell to Benjamin, July 25, 1862, in  Richardson, A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Confederacy, 2:272.
Seward to Adams, September 26, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William H.  Seward, 5:355-356; Seward to Dayton, October 20, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William  H. Seward, 5:361.    
Seward to Dayton, October 8, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William H.  Seward, 5:357-358.    
Seward to Dayton, October 20, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William H.  Seward, 5:361-362.    
Adams, 2:37.    
Mahin, 128.   
Seward to Dayton, October 20, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William H.  Seward, 5:361-362.   
Seward to Dayton, October 20, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William H.  Seward, 5:361.    
Seward to Adams, November 10, 1862, in Baker, The Works of William H.  Seward, 5:369.   
Adams, 2:44.   
Mahin,[138][139][140]. Mahin argues that upon conclusion of the November 11 rejected vote and Adams delivery of the threat, Russell finally became convinced that there was zero possibility for British intervention in the Civil War.
NAME(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Dr. Kuehn
Dr. Kuehn
Dr. Dean Nowowiejski
Art of War Scholars Chair
Major Dave Jones
been more and more friendly, and on one recent occasion M. Thouvenal was pleased to say to me that no one could have done or accomplished more than I have." 
139
140
142
139
140
141
142
161
231
232
327
328
325
Seward,
5:360. 326
327
during the summer and early fall had ceased and the opportunity for joint intervention had finally come to an end. Perhaps Seward said it best when he wrote to Dayton: "A year ago it seemed that any foreign nation might assail and destroy us at a blow. I am sure that no one foreign nation would now conceive such an attempt." 
355
In July of 1862, for political, humanitarian, and foreign policy reasons, Lincoln drafted the Emancipation Proclamation and presented it to his cabinet. 
356
357
358
355
356 Bailey,
[156]
[157]
[158]
[159]
[160]
358
When evaluating the effectiveness of the diplomatic efforts of the United States and the Confederacy and determining associated level of success, it is important to recognize that the Confederacy was at a distinct disadvantage. Due to its unrecognized international entity status, its long-term and short-term goals were more difficult to attain.
Additionally, due to its recent establishment as an independent state, its internal processes
were not yet developed.
In contrast to the United States, where its status in the world was defined and secure, the Confederacy, as a rebelling faction of the United States, was responsible in proving to the rest of the world that it possessed the "will and ability to maintain independence." 
370
The scope of the Civil War was wide and events that caused diplomatic maneuvering proved vast. This study focused on events from the winter of 1861 to fall of 1862, where likelihood of intervention proved high. However, just because likelihood was highest during that time period does not mean that likelihood was zero in the period prior to winter of 1861 and the period after the fall of 1862. In regards to further research, using the diplomatic effectiveness model, it would prove beneficial to examine events in early 1861 at the outset of the war to include: the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, the British shipbuilding efforts to supply the Confederacy naval vessels, and the First Battle of Bull Run. Additionally, an examination of the diplomatic efforts of the United States Further Thoughts
The author went into this study with an interest in diplomacy, an interest in the Civil War, and a preconceived notion that the Confederate diplomats were much to blame for the Confederate loss in the Civil War. For example, why were they unable to achieve what the American Revolutionary diplomats had 80 years earlier? The author soon realized that there proved to be much more to the story-there was Seward, a great Secretary of State, and there were outstanding United States diplomats abroad to account for and undermine. Furthermore, there were complex foreign offices that required convincing. Interestingly, the author discovered that the Confederate diplomats, in fact, made great progress over the course of study. Also, intervention, specifically in 1862, proved much more likely than the author previously realized. In the end, however, the Confederate diplomats came up short and do deserve some approbation. More importantly, the true lesson that was taken away from this study has little to do with the Confederate shortcomings but, instead, with the diplomatic achievements of the United States. The author now recognizes that, rather than assigning blame to the Confederate diplomats, much credit is due to Lincoln, Seward, Adams, and Dayton. From the winter of 1861 to the fall of 1862, intervention proved likely on many of occasions. If it were not for effective United States diplomatic maneuvering, Great Britain and France could have easily intervened in the war and the outcome of the Civil War, that we now take for granted, could have been widely different. The United States diplomats may not have won battles on the battlefield, but their contribution to the Union cause proved just as vital and critical in winning the war.