# ID: 59db85d6fda74d42b90f402f6c8470f0
# Title: The Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System: can procedures be developed to support the requirements of the land and air component commanders?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1992.0
# Fulltext:
fItd.Ant.'ld£ ... e P. I'l OA. IVd' IN4 w
He and LTC Jim Winters ordered, cajoled, and directed me to achieve the high standards which they established for the program.
Additionally, Colonel Martin Kleiner served as the catalyst behind my deployment with Joint STARS to DESERT STORM.
Col Kleiner alternated between being a boss, mentor, and friend during my two year involvement with the program. If the truth be known, Col Kleiner is the primary reason for any success that the Army has achieved with Joint STARS.
Last, but most importantly, my heart felt thanks and love go out to my wife Susan and daughter Stephanie.
Thank you for your help with this thesis.
You two kept me smiling, despite my periods of doom, doubt and hard disk crashes. Your patience and understanding were the keys to my success. This paper is as much your accomplishment as it is mine. I love you both very, very much! P.S. Thank you Stephanie for your help on Figure 
21
18
9
20
1
Four months later LTG Franks would command the armor units in DESERT STORM. The Joint STARS contributions to DESERT STORM were noteworthy, significantly adding to the war effort. Following the war, the Air Force Chief of Staff stated, "We will never again go to war without a system like Joint STARS." 
24
(Identification of the Problem) This thesis is an assessment of the use of Joint STARS for joint surveillance and targeting missions in support of operational warfare. An analysis of the effectiveness of the system during Operation DESERT STORM (Chapter Four)   suggests that Joint STARS was sub-optimized in combat. The Air Force and Army separately generated targets with Joint STARS, but seldom developed targets "jointly." Iraqi positions were engaged exclusively by Air Force fighters or by Army artillery.
Army helicopters however, played no role in the attacks on Joint STARS generated targets, thereby missing an opportunity to fully exploit the "deep attack" intelligence of Joint STARS.
Additionally, as will be explained in Chapter Four, Joint STARS' capabilities were used in an "either/or" role in DESERT STORM.
Either targeting missions were serviced with the Joint STARS radar or situation development was worked.
The simultaneous use of the surveillance and targeting tools of Joint STARS rarely occurred.
Thesis Question. The goal of this thesis is therefore to offer solutions for improving the operational employment of Joint STARS. The primary question this thesis seeks to answer is: Can Joint STARS procedures be developed to support the requirements of the Land and Air Component Commanders? Subordinate Questions. Before the primary focus of this thesis can be addressed several subordinate questions must be addressed. These questions include:
(1) What was Joint STARS' initial mission design? (2) What current joint surveillance and targeting procedures are in effect? (3) Can Army target development occur independently of Air Force target development? (4) What service should control Joint STARS? (5) What role(s) will Joint STARS play in future wars?
Answering these questions will provide needed insights to the operational tactics, techniques and procedures for Joint STARS.
The answers and conclusions will remain consistent with doctrine and technologically attainable. The recommendations will continue to ensure that Joint STARS contributes to operational warfighting.
Assumptions.
The importance of this thesis rests upon five assumptions:
(1) Joint operations will increase in importance as the military "builds down." "Jointness" will be needed to accomplish what, in thF past; was often achieved by a single service.
(2) Joint STARS will continue to receive adequate fundin? and support from the Army and Air Force.
(3) Aircraft, ground station modules, data links, communication radios and mission equipment will be procured in sufficient numbers to ensure the system's capability.: Reduction in Joint STARS hardware will reduce the possibilities for operational improvements. (4) Operational improvements for Joint STARS requires a balance of doctrinal, procedural and technological approaches. (5) Joint STARS will remain an important wide area surveillance system for the detection and tracking of ground moving target indicators for the next 10-20 years.
DEFINITIONS. Many terms, used in association with the Joint STARS are system unique. Appendix A (Glossary) contains definitions of relevant terms and acronyms to this thesis.
As of January 1992 Joint STARS is fully funded in the Program Objective Memorandum.
STn 1990 the projected procurement totals were 22 aircraft and 75 GSMs.
However, to help the reader several key terms are defined at the outset of this work. These three terms are: Joint STARS.
Ground Station Module (GSM), and MTI.
Joint STARS -The Joint Surveillance Target Attack
Radar System includes several components. Each of these system components is essential for conducting the Joint STARS mission. This is especially true in the linkage of the E-8A and the GSM.
The primary components of Joint STARS are:
- Joint STARS is able to track the direction and speed of MTI in a wide area surveillance mode.
This capability distinguishes Joint STARS from all other fielded MTI system.
Delimitations. The scope of this thesis intentionally restricts discussion to an analysis of Joint STARS' place in the conduct of operational warfare.
The following delimitations are established:
(1) Except for the historical background, provided in Chapter One, this study will not address the Joint STARS program or system capabilities before 1990.
(2) This study will not address Joint STARS reporting procedures below the brigade level.
(3) Because doctrine should drive the development and use of new weapon systems, this study will not recommend changes to the developing concept of AirLand Operations. (5) This thesis does not rely upon classified material for the formulation of conclusions.
The following limitations are established:
(1) This study will present an analysis of the Joint STARS missions in DESERT STORM as a case study to offer one look at system operational procedures. Care will be taken not to focus upon coincidental relationships which can occur with the introduction of a unique system into war.
(2) This study will examine those DESERT STORM questionnaires and surveys prepared by the Army's Operational and Evaluation Command (OEC), and analyzed by OEC in its DESERT STORM After Action Report (AAR).
(3) This study will use a comparative analysis of current Army and Air Force doctrine as it pertains to operational warfare. The methodology of this thesis modifies the TRADOC model in the following order, with steps eight and nine deleted, as these steps are beyond the scope of this work.
Step FM 6-20 Fire Support in the AirLand Battle. (17 May 1988). FM 6-20-10 Tactics, Techniques and Procedures for the Targeting Process. (March 1990). FM 6-20-30 Fire   No less important to the Joint STARS mission is the "below deck" storage areas which house the computer processors and radar system components.
Crew member requirements are a further reason for the selection of the 707 as the aircraft of choice.
The flight and mission crew encompasses about twenty-five personnel. 
27
The space aboard also permits crewmembers to rest in four sleeping berth areas and numerous reclining "airliner-type" seats.
To the rear of the plane are two restrooms and a kitchen galley for food and water. However vulnerable, the Joint STARS' E-8A is no more or less survivable than similar Air Force special mission c COMPASS CALL is an electronic countermeasures system installed on an Air Force C-130.
RIV*c JOINT locates ground based radar systems.
The RIVET JOINT system is found on a modified Boeing 707 aircraft.
aircraft.
an aggressor fighter pilot is willing to sacrifice his life in return for a "Joint STARS kill" he may likely succeed. For that matter, one lone gunman with an SA-7
could serve the same end during the E-8A's takeoff or landing.
The Joint STARS aircraft is not indestructible; it was never designed to be invincible. 
33
Joint STARS'
risk is equal to that of other theater High Value Assets.
Ground Station Module (GSM). The Army's link to the Air Force's E-8A is the GSM.
The GSM receives and displays surveillance data from the aircraft's radar and distributes this data and developed targeting information to Army Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (C3M) nodes. 
34
3
35
9
The GSM operators manipulate the pre-processed radar data received from the E-8A. Battlefield information of the coverage area enters the work station and is stored in the system's computers.
Through the use of these computers operators tailor battlefield data, specifically to areas determined by their commanders. 
36
Once the operator focuses his attention on a confined set of geographic coordinates or area, the GSM computer can further assist his battlefield analysis by the techniques of time compression and time integration.37 The result of this technique is a fast-forward/fast reverse "movie" of enemy activity in an area of interest.38
In the time integration mode the GSM's computer overlays frames of imagery, one on top of another, until a direction or trend of activity is depicted. Time integration differs visually from time compression in that "fingers of activity" appear and grow on the GSM's video monitors, highlighting for the operator the areas of concentrated enemy activity. Time integration offers a different perspective on enemy activity which can be used in tandem with the time compression mode to determine enemy intent.39
Once targets are determined or probable enemy courses of action are recognized the intelligence can be passed via land-line or secure radio to Army command and control nodes.
The exact communication network will vary with the mission of the supported unit but in most cases derived intelligence can be quickly transmitted to Army and Air Force weapon systems for suppression or destruction of the enemy force. 
40
Mounted on the back of a M885, 5 ton truck, with a 60Kw generator in tow, the GSM is a self-contained battlefield intelligence workstation. Maintenance on the standard vehicle and generator is not complicated and can usually be accomplished by the mechanics available in the supported unit. 
41
42
Limitations in the function of the GSM computer disk drive require the GSM to be stationary and level before "mission booting." From a cold start the process of leveling the truck, erecting the SCDL mast and loading up mission data files takes thirty minutes with a good crew. 
44
For this reason the GSM is likely to be located somewhere besides the front line forces where rapid mobility is not as crucial.
Data link range is the second limitation of the GSM.
Presently the GSM can on'y receive battlefield information when the E-8A is within line-of-sight SCDL reception range.
In a large theater, (such as Saudi Arabia) or in the absence of several Joint STARS aircraft the orbit of the E-8A is stretched to ensure maximum coverage of the Area of Operations (AO).
In such a situation the GSM often "loses data-link" at the ends of the aircraft's orbit. 
45
73
To fight and win the Army of the future must exhibit four characteristics. III.
Decisive Operations.
"The focus of this stage is on culminating the effort of previous stages with tactical and operational decisions.
Security remains an important issue.
At the brigade level, the intense close combat maneuver actions are envisioned to last for short periods.
Force agility is achieved by force tailoring and by using gultiple routes and a detailed mobility plan.
Joint STARS ability to see the entire Area of Operations allows for deep strike targeting missions to be conducted at the same time as surveillance missions.
The surveillance of the AO is important to the continued need for security during the operation.
Once again the dissemination of a battlefield picture down to the brigade level allows for
Joint STARS use at the tactical to operational levels. Known enemy locations, movement speeds, and concentration will allow commanders at a-l levels to tailor his forces for decisive combat.
IV. Force Reconstitution.
"The purpose of this stage is to restore optimum combat power. Force reconstitution spans activities from normal sustainment, through reorganization, and regeneration to redeployment.
The first principal action upon completion of decisive operations will be t_. disperse the force and establish security. Operational Significance.
Joint STARS capabilities demand its involvement in the Army's Operational Cycle. Joint STARS should be able to add to all stages of the cycle.
Additionally, the consistency of Joint STARS capabilities with the characteristics of both the Army and the Air Force suggest that the system will successfully contribute to conflicts across the operational continuum. An analysis of Joint STARS' performance in Operation DESERT STORM will help to establish if this assumption is correct.
13.Joint STARS Operational and Organizational Plan, (23  February 1989).
Signed by TAC and TRADOC Headquarters. Most of these problems might have been resolved
prior to departure from the United States had there been more time between the JCS notification and deployment.
As it was, there was barely enough time to assemble the required personnel.
On 18 December 1990, the Air Staff was ordered to deploy Joint STARS to Saudi Arabia. As a consequence of this notification the Air Force formed the 4411 Joint STARS Squadron (JSS). 
9
Likewise, the Army organized the Joint STARS Operational Detachment (JSOD) at Fort Huachuca, Arizona. This unit, under the command of the TRADOC Joint STARS system manager, pulled its operators from among the instructors and soldiers at the Army Intelligence School. 
10
Consequently the pre-hostilities phase was important as it provided an intense dress rehearsal period to prepare the soldiers, airmen and equipment for the impending conflict.
As For the Air Force, targets were relayed via voice reports, over secure FM or UHF radios.
For the Army, targets were moved to and through the Ground Station Modules (GSM). 
12
GSMs and E-8A orbits available to provide dedicated support to all forces, a theater concept was devised. The distribution of GSMs across the DESERT STORM theater allowed GSM operators to generate their own targets from the battlefield data passed down from the airplane.
Consequently, a key decision in the prehostilities phase was to cross-check these developed target sets as a measure against fratricide. Although redundant, nominated targets were confirmed between Joint STARS' Army operators in the plane and in the SSMs before a target strike. This was done by means of a secure UHF radio net. 
16
Mission planners from the Joint STARS Team coordinated with Army collection management cells at ARCENT and CENTCOM as well as with the command and control elements of CENTAF.
The result was the formalizing of tasking procedures and the addition of the 4411 JSS to the Air Tasking Order (ATO). 
17
Air Operations (17 Jan -23 Feb) To strike at these Iraqi targets each Joint STARS flight was assigned between 12 and 30 sets of fighter aircraft to respond to developed battlefield intelligence. 21 A Weapons   Allocation Officer (WAO) aboard the E-8A was responsible for the target handoff between Joint STARS, attack aircraft and Air Force command and control systems.
Targets not directly passed to fighters were relayed to the TACC, the Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS), the I MEF, or the Airborne Battlefield Command and Control Center (ABCCC) for targeting. 
22
In some cases target handoff was not successful.
There were two reasons for this failure.
One cause was the inability of attack aircraft to respond to near-real time targeting data which required them to make inflight mission changes. 
2 3
Quite often, during the first week of the air operations, Joint STARS shifted its coverage across the battlefield. This was frustrating for the ground based Joint STARS operators who were often unaware of the multiple requests being channelled into the airplane.24 Additionally, because Joint STARS was still a true engineering prototype, there were frequent problems experienced between the radar system software, hardware and the Joint STARS data link. The 22 January -"Joint STARS crews find an Iraqi assembly area and a 60 vehicle formation moving toward Kuwait city. The aircraft calls in an airstrike of F15s. 58 enemy tanks are reportedly destroyed.'2 Most of the Iraqi convoys moved at night and without the Joint STARS MTI capability, which was not restricted by light or cloud coverage, these convoys may have gone undetected. 
28
These cues came from a variety of sources.
Human intelligence reports, visual sightings from Air Force fighters, and overhead systems all contributed to the "tipoffs" that Joint STARS exploited. The free assistance allowed for Joint STARS' success in the detection of more than half of all convoy taskings.29
As air operations continued, the Iraqi army changed their movement techniques.
Relocation of supplies and Iraqi troops were grouped into formations no larger than three or four vehicles. After the success of 22 January, convoys ceased to present lucrative targets. 
30
The composition of each aircrew or flight is provided in the table below. 
32
These system engineers sat in the back of the E-8A airccaft during all missions, fine tuning the radar software functions in order to optimize Joint STARS capabilities.
In the future the position of system engineer will likely be filled by an Air Force officer. In response, the Army aircrew members and the mission commander would confer with the ASO to assist in the refinement of surveillance assignments. 
37
32
38
The net result of this coordinated effort was a discussion and decision on the significance of the enemy activity.
If the MTI were believed to be a valid target, such as a convoy or SCUD site, the coordinates were passed to the WAO for assignment to an Air Force strike package.39 If the MTT were being worked in response to an Army request they were passed back to the Army aircrew members who in turn relayed target location and a description of activity back down to the supported corps.
On most missions the established procedures improved with each flight and worked to identify the disposition and activity of Iraqi forces. 
40
5 Feb -"Joint STARS passes to the USMC, fighting near Kafji that there are no reinforcements enroute to the city." 
4 1
Boomer, the USMC commander, worried about being drawn into a premature land battle. 
42
Joint STARS wide area surveillance of Kafji and the areas to the north of the city showed no reinforcements poised  Once the theater priorities were received at ARCENT Headquarters, and at the AFCENT, Tactical Air Control Center, they were incorporated into the ATO process. 
6 3
The officer in charge of the GSM team took his orders from the staff officers of the supported command.66 Consequently, this relationship defined the surveillance and targeting area of interest for the GSM team.
The supported ground commander's area of interest became the GSM team's main focus.
In the E-8A, the Corps surveillance area was only a part of the total mission coverage area. assets. The Air Force continually claimed that JSTARS was actually a targeting system, and since their aircraft would attack the targets, the Air Force should retain control of JSTARS.
This was not an academic issue.
The JSTARS could "zoom-in" on targets using synthetic aperture radar, or it could look at the entire battlefield using its side-looking radar. The latter, for example, told ui whether Iraqi units were mcving or not and if they were moving precisely where and in what vehicular strength.
The former Lllowed us, then, to focus precisely on those vehicles in order to determine their dispositior for attack -urposes. Some of the negative phrases on Joint STARS were focused upon the lack of support, as defined by coverage time, provided to a specific command.
"Joint STARS coverage did not allow for continuous tracking.
Its theater support mission afforded a maximum of two hours continuous coverage in the Marine's sector."' 
7 5
As the commander of the USAF Electronic Systems
Division would say:
"The Joint STARS ... performed truly outstandingly.
Providing real time, large area data to moving target a,ýe fixed targets to our forces on the ground.
This appears to have been one of the strengths of the Joint STARS system. Only one user in the OEC survey felt that the Joint STARS data was not timely. 
77
78
The five hours of aTn reality the Joint STARS radar system was operational for less than 4 hours during this 10 hour mission. coverage time was a cumulative total, combining 10 minute blocks of radar "up time" with 90 minute periods of system availability. 8 9   This "strobe-light" radar availability prevented decentralized exploitation by Army GSMs. The Joint STARS aircraft and primary mission equipment (PME) were not technically able to produce continuous wide area surveillance of the battlefield.
Additionally, as has already been stated, the PME was not able to interleave the WAS and SAR radar modes.9 0 Finally, the aircraft and the GSMs were constantly experiencing trouble in maintaining a data link lock. Each time the GSM would "lose the SCDL", precious minutes would be lost as the Army operator would try to reacquire the airplane and reestablish SCDL lock. 
9
These limitations combined to make it difficult for the Army to receive continuous wide area surveillance.
The best that was possible was to piece together sporadic coverage periods in order to develop an understanding of Iraqi troop movement and intentions.
Although useful, as a general overview to the Army, the Air Force was the true beneficiary of this piece-meal coverage.
For the USAF the sporadic coverage was "good enough" for target development.
With fighter aircraft dedicated to respond to the directions of the E-8A, the Air Force attack assets were positioned to fully exploit the Joint STARS targeting information.
Targeting.
During the 49 Joint STARS missions, 1839 targets were generated for the Allied Coalition forces.
As and GSMs (4) Doctrinal differences between services. Table 
8
1 -A valuable product 2 -A timely product 3 -Accurate locations of enemy forces9
Joint STARS did not provide: In the final chapter of this thesis a recommendation is offered to the problem of simultaneous support. This  89.Aircrew mission chronological sheets. 90.OEC Report, "User/Operator Comments," N-12, N-53.   91.Ibid, 49 (7.1.3.5).
92.0EC Report, J-1 through J-6.
93.The Virginian-Pilot and the Ledger Star, "Special Map:
The Middle East," (25 January 1991)  (18 March 1992).
96.These criteria are consistent with the "Principles of Intelligence Quality" found in Joint Pub 2-0, Doctrine for Intelligence Support to Joint Operations, JCS Publications, Washington, D.C., (30 June 1991), 11-10.   97.Author's talks with LTC George J. Cusimano   Finally, the targeting capabilities of the system would not be valuable; again because the insurgents would integrate their operations with the country's population.4
Unless an area of insurgent activity could be clearly identified,c and enemy boundaries established, it would be hard to focus the capabilities of Joint STARS on insurgent forces.
Because of the lack of large unit movements with a Level I threat, the Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) mode of Joint STARS would probably be a more appropriate sensing capability than would the Moving Target Indicator (MTI) mode.
But SAR would only be possible after a tip-off from another intelligence source. Signals Intelligence (SIGINT) or Human
Intelligence information would be needed to help locate a bHUMINT, an acronym for Human Intelligence.
CSuch as the jungles or hills of Panama or the Philippines. picture of enemy activity. In this example it is important to note that the system's value is a part of an intelligence collection network. 
7
In conclusion: Likewise, the final three scenarior:
-War against a re-Armed Iraq -War between Russia and NATO.
-War against a new "Soviet-like" coalitionf provide conditions very similar to DESERT STORM and offer the greatest opportunities for the effective use of Joint STARS capabilities.
The common characteristic of these final cases is the Soviet-nature of the proposed threat.
In the threat model of Chapter Thrce, such forces fall within the Threat Level II category.
Level II threats involve an enemy that has modern, multi-echeloned, armored and mechanized units, operating from wiChin defined te-ritorial boundaries.
These are the ideal fThese three scenarios illustrate modern, but NON-NUCLEAR threat forces.
conditions for which Joint STARS was developed.8
In such an environment Joint STARS will be an especially relevant surveillance or target acquisition system.
The system can look deep9 to develop the battlefield situation, while providing ground commanders with enemy location accuracies needed to fight the close battleh. Additionally, the differentiation between civilian and military targets will be easier because of the number and formation patterns of mechanized forces.
In a comparison between Level I, II an III threats it appears that:
Joint STARS' greatest contributions to operational warfighting will be made against the scenarios which deal with Level II threats.
The Joint STARS of 1992 would contribute to operations against the threats of the Seven Scenarios in the following ranked order: qBeyond 200 kilometers.
hWithin hundreds of meters of friendly ground forces in contact.
Joint STARS Contributions to the Seven Scenarios:
Rank Ordered  Major, rank did ý,.be_ upgrade& to. a not interfere with :LTC. the mission Table 
11
11
If projected funding continues, and enough aircraft, GSMs and an improved data link are purchased, the system would be capable of supporting warfare across the operational continuum.
Although each employment of Joint STARS will be The greatest contribution of Joint STARS will be its ability to support a CINC and his theater of war or when supporting a Joint Force Commander (JFC). The commander ol these joint forces may be an Army, Air Force or USMC general.
Service affiliation will be unimportant, as Joint STARS supports the surveillance and targeting requiremrents of joint warfare.
As the system's radar is mounted on an air platform, the control of Joint STARS will be by the direction of the  'Although 700 miles from Riyadh, the E-8C, flying out of Oman is able to maintain operational interface with CENTCOM HQS through the use of an over-the-horizon data link.
nThe deployment of a base-line CGS capability has been factored into the development of the Corps' TPFDD.   This secure data link transmits pre-processed radar data from the E-8A's radar down to the Ground Station Modules.
In return the SCDL transmits radar service requests up to the Joint STARS aircraft.
Development-The basic process by which intelligence is developed.
Information is collected, then integrated into an all-source product to provide an estimate of the situation and a projection of enemy intentions in sufficient time to permit the commander to select the most effective friendly courses of action.
Surveillance-Surveillance is passive.
It implies observing a specified area j7r areas systematically from a fixed, concealed position. Synchronization-... the arrangement of battlefield activities in time, space and purpose to produce maximum relative combat power at the decisive point .... the actual concentration of forces and fires at the point of decision. Synthetic Aperture Radar-Provides a radar "picture" of stationary targets. SAR is useful for mapping unknown terrain or for developing target folders of fixed sites, (military facilities, airfields, seaports).
Target Development-Based on situation development, it is the process of providing direct combat information, targeting data, and correlated targeting information to commanders and fire support means.
Must be sufficiently timely and accurate to support effectiva attack by fire, maneuver, or electronic means. 
6
the possibility of a war in Central Europe."
the possibility of a war in Central Europe."
profile of Joint STARS was originally devised, and ideally suited for operational contingencies in Central Europe. activity. Once detected the direction, speed, and location of the enemy force is passed, via a secure data link, to U.S. or allied command and control nodes.
15
profile of Joint STARS was originally devised, and ideally suited for operational contingencies in Central Europe. activity. Once detected the direction, speed, and location of the enemy force is passed, via a secure data link, to U.S. or allied command and control nodes.
STARS are not of the same high fidelity of other Air Force systems, future radar enhancements may enable Joint STARS to fly BDA missions.5
STARS are not of the same high fidelity of other Air Force systems, future radar enhancements may enable Joint STARS to fly BDA missions.5
The scale of view can be changed with a zoomin/zoom-out function.
More than 3 E-8As and more than 15 GSMs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS A special thanks to 
BG Gerald Miller
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
the possibility of finding the enemy would be geometrically increased. 
6
This location, coupled with confirmatory reports from local citizens could provide a specific area for the targeting of the Joint STARS' radar.
The SAR and MTI modes could then be used interchangeably to help contribute to an all-source dA Signals Intelligence Aerial Platform.  The integration of Joint STARS into the continuous operations of a collection management cell will be most beneficial.
Joint STARS, as an imagery intelligence and targeting The Unknown," Army Times, (2 March 1992), 30.
3.These criteria are consistent with the "Principles of Intelligence Quality" found in Joint Pub 2-0, Doctrine for Intelligence Support to Joint Operations, JCS Publications, Washington, D.C., (30 June 1991)  
-HIZBIRR party in Iraq overthrows the regime of Saddam Hussein.
-New government of Iraq signs economic and military treaties with the nation of Iran.   This information is passed to the carrier battle kThe CINC, through his J2, establishes the surveillance and targeting missions for the JSS.
The mission priorities are transmitted every twelve hours via secure radio and hard copy message traffic.
The JSS operations center receives and disseminates these priorities to Flights Sword and Stone.
Circular Error Probable-An indicator of the delivery accuracy of a weapon system, used as a factor in determining probable damage to a target.
It is the radius of a circle withip which half of a missile's projectiles are expected to fall.  (General Russ). This phrase means the annotation of targets and target sets with a number that will consistently identify the same target for Army and Air Force operators.
Common Picture of the Battlefield-A phrase synonymous with the development of a common track numbering system. In November 1990, the commanders of the Air Force Tactical Air Command (TAC)  and the Army's Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) felt that it was important for the services to "see the battlefield" in the same way. This issue also raises concerns about the establishmept of battlefield boundaries between the Army and Air Force.J Deep Operations-Activities directed against enemy forces not yet in contact designed to influence the conditions in which future close operations will be conducted .... deep operations include efforts to isolate current battles and to influenc where, when, and against whom future battles will be fought.• E-8A Aircraft-An Air Force militarized version of the Boeing 707 aircraft.
It carries the 24 foot lcng radar antenna which detects moving and stationary targets.
GSM-The Ground Station Module (GSM) is the Army link in the Joint STARS.
Made by Motorola the GSM is mounted on the back of an standard Army 5 ton truck.
In the future, technology will allow for the GSM to be positioned on the back of a smaller vehicle.
Operational Capability (IOC)-The first attainment of the capability to employ effectively a weapon, item of equipment, or system of approved specific characteristics, and which is manned or operated by an adequatply trained, equipped, and supported military unit or force. 0
The ability of the Joint STARS radar to simultaneously run the wide area surveillance (or Moving Target Indicator [MTI]) mode of the system's radar along with the Synthetic Aperture Radar mode of the radar. This technique provides for location accuracies as it develops a picture of the battlefield situation.
Joint STARS-The Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System is made up of three major components.
These components are:
the E-8A aircraft with its associated radar, the GSM, and the SCDL data link.
Failure of any one of these components substantial degrades or destroys the mission capability of the system. Joint targeting-Target development and target engagement by elements from two or more distinct military services. (i.e., A target is developed by Air Force sensors and fired upon by an Army artillery unit.) MTI-Moving Target Indicator, A radar presentation which shows only targets which are in motion.
Signals from stationary targets are subtracted out of 9the return signal by the output of a computer memory circuit.
OV-1D Mohawk-Two-place, twin turboprop aircraft featuring a mid-wing, triple vertical stabilizers, and a tricycle landing gear.
The aircraft is capable of performing missions of observation surveillance and air control. 