# ID: 59e2b07729354c1c96a9cf6f554fb9dd
# Title: The King of Battle versus the God of War: Reforming the Division Artillery to Defeat
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
In early August, 2008 the Russian Federation launched an overwhelming assault on Georgia, annexing territory and crushing the Georgian armed forces. Despite the successes of the Russian forces, the Russian high command sought to improve their military force. Over the next few months the Russian Ministry of Defense developed a plan for a series of sweeping changes that would overhaul the Russian military, with specific emphasis on ground forces.
These modernization efforts capitalized on the lessons learned from the two Chechen conflicts and the invasion of Georgia, where Russian ground forces learned the importance of target acquisition assets, electronic warfare systems, and overwhelming long-range firepower. After these efforts, Russian forces became more agile, flexible, and deadly, increasing the numbers of artillery systems and vastly improving battlefield surveillance capabilities. These reorganized and reequipped formations were highly effective during combat operations in eastern Ukraine in 2014. The newly developed Russian capabilities were highlighted during an artillery strike in July of 2014, when two Ukrainian mechanized battalions were made combat ineffective during a single artillery strike. The Ukrainian forces were located through electronic warfare (EW) assets, locations confirmed by an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), and struck by rocket and cannon forces within approximately fourteen minutes of detection by the EW assets. 
2
Methodology. Russia was chosen as the case study because of the US Army and Department of Defense's emphasis on Russia as a great power competitor and as a pacing threat for US force design and modernization. 
3,
4
5
Russia is capable of fielding more brigade sized formations than the US and its NATO allies, leading to the distinct possibility that a US BCT will be required to engage two BTGs or one Russian brigade at one time. 
6
7
Modernizing the Force. The Russian military has undergone three major reforms and restructuring initiatives since the collapse of the Soviet Union in December of 1991. 
8
10
11
In December 1994, this depleted force was ordered into Chechnya to prevent an Islamic succession of the region. 
12
13
After initial delays, the Russian Army mobilized four brigades and swiftly crushed the separatist fighters and was subsequently used as the pretense to conduct a second campaign within Chechnya. 
15
In August of 2008, Russian armed forces massed along the border of Georgia and within the Georgian provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in support of pro-Russian separatists within the region. 
16
17
The 2008 military reforms were known as the "New Look" reforms and represented the most drastic changes the Russian military had undergone since the end of the Cold War. These "New Look" reforms drove military reorganization at almost every echelon from the strategic level down to tactical formations. 
18
19
20
21
22
The reduction in forces reflects Russia's changing attitudes on what its military needs to accomplish and the types of conflicts that the Russian military must be prepared to fight. Russia still views large scale conflict with the United States as the primary threat to its sovereignty and continued existence, and dedicates most training resources to this task. 
23
24
27
1
Brigades also include a Fire Control Battery, containing a fire support coordination element, survey platoon, counterfire radar platoon, and two reconnaissance platoons. Additionally, each mechanized and motorized battalion contains a mortar battery consisting of eight 120mm selfpropelled or towed mortars while each company is supported by three 60mm mortars for close range support. 
28
30
31
Additionally, the Russian Ministry of Defense has stated the Russian army will expand the number of ready BTGs to 125 by 2018. 
32
Despite the fact that no official organizational structure for the BTG exists, most of these formations share several characteristics. BTGs are formed with a command element, four maneuver companies (one tank and three mechanized or motorized), three artillery batteries (two howitzer and one rocket), one anti-tank company, and two air defense companies (see fig. 
2
33
34
35
3
3
38
3
Commanders will route the approved and prioritized fire mission orders from the COP to the technical fire direction centers located at the battalion and battery. The technical fire direction centers (outlined in green within figure 
3
39
4
40
41
4
In addition to organizational improvements and modernization, the Russian army has also undergone a massive series of equipment modernization programs since the 2008 invasion of Georgia. Utilizing lessons learned from the Georgian conflict the Russian army has concentrated its modernization efforts in several key areas, specifically electronic warfare capabilities, UAV systems, and communication systems. 
46
47
49
Current munitions enable the 2S19 to fire standard rounds out to 24 kilometers and rocket assisted projectiles to 36 kilometers. 
50
51
52
While a majority of artillery systems within Russian army are cannons, the Multiple Rocket Launcher (MRL) is growing in importance. The Russians employ an extremely diverse range of MRL systems, ranging from the Iskander-M tactical missile launcher with ranges exceeding 500 kilometers to the 122mm BM-21 GRAD at the tactical level. 
53
57
Communication Systems. Operations during the defense of Dagestan and invasion of Georgia in 2008 revealed extensive weaknesses within the Russian army's communications systems. The "New Look" reforms subsequently placed a great deal of emphasis on improving and hardening communication systems utilized by Russian ground forces. 
58
Transitioning to digital systems also enabled the development of advanced encryption technologies, such as cypher text and frequency hop capabilities. 
59
In addition to upgraded radios the Russian army has been developing new digital command and control systems to improve battlefield coordination, battlefield tracking, and situational awareness. Starting in 2015, the Russian army began development of the Andromeda system, a computerized common operational picture and unit tracking system that is analogous to the US Army's Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2 or "Blue Force Tracker") system. 
60
These systems have been fielded to the airborne brigades in the Western and Southern Military Districts and are starting to appear in mechanized units operating near the Ukrainian border. 
61
The system, known as Strelets or KRUS (an acronym for Reconnaissance, Command and Control, Communications System) enables a user to essentially point to a location on the tablet's map and the system will send a digitally formatted request for fire to the supporting artillery unit. 
62
63
Observation systems. In order to effectively employ the considerable fires assets assigned to brigades and BTGs, the Russian army needed to improve its observation capabilities. Two (Zoopark 2) radar systems. 
64
65
66
67
Visual systems. Forward observer teams have also seen an influx of modernized equipment since 2008. To improve its visual observation capabilities within frontline units, the Russian army developed and deployed the PRP-4A Argus Artillery Reconnaissance vehicle. The Argus includes an optical laser range finder capable of locating vehicles out to ten kilometers.
The system has an additional ground sensing radar for wide scanning observation and is fully digital, capable of transmitting target location data directly to the Command Observation Post.
Additional improvements have been made to dismounted systems as well, including man portable systems capable of laser designating targets and accurately locating targets out to ten kilometers. 
68
73
74
75
Fires Planning and Execution. The Russian army is an artillery army. The tradition of the Russian army as a fires based army extends back to World War II, where Soviet forces were described as a massive artillery formation with an excessive number of combat vehicles. The reliance and focus on artillery continued throughout the Cold War with the development of the Deep Battle concept, an operating concept based on tactical, operational, and strategic fires ranging and striking enemy formations in depth. 
76
77
78
The primary objective of the RYS at the brigade and BTG is to overwhelm enemy formations with EW attacks to disrupt and prevent coordination followed by devastating massed artillery strikes and limited precision strikes on high priority targets. The RYS executes these missions through dynamic and pre-planned targeting methods while attempting to achieve four categories of effects. 
79
Dynamic, or on-call, targets are engaged using two types of fire, the individual target and fire concentration. Individual targets are on call fire missions targeting low priority targets of opportunity. Russian tactical fire direction elements will usually only dedicate a small number of tubes to engage, typically a battery or platoon (three to six guns). Fire concentration works similiarly, but on a much larger scale. Fire concentration strikes on targets of opportunity are executed with a battalion or, usually, multiple battalions utilizing a mixture of munitions for increased effect. Fire concentrations target larger formations and are often accompanied by EW attacks to disrupt early warnings and indicators and prevent medical evacuations and counter battery support. 
80
Ukrainian mechanized battalions at Zelenopillya in 2014. After laagering for the night, the two battalions were observed by an Orlan-10 UAV. Within ten minutes the battalions' radio and GPS communications were jammed, and approximately 20 minutes after first observation received between one and three battalion sized strikes from Tornado MRL systems. These strikes mixed thermobaric and high explosives to devastating effect, in which the battalions suffered over 150 casualties and almost the complete loss of all armored vehicles in the two battalions. 81
Pre-planned targets and artillery strikes form an important part of the Russian brigade and BTG's tactics. Pre-planned fires fall into four types, barrage fire, rolling barrages, massed fire, and successive concentration. Pre-planned fires are targeted against known and suspected enemy defensive positions or against terrain that the brigade or BTG is attempting to seize or secure.
On call targets are executed in order of priority, with enemy nuclear systems, artillery systems, FASCAM systems, command posts, and reconnaissance elements considered high payoff targets. 
82
Artillery units assigned a barrage fire will fire continuously until out of ammunition or requested to cease loading. Rolling barrages are similar, but used both offensively and defensively.
Rolling Artillery Positioning. While fighting as a brigade or a BTG, artillery positioning tactics remain consistent. Due to a lack of fire direction centers for each platoon, communications range limits, and preference for massed fires, Russian forces will often form artillery 'parks.'
These parks are similar to the US concept of Position Areas for Artillery, but are occupied by multiple battalion sized elements. Within the artillery park howitzer batteries will occupy one primary position and have one to two alternate positions established. Batteries will displace and move to their alternate and subsequent positions after a certain number of rounds have been expended. Howitzer artillery parks are generally located five to six kilometers behind the forward line of troops (FLOT), although Russian artillery positions in Ukraine have been observed as close as 500 meters from the front line. 
88
Russian artillery forces prefer to keep their howitzer and launcher sections relatively close together, with only 30-50 meter spacing between systems. This helps facilitate command and control as well as mitigate logistics and communications issues. 
89
Observation Tactics. Russian forces are evolving observation techniques as new equipment rolls out to the force, but trends from Syria and Ukraine are emerging. Russian forces are dramatically increasing the use of EW systems, UAVs, and radars for observation, target location, and adjustments of artillery strikes. These systems can be used as stand-alone observers, but are more commonly used in synchronization. 
90
The Ukrainian's report that the average response time from being detected to receiving fire is ten minutes. 
91
92
Despite the rapid modernization, improvement in equipment, and reorganization of forces, the Russian brigade, BTG, and supporting artillery forces have multiple vulnerabilities that US forces can exploit. These vulnerabilities stem from both tactics and equipment design, and include centralization of assets and forces, reliance on UAVs and EW assets for surveillance, and issues with logistics.
Current Russian tactics with regard to brigade and BTG artillery support often collocate and centralize assets. 
93
Targeting FDCs will produce disproportionate disruption, as eliminating the artillery battalion FDC cuts the communication link with observers and batteries. Targeting battery FDCs will prevent guns from operating, as each battery does not have a backup FDC and cannot execute technical fire direction of battalion sized elements. In addition to centralizing command and control and fire direction assets, Russian forces also collocate their artillery systems. Battalions and batteries are collocated in 'artillery parks', with spacing between guns often not exceeding 40 meters. 
94
Russian forces operating in Syria and Ukraine have begun to develop a reliance on UAV and EW observation assets for target location. 
95
96
97
98
The last major vulnerability of the Russian brigade and BTG centers on logistics, especially the replenishment, resupply, and maintenance of front-line units. While Russia plans to field over 125 BTGs by 2021, most maneuver brigades are only operating at 50% manning levels. 
99
100
101
The current US Army unit on the 'front lines' of eastern Europe is the 2 nd Armored Cavalry Regiment, a Stryker Brigade Combat Team (SBCT). The SBCT is organized similarly to both infantry and armored brigade combat teams, and units are equipped with variants of the M1126 Stryker Infantry Carrier Vehicle. The SBCT contains three infantry battalions, one reconnaissance squadron, one artillery battalion, one support battalion, and one engineer battalion (See Figure 
6
Soldiers and is capable of independently sustained operations for five days. 102 With higher echelon logistics support, the SBCT can function independently on the battlefield, executing missions without requiring task organized support.
Figure 
6
The Field Artillery battalion within the SBCT contains three firing batteries, one headquarters battery, and a forward support company (see Figure 
7
104
kilometers with conventional munitions such as high explosives, smoke, incendiary, and Figure 
7
The US Army has recently re-introduced the Division Artillery (DIVARTY) formation.
With the return to the Division as the primary tactical fighting formation during Large Scale Ground Combat Operations (LSGCO), the US Army re-established the DIVARTY as the Force Field Artillery Headquarters (FFAHQ) for the division. 
107
The Russian brigade and BTG has some significant advantages over the US SBCT in MRL systems, the US SBCT finds itself outgunned (see Figure 
8
9
121
In their current configurations, Russian ground forces hold considerable advantages over US ground forces at the division and brigade levels. The number and type of weapon systems, EW assets, and target location systems provide the Russia forces the ability to outrange, outgun, and fire more responsively than American forces. The Russian's have not achieved this overmatch through new or exotic technology, but through a focused modernization effort to upgrade systems and to reorganize those assets into a more efficient structure. Other adversaries have watched Russia's operations in Syria and eastern Ukraine intently, learning and upgrading their own fires complexes. The US can degrade and match Russia's current advantages by reequipping and reorganizing its own artillery forces. Reintroducing the DIVARTY structure, providing additional assets, and equipping the formation with new launchers and acquisition assets will provide US ground forces at the division and brigade level with organic systems capable of overmatching current adversary threats.
Endnotes
Grau and Bartles. The Russian Way of War, 34.   
Grau and Bartles. The Russian Way of War, 37.  
transportation trucks (primarily the Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck (HEMTT) and Family of Medium Tactical Vehicle (FMTV) systems) were cut by roughly half, leaving BCTs with inadequate transportation assets. Sustainment battalions organic to BCTs have struggled to supply multiple infantry and artillery battalions during large scale exercises at the National and Joint Readiness Training Centers. Each Field Artillery battalion currently has a Forward Support Company (FSC) with a transportation platoon, but this platoon is also inadequate to supply the three subordinate firing batteries. The FSC's transportation platoon is responsible for supplying the firing batteries and headquarters elements with all classes of supply, and suffers from the same issues the brigade's support battalion does during simulated combat exercises. Currently, each artillery platoon has three FMTV ammunition trucks, for a total of six per battery. These trucks are capable of carrying a maximum of 650 complete rounds (fuze, projectile, and propellant. Based on average expenditure rates during Combined Training Center (CTC) rotations, 650 rounds are usually expended within 24 hours of combat operations. 
113
The addition of an ammunition platoon to each battery would greatly improve operational capabilities. A small platoon of 16 Soldiers operating four FMTVs with trailers and two HMMVWs would enable a battery to send the ammunition platoon to ammunition holding areas without interrupting firing operations. In addition to enabling battery firing operations, an cumbersome to survive on today's battlefield and needs to be replaced with a self-propelled howitzer. Russian forces are able to effectively execute fire missions on targets within five minutes of accurately locating a target. 
115
While nine minutes is the standard, the average M777A2 battery displaces in 14 minutes under continually operations during training rotations at the National Training Center. 
116
Utilizing the D30, which is faster to displace and move than the M777A2, Ukrainian artillery forces have been devastated during operations in the Donbass and Donetsk. Contrasting the high casualty rates of the towed artillery systems, Ukrainians have suffered only 15% casualties among front line self-propelled howitzer formations. 
117
The DIVARTY will be task organized with an MRLS battalion, providing organic long range and precision fires to the division. SBCT supported divisions will be equipped with the M142 HIMARS MRL system, providing US Army standard MRL capabilities including guided and unguided rockets as well as the Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS). The immediate benefit of adding a HIMARS or MRLS battalion to the DIVARTY is the drastic increase in range, extending ranges to 70 kilometers with rockets and 300 kilometers with ATACMS.
Additional rocket munitions are in development to extend the HIMARS range to 499 kilometers. 
118