# ID: 5a49c8a16e824c6fa0a1f3f9829938d0
# Title: The Chekinov-bogdanov Commentaries of 2010-2017: What Did They Teach Us About Russia's New Way of War?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
From 2010 to 2017 Russian Colonel (reserves) S. G. Chekinov and Lieutenant-General (retired) S. A. Bogdanov wrote 13 interesting articles in the journal Military Thought (nine of them are summarized below) that had a major impact on how Western analysts understood Russian military affairs and way of war. Though the authors have not written publicly since 2017, their impact continues to be felt as the West grapples with how to confront Russian activities across all domains. Asymmetric and indirect actions, the initial period of war, deterrence, military art, forecasting, strategy, new generation warfare, and other topics were discussed, ending with an article in 2017 discussing war in the 21 st century. Numerous aspects of these themes remain under discussion in Russia.
Their analysis offered some interesting details, such as the following:
• They wrote intensely on new generation warfare (a focus on weapons) in 2013 yet by 2017 they had completely abandoned the concept in favor of new-type warfare (a focus on military, nonmilitary, and other types of fighting) • They warned on several occasions of the need before conflict begins to mislead or bribe opponents, to conduct sabotage operations, and to utilize cunning and indirect actions to surprise adversaries • They stated that the use of psychological (ultrasonic) and climate/geological (magnetic storms, tsunamis, earthquake) weapons were under consideration • They specifically said administration and control systems should be targeted if war begins, to include dams and nuclear, chemical, and oil and gas facilities • They forecast that future war would begin with electronic warfare operations and blend with a strategic aerospace operation, augmented with cruise missile launches and space-based strike weapons and reconnaissance units (such as remotely piloted vehicles and robots) • They examined various elements of strategy, to include its main issues, nature, regularities, principles, content, and tasks • They noted that 21 st century war includes traditional war, noncontact war, information warfare, network-centric warfare, hybrid warfare (what the U.S. is doing), cold war, and environmental warfare. New-type war was imbedded in the discussion of cold war and mentioned 12 times by name. New-generation war was not noted.
Unfortunately, since 2017 authors Chekinov and Bogdanov have published neither as a pair nor individually. In effect they have disappeared from public view with no explanation as to why. This includes, in addition to the journal Military Thought, articles in the popular publications Army Journal and the Journal of the Academy of Military Science, which together are the three most popular Russian military journals for Army-related material. Their commentary has been missed for the rich discussions of warfare that they offered.
The analysis that follows intends to keep the focus on these important works and directs attention to the theme of each of the nine articles selected and the sections indicating new or different forms and methods of warfare. The titles of each article (to include the four not examined) and the date of their publication in Military Thought are listed at Appendix One. Important quotations found in the nine articles but not used in the writeup are to be found at Appendix Two.
In their conclusion to this article, the authors made a dramatic statement about the targets of future warfare. Specifically, strategically important targets that, if destroyed, lead to unacceptable damage to an opponent include:
Top government administration and military control systems; major manufacturing fuel, and energy enterprises (steel and engineering plants, oil refineries, defense industry enterprises, electronic power plants and substations, oil and gas production, accumulation and storage facilities, life support facilities, and so on); vitally important transportation facilities across the adversary's entire territory (railroad hubs, bridges, strategic ports, airports, tunnels, and so on); potentially dangerous objectives (hydroelectric power dams and hydroelectric power complexes, processing units of chemical plants, nuclear power facilities, storages of strong poisons, and so on). 
1
2
An asymmetrical approach to military security was stated to be "a combination of forms and methods of using forces and means that depend on the adversaries' unequal potentialities and allow confrontation or a direct armed clash with a potential adversary to be avoided (or their consequences mitigated)." 3 Asymmetrical actions may include: measures making the opponent apprehensive of Russia's intentions; a demonstration of the readiness and potential of forces in a strategic area; and actions designed to deter through the implied guaranteed destruction of vulnerable military and other targets. 
4
5
6
In hindsight it is not surprising that the authors would follow-up their article on asymmetrical measures with a discussion of indirect ones. However, the focus of this article was very odd, in that the indirect operations discussed involved information, climate, and psychological issues. Nonmilitary issues were discussed as well, but later articles were much more interesting on that topic. Many paragraphs from the 2010 asymmetric article appeared verbatim in this one. Therefore, this article offered little new substance about topics for which Western analysts are accustomed, but it did offer interesting discussions on "causing" weather and disasters or psychologically oriented topics.
Information technologies (IT) are a major method of ensuring the information and military security of a state when rivalries exist in political, economic, and military affairs. IT can, the authors note, pursue the same goals as can military interference, economic expansion, and other aggressive actions. Time shows that states which cannot secure a nations' information security risk losing their political sovereignty, economic independence, or role of world or regional leader.
7
8
Finally, the authors discussed how the U.S. had developed a High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP), which the authors state emits radio emanations that can penetrate underground and into masses of water, find bunkers, or put out of commission ballistic missiles and submarine control systems. Others believe HAARP can manipulate weather and cause disasters (earthquakes, tsunamis, etc.) or create artificial magnetic storms that will affect navigation systems and the psychological condition of humans.
9
Russia has two terms for deterrence, sderzhivanie and ustrashenie. The former, used most often by the military, works to contain opponents while the latter works to scare them. The military uses the former much more often than the latter. The authors defined deterrence in this work as follows:
Deterrence is understood as a combination of the state's coordinated political, diplomatic, economic, military, nonmilitary, and other measures taken to convince a potential aggressor of the futility of military action he wants to undertake to achieve his political goals because of retaliation that could be too much for him to accept. 
10
The development of high-technology nonnuclear weapons that can fulfill strategic tasks has helped introduce the term "strategic deterrence" into the lexicon. The term includes a state's ability to show its readiness to use both nuclear and conventional forces, and its ability and resolve to conduct special, asymmetric, indirect, and other operations. 11 Strategic deterrence frequently involves a show of force which, in peacetime, deters aggression or attempts to pressure Russia. In wartime strategic deterrence aims to prevent aggressors from using nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction and to limit the scale and intensity of military operations. 
12
Chekinov and Bogdanov mentioned the tern new-generation warfare (NGW) in this article, a year before they wrote extensively on the topic (see 2013 discussion below). In NGWs, preparations will differ in that the side desiring to aggress engages, sometimes before the start of operations, in a campaign to conceal both the arming of its Armed Forces (AF) and the nature of their special preparations. 
14
15
16
• Broadcasts of information on various communications channels about intensive and wide-ranging preparation of the Russian economy and public for war • Mobilization of reservists in many age brackets • Relocation of army units on high alert and the deployment of reserves from the heartland • Development of false activities designed to be captured by adversary reconnaissance • A broad campaign (launched simultaneously) to inform the public about the adversary's destructive intentions. 
18
Of all the articles that Chekinov and Bogdanov co-authored, this one received the most attention in the West. It revealed both Russian paranoia over how military affairs were developing, since many of the systems mentioned were fielded in the U.S. and only under development in Russia; and Russia's plan to confront these changes. Perhaps the article's point of paramount importance was that a new-generation war (NGW) will be "fought by the rules and customs of the side that is best prepared to put the recent breakthroughs in warfare economics and technologies 
16
19
Of initial interest were the author's reference to Vladimir Slipchenko's 1990s book on sixth-generation warfare, with the main objective of such warfare to "destroy the enemy's economic potential" and "keeping the man outside of the battlespace is what makes future wars and armed struggle cardinally different." 21 Many of the points that Chekinov and Bogdanov developed tended to follow and support Slipchenko's contentions. For example, the authors stated that "defeating the enemy's main forces and destroying the economic potential of the country attacked, and also overrunning its territory" are the objectives of NGW's fought in a networkcentric environment (the latter defined as a concept of control over combat operations). 
22
It is very probable that an attacker will achieve his political and military goals in a NGW before he deploys his ground forces. The aggressor will, most likely, send them into enemy territory only after he as assured himself that his missile and air strikes, long-range artillery fire, and weapons based on new physical principles have wiped out a majority of the defending units, destroyed government and military control centers, key military, industrial, and economic targets, and wrecked the stability of the defending country's government administration system. 
23
• Technological superiority cancelled an opponent's numerical advantage • An electronic operation launched in parallel with an aerial offensive and seabased cruise missiles began the "first war of a new age" • There were no clear dividing lines between the opponent's forces and flanks were exposed, etc. • Orbiting satellites played a special role in the war. 
24
25
• NGW will be dominated by information and psychological warfare seeking to achieve superiority • Asymmetric actions will be used extensively to level off the enemy's superiority in armed struggles 26 • Aggressors will make efforts to involve all public institutions in the country it attacks, such as the mass media, religious organizations, public movements, nongovernmental organizations, and so on 27 • Attackers will plan for NGWs and take measures to conceal preparations 28 • Decisive battles in NGWs will rage in the information environment 
29
The authors stressed on several occasions that the only way for strategic operations to achieve their goals in NGW would be through one side gain information superiority over the other. 
33
Military art was defined as the theory and practice of preparing and conducting armed struggle, whether on land, sea, or space. It encompasses the basic means of organizing, conducting, and supporting operations and combat actions, and organizing control over them. 
34
35
36
39
40
In this important article, Chekinov and Bogdanov noted that forecasting helps avoid errors in future planning through the identification of principal avenues for promoting military art. Future war success will require the skillful combination of military, nonmilitary, and special nonviolent measures that include a blend of political, economic, information, technological, and environmental measures. Information superiority will be the primary avenue through which to take advantage of opponents. 
42
43
• Weapons will be designed with new technological principles, such as highprecision weapons and the weaponry listed as starting future conflicts • Nuclear weapons will be less significant, with strategic and political objectives now attained with high-precision weapons, weapons based on new physical principles, and other conventional weapons • Strategic operations will be the principal form of strategic task fulfillment • A unified system to collect and process information that integrates space, aerial, and ground reconnaissance capabilities will be used for target allocation and designation in real time. 
45
• Speed, synchronization, and concurrency will be the decisive factors behind the success of a military operations 46 • Future wars will be changed by space-based attack weapons, orbiting battle space stations, new weapons of improved destructive power, range, accuracy, and rate of fire 47 • Leaders must abandon the rigid canons of military art and entrenched stereotypes are to be avoided 48 • Adjustments will be made to the laws and rules of warfare 
49
• The closing period of conflict will be as short as possible. 52
Chekinov and Bogdanov offered a lengthy (and at times difficult to follow) discussion of military strategy and its requirement to adapt to new 21 st century circumstances. The last decade, in their opinion, has witnessed a new type of warfare, namely those of controlled chaos. They stated that the sphere of military strategy now all aspects of military state activity and that military strategy cannot be viewed in isolation from the general processes of the state. Not only has there been an expansion in the forms of an Armed Forces employment but also in all the structures of a state's military organization. There are new methods of warfare and a transformation in the content of armed struggle using nonmilitary measures and indirect and asymmetric actions that can affect the outcome of a confrontation. 
53
54
The main issues of military strategy were stated to be:
• The nature of today's warfare and ways of preventing it by military means • The goals and tasks of the Armed Forces in war and military activity on a strategic scale • The necessary resources to conduct those wars • The content, methods, and conditions of preparing and waging war on the whole and various forms of strategic actions • Strategic planning for the AF's employment in warfare and strategic operations • Fundamentals of the strategic, moral, and psychological and logistical support of the AF's actions • Leadership of the AFs in peace-and wartime • Strategic requirements to be worked out for the AF's buildup, preparation of the economy, the public and territory for war • Strategic opinions of leading states and coalitions, their ability to prepare, unleash, and conduct wars and combat actions on a strategic scale.  
54
55
The nature of military strategy includes specific categories which are being elaborated and perfected. New categories of study include asymmetric methods of warfare, remote noncontact impact on an adversary, the military strategic balance, defense sufficiency, strategic deterrence, and strategic warning, among others. Categories are a way to express a scientific understanding of an entire military strategic activity. 
56
Principles depend on the objective and subjective factors of an economic, political, informational, and military nature. 
57
58
59
60
61
63
This article, the last that Chekinov and Bogdanov published together in the open press, did not mention NGWs at all, which was a strange development based on the huge impact their 2013 NGW article had produced on militaries in Europe and in the U.S.. Entire studies in the latter were devoted to revealing the essence of NGWs. But by 2017 references to NGW had all but disappeared, not just in the publications of Chekinov and Bogdanov but throughout the AF. Perhaps this was because General Staff Chief Valery Gerasimov had brought up the "new-type" warfare concept in 2013 and the authors (and others) were just following his lead. 
65
68
69
We have been witnessing an extensive debate about the need to revise the essence and content of war necessitated by the appearance of views that not only the role of military capabilities have been diminishing, but that these are no longer any good for achieving relevant objectives. 70
The breadth of the Chekinov-Bogdanov commentaries offer much ground for the consideration of analysts regarding Russia's new way of war. Targets and goals were described, which included key infrastructure facilities (dams, nuclear power plants, and other infrastructure facilities). The initial period of war (IPW) discussion was extensive and appeared in several articles. It was clear that before future conflicts begin, it will be important to mislead, surprise, intimidate, bride, or use other means to confuse opponents as part of the IPW. Subversion and provocative measures are expected to be active, which could include the use of military or nonmilitary assets. Some initial actions might include indirect actions, such as attempts to induce climate change or to utilize infrasonic or electromagnetic energy to harm or destroy humans or equipment, respectively. Deterrence concepts could be used in the IPW that involve a show of force which, in peacetime, deters aggression or attempts to pressure opponents. Such efforts can now be strategic in nature due to the development of information technologies that can reach populations or organizations anywhere on the globe. With so many important components, many Russian military analysts rightly consider the IPW to be the decisive factor in determining winners and losers in future conflicts.
There was an extended discussion of new weaponry and its role in a NGW. Yet perhaps the main point of interest was that a NGW will be "fought by the rules and customs of the side that is best prepared to put the recent breakthroughs in warfare economics and technologies to a practical test." To accomplish many of the goals of NGW, military art will undergo significant changes, especially the contention that "differences between strategic, operational, and tactical levels will be obliterated, as will be the difference between offensive and defensive activities." The reminder is that weaponry based on new physical principles is allowing Russian theorists to contemplate planetary war, a new addition to the traditional components of military art of strategy, operational art, and tactics. For Russia's new way of war to be successful, forecasting will require the ability to spot new trends. It will also require the skillful combination of military, nonmilitary, 68 Ibid., p. 40. 69 Ibid., p. 41. 70 Ibid., p. 42.
and special nonviolent measures that blend political, economic, information, technological, and environmental measures. Information superiority will be the primary avenue through which to take advantage of opponents in these circumstances. Further, military strategy cannot be viewed in isolation from the general processes of state activity any longer. New methods of warfare will include nonmilitary measures and indirect and asymmetric actions to a greater degree than ever before, with the capability to affect the outcome of a confrontation. Finally, the authors made clear that the boundaries between military and peaceful methods in 21 st century warfare have disappeared. A "new-type" of warfare has evolved that even surpasses NGW and, for many, is not even perceived as war. It does what it can to split societies with the use of fifth columns or inducing rioters to betray their country.
In summary, the works of Chekinov and Bogdanov have provided Western analysts with a basic overview until late 2017 of the basic thinking behind how Russia might intend to go to war and with what capabilities. The discussion of these two authors will be missed. While other pairs of officers have produced similar rich discussions of warfare (Kiselev and Vorobyev naturally come to mind immediately in regard to tactical issues) rarely have the discussions focused on the overarching parameters of strategic warfare (IPW, strategy, war types, etc.) as did the commentary of these two men.
Forecasting: Forecasts of the possible content of future warfare involving the use of arms suggest that it will be conducted with the use of unconventional arms causing earthquakes, typhoons, sustained heavy downpours [author's note: almost this exact wording was in the 2013 article on new-generation warfare] leading to the erosion of the economies and the intensification of sociopsychological tensions in the warring countries. These unconventional arms will certainly set off the development of new forms and methods for the conduct of military operations and changes in the pattern of military operations at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels. 
76
77
78
79
21  
21  
Ibid., p. 20.
S. G. Chekinov and S. A. Bogdanov, "The Influence of the Indirect Approach on the Nature of Modern Warfare," Voennaya Mysl' (Military Thought), No. 6 2011, p. 10.
Ibid., p. 6
Ibid., pp. 11-12.
The authors stressed the close integration of the IPW with information planning. The authors defined the initial period of war as follows:
USEUCOM 
ECJ6
N251
W56KGU-18-D-0004-S120
0720S120-J6
Department of Defense
20-3027 ©2020
MITRE Corporation
The list of articles below initially includes a few separate items that Chekinov and Bogdaov wrote either alone or in conjunction with other analysts. Those articles are followed by the ones the pair wrote together. 
Asymmetric Actions: To prevent and restrain aggression by any country (or a coalition of countries) and maintain the Russian Federation's military security, it makes sense to take asymmetrical measures of a systemic and comprehensive nature combining political, diplomatic, information, economic, military, and other efforts. As President of the Russian Federation V. V. Putin said "…Our responses are to be based on intellectual superiority. They will be asymmetrical, and less costly." An asymmetrical approach to military security maintenance is, therefore, a combination of forms and methods of using forces and means that depend on the adversaries' unequal potentialities and allow confrontation (or a direct armed clash) with a potential adversary to be avoided (or their consequences mitigated). 
71
72
73
74
75