# ID: 5ab515482b0d4042a2443485a74f24d2
# Title: Multi-Domain Suppression of Enemy Air Defense
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this monograph is to distill lessons from the history of air defense and airpower's efforts to penetrate those defenses. It identifies six lessons from World War I, World War II, Vietnam, Desert Storm, and modern developments by Russia and China. These six lessons inform both air and ground forces in their future efforts to conduct Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD) and penetration operations. This monograph explores the question of how the Joint Force should approach the SEAD mission and whether or not forces in the land domain should take a more significant role in penetrating ground-based air defense systems.
Americans in 1950 rediscovered something that since Hiroshima they had forgotten: you may fly over a land forever; you may bomb it, atomize it, pulverize it and wipe it clean of life-but if you desire to defend it, protect it, and keep it for civilization, you must do this on the ground, the way the Roman legions did, by putting young men into the mud.
-Theodore Reed Fehrenbach, Jr., This Kind of War T.R. Fehrenbach reminds us of an enduring feature of warfare. Regardless of how sophisticated and advanced our technology has become, armed conflict still requires a soldier to stand upon a piece of ground and claim it for his cause. Airpower theorists have suggested that in future wars, men and women may no longer need to confront violence in close proximity and that air means alone can achieve the ends.0 F
1
The reach and impact of air forces have become inextricable from ground maneuver and have, in recent wars, been the necessary lead of an army's attack. However, the model of air supremacy as a prerequisite for ground progress may no longer hold. The proliferation of mobile and portable air defense systems, combined with long-range strike capabilities that hazard ground forces, regardless of their location, can force ground combat to precede its air complement. This monograph addresses how the Joint Force should conduct Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD) in the future. It considers the struggle between attacking air forces and defenders on the ground. Specifically, it discusses how advances in air defense systems have developed to a point beyond the US Air Force's capability to continue carrying the lion's share to suppress and penetrate them. In the future, the US Army may have to strike the first blows against an Integrated Air Defense System (IADS) to open the door for the US Air Force to begin the air superiority fight.
SEAD is critical to a ground force's freedom of maneuver.1 F 2 Prior to the reduction of an opponent's air defense assets, the enemy's air force can attack maneuvering formations at will. Airpower has been critical to modern maneuver warfare since early flyers dropped the first weapons from aircraft in the early 20th century. Air and ground defenses have advanced to the point that it is unthinkable for an army to attack without first defeating its competitor's air forces.
The rapid and thorough defeat of Iraq's air defense systems and subsequent destruction of their air force was instrumental in the quick maneuver and overwhelming victory of the coalition in Operation Desert Storm.2 F 
3
4
The hypothesis proposed is that the Joint Force should conduct future SEAD as a closely coordinated ground and air team. The US Army should resource responsive, robust, and mobile air and missile defense systems, long-range precision fires, ground-launched Anti-Radiation Guided Missiles (ARGM), and loiter munitions. The airplane's weaponization happened within a decade of Wilbur Wright's demonstration at Le Mans in 1908.1 1F 12 Although it did not have a decisive effect during the Great War, the airplane's potential for disrupting ground forces was recognized and pursued. The new invention rapidly developed from a reconnaissance tool and artillery spotter to a direct threat to opposing ground and air forces. The giant R-planes and Gothas of the German bombing effort signaled that future war could see massive attacks directed at breaking infantry formations and interrupting lines of communication.1 2F 
13
12 Ibid., 20, 72-73. 
13
Bomber formations had a significant effect on the evolution of warfare.1 3F 
14
16
Early ground-based anti-aircraft weapons were simple and initially amounted to not much more than artillery pieces modified to shoot higher and broader angles.1 6F 17 These ground systems were recognized as necessary but did not have the desired efficiency. Sound-detection, searchlights, optical range-finders, and mechanical fuses improved kill rates from 11,600 rounds per kill in 1915 to near 4,000 rounds per kill in 1918, but this was far from adequate for reducing the impact of air raids on the homeland.1 7F 
18
Explicit theories of airpower and air defense did not appear until after the war. Giulio Douhet is credited as one of the earliest thinkers to publish on the subject. He landed squarely in the offensive camp and gave short shrift to the future of anti-aircraft efforts. He went so far as to claim that anti-aircraft guns' future development was a waste of energy and that nations should 14 Raymond Fredette, The Sky on Fire: The First Battle of 
Britain 1917
Britain -1918, 13. 15 , 13. 15
16
invest in independent air forces.1 8F 19 Given his experiences and the state of air defense weapons at the time, it is clear why he arrived at this conclusion.
The offensive advantage of the airplane was well established by 1918. Reconnaissance, fighter, and bomber aircraft had all proved their worth. Airpower, despite its immaturity, had confirmed its impact. Early bombing efforts and nascent anti-aircraft tactics struggled to provide their respective sides the advantage, with technological superiority landing squarely on the side of the attacker. Commanders, theorists, and the public saw flight as the future and invested themselves in aviation. To the soldiers in the trenches, military aircraft represented another new threat among the growing number of lethal tools on the battlefield. The machine gun, poison gas, tanks, and airplanes combined to create a titanic shift in offensive capability. Airpower had proven itself a force to be reckoned with, and ground maneuver needed to adapt or die. As the "War to End All Wars" ended, military leaders took advantage of the pause to increase their strengths and mitigate their weaknesses. One weakness of the defense was the bomber's ability to "always get through."1 9F 
20
21
19
20
22
Air Marshall Dowding integrated the Tizard Committee's refinement of Radio Detection and Ranging (RADAR) with belts of observers stationed along the British coastline. These technical and human sensors reported to a hierarchy of command and communications posts that decided what response to take and notified anti-aircraft gun emplacements and the newly minted pursuit squadrons of the RAF's Fighter Command.2 2F 
23
24
26
27
The Dowding IADS and Operation Eagle's lesson was that detection and prediction of the attacker by a well-organized IADS could defeat an air force. The Battle of Britain represented a tipping point in the competition between offense and defense. The days of high-flying bomber incursions that struck with impunity were gone. Accounting for a target's air defenses was now a requirement, and merely amassing a larger number of aircraft than your opponent was no longer enough to gain Douhet's "command of the air." As is true today, numerical and technological superiority was not a guarantor of victory, and robust defense systems required the application of multiple and sustained dilemmas to reduce them.
RADAR provided an effective means for identifying, tracking, and predicting the routes of attacking aircraft, but defenders were still in the process of developing effective engagement methods. It was clear that close coordination was critical. The Dowding System had created some efficiencies; however, the supporting weapons systems were not much more than adaptations of tools from the trenches. Attackers learned that avoiding detection was mandatory for effective bombing and that their opponents could not just be ignored and overflown. Airpower had to expand its expertise towards countering networked ground fire systems. The Germans' failure to defeat the British defenses showcased the importance of understanding how an IADS components functioned. It was not enough to attack those components in isolation; a systematic approach would be necessary.
Chapter 2: Doubling Down Air defenders of World War II built upon the paradigms established during the interwar period. Defensive improvements came from new combinations of existing technologies instead of original capabilities. RADAR-aimed guns and mechanical fuses increased target acquisition and accuracy. Attackers responded by employing physical and electronic measures in the form of bundles of aluminum strips called chaff, code-named "Window," and airborne electronic RADAR jamming called "Carpet," but made few advances that directly countered the ground fire threat.2 7F 
28
29
Improvements in RADAR transitioned it from a wide area early warning tool to an integrated target acquisition and aiming system that helped ground crews to accurately engage attacking aircraft at night or in adverse weather conditions.2 9F 30 RADAR aiming was only half of the equation. Projectile performance needed to match target acquisition. The addition of proximity 28 Army Air Forces (AAF) Evaluation Board in the European Theatre of Operations, Tactics and Techniques Developed by the United States Tactical Air Commands in the European Theatre of Operations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 1945), 6, 7, 14, 18-20. 
29
32
34
2
31
34
35
Chapter 3: Proxy Missiles By the 1960s, monumental technological developments had changed the tools of war. In less than two decades, air defenses had transitioned from simple RADAR, flak guns, and propeller aircraft to jets, missiles, and guns, all guided by multiple RADAR systems.3 5 F 36 Jet propulsion, missile guidance, and electronic sensors gave aviators new options, but it was unclear whether the new technologies favored the attacker or the defender. Despite these advances, the principles remained the same. Defending forces needed to identify and predict where and when aircraft would be, and the attacking air force had to evade or neutralize ground to air weapons and sensors before it could strike its targets. The tools had changed, and the question to be answered was, who could adapt them to best advantage first?
The Vietnam war served as a proving ground for both the United States and the Soviet Union to test how to achieve air superiority at the least cost.3 6F 
37
36
37
In the 1950s and 60s, Air Force bombers and fighters evaded air defenses by approaching their targets at high altitude and out of range of AAA guns.3 7F 
38
Early in 1965, missile crew members and technicians from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) began to build launch sites in the Red River Delta. These sites incorporated the Soviet SA-2 into the North Vietnamese IADS that protected Hanoi.3 9F 
40
42
38
39
40
The US response to the PAVN IADS was technological, tactical, and highly specialized. Communist forces in the south responded to the Americans and Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) with light anti-aircraft guns and, late in the war, the SA-7. In 1972 the SA-7 "Strela" or "Grail" made its appearance in Vietnam. The SA-7 is a man-portable, shoulder-fired, heat-seeking, anti-aircraft missile. It is effective to both a range and altitude of three and a half kilometers.4 6F 
47
48
The PAVN IADS changed the way the United States fought its air campaign. The North Vietnamese demonstrated an ostensibly weaker opponent's ability to use less sophisticated technology to force a world superpower to scramble to adopt new technologies and techniques.
Though it did not defeat offensive air operations, the IADS around Hanoi forced decision-makers to change their behavior. This example indicated that a wide array of defensive technologies 
45
The 1991 air campaign against Iraq proved that independent air operations could achieve significant war aims with minimal ground contribution and hinted at chinks in the AirLand battle armor that future technologies might exploit. The implications of coalition operations against Saddam Hussein were far-reaching and closely analyzed by the world's militaries.
The sixth-largest air force in the world prepared to frustrate the most powerful opponent on the planet by digging in and trusting to its massive array of ground to air weapons.4 8F 49 Iraq's IADS reflected a similar structure to what the PAVN had established around Hanoi twenty-three years earlier. It centered around a French-designed system name Kari that orchestrated a highly centralized array of SAMs, AAA, and interceptor aircraft. This centralization was simultaneously its greatest strength as well as its greatest weakness.
Kari was a joint project between the Iraqis and French that focused on defending against Iranian, Syrian, and Israeli incursions. This custom-built IADS linked outlying Intercept Operation Centers (IOC) to regional Sector Operation Centers (SOC) and ultimately to the Defense Operations Center in Baghdad. Kari focused on threats from the north, west, and east, leaving it vulnerable to attack from the south.4 9F 50 Kari's strength was its ability to coordinate the sixth-largest air force, employing 500 modern aircraft and 400 older airframes, in conjunction with 707 RADARs, 3,679 SAMs, 972 AAA, and 8,504 gun systems. It was estimated to have 
49
50
51
Colonel John Warden was one of the most influential Air Force planners to address operational challenges in the Middle East. His theories about the primacy of targeting centers of gravity, enemy leadership, and the value of shock effect, as laid out in his draft plan Instant Thunder, were adopted to devastating effect as part of Operation Desert Storm. Colonel Warden's project stemmed from his theoretical work, The Air Campaign: Planning for Combat. Published in 1988 by the National Defense University, his visualization of centers of gravity as concentric rings and his five conceptual "cases" of air war were the air campaign's foundational assumptions. 1945. He lauded it as the "commander's dream" and as an "opportunity for action so decisive that the war can theoretically be won from the air."5 7F 
58
54
55
Instant Thunder stood in stark contrast to Rolling Thunder. In Vietnam, the national command authority closely controlled the air campaign to prevent wide-scale destruction that 59 Diane Putney, Airpower Advantage: Planning the Gulf War Air Campaign 1989-1991  (Washington, DC: Air Force History and Museums Program, 2004), 348-355.  could have triggered a world war. Instant Thunder, and later Desert Storm, embraced the idea that Iraq was an interdependent system that should be attacked broadly and at intersecting functional points. The twelve strategic target categories that resulted from this idea were: leadership, electric power, naval targets, oil, telecommunications/government command, control, communications, IADS and Kari, military industry, nuclear biological and chemical sites, lines of communication, SAMs, Scud missiles, and airfields. These twelve categories fit the Five Rings model and guided the targeting approach for the duration of the conflict. During the campaign, 2,860 strikes out of a total of 11,610 were executed against IADS related targets.5 9F 
60
Kari was incapable of absorbing the high tempo, whole-of-system attack. The shock was too much. Kari was like a spoked wheel that can withstand significant impact and leverage enormous force, but that is vulnerable to disintegration when its major connection points are struck. Its design was efficient but ultimately fragile. The opening salvo of Desert Storm attacked Kari at multiple vital points and rapidly eliminated Saddam Hussein's ability to employ his air force and air to ground weaponry effectively.
The war began at 0238 hours on 17 January 1991 when a flight of attack and special forces helicopters breached Kari's first layer by destroying an early warning RADAR site linked to the Nukhayb IOC. Eliminating the southern early warning RADAR opened the door for stealth aircraft to infiltrate north and strike the Nukhayb IOC itself. The facility survived but was not employed by the Iraqis afterward. Within minutes of these first two attacks, laser-guided bombs delivered by a sortie of stealth bombers destroyed two telecommunications facilities in downtown Bagdad that were critical to the IADS communications network and civilian broadcasting system.6 0 F
61
Instant Thunder and Desert Storm stand in stark contrast to the methodical escalations of Rolling Thunder. Coalition forces in the Middle East showed the impact that combat power's high tempo application could have. The United States had proven that a wide-ranging, systematic attack of a nation state's critical requirements could bring an opponent's conventional military capability to its knees in a matter of hours. In particular, the joint employment of stealth, precision weapons, and long-range strike capabilities demonstrated that highly centralized defensive networks were vulnerable to collapse when overwhelmed by precision targeting of their critical nodes. The French designed Kari as a robust system, but it proved rigid and brittle. It was not an adaptive system. Future defenses would need to be more flexible to counter SEAD operations. The increased connectivity and redundant organization made capable by the burgeoning internet and cellular communications networks, combined with the continued proliferation of ever-smaller sensors and processors, would make this possible. The competitors of the United States took note.
Chapter 5: Defense Rising
The tremors from the coalition victory over Saddam Hussein reverberated through the world's militaries, shaking their confidence in their abilities to repulse a similar future attack.
Iraq's destruction was so swift and so thorough that it caused military leaders to reevaluate their forces and their approach to operations. The Russian Federation and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) keenly felt pressured to keep up with the military might of liberal democracies.
In 2008 the Russian Federation embarked on the "New Look" military reform to update its technology, optimize its structure, and professionalize its force. Air defense was a specialty for the Russian military, and this continued in its most recent restructuring. Russian forces reorganized and reequipped in response to their competitors' aeronautical prowess. The Russian Army developed redundant, flexible, and overlapping defensive coverage at every echelon from the battalion to the strategic level. Current assets range from MANPADS to larger missile systems like the S-400 capable of engaging targets from ground level to the stratosphere. Many of these modern weapons can fire on the move supported by specialized electronic warfare systems designed to confuse NATO cruise missiles, attack aircraft, and UAVs. These systems provide a mobile and flexibly networked IADS from the national to the small unit level.6 1F 
62
To further reinforce this robust, formal defensive system, the Russian Federation under President Putin has shown a penchant to use tactics that skirt the edge of conventional war. The employment of "Little Green Men" in the annexation of Crimea and the use of private military 62 Lester Grau and Charles Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces (Fort Leavenworth, Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016),  27, 31, 101, 266-271.  companies like the Wagner Group in eastern Ukraine and across the globe brings with it a profound challenge for any air force seeking air superiority. These irregular and deniable forces have at times been armed with state-of-the-art military equipment to include advanced SAMs.
The Dutch Safety Board Joint Investigation Team concluded that a Buk missile shot down Malaysian Airlines Flight 17. This missile system had at one point belonged to the Russian 53rd Anti-Aircraft Missile Brigade.6 2F 
63
An attacking force entering a Russian Federation A2/AD network would encounter hostile partisan forces backed by well-trained private military contractors capable of coordinating with the conventional Russian IADS. These low-visibility forces would remain out of sight, keeping their SAMS and AAA concealed inside buildings and hide-sites until the conventional IADS required reinforcement. When the attacking force maneuvers towards the conventional IADS, partisans and PMCs would intermingle with its formations, particularly in urban areas, and activate independent anti-aircraft systems in proximity to the aggressor's formations. This hybrid approach would disrupt the SEAD effort, expose maneuver forces, drain the attacker's resources, and threaten their basing. Ground forces would be required to hunt SAMS, AAA, and MANPADS in parallel with the broader SEAD effort against the national IADS.
While Russia adapted to the overt and physical implications of US AirLand Battle, the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) sought to understand and counter the connective tissue that supported the global reach and synchronized impact of US technologies. In an extensive 63 "MH17: Four charged with shooting down plane over Ukraine," British Broadcasting Corporation, 19 June 2019, accessed 24 November 2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-48691488.
study of Western military thought titled Unrestricted Warfare, two PLA officers detailed the Western way of war's strengths and weaknesses. They proposed a new conceptual approach for the PLA to employ. Colonels Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui proposed that Desert Storm had not only changed the way militaries employed technology but that the nature of coalition actions outside of the military sphere had changed the very heart of warfare. They defined the new way of war as "unrestricted warfare" and framed it as actions in all domains, both military and non-military, that a nation uses to exert its will on others. It is warfare that "transcends all boundaries and limits."6 3F 
64
Integrated joint operations indicate that the PLA has adopted the perspective that forces in all domains need to cooperate to achieve the maximum effect possible against an enemy.6 4 F 65
Applying the strategic concepts of unrestricted warfare, joint operations, and informatization to an IADS manifests various PLA options. The Chinese military approached the challenge of potential technological overmatch by Western armies from a broad view and a high angle. Instead of seeking to counter US capabilities directly, their analysis of Desert Storm led them to seek the linkages that made that technology successful, namely the shared information that enabled such successful targeting. As early as 1999, PLA strategists viewed space and cyberspace as the new "high-ground" and sought to achieve a position of advantage in these 64 Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, 1999), 12. domains.6 5F 66 The PLA's approach prevents an opponent from ever reaching air-superiority by preempting their space and cyberspace efforts. By degrading an attacker's ability to employ precision, navigation, timing, and data networks, they intend to nullify the advantage of the types of high technology used in the Gulf War. Advanced weaponry like the HQ-9 SAM supports this prepositioned advantage.6 6F 
67
On the mainland President Xi Jinping designated the People's Liberation Army Rocket Force (PLARF) as an independent service branch in 2015 and charged it with the employment of both nuclear and conventional missile systems in defense of the homeland.6 7F 
68
PLA forces would counter a penetration operation with long-range strikes against the enemy's airbases and logistics facilities. As the conflict escalated, the PLA would transition from spoofing their opponent's satellites and communications networks to the physical destruction of space systems. CCP cyber forces would weaponize "smart city" technologies to track and target maneuvering forces.6 9F 
70
The Chinese and Russian militaries embraced Desert Storm's implications and restructured themselves to contest the advantages that airpower provided in that conflict. Irregular The second World War provides the example that combinations of existing technologies and cooperation between adjacent warfare domains can create a decisive advantage. The heavy attrition Flak inflicted on Allied airpower and the associated disadvantage that resulted from reduced air support indicates that cooperation between air and surface forces is critical.
Combining technologies and increasing the support between domains was a key lesson of Army Air Forces in the European Theatre of Operations.7 2F 
73
74
The internet has solved this brittleness problem. Modern militaries can adapt to disintegration attempts by using radio, hardline, line-of-sight, cell towers, and satellite communication systems to stabilize their networks. This increased interconnectedness makes future IADS far more resilient than Kari. Additionally, the ubiquitous coverage of cellular technology enables irregular forces to coordinate an informal air-defense web.
Technology has become orders of magnitude more potent in the past two decades while simultaneously becoming more accessible. Dispersible, intuitive, interconnected technologies will enable future defensive systems to move from being highly integrated to becoming federated.
Future IADS might look more like a federated air defense system that can behave in a fully integrated manner when its network fully functions and transitions to localized cellular cooperation when an attack begins to degrade its command-and-control nodes. In essence, the command-and-control function could float from one node to the next when the central node is destroyed. This federated method would make an IADS a complex adaptive system.
The ever-increasing range of missiles indicates the value that competitors place on disrupting their opponents long before an attacker breaches their territory. China claims its DF-26 intermediate-range ballistic missile can strike moving targets on sea or land at ranges up to 4,000 kilometers. 74F 
75
The future US Army should take advantage of the six lessons of prediction, cooperation, attack ratios, interconnectedness, federation, and long-range strike by employing offensively mobile air and missile defense assets capable of disrupting modern aircraft attacks and ballistic 
75
In prior conflicts, the US Army had the luxury of waiting for the US Air Force to establish air superiority before ground forces began their maneuver. In an operating environment where an opponent has a conventional global strike capacity, waiting might not be an option. A future war could see the US Army forced to maneuver out of its intermediate staging bases because remaining in place would subject it to a persistent ballistic missile threat. The Air Force is once again subject to managing the 3:1 attack ratio that the Vietnam conflict exhibited and will not have the spare capacity to simultaneously fight for air superiority, strike strategic targets, conduct SEAD, and provide close air support. Developing an offensive, ground-based anti-air and missile capability will reduce the Air Force's workload. Creating a maneuver-based SEAD option will enable the US Army to maneuver under fire and create diverse challenges for an opponent, contrary to the single-domain solution today. This concept is analogous to the Roman testudo formation.
The word testudo is Latin for tortoise and was used to describe a formation employed by Roman infantry in which the soldiers held their shields to create frontal and overhead protection against enemy projectiles on the battlefield.7 5F 
76
Resourcing the US Army with offensively mobile anti-air and anti-missile systems capable of defeating modern attack aircraft and ballistic missiles will provide a "testudo" like effect and enable ground forces to penetrate modern A2/AD networks.7 6F 77 76 Philip Rance, "The Fulcum, the Late Roman and Byzantine Testudo: The Germanization of Roman Infantry Tactics?" Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies, no. 44 (2004): 300-302. The Army's Multi-Domain Operations concept proposes that a future force must stimulate, see, and strike enemy formations to win in a near-peer conflict. A testudo organization structured with stimulate, see, and strike echelons would disrupt the enemy's prediction, enhance Joint cooperation, reduce Air Force SEAD to strike ratios, overwhelm the enemy's interconnectedness, isolate a defender's federated IADS, and mitigate the enemies long-range strike capability. This penetration force should be equivalent to a division or larger and maneuver subordinate brigades that specialize in the stimulate, see, and strike functions.
A stimulate brigade should field many expendable autonomous and semi-autonomous systems capable of replicating the visual, thermal, and EMS signatures of air and ground combat systems, as well as command posts. The purpose of this formation would be to deliberately trigger the sensory apparatus of the opponents A2/AD while employing sufficient deception and mobility to minimize attrition from the enemy's counterstrike. Stimulating the defender's networks with deceptive signatures would enable the following echelons to map, track, and predict enemy maneuver and long-range strike positioning.
The second echelon of a penetration division would fulfill the see function. This organization of two or more brigade-sized elements would employ air and ground mannedunmanned teaming (MUMT) formations to exploit the targeting data relayed from the expendable unmanned systems of the see echelon. The see brigades would strike at high-value targets and shape the battlefield for the subsequent strike formations.7 7F 
78
organization. The successful armed reconnaissance and shaping of the see brigades provide the commander decision space to determine where the strike echelon should be employed to best advantage.
Strike echelons would employ mobile infantry and armor formations to exploit the weak points in the A2/AD network. Strike brigades use mostly manned ground systems with some autonomous and MUMT capability to maneuver into an A2/AD bubble to disrupt its ability to strike long-range targets and prevent the enemy from massing anti-air weaponry. This echelon would require a high density of air defense artillery systems to prevent its attrition before maneuvering into range with its ground combat systems. This future ADA capability should employ weapons capable of defeating incoming intermediate and short-range ballistic missiles and disrupting attacks by modern aircraft. It must be mobile enough to maneuver alongside major ground combat systems such as the M2/A3 Bradley Fighting Vehicle or M1/A3 Abrams tank.
The strike formations require close cooperation with Air Force assets to provide windows of opportunity for fifth-generation fighters to exploit further and then jointly disintegrate the opponent's A2/AD capability.
The multi-domain combination of a protected land force, in the form of a Penetration Division, with the SEAD expertise of the US Air Force, will reduce the number of support aircraft the Air Force requires, provide for more rapid maneuver, reduce the ability of an opponent to destroy US forces at staging bases, and speed the disintegration of future IADS.7 8 F 
79
Giulio Douhet,  The Command of the Air,
2nd ed. (New York: Coward-McCann, 1942), 29.
Joseph Trevithick and Tyler Rogoway, "Air  Force to Turn Navy Air Defense Busting Missile Into High-Speed Critical Strike Weapon," The Drive, 18 March 2019, accessed September 14, 2020, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/27022/air-force-to-turn-navy-air-defense-busting-missile-into-
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2018), IV-9.
Ibid., 
Maj William Hewitt, Planting the Seeds of SEAD: The Wild Weasel in Vietnam (Maxwell Air Force Base: US Air Force School of Advanced Airpower Studies, 1992), 3-10.
Petro G.Grigorenko, FM  
100-5: A Soviet Assessment (Falls Church: Delphic Associates  Incorporated, 1983), 64.   
Col Joseph Speed and Lt Col Panagiotis Stathopoulos, "SEAD Operations of the Future." The Journal of the Joint Air Power Competence Centre, ed. 26 (Spring/Summer 2018): 38-43, accessed 29 July 2020, https://www.japcc.org/portfolio/journal-26/.
Werrell, Archie to SAM, 3.   
Austin Duncan, "Innovation Determinants of the World's First Integrated Air Defense System," Real Clear Defense, May 03, 2018, accessed 16 September 2020, https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2018/05/03/innovation_determinants_of_the_worlds_first_integr ated_air_defense_system_113402.html.
"The Battle of Britain," RAF 100 Schools Project, The Historical Association, accessed 17 September 2020, https://www.raf100schools.org.uk/resource/40/the-battle-of-britain-and-radar.
Ibid., 5.   
Joe Strange, Centers of Gravity and Critical Vulnerabilities (Quantico: Marine Corps  University, 1996), 84.
McCanne, Olson, and Teicher, Operation Sea Lion: A Joint Critical Analysis,[5][6][7][8][9][10] 
Werrell, Archie to SAM,[57][58][59] 
Werrell, Archie to SAM, 118.   
Maj JohnDeeney, Finding, Fixing, and  Finishing the Guideline: The Development of the United States Air Force Surface-to-Air Missile Suppression Force During Operation Rolling Thunder (Fort Leavenworth, US Army Command and General Staff College, 2010), 41.
Ibid.,[41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52][53][54][55][56][57][58][59][60] 
Werrell, Archie to SAM, 128.   
Putney, Airpower Advantage,[351][352] 
Putney, Airpower Advantage,[339][340][341][342][343][344][345][346] 
I am endlessly grateful for my wife's support and her willingness to let me sequester myself to read and write to my heart's content. This monograph would not be possible without her patience. Additionally, 
Dr. Gorman
//signed/8 MAR 21/gsg// ________, 
Monograph Director Gerald S. Gorman
Seminar Leader Juergen Prandtner
20 APR 21/BAP//
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
71 Thomas Newdick, "Yes, Serbian Air Defenses Did Hit Another F-117 During Operation Allied Force In 1999," The Warzone, 01 December 2020, accessed 03 February 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/37894/yes-serbian-air-defenses-did-hit-another-f-117-duringoperation-allied-force-in-1999; William J. Broad, David E. Sanger, "China Tests Anti-Satellite Weapon, Unnerving U.S.," New York Times, 18 January 2007, accessed 03 February 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/18/world/asia/18cnd-china.html.
72 Dave Majumdar, "Could Russia's S-400 Do the Unkthinkable: Kill a F-22, F-35 or B-2 Bomber?" The National Interest, 18 January 2018, accessed 03 February 2021, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/could-russias-s-400-do-the-unkthinkable-kill-f-22-f-35-or-b-24114.