# ID: 5aee5480c0504d00b32f52f492b5abbc
# Title: Transformation of Romanian Army Special Operations Forces officers education
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Romanian Army Special Operation Forces (Romanian ARSOF) were created as a counter-terrorist unit in 2003 in response to a strategic partnership with the US and Romania's commitment to deploy forces outside of the national territory under NATO command as a niche capability -CT. But with the emerging Russian threat to the east in the last years, Romanian ARSOF faces a different type of mission-set: national defense, integrated in large maneuver forces, with denied multi-domain environments. This raises the question: Are Romanian ARSOF officers prepared for this new OE? And even more important: How to transform the Romanian ARSOF officer education to address the complex challenges of today and tomorrow's operational environment? This study will analyze the challenges that current Romanian ARSOF officer education is facing in this new complex and dynamic environment and compare it to the US ARSOF Professional Military Education (PME) in order to identify educational approaches and recommendations that might be suitable for the Romanian ARSOF case. This study is critical not only for the Romanian ARSOF present and future missions, but it could support other NATO and non-NATO countries efforts in addressing similar issues.
15.
vi ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I will begin this section by extending my sincerely thanks to the people of the faculty of the Master of Military Art and Science Department at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas for their professionalism, candor, hard work and friendship they showed to me and all my peers engaged in this arduous writing process. I also extend my very special thanks to my operational sponsor and mentor, Mr. Wood who guided me, pushed me and supported me throughout the writing process of this thesis.
I will continue to acknowledge and thanks my research committee Chair and members, for their invaluable contribution to the completion of my thesis. Mr. Gregory Cook, my Chair, who not only provided me with the knowledgeable insight in the thesis writing process, but also for his friendship. You made the process run smooth and seamless and arguably less painful for me. To my committee Doctor, COL Paul Schimdt, thank you so much for both your straightforward opinions on my work and for the invaluable academic foresight that you provided from the beginning to the end of this process. To LTC James Love and LTC Bryan Moffat, thank you so much for your extended technical expertise in the Special Operation Forces issues, your continual openness and your ability to keep me focused on the road ahead. Without my research Committee, my efforts in writing this thesis would have been tenfold in working hours.
I extend a special thanks to my US-ambassador and brother-in-arms, Maj.
Andrew Smith who not only provided very valuable support during the entire CGSC year and, especially, during the entire process of the writing of this thesis, but also proved to be the quiet professional that I grew up to know that 10 th Group members are. vii Especially important, I wish to thank my exceptional and beautiful wife, Cpt.
Cristina Rus who went above and beyond to support me during this entire year in CGSC, endured my absence for so many hours while researching materials, typing and editing this paper, and made my short and rare free time be worth their weight in gold. You are amazing! Finally, this thesis is dedicated to all the Romanian SOF Heroes, that gave their lives to ensure that Romanian values and principles stand true and visible. May this work be of help to the future Romanian SOF soldiers that will follow in their footsteps! Currently, the Romanian ARSOF officer's education is not fully able to address the complex and inter-related issues that conventional war, terrorism, Counter Insurgency (COIN) and grey-zones present to Romania's national security. With the rise of the terrorist threats after the fall of the Iron Curtain, Romania decided to build its own Army Special Forces (ARSF), later to be renamed Army Special Operation Forces (ARSOF).
Their main mission is counter-terrorism, but incumbent to their position in the Land Forces, they also hold a crucial role in the conventional warfare. The Romanian ARSOF shaped and adapted their education to overcome the terrorist threat for many years, with regional and cultural approaches to all the aspects of education tailored to conduct operations in another country. But the emerging Russian threat paints a different type of battle: on our own territory, part of a large maneuvering force, across a large area, in contested multi-domain environments. This new type of political, social and military environment was not the one armies in Romania and most of Europe trained or prepared in the last few decades. This raises concerns on the preparedness of our military leadersparticularly for Romanian ARSOF officers. The Romanian ARSOF strategic orientated mission-set puts them in a crucial positon, with the capacity to influence the Romanian Army missions and the political situation during their operations. This study will analyze the challenges that Romanian ARSOF is facing in the new complex political, social and military environment, compared with the present day education system. It will present the way that the Romanian ARSOF officer education came into existence, its driving forces and some of the critical influencers. Additionally, by analyzing other countries approaches to their ARSOF officer education, it will try to identify possible new challenges that the Romanian ARSOF officers might be required to address. The study will also analyze, discuss and compare the US ARSOF educational system with the current Romanian ARSOF, identifying the educational approaches and actions that might be suitable for the Romanian ARSOF situation. In doing so, this study would provide recommendations not only to the Romanian Army leaders, but to other regional army leaders, that are or might be confronted with similar issues and challenges.
What PME outcomes directly related to Romanian ARSOF core missions must Romanian ARSOF officer education integrate to address the complex challenges of today and tomorrow's operational environment? 3. How is the current and future OE shaping Romanian ARSOF missions? 4. What is the impact of the increased requirements on the Romanian ARSOF officer's education approach? 5. How the USSF core tasks shape the officers PME and how can those USSF PME tasks that closely relate to Romanian ARSOF core mission requirements be used to support the Romanian ARSOF PME transformation? Background Romania has a very dynamic history, as a result of its geographical disposition placing it at the crossroads of continents and various empires. This shift of influences and continuous friction between Romania's desire for sovereignty and independence left an indelible mark on the way the military organization is built and functions. The defensive nature of the Romanian National Army was a defining line since it was first founded 1859 and it endures until today, with Romania being part of the NATO Collective Defense and European Defense Agency. The Land Forces comprises the majority of the personnel and resources of the Romanian Army and the officer corps has been historically the most influential of all the cores.
This thesis will assume that Romanian Army continues its current transformation process, with the aim of providing a streamlined and effective force, capable of accomplishing the principal mission of national defense, as well as maintaining its status as a trusted NATO partner.
NATO will continue to provide for its defensive obligations, within a transitional process from US-heavy sponsored organization towards an effective, European collective defense entity, with a reduced US troop presence.
Russia will continue to challenge NATO, and especially NATO's easternmost members.
Romania will maintain its national desire to train and prepare for resistance movement development, under a national responsibility, not under the NATO SOF doctrine -similar to the way Hungarian SOF are currently addressing the UW missions.
The assumptions will consider that Romania will provide a complementary legal framework that resistance movement development missions will remain a part of the Romanian ARSOF mission spectrum. This assumption is based on the real possibilities that an attack on Romania resulting in a loss of territory will require building resistance movements by the Romanian ARSOF to support the defensive efforts.
This paper uses the Romanian definition of education as being an ensemble of systematically applied measures that intends to establish and improve the intellectual, moral and physical capabilities of military personnel. 
1
2
Romanian SOF are comprised also from designated airborne units, special reconnaissance units, ranger units and other similar special purpose units. For this study the ARSOF will refer only to the SF-equivalent forces in the ARSOF community.
This study will not involve human subjects and it will be based only on the researched literature about ARSOF education in different armies and time periods.
Another limitation is the unclassified character of the study, that limited the depth of the research and the details of the conclusions and solutions presented. This study will analyze and make reference only to the direct-access officers (that enter the Romanian ARSOF by graduating the Military Academy) not including the indirect-access officers (commissioned after graduating a civilian university). The very small number of indirect-access officers in the Romanian ARSOF makes them negligible for this study. This study will not address the Romanian ARSOF officers transferring from other services or branches of Romanian Military (Technical, Naval or Air) due to their statistical insignificant number compared to the Romanian Army sourcing. This study will not cover the special mission units that Romanian Armed Forces had before 2003. The Army Special Purpose Units in the Romanian Army before the SOF units were constituted were basically Long Range Surveillance (LRS) units, specialized in behind enemy lines reconnaissance-specific operations. They had neither a SOF specific doctrine, nor a specific integration in the overall army structure, being constituted on the same principles LRS units functioned in US Army.
The paper will concentrate on core missions of ARSOF, for both US and Romanian ARSOF to accommodate the time and space limitation required to analyze all the SOF missions. The paper will make reference only to the FID/MA, SR, DA, CT and UW missions / similar in order to allow for a relevant analysis for the two organizations.
The research paper will not cover the Romanian ARSOF officers' education linked to the Defense Support to Civilian Authorities (DSCA)-focused mission because those missions are common for all the Romanian Army and the education requirements has no particularities for the ARSOF. Similarly, the author will not make reference to the Joint PME of the USSF because it does not correspond to the Romanian ARSOF system thus making the analysis not utilizable for the purpose of this paper.
For this paper, the author will only analyze the education for the USSF officers not including the warrant officers, because there will not be an equivalent of them in the Romanian ARSOF system. The Warrant Officers in Romanian Army are technical officers and in the Romanian ARSOF system they cannot hold leadership positions.
Similarly, the author will focus on the education paths that the majority of the USSF officers will follow, avoiding the specialized or very limited number of education branches due to the limited time and space available for the present research. This thesis will not cover the USSF Joint PME (JPME) analysis due to the absence of an AR SOF JPME equivalent, but the study will try to suggest a further study to be conducted on the applicability, creation, development and implementation of a Romanian SOF JPME.
This study will limit its focus to unclassified materials published in English or Romanian language, by national and collective entities.
The research will focus on identifying the critical officer education aspects that the Romanian ARSOF needs to address in order to retain the initiative for the current and foreseeable challenges. By comparing other ARSOF officer education systems, it will present solutions to challenges, providing a starting point for future detailed researches possible with access to classified information.
The reason to pursue this study resides in the importance and the actuality of this subject in the current complex European and global environment, especially in the present day strategic context that Romania is facing. The combination of conventional territorial defense missions, continuing COIN operations and complicated political and social environment presents the Romanian ARSOF officers with challenges unlike any other before.
Romania's geographical position in the South Eastern part of Europe has always presented a place where strategic interests of different powers and systems have come into conflict. From the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian Empires in the 16 th Century to the present day frictions between Russia and NATO, the Romanian Army had, has and will have the difficult task of defending the country, in a national and allied context, as well as addressing the EU solidarity and reciprocal assistance requirements. 
3
Among the Romanian SOF, the ARSOF is the most numerous, oldest and most experienced of all the branches. The leaders of ARSOF, the officers, are the ones charged to make strategic decisions that can have effects not only at national level, but can influence the Regional, European and even global decisions. Romanian ARSOF was born in a COIN context that caused the officers education to be greatly focused on the counterterrorism actions, aligned with the NATO and US Global War on Terror. But the rise of the Russian threat on the Eastern front, with a mix of hybrid and conventional warfare techniques, underlined the area where Romanian ARSOF currently need to focus their efforts, with the ARSOF officers being the main focus. Being a force multiplier, the ARSOF officers are not only the ones called to lead their forces, but are the ones that are called to provide specialized competencies to the conventional forces in a complex and hybrid environment. This is why it is important for a professional Romanian ARSOF officer to understand both the unconventional / irregular and the conventional aspect of the Romanian Defense requirements, as well as the National, Allied, Regional and Global implications of their actions. Only by transforming and adapting their education to the new threat environment challenges, Romanian ARSOF officers the proactive and efficient leaders that the Romanian ARMY will need to achieve deterrence and protect national and collective values.
CHAPTER 2
The research for this thesis revealed numerous articles addressing needed changes or transformations for the USSF PME, both for junior and field grade officers. On the other hand, there are little to no articles covering the Romanian ARSOF PME, as a separate system or as a part of the Romanian Army PME structure. This is the reason why the analysis in chapter 5 is a compare and contrast approach with the United States SF Professional Military Educations (PME). The USSF PME system was chosen due to the way the Romanian ARSOF PME system was initially envisaged to be developed, as an adaptation to the Romanian specifics of the USSF PME model. Chapter 2 will present the literature overview, from a wide range of official documentation, materials, books, articles and official blogs referring to both the past, the present and the envisaged future with an influence over the Romanian ARSOF community.
The study will use as primary sources of literature public sector works, composed of official (released or assumed) national government or collective entities documentation (Romanian, US, NATO, EU) relevant to the topic: national, security, and military strategies, national and military visions, education programs and strategies. These documents describe relevant aspects in regards to both the political, social, and military context that Romanian is and will be facing, but also regarding the way the Romanian ARSOF will be called to respond to them. This chapter will be structured in three main parts: doctrine, operational environment and Army and ARSOF PME. This construction will allow for a logical and comprehensive overview of the literature and allow for a nesting from broad -doctrine to narrow -ARSOF PME documentation.
An analysis of the 2015-2019 Romanian National Defense Strategy,
4
5
6
9
The Romanian ARSOF requirements for national defense and for multi-national missions are a synthesis of the 1994 Romanian National Defense Law no. 45 10 and the 2011 Romanian Armed Forces participation in missions and operations outside the National Borders Law no. 121, 11 corroborated with all the subsequent Romanian Government Executive Decisions. These aforementioned documents provide the basis of not only the AR SOF mission-set, but they also provide a way to envision how the current Romanian posture can be challenged by the new and complex threats rising on the Eastern borders.
In order to fully understand the Romanian ARSOF missions, the 2012 National Defense University, Center for Strategic Studies paper Romanian Army Strategic 8 Romanian Presidential Administration, The Romanian National Defense Strategy Guide, Decree no.128 of The Romanian Supreme Defense Council (CSAT) (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, December 10, 2015). 
9
10 Romanian Parliament, Romanian National Defense Law no. 45, in The Official  Monitor of Romania, no. 172 (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, July 7, 1994)   11 Romanian Parliament, Romanian Armed Forces Participation in Missions and  Operations Outside the National Borders Law no. 121, in The Official Monitor, no. 427  (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, June 17, 2011).
Missions within NATO
12
To understand how and why the Romanian ARSOF missions changed, but also how those changes will need to trigger a change in the way the Romanian ARSOF PME is built, developed and updated, the author analyzed the 2013 Allied Joint Doctrine for Special Operations -AJP 3.5, comparing and contrasting it with the 2004 Romanian ARSOF doctrine. Analyzing the influence of AJP-3.5 on the Romanian ARSOF PME is important for this paper not only because it became the de facto ARSOF doctrine since 2013, but it also aims at leveling the mission-sets, requirements and capabilities throughout all the NATO countries, implying tasks and responsibilities for Romanian ARSOF PME that were not required before it was adopted. Additionally, the author used AJP-3.5 is his analysis of the USASOC ARSOF 2022 
13
Although Romania does not have a UW mission set defined for its ARSOF, its history points out that in different times and for different reasons, Romanian paramilitary forces organized and executed extensive resistance operations, which points out to a gap in the required training of Romanian ARSOF, the only ones that could be able to plan, organize and conduct these type of operations in a hostile or denied territory. The current Crimean situation is a perfect example of why such capabilities are needed for a country in the Eastern Europe, especially if we are analyzing current threat trends.
Romania has a long history of occupation by many regional powers starting with Roman times and ending with the Soviet occupation in the 20 th century. Because of that, for centuries Romanians have resisted their foreign rulers. The haiduci are the oldest form of organized resistance that are mentioned throughout the Romanian history, organized groups under centralized command that planned and executed sabotage-type actions on occupiers' apparatus, undermining their credibility and affecting their combat power and moral. Detailed description of their organization, actions and geographical location, as well as their modus operandi are analyzed by the Dr. Daniel Dieaconu in his two books
15
The 20 th century saw a more sophisticated and organized type of resistance movements in Romania, more similar with what today resistance movement will be identified in doctrine. The 1914-1917  To fully understand the current and future operational environment, different points of view must be considered to allow for a complete picture of the way the challenges are perceived by various actors on the international, regional and national area. By corroborating the concepts that Frank Hoffman analysis in his essays The Contemporary Spectrum of Conflict: Protracted, Gray Zone, Ambiguous, and Hybrid Modes of War 19 and Hybrid Threats: Re-conceptualizing the Evolving Character of Modern Conflict 20 we can form an idea of the way the modern challenges are perceived by the US, from its distance positons vis-à-vis of the Eastern threat center. Hoffman sees difference between various types of new conflicts and provides a broad description of the particular challenges each one poses. How to Shape Special Operations Forces
24
This gives an insight on the particular environment that the European region is facing and will face in the future, referring to both NATO and European Union.
The 2017 research paper Romania and The New Cold War Security Challenges
25
The future environment that Romanian ARSOF will be called to operate in presented by synthesizing the analysis of the Romanian National Defense and Romanian Military strategies, the latest strategical and operational military and security developments within Romania and NATO, as well as through a corroboration of the latest interviews and declarations of Romanian and NATO officials, referring to the future role of Romania within the South-Eastern region and on the NATO Eastern flank. Additional to the newly arisen threats and challenges, the long standing issues like terrorism, trans-national criminality, immigration, corruption and others are also covered, to complete the picture of the future complex, very dynamic and sensitive environment. To reinforce these new objectives, the Romanian President Klaus Johannis in his speech on hybrid threats at the Global SOF Symposium in Bucharest in February 2018 pointed that the Romanian ARSOF have to develop a specific security profile in Central and East Europe, to rapidly transform and to be ready to execute the full-spectrum missions, anytime and anywhere, for national or collective defense missions. 
26
Chapter 4 will provide a more detailed analysis of these structures.  
34
The SOF community today is a joint and multi-national melting pot of capabilities, knowledge and education, but with missions and goals that can drastically differ even among allied forces. In order to understand some of the important area of concern for present and future day leaders, the 2013 JSOU 21st Century SOF: Toward an 32 Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Department of the Army Pamphlet (DA PAM) 600-3, Personal -General Commissioned Officer Professional Development and Career Management (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 3 December 2014). 
33
34
The specificity that a SOF officer must address in an Unconventional or Irregular Warfare environment is covered by Major Bryan Cannady in his 2008 thesis Irregular Warfare: Special Operations Joint Professional Military Education Transformation. 
36
The language aspect of the USSF, part of the cultural awareness necessary for any successful SF operator, but especially for the officers working at a strategic level is the focal point of the 2008 Committee on Armed Services House of Representatives hearing on Transforming the U.S. Military's foreign language, cultural awareness, and regional expertise capabilities. 
37
35
36 Bryan H Cannady, "Irregular Warfare: Special Operations Joint Professional Military Education Transformation," accessed November 10, 2017, http://cgsc.cdmhost.com/u?/p4013coll2,1581. 39 James F. Powers, Jr., "Civil-Military Operations and Professional Military  Education," accessed August 17, 2017, http://www.dtic.mil/get-trdoc/pdf?AD=ADA495472. 
40
Advanced Education. 
42
Looking back at the entire literature covered for this thesis, the author identified new emerging missions -resistance movement development, resulting from both the new threat streams in the region and from the analysis of the Romanian historical background.
The new complex and dynamic environment, defined by the new Strategic documents and by the new approach to security that Romania is taking, points to a need of a transformation of the Romanian ARSOF approach, a closer CF-SOF interaction and an officer PME focused on the JIIM, not only national military OE. The author identified gaps not only in the way Romanian ARSOF officer PME is currently developed, but also in the length it covers -limited up to captain level, compared to the requirements by both career development, functions and positions. The new challenges presented by the hybrid and emerging threats underlined the requirements for the Romanian ARSOF officer 41 Michael Meumann, "A Different Approach to SOF Education for Majors," Technical Report, accessed September 25, 2017, http://www.dtic.mil/get-trdoc/pdf?AD=AD1022393.
42 Mark A. Beattie, "U.S. Army Special Forces Advanced Education" (Master of Military Art and Science Thesis, US Army Command and General Staff College, Fort  Leavenworth KS, 2003). education to expand outside the military-only focus, requiring a comprehensive, progressive, continuous and adaptive approach, able to address the rapid and new changes that the OE is experiencing in the present and certainly in the future. Most importantly, the study of the literature pointed out the need for the Romanian ARSOF PME to include the maximization of outer SOF officer PME, especially the USSF officer PME. This will allow for an immediate and progressive approach to developing a tailored ARSOF officer PME, drawing from the experience of other similar forces, while maximizing the cost-result ratios, given the current and forecasted budget restrictions and challenges.
CHAPTER 3 METHODOLOGY This research will utilize a single-case study qualitative method to provide focus in managing the large amount of information that pertains to the subject and assist in distinguish between the relevant and irrelevant documents needed to answer the thesis research question. The research question examines the Romanian ARSOF officer education as it is today and it also questions if the current Romanian ARSOF officer education is capable of developing a leader for an operational and strategic-level force.
Due to the lack of previous papers that cover the Romanian ARSOF education, in general, and ARSOF officer education, in particular, this paper will conduct an analysis and synthesis of existing publications and papers related to the subject, with focus on the US Special Forces, but looking through the NATO and EU point of view also. The analysis will be made through the lens of the present and future requirements of the operational environments that Romanian ARSOF will have to conduct its actions.
The author used an Army Design Methodology (ADM) approach to analysis the problem at hand and to point to the conclusions and recommendations at the end of the thesis. The answers to the primary question are provided by looking at the current situation (the current Romanian ARSOF PME), defining the desired state (by analyzing how the Romanian leaders define in the national and strategic level documents the environment that Romanian Army and ARSOF, in particular, will have to operate in), frame the problem ( by analyzing how the current Romanian ARSOF PME is able to address the current and future challenges that Romania is / will face and what are the gaps that it needs to fill in order to educate ARSOF officers to address the challenges of the new and complex OE). The last part of this approach developed an operational approach (by analyzing how the USSF PME is currently set to address their core tasks and missions) and developed a plan (by providing a set of recommendations to address the identified issues, thus answering the primary question of the thesis).
The study will also help in determining how the US ARSOF is postured to address the current and future challenges. Additionally, it will assist to identify possible ways the Romanian ARSOF officer education can be changed, adapted or reshaped, based on the broader experience that the USSF enterprise provides. Figure 
1
In order to answer the primary research question -what PME outcomes directly related to Romanian ARSOF core missions must Romanian ARSOF officer education integrate to address the complex challenges of today and tomorrow's operational environment -several secondary questions were needed to properly nest and frame the way the analysis will be conducted.
The first secondary question is analyzing and presenting what is the current Romanian ARSOF PME system, what is valid and what needs to change. The answer to this question is given by reviewing and synthetizing the content of the curriculum of both junior and field grade officer for their relevance and completeness.
The next question inquires about the internal and external challenges that the Romanian ARSOF officer education needs to address to remain relevant. The inquiry is made by comparing the past, present and future environment for Romanian ARSOF. The answers will be given by analyzing the national level strategic documents to identify the way the Romanian political leaders saw and see the environment that Romanian Army, in general, and Romanian ARSOF, in particular, will have to operate in.
The questions related to how the current and future OE will challenge Romanian ARSOF and what is the impact of the increased requirements on the Romanian ARSOF officer's education will be answered by comparing the current Romanian ARSOF PME with the current and future challenges that Romania is / will face and the requirements that Romanian ARSOF have to address in the new NATO, EU and global environment.
The final secondary question -how the USSF core tasks shape the officers PME and how can those USSF PME tasks that closely relate to Romanian ARSOF core mission requirements be used to support the Romanian ARSOF PME transformation?will be answered by the analysis of the current USSF PME approach. The analysis will be done by using the lens of core mission requirements, organizational requirements and personal development. This analysis will provide the needed indicators and possible USSF solutions to the current and future challenges that in turn can be used by Romanian ARSOF as a starting point to address the needed changes to its own officer education. for all the field grade officers, in order to be promoted to lieutenant colonel, must have a Master in Military Arts and Science (MMAS), eliminating the previous option of a similar civilian master program. This severely restricted the broadening opportunities for the field grade officers in their future education, forcing them to base their post-graduate education only on military institutions. Additionally, NDU, through its War College section, provides post-graduate, operative and strategic level PME for lieutenant-colonels and colonels, similar with the US War College. 
43
The instructor positions in any of the Romanian Army schools (LFA 
44
45
Junior Officer Education -Romanian Land Forces Academy "Nicolae Balcescu"
The modern Romanian Army officer education concept was born in 1861, by order of Alexandru Ioan Cuza, the first ruler of the unified modern Romania. He unified the Wallachia Officer School, founded by Grigore Bibescu in 1847 and Moldavian Regimental Officer School, founded by Grigore Alexandru Ghica in 1858 46 under a single curriculum. The school was started as a need to train competent officers that could be proficient at the art and science of war for the territorial defense of the newly born Romanian nation. The institution started to integrate the instructors' empirical experience, gained through generation of combat for territorial defense with modern pedagogical and methodical methods, focusing mainly on practical skills.
A new step for the officer education was made in 1879, when the school started to specialize infantry and cavalry officers, followed in 1886 by the artillery and engineer's branches. The curriculum sees a maturation, all the officers followed a common core until they chose their branch, further continuing on separate, branch-specific course in their respective application schools. This Soldier School (Scoala Osteasca) 47 continued to develop its curriculum and adapt its structure, based on the needs of the days and the operational environment, with a focus on the practical side of the military profession until 1991 when the school became a superior education institution and underwent a radical change, including a name change in 1995 into the Land Forces Academy. This change slowly shifted the focus from the 46 Romanian Land Forces Academy, "The History of the Institution," accessed October 05, 2017, http://www.armyacademy.ro/istoric.php. 
47
48
49
Field Grade Officer Education -Romanian National Defense University "Carol I"
The ROU NDU was founded in 1889 under the name of Superior War School and, at the time, was the sixth staff school in Europe after those in Berlin, Vienna, Paris, Turin and Brussels. The Commandant, teaching staff and students assigned to combat units and deployed to the operation theaters of the First and Second World Wars, in doing so acquiring some combat experience that proved crucial in developing the school in the years to come. As for the LFA, the Superior War School was a practical orientated there is no evaluation of the student's involvement. 
52
53
54
56
The classification at the end of the examinations is constructed based on how exact the answer was reproduced compared to the given bibliography.
One other item is needed to be accepted at the selection process: the last three to four years' evaluation rating in the annual Officer Record Brief (ORB). This, however, has no input in the selection classification, but is only one of the pre-requisite to be allowed to participate in the selection process. Romanian NDU does not have a specialized branch for SOF, nor does it provide specialized, continuous education for the AR SOF officers attending CSF. The only way an ARSOF officer can continue, expand and perfect his SOF education in the Romanian NDU is by researching for a master thesis on a SOF-specific subject. But without SOF experienced instructors in the NDU, the level and cohesion of the works and education cannot be correctly quantified. With no formal framework in place to plan, prepare, execute, and assess the requirements, needs, and future challenges to be addressed by the education system, the SOF education beyond field-grade officer level is limited.
Romanian ARSOF can take advantage of foreign school systems, made available through bilateral agreements with various countries (NATO and non-NATO), through the NATO SOF school system or various other similar agreements. Because the Romanian ARSOF partner of choice is the US SOF, the great majority of the SOF-specific education options are available through various US Security Cooperation Programs.
These education opportunities cover Romanian ARSOF needs from junior officer to general officer level, most of them being equivalent, in some conditions, to the national education programs. Especially important are the SOF-specific field grade officer education are the ones provided at the US Naval Postgraduate School (within the Special Operation and Irregular Warfare curriculum) and US CGSC (if the student choses to attend the SOF-specific electives).
The continuous education is conducted in the parent units (brigade or battalion level) through a variety of partnered activities. The majority of these activities are provided by the USG, both using the military forces (US SOF and conventional forces) and civilian contractors (JSOU, CUBIC, etc.). These activities are meant to bridge the gap that exists in the current ARSOF education system, as well as to provide a continuous collaborative environment for US-Romanian ARSOF.
Currently Romanian ARSOF career path can be long term or short term, depending on the officers' personal choices or the restrictions or limitations presented by the system.
For the long career path, a Romanian ARSOF officer starts as an ODA commander and will serve for at least two years. Next, he can choose or be appointed a battalion-level staff position (operations or intelligence) or as an ODB executive officer for another minimum of two years. If his rank is lieutenant, he will attend and graduate the Captain Career Course, in his own, initial MOS, or -preferable, in the SOF School or Military Intelligence School. Following graduation, he will return to unit to serve as ODA commander or staff officer until he is promoted to captain. Once a captain, the officer will attend the Staff Officer Course in his own MOS or the SOF specific school. He then will be appointed ODB commander and serve at least two years. The officer will be then selected as a chief of office in the operation or intelligence cell of the SOF battalion or as a staff officer in SOF Brigade headquarter. Once promoted to major, the officer will attend the Command and Staff Faculty (the equivalent of CGSC) or a similar course that upon graduation, will qualify him as promotable to lieutenant colonel.
While attending the two-year long CSF, the officer loses all the SOF-related specializations, being returned to his base MOS before he qualified as SOF, limiting his abilities to maintain contact and working relations with the SOF community.
Additionally, at the end of CSF the officers are assigned to their next position based on an overall, course-wide classification, not based on their MOS, because the Romanian Army considers all the graduating officers as being command and staff officers and not necessary linked to their MOS.
If the officer manages to maintain or regain his required SOF pre-requisites (mainly the medical status and the airborne qualification), his next assignment will be chief of operations or intelligence in a SOF Battalion, battalion executive officer or chief of staff, chief of office in operations or intelligence section of the SOF Brigade or staff officer in Romanian SOCOM staff for at least two to three years. The officer needs to graduate a National Defense College course to be eligible for promotion to colonel. Once promotable to colonel, the officer can be appointed battalion commander, brigade chief of operations or intelligence, brigade executive officer or chief of staff or chief of office in the Romanian SOCOM staff for at least two to three years. After graduating the General Officer-level course in NDU, a colonel is promotable to general officer rank and appointed SOF brigade commander.
The officers can graduate the required career courses in Romanian schools or in equivalent foreign schools. The Romanian Defense Human Resources Directorate issues regularly instructions regarding which of the foreign, partnered countries courses are deemed equivalent to national level ones and under what conditions.
The short term career of an officer can start at any of the points above the ODA commander level, as presented in the previous section. Because the officer does not have the required ODA commander experience he cannot be appointed ODB commander, the ODA level experience being a mandatory requirement. This in turn signifies that, in most cases, the officer cannot occupy a SOF battalion chief of operations or intelligence position later in the career.
At the SOF brigade and SOCOM level, officers can be appointed in any positions without passing through the ODA-ODB-Battalion requirements, because the SOF BDE and SOCOM subordinate more than SOF-specific forces (airborne, ranger, etc.). This allows for a larger selection pool for the staff and command positions. A long-term career SOF officer, on the other hand, has a net advantage when competing for the same position with a short-term career SOF officer in the SOF Brigade or SOCOM, because of his longer experience in the SOF community and his values for the SOF structure.
Romanian ARSOF were created as a direct response to the lessons learned from the multinational participation of Romanian forces in TO outside the national territory.
The strategic partnership between Romania and the USA made the USSOCOM as the preferred option in advising and supporting the creation of this new structure within the Romanian Army. Upon its creation, the Romanian ARSOF units where exclusively destined to be deployed in missions in TO with the mission sets, training and equipping to match the US SOF units. 
57
58
At the time of the Romanian ARSOF creation, the OE for Romania was vastly different than the present day one. The Romanian Defense White Paper of 2004 started to define Romania as a security contributor in the area, as well as a contributor in the crisis response situations. Romania was at the time a newly accepted NATO and an aspirant EU member state and started to actively march towards an Occidental orientated security policy, after the radical systemic changes caused by the Romanian Revolution in 1989.
The full-spectrum, USSF-inspired mission continued to be valid, the 2008 Defense Strategy continued to mention inefficient governing of some nations as a contributing factor that can positively influence the trans-border terrorist organizations. This made sense when taking about specific ARSOF mission that were controversial for some NATO countries (e.g., UW).
The evolution of the OE in the following years has been reflected in the readjustment of the Romanian strategic and operational focus. The 2013 Defense White Paper continues to mention as the center of gravity of the international relation South-East Asia and their associated non-state actors, but also introduces as threats and risks the crisis points in Europe, Caucasus, Middle East, Nord Africa, Korean Peninsula, territorial disputes and states divisions, as well as transnational threats. This meant that the main focus of the Romanian ARSOF were the same AORs, because the risk of a major conflict in Europe was asset at reduced. The 2013 Defense Strategy, presented, on the other hand, as emerging threat the cyber domain, with no direct mentioning of what forces or entities from the Romanian Army will address it.
The 2004-2013 OE presented as focus missions for the ARSOF units anti-terrorist (AT) missions, alongside counter-insurgency (COIN) and preventing conventional and non-conventional threats against Romanian national interests. While CT and nonconventional missions were the one the ARSOF were created to accomplish, the AT and conventional missions become an ever-increasing focal point for both joint-training and de-confliction, but also for real-life scenario planning. ARSOF began to be integrated in all major conventional forces national and international exercises, all the local, regional and national crisis and DSCA-specific activities and called to provide SME training to DoD and non-DoD units for various missions.
Additionally, the adoption of the NATO Joint SOF Doctrine AJP-3.5 in 2013 as the Romanian ARSOF doctrine, replacing the 2004-based document, removed UW as a mission set from the full-spectrum mission definition for Romanian ARSOF, defining the core NATO SOF mission as SR, DA and MA (the former FID in the former Romanian doctrine). The NATO does not utilize the UW missions most probably because the entire mission definition makes it a highly-sensitive political matter.
Another characteristic of the 2004-2013 timeframe is that in the defense strategic paper, except for the United States, there is no mentioning by-name of another country as a focus or strategic interest of Romanian Army. The OE in this timeframe is defined as looking to strengthen and develop bilateral relations in the extended region of Black Sea and the Balkans, with no country mentioned in particular. This defines the way Romanian Army is supposed to navigate the regional and international arena, emphasizing its role as a regional security hub, while leveraging all of the relations it can to support of its national defense.
The events that happened in Europe after 2008 triggered a change in the defense policies for all the NATO countries and NATO as a defensive alliance. The Eastern flank of NATO become very important for the alliance, especially after 2013 when the socalled Gerasimov Doctrine presented the way Russia is envisaging the war in the new century. Romanian Defense Strategy defines as one of the main threats to the defense and security of Romania the threats generated by state and non-state entities emanating from the country's Eastern part. Destabilizing actions in the Black Sea region and in the territories East of Romania, influences and distortions on the energetic markets, support for frozen conflict in the West Balkans, as well as cyber-attacks launched from state and non-state entities located East of Romania -all describe a major threat, not described in such detail in the previous Strategies. This is one of the reasons the new Defense Strategy introduces the term of Extended National Security.
These threats are further exacerbated by the fact that starting in 2015 Romania has been hosting on its territory Allied military equipment (Missile Defense System based at Deveselu) part of the NATO ballistic defense system, as well as the Headquarters for the Multi-National Division -South East (MND-SE) and NATO Force Integration Unit (NFIU), all part of the NATO effort to consolidate the Eastern Flank of the Alliance and allow for the C2 for operations under NATO Article 5 -Collective Defense. The international East-West effect of these have been perceived by Russia as a direct threat to in the region. The direct expression of this new role is the Defense Capacity Building (DCB) Initiative for Republic of Moldova and Georgia. These activities are also in line with the new Defense Strategy trend of increasing Romania's strategic profile in the Black Sea Region, in an Allied context, on land and sea that implies a tighter cooperation between the Romanian Army and Navy in achieving unity of effort during these missions.
In addition to intensifying the efforts to expand as a security hub in NATO, Romania desires a more active role in the EU structure, by increasing its contribution with forces and military and civilian capabilities to EU missions, with a special interest in participating in the EU rapid crisis response, including as part of the EU Battlegroups (EUBGs), under the EU Council control.
The new European defense challenges have redefined also the way Romania looks at its defense partners on the continent. In the new 2016 Defense White Paper, as part of the new Smart Defense approach, new European defense strategic partners are designated by-name: France, Turkey, and Poland. The Romania -Germany partnership is defined both in the Smart Defense context, as well as in the new Framework Nation Concept (FNC). Germany is the lead nation for the FNC and the main goal for this approach is to enhance the force integrations and to ensure the necessity capabilities for the Alliance in the new security context.
As defined by the new Defense Strategy, the new Extended National Security concept is a whole of government approach to the national security, extensively emphasizing the requirement of close cooperation between the national institutions. For the Romanian Army, including ARSOF, the support of the local authorities in emergency situations became more intensive than in the past, exacerbated by the environmental changes and the weather changes that affected Europe in last years. Forces in all cycles of training and readiness are to be directed to support the local authorities anytime a crisis arises, the stability of the civilian order becoming one of the main objectives of the new national defense concept. Ro Army forces, including ARSOF will have to execute missions from search, rescue and evacuate civilians from disaster areas, to providing basic services and relief in affected areas, to protecting cultural objectives and population centers.
For the Romanian ARSOF, this new OE as described in the national strategic documents are redefining not only their mission sets, but also the requirements for  
62
One might wonder if the beginnings were so different, what is the value of analyzing the USSF education to provide solutions for the transformation of the Romanian ARSOF PME. There are a variety of reasons why this approach is useful: the Romanian ARSOF were created with a major input in know-how by the USSF, the US 62 Bradford M. Burris, "Army Special Operations Forces Professional Military Education for the Future" (Master's thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, 2010), 10.
Army is the most important strategic partner to Romania, the NATO SOF doctrine was developed with a big input from the US SOF community, and the current and future SOF missions are and will be conducted in a multinational environment, making the interoperability one of the major advantage that will allow for a common effort against conventional, un-conventional and hybrid threats. Even if the size of the two Armies and their roles in the world are different, and their national policies are different (US has a pre-emptive approach, while Romania has a purely defensive one), the efficiency and effectiveness of a similar SOF education, as well as the long standing tradition of US -Romanian military cooperation, at SOF and conventional forces level, points at the USSF PME as the best solutions to the current and future challenges that Romanian ARSOF will face, especially towards its leaders, the officer core.
Additionally, even if the core mission of the USSF and Romanian ARSOF organization are different (USSF core mission is UW and Romanian ARSOF is MA), that does not exclude the value of using a long-standing and proven education system -like the USSF one -as an anchor point to further develop, refine and adapt the Romanian ARSOF PME (e.g.: even if Romanian ARSOF does not conduct UW, Romanian history has proven that resistance movement development activities have been conducted on national territory against oppressive regimes, thus pointing to a needed standing capability; the Romanian ARSOF MA, SR and DA missions have been designed after the USSF model and still successfully employed). As for the USSF, the FID capabilities employed are those inherent to its UW mission, with the only difference that UW focuses on a resistance fighters while FID on supporting a government to defeat an internal threat. 
63
When analyzing the definition that US Army utilizes for PME 
64
In order to understand what the USSF education goals are for the officers compared to other US Army officers, we must conduct an analysis and a synthesis of their core mission requirements, their roles in the SF organization and the military, the specific SF characteristics and their positions and functions to be assigned to.
Additionally, we have to be cognizant that the USSF officers still have to train, maintain and improve their skills as a SF operator throughout their career, while enhancing their education. The synthesis of those requirements for a USSF officer, regardless of its junior or senior level positons, can be summarized as: a flexible, creative and critical thinker, proficient tactical, operational or strategic leader, able to provide SME advise on the fullspectrum SF operations in complex and ambiguous, hostile, denied or politicallysensitive JIIM environment, while maintaining an extensive cultural, regional and language expertise. USSF PME, at all levels, needs to satisfy all the aforementioned requirements, while always preparing the officers for their future assignments, incorporating at both junior and senior level the academic and organizational requirements with the officers' personal and operational experience.
USSF education focuses on developing and maintaining characteristics in USSF officers that will allow them to fulfil their missions throughout their entire career.
Alongside the tactical and technical proficiency that the USSF officers must maintain as SF operators, they must be continuously educated towards specific and unique knowledge, beliefs, values and habits like: foreign language proficiency, in-depth knowledge of at least one region in the world, solving complex politico-military problems, have and develop personal and cross-cultural communication skills, create and develop cultural sensitivity, adaptive and creative thinker, have cognitive resiliency and moral courage. 
65
The need for a SF leader that is culturally sensitive and aware, with language proficiency and able to understand the political impact of the mission required not only by UW or FID/MA, but by other mission that NATO and Romanian ARSOF doctrine is not mentioning as requiring these characteristics. US JP 3-05 requires the DA and SR mission to be conducted in hostile, denied, or politically-sensitive environments, while NATO AJP 3.5 does not make reference to these characteristics of the OE. But, on the other hand, the NATO AJP 3.5 requires these mission to be conducted against targets of operational and strategic importance, without limiting the span of their area of operation, and, corroborated with the definition of the CT missions (that both SR and DA support) as offensive measures including counter-force activities, we can see that the Romanian ARSOF officer still need to be capable to operate in complex politico-military and sensitive environment and not necessary on national territory.
Junior Officer Education USSF officer training and education starts before he candidate is even qualified as a SF operator. It starts with commissioning and basic branch training, followed by the first assignment in Key Developmental Branch Assignments. This time in a basic branch of the Army is different that for the Romanian ARSOF officer, who can attend the Romanian ARSOF Qualification Course right after the military academy, without any exposure to the conventional army junior officer experience, especially infantry tactics.
The USSF restriction for an officer to access the SF community only after the first tour of duty in the conventional forces ensures the junior level leadership, initial army onthe-job education and the minimum required experience as an officer are met. It also supports the build-up of the core SF missions, especially when considering that DA, SR and CT missions develop from basic tactical knowledge, while FID and UW missions require interaction with conventional forces and the civilian apparatus.
Accession into USSF specific training and education system is made by volunteering to attend and pass the SF Assessment and Selection (SFAS). The SFAS is designed to select candidates that have the prerequisites to complete the SF Qualification Course (SFQC) and are suitable for service in the SF units. This activity and the structure of the SFAS is similar to the one that Romanian ARSOF employs.
After the completion of the SFAS, the officer candidates will attend the US ARSOF Captain Career Course (CCC). 
66
67
68
The ARSOF CCC has an initial distance learning portion, followed by an Army common core curriculum and a maneuver curriculum. The distance learning portion further consolidates the self-development requirements that SF officers will require thorough their career. The course continues to develop the train-the-trainer attitude, by using the students, coming from various branches, as teachers for the classes, under the student-led, instructor-facilitated learning model. 
69
68 Gordon Richmond, "Lost Opportunities with a New SOF Career Course," Small Wars Journal, accessed December 23, 2016, http://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/lost-opportunities-with-a-new-sof-career-course.
69 Shawn Stangle, "SOFCCC Special Operation Forces Captain's Career Course," Special Warfare 28, no. 4 (October-December 2015): 26. forces. To ARSOF CCC also integrate cross-cultural skills, starting to develop the critical skill essential in missions like UW and FID, where basic tactics are utilized in an asymmetrical, dynamic, and culturally sensitive environment. Additionally, the US Army Learning Model is based on adult learning methods to develop knowledge retention skills. 
70
The next step for USSF officers is the Special Forces Qualification Course (SFQC) that is the cornerstone of the USSF operators. The SFQC focuses on the full operational spectrum of problem analysis and resolution design associated with SF core missions across the elements of national power spectrum. Different than the SFQC for Romanian ARSOF, which is more oriented towards the FID/MA and CT tasks, and emphasizes SR and DA, the USSFQC is built on a UW framework, with the other missions developed as interrelated fields of UW. 
71
70
For USSF, the CREL portion of the curricula will continue to be developed throughout the SF officer's career both through institutional education, but also through self-development. The language portion is continuously maintained and improved and it is also continuously tied into the regional focus of the SF units that the officers are assigned to. Setting aside the fact that the SF operators are incentivized to maintain and expand their mission-specific CREL capabilities, this continuous and progressive approach to these specific capabilities are tied seamlessly into the overall SF imperative of understanding the environment. 
74
75
75 HQDA,
[14]
[15]
Linked to the joint inherent character of all SF operation, one important portion of the USSFQC is the interagency -operations and the face-to-face interaction with various agencies that the USSF is called to work. Educating the USSF officers from the beginning in interagency operations allows to visualize how all elements of national power are utilized in SF operations and how this supports unity of effort, maximizes use of national resources, and reinforces primacy of the political element. Due to the multinational character of most of the operations in modern time, interagency operations can include international organizations, agencies of foreign nations, public and private charitable agencies, and religious organizations. 
76
After graduation, before the SF officers are assigned to their units they are exposed to the reality of SF missions during the Detachment Leader Course (DLC).
During this course, the SF officers will interact with senior leaders from the SF community and with various forward HQ and units. The goal is to refine their operational awareness and to better understand the OE in which they will operate. They also continue to build and maintain the SOF community spirit, because the DLC includes MISO and CA officers. 77 This will not only allow the officers to properly adjust their expectations and goals in their future units, but have the real-time updates regarding what are the dynamics of the OE and what the higher commands are focusing on. The USSF officers are also the ones fill instructor positions to USAJFKSWSC, further developing their leadership skills while providing operational experience back into the school environment.
Once assigned to their units, SF officers are required to continue their education by various means. The continuous education approach of the Army and SF is designed to maintain, develop and refine the officers' education. Language proficiency is maintained and improved by various methods (institutional and distance learning courses, cultural immersion, personal language teachers). USSF officers are also required to expand their Studies). Additionally, they may be selected to attend a Sister Service or Foreign Equivalent or may be selected for advanced civil schooling where they spend two years attending the top graduate schools in the nation. This broad palette of options for ILE insures that the SF officers maintain their joint and multinational character at the advanced education level, but also provides a continuous influx of knowledge and perspectives from entities outside the Army and ARSOF community. But, except for the selected officer to attend other ILE institutions, the majority of SF officers attend CGSC. 
78
78
The CGSC curriculum is designed to educate, train and develop leaders for 
Unified Land Operations in a Joint,
Interagency,
Intergovernmental,
and Multinational operational environment,
79
Because ILE is a higher-level educational institution, the USSF officers are called to integrate their knowledge of the SF and SOF operation in different a large scale unified land operations, that takes many of the USSF officers away from the usual set of missions that SF is called to accomplish. This requires them to understand Army doctrine at the operational level, while factoring the missions of the USSF and SOF throughout the area of operations. At the same time, the CGSC insures that the USSF officers continue their SF-specific education, by integrating SF and SOF-specific electives, designed to build on their personal experience as junior officers while integrating it with the Conventional Forces doctrine. For that purpose, CGSC maintains a SOF cell, manned by experienced SOF (SF, CA and PO) active and retired experienced officers, with a dual purpose: to ensure that USSF officers develop their SF-required education, and serve as instructors for the rest of CF students. The SOF instructors are specially selected and trained to the CGSC's demanding academic standards, with sufficient experience at operational and 79 US Army Combined Arms Center, "Mission, Vision, Priorities, Principles, & College-level Learning Outcomes," U.S. Army, accessed March 4, 2018, https://usacac.army.mil/organizations/cace/cgsc/mission. strategic level to be a SME for all the students. Their interaction with the non-SF officers has the advantage of exposing them to the entire SOF community capabilities, educating them in how to properly interact and utilize the SOF and SF on the battlefield. 
80
81
82
84
85
Army,
Interagency and SOF commands. 86
By attending the Pre-Command Course (PCC), USSF Officers selected for command at battalion and group level have the opportunity to further expand, refresh and update their doctrinal preparation in both SOF and Army doctrine. PCC is created to cover not only the doctrinal education, but also on the leader development and the legal aspects of the future senior leaders. This is the initial step in educating the USSF senior officers as an influential part of the Army leadership, extending beyond the SOF branch, needed at the operational and strategic level commands. 
87
89
Another way USSF education is utilizing the vast operational, strategic and organizational experience of its senior level officers is by assigning them in staff and faculty positions at CGSC and USAWC, with similar effects with the assignments of majors and lieutenant colonels. Moreover, as senior leaders they can also coordinate the activity of the subordinate SOF instructors in those institutions, as well as contributing to embed the SOF doctrine in the Army PME curricula. 90 89 USACAC, "School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS)." 90 USASOC, ARSOF 2022, 20.
When the Romanian Army decided in 2006 to embark on the road to stand-up, develop and employ ARSOF as a unique, niche capability to counter the ever increasing terrorist threats and to respond to the new requirements as a NATO member, the operational environment was easy to visualize and address -the terrorist threats were the main opponent. But as time progressed, Romania saw the environment changing: terrorism became global and more than one major terrorist threat developed, hybrid warfare transitioned from a concept to reality throughout Europe, the neighboring Ukraine underwent a never-before seen attack and a loss of territory and the forgotten Cold War menace from the East become very present and worrisome.
In this complex operating environment, one of the key components that many of the Armies in the world identified as being critical are the ARSOF. Luckily Romania has these forces, but the question arises: are they ready to address these new challenges and complex threats? Are their leaders properly train and educated to comprehend and properly act in these situations? The author's primary question asks what PME outcomes directly related to Romanian ARSOF core missions must Romanian ARSOF officer education integrate to address the complex challenges of today and tomorrow's operational environment that will allow for those missions to be successful.
A question so broad cannot be answered simply and that is the reason the study started with an analysis of the current Romanian Army officer PME and how the Romanian ARSOF is arrayed into it. The research pointed that the current Romanian ARSOF officers, PME, although created based on the USSF model to junior officer level, has no SOF-specific progression above that. It has no intrinsic exploitation of the personal and superior level experience, limited exploitation of operational experience, no SOF-specific senior level PME that allows analysis and solving of operational and strategic problems. In contrast, it also discovers that the Romanian ARSOF officers' PME must maintain its rooting in the Romanian Army PME in order to allow lateral transfer of officers at all levels as well as to maintain the alignment with the Romanian Ministry of National Education requirements.
Romania's geographical position in Europe, as well as its international and regional commitments have always determined its internal and external policies and it is the main determinant of its purely defensive posture. But its international commitments to the global efforts against terrorism had the side effect, as for many European countries, of making it a possible target for retaliatory actions of the global terror groups. But this is not the only issue facing Romania today. This is exactly what the second supporting question of the study explores how the current and future operational environment that the Romanian ARSOF has to accomplish its missions in. It results that the terrorist threats that initially they were created to address have not subsided, but expanded and become more complex, requiring not just simple surgical actions, but comprehensive, joint, interagency, international and multinational collective efforts.
Additionally, especially in the last years, the terrorist remained on the second place for the East European countries with Russia is renewed expansionist policies and its new preference for hybrid warfare and little green men tactics. This new environmental variable shifted the focus from small, low-footprint forces back to large combat forces, with the near-peer adversary and large scale land operations expression being present in all international discussions. Yet against, the Romanian ARSOF were not created in that environment, not developed with the focus on integrating in large combat forces or operating in a possible occupied territory. But still, this is the reality of today and tomorrow's situation. Amidst these radical external environmental changes, the national military strategy become more focused on the Army to become a hub of security in the Central and Southern Europe, to export military know-how to neighboring countries in a regional effort to address these new threats. It requires becoming one of the main European East flank defensive platforms, with a Multinational Division, a NATO Force Integration Unit and a ballistic missile defense facility stationed on its territory. All this in the context of Russia pointing at Romania as a future primary target in an eventual conflict.
These analyses of the operational environment lead to the answers to the third supporting question how these changes impact the Romanian ARSOF. The first and most important answer is that the ARSOF became a strategic command structure in 2018 and started an accelerated transformation process. The transformation is not only to address the structure and equipment, but missions and soldiers also. The initial main CT mission still remained of critical importance for Romania, but the newly adopted NATO SOF doctrine points to Military Assistance as the primary mission, followed by Direct Action and Special Reconnaissance. But what the NATO SOF doctrine does not cover is how a country will address a foreign occupation that does not trigger a NATO Article 5 response. Resistance movements comes into any Romanian military that knows their history, with examples even from these century being very fresh in memory. Looking at the required skillset and education, USSF UW activities are very similar, especially looking back on how they were formed, as resistance building forces in occupied territories.
Looking past the foreign occupation threat or the new large combat operation and the mandatory CF-SOF integration at a level not thought before, the terrorist and hybrid threats are still present. Corroborating that with the findings from the secondary questions, pointing to the limitation in the Romanian ARSOF PME due to their close linkage with the conventional forces education and the requirements for a whole of government approach to deal with these complex threats, the conclusion that the Romanian ARSOF leaders PME need to educate them to navigate the new JIIM environment, to deal with denied or politically-sensitive areas of operations, with different culture and language that they have focused (like many other armies) in the last 15 years. All these changes in the environment and in requirements to adapt and overcome them through a re-focused ARSOF PME will demand a phased approach. The answer to the fourth question on the impact of these concurrent requirements on the Romanian ARSOF PME points to the risk and challenges that it must overcome to accomplish its mission of educating the leaders to successfully meet their missions. Combining all the requirements imposed by the new OE with all the national refocus and expansion of goals and objectives results in a substantial impact on the future Romanian ARSOF PME needs. Not only the ARSOF PME has to address expanding missions, larger, complex and more dynamic areas of operation, has to optimize ARSOF-CF-JIIM efforts on both national and, possible, other nations territory, multi-domain battles, but it must maintain its close ties with the Romanian Army PME and to the required alignment with the academic requirements, restrictions and limitations of the Romanian National educational system. All of these while staying in a 2% national budget, with increasing, multiannual spending on conventional forces.
To the answer of combating terrorism back in 2006, Romania looked for solutions that would satisfy its requirements both in terms of results and in terms of time and financial efficiency. The answer at that time was building the Romanian ARSOF, using the support, knowledge, and experience of the USSF. Since then, not only Romanian ARSOF have received advice and assistance from the USSF, but also most of the Romanian Army branches. The new 2016 National Defense Strategy points to Romania's desire to expand its strategic partnership with the USA, naming it as essential to its national security. All of this drove the study's last supporting question: How the USSF core tasks shape the officers PME and how can those USSF PME tasks that closely relate to Romanian ARSOF core mission requirements be used to support the Romanian ARSOF PME transformation to successfully answer all the challenges and requirements aforementioned.
The analysis of the USSF officer PME was made by focusing on the overarching, constant educational requirements that allows a USSF officer to accomplish his present missions while setting him up for success in his successive assignments and positions.
The study analyzed the USSF officer PME in two blocks -junior and senior level PME, always comparing and contrasting the main objective of a certain education with the Romanian ARSOF one in order to identify the similarities and differences. The study acknowledges that the two forces, USSF and Romanian ARSOF are different in size, many missions, reach and strategic employment, but also realizes that the PME principles conceptual framework and an initial PME requirements -progressive and continuous throughout the military career -that will address the resistance movement development.
This new guidance will allow the initiation of an adaptation process of the current PME while identifying the priorities of effort for each unit. Additionally, it will allow a proper planning of the required PME steps within the Romanian Army educational system and the required annual slot allocation.
In order to address the lack of initial exposure of the junior ARSOF officers to the reality of maneuver units, due to the fact that the great majority of them joined the SFQC directly after being commissioned, a ARSOF wide requirement should be implemented for those without outside ARSOF experience to serve in a temporary duty assignment in deputy platoon positions in maneuver units. This can be delegated to each ARSOF battalion commander to ensure that their newly assigned junior officers in their first leadership positions request the mentioned assignment and be required as a key developmental position for the ARSOF officers. The temporary duty assignment will also address the challenges presented by a tour of duty in other CF units, by maintaining the ARSOF parent unit ownership over the officers, eliminating the possibilities of losing personnel during these assignments.
The implementation of instructors and/or staff positions in the SOF school as key developmental position for advancement within the Romanian ARSOF would be needed. This requirement would not only insure the integration of the personal and operational experience of the officers in the ARSOF PME, but it will also insure that there would be a bigger pool of instructors and staff available for assignments.
The Romanian SOCOM should initiate a project that should aim at identifying the needed Romanian ARSOF interagency cooperation requirements, identify the national and organizational restrictions and limitations, construct the curricula for bilateral and multilateral cooperation agreements and initiate an initial dialog to define their implication and needed deconfliction for junior and senior level SOF education. Initiating this process as soon as possible and at the Romanian SOCOM level would allow for a better institutional communication, while giving the interagency education an increased credibility.
In order to address the lack of continuity of SOF-specific education at field grade The foreign school opportunities should become a strong focus of the Romanian ARSOF, not only because they provide the fastest results for the ARSOF PME needs, at all levels -they take advantage of bigger armies experiences and educational systems, but also they contribute to officer's cultural and language expertise, but also it builds fast a base of selection for instructor and staff needed in various assignments in support of the new Romanian ARSOF educational redesign.
Organizational CIOS, as a SME in the details and requirements of the National Defense Education System would be tasked to develop and deconflict the institutional dialog with NDU, while Romanian SOCOM would have to implement two supporting policies: one requiring all the Romanian ARSOF officers attending NDU CSF to attend and graduate the SOF courses and two requiring the development of a SOF-cell staff minimum qualifications and their utilization. Being inside the Romanian SOCOM structure, temporary assignments to these staff position for the selected officers would be a quick and efficient process. These staff positions would have to be defined as key developmental positions when the process is matured, allowing for a field grade level integration of the personal and operational experience.
The implementation of the SOF cell at NDU would provide not only a coaching and mentoring mechanism for the field grade officers in CSF, but also be an excellent venue of exchange of experience and a feedback mechanism for the previous PME steps, as well as a benchmark for the current SOF curricula. Additionally, being in NDU, the senior level SOF officers attending the National Defense College (NDC) can be integrated in the education process, enhancing its value and providing the bridge between the tactical and operational / strategic level.
Romanian SOCOM should identify where integrating ARSOF officers during large conventional forces (brigade and above) exercises are opportune and identify the correct level of representation. The ARSOF officers, even if not part of the exercise script, would still represent the ARSOF entities in the CF AO, forcing the CF to visualize the ARSOF presence on the battle field, especially during large scale defensive land operation inside Ro territory. It will be an excellent educational moment, both for the ARSOF officers, complementing the lack of CF doctrinal and maneuver experience, while educating the CF leaders in how the ARSOF are meant to be utilized, their limitations and capabilities, and suggest the aspects of doctrine that need to be adapted The implementation of a SOF-specific education office at the NDU (both for CSF and NDC) that will coordinate the SOF-cell, provide academic guidance for ARSOF officers and be the SOF SME for the SOF related topics that the other branches during their academic development. This will require a NDU decision and update of their task organization. But both junior and senior officer PME should include and continue to build on the resistance movement development requirements, with different focuses linked to the education level they address (e.g. tactical for the junior officer PME, operational and strategic implication of resistance movement development activities at NDU level).
In order to address the CF-SOF integration, CIOS should develop a CF-specific branch, directly linked or in direct coordination with the Land Forces HQ Training and Doctrine. This will allow the direct integration of the army maneuver specific educational requirements in the Romanian ARSOF PME curricula and also allow for a better visibility for the Romanian ARSOF on the CF-specific focuses and allow the identification of deconfliction areas or points.
Training ARSOF School should develop a focused language training program, based on the current and emerging operational requirements that will complement the Romanian Army Language Centers Courses. It will have to add the cultural and regional specific aspects that are require by the SOF, not of interest to most conventional forces. Additionally, the missions, it creates interpersonal relations at all levels -junior and senior, and it develops the knowledge base needed for SOF to properly operate in both peacetime and crisis or conflict.
Romanian SOCOM should continue to develop and implement the concept of resistance movement development, by initiating periodic joint and interagency workinggroups (WG) focused on the whole of government approach to this concept. At the same time, the Romanian ARSOF officer PME should include, at both junior and senior level, the detailed and comparative studies of Romanian historical resistance movements as well as the regional resistance movements, and integrate the lesson learned into the operational units training plans, as test concepts. This will allow not only the real-life testing of these concepts, but also identify the needed external support requirements that will feed into the joint and interagency WGs. Moreover, given the intention of Romania becoming a regional security hub, these type of activities should be discussed in regional WGs, with Coalition and Regional Security partners, to identify the dynamics and challenges that an Alliance support will pose to these type of national missions and how they have to interact to provide the maximum effect with the minimum of deconfliction efforts.
From an academic point of view, this thesis opens the perspective for further researches that are of crucial importance for Romanian ARSOF, but for the Romanian SOF in particular, and Romanian and regional armies in general. The subject of the ARSOF, SOF or Army PME is a subject that should be of critical importance for all the armies in the Southeastern Europe and, in the new Allied context, should be part of a collective effort to make if as efficient and streamlines as possible. Many future studies can use this research as a starting point or as a reference. Critical for the Romanian ARSOF would be the researches that cover the transformation of the SOF Non-Commissioned Officers and Enlisted PME. Of more critical importance would be the research on the development and implementation of a Romanian SOF JPME and, more important, a Romanian Army overall JPME concept and how the SOF JPME can be integrated into it.
Other studies can focus on how the external PME capabilities can be leveraged to complement the existing or envisioned Romanian ARSOF PME or the Army PME, as a whole. To expand even further, future researched can concentrate on identifying way that the Romanian Army PME can better utilize all the available resources -national, regional and global -to assist its adaptation to the XXI century operational challenges.
This thesis can also be used as a starting point for future researches on the way resistance movement development activities can be integrated into the national or regional SOF mission-sets, how the hybrid threats influence and shape the national and regional SOF missions and, more important, how the CF-SOF and Inter-Agency relations are adjusted to address them. Additionally, how the new regional European security entities (i.e. PESCO) will influence the dynamics in the region and how the entire European security apparatus will be changed by them.
Romanian Academy, DEX '16 -Romanian Language Explanatory Dictionary,
2nd ed. (Iorgu Iordan, Univers Enciclopedic Gold, 2016). 2 Brandusa Niculescu, and Mircea Cosma, The Modern Officer -the Leader of the Military Organization (Scientific Monograph of the 11th International Scientific Conference Human Potential Development -Innovative Trends and Conclusions for XXI Century, Higher Hanseatic School of Management, Slupsk, Poland, 25-26 June 2014).
Romanian Land Forces, Romanian Defense White Charter, 2015, accessed  October 9, 2017, https://www.forter.ro/sites/default/files/informarepublica/carta_alba_apararii.pdf.
Romanian Presidential Administration, Romanian National Defense Strategy for2015-2019 (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, 2015).
Romanian Government, The Romanian Defense White Paper (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, April 22, 2016).
Romanian Government, The Romanian Military Strategy (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, September 28, 2016).
Romanian Defense Ministry, Romanian Army Transformation Strategy (Bucharest: National Monitor Publishing, 2007).
Petre Dutu, Romanian Army Strategic Missions within NATO (Bucharest: National Defense University Publishing, 2012).
Charles T. Cleveland, ARSOF 2022 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013).
Kenneth E. Tovo, USASOC Strategy-2035 (MacDill AFB, FL: Government Printing Office, 2016).
Daniel Dieaconu, Haiduci și tâlhari -Contribuții de mitologie și antropologie istorică (Piatra Neamt: Editura Cetatea Doamnei, 2013); Tâlhăria şi haiducia la români: jefuitorii cu arme (Iasi: Ed. Universitara, 2014).
Marian Mosneagu, Petre Flores, and Cornel Tuca, Armata română şi unitatea  naţională: studii şi comunicări (Pitesti: Delta Cart Educaţional, 2008.)    
Cicerone Ionitoiu, Rezistenţa armatǎ a Românilor împotriva comunismului,  1944-1960 (Viganello: Ed. Coresi, 1987.)   
James A. Copp, "The Russian Way of War: Post Soviet Adaptations in the Russian Military," accessed November 10, 2017, http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a599655.pdf.
United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM), Little Green Men: A Primer on Modern Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine 2013-2014 (Fort Bragg, NC: US Government Printing Office, 2015).
Harry R. Yarger, "21st Century SOF: Toward an American Theory of Special Operations," accessed September 26, 2017. http://www.dtic.mil/get-trdoc/pdf?AD=ADA591817.
Norbert Vaczi, "Hybrid  Warfare: How to Shape Special Operations Forces," accessed August 16, 2017. http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=AD1020415.
Lucian Oancea, "Romania and The New Cold War Security Challenges" (Master's Thesis,US Army Command and General Staff College, Ft. Leavenworth KS,  2016).
Klauss Iohannis, La Simpozionul Fortelor Pentru Operatiuni Speciale.  Sa ne adaptam la razboiul hibrid (Stirileprotv.ro.), accessed March 7, 2018. https://stirileprotv.ro/stiri/actualitate/presedintele-iohannis-participa-la-simpozionulfortelor-pentru-operatiuni-speciale.html.
27 Mircea Cosma, The Formation of Modern Officer. From Reality to Necessity (Sibiu: RomanianLand Forces Academy Publishing, 2005)   
Cristinel Colibaba, "Educating and Evaluating the Land Forces Structures in the context of Coalition Operations" (Ph.D. diss., National Defense University, Washington, DC, 2015).
Radu-Adrian Mandache, "The Formation of the Land Forces Officer as a Leader in the Modern Military Organization" (Ph.D. diss., National Defense University, Washington, DC, 2015).
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Regulation (AR) 350-1, Army Training and Leader Development (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 10 December 2017).
31 Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Department of the Army Pamphlet (DA PAM) 600-3, Officer Professional Development and Career Management (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 26 June 2017).
Romanian Land Forces Academy, "2016-2019  Student Guides," accessed October 21, 2017, http://www.armyacademy.ro/ghidfsm2016.php.
Odeta Vestemean, "Interview with Land Forces Academy Commander, BG Barsan Ghita," accessed October 21, 2017, http://sibiu100.ro/cultura/10193-gl-ghitabarsan-rectorul-aft-sibiu-studentii-nostri-sunt-cei-care-vor-conduce-subunitati-de-luptapentru-asigurarea-securitatii-nationale/.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-05-20, Special Forces Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office), 42.
HQDA, 235.   
HQDA, 167.   
Special Operations Recruiting, "SF-Training," U.S. Army, accessed August 3, 2017, https://goarmysof.com/sf-training/.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 8-42, Combat Health Support in Stability Operations and Support Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1997), Appendix B.
HQDA, 8.   
. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 6. 
AUTHOR(S) Major Roland-Albert Tirdea-Paunescu
Romanian Armed Forces SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
US and Romania
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
the security environment, making Romania a target for the Russian forces for conventional or pre-emptive strikes. 
59
60
61
60
61
The USSFQC not only trains the officers in the basic SF operators' skills for all the SF missions, but also educate them towards being more than a tactical leader, to understand the broader operational and strategic role and mission. That is the main reason that the SFQC integrates from the beginning fields of study like human dynamics, regional analysis, adaptive thinking, interagency operations, language, culture, information operations, the OPFUND management. 
72
Because SF are inherently joint and they usually are employed in volatile and sensitive areas where a degree of political liability is to be avoided, educating the leaders of the SF starting at the lowest level (ODA) to conduct operations quantifying the DIME variables allows for a more adaptable, innovative, and autonomous forces, regardless of whether they are conventional or unconventional, covert or overt employment.
Into the USSFQC six-phase curricula are built several blocks that provide the SF officers with the initial education required for the most important missions: human terrain analysis and dynamics -needed both in FID and UW, as well as cultural, regional expertise and language (CREL) -critical in all missions executed overseas. Language courses are focused on mission-related tasks, enhanced rapport-building techniques, cultural mitigation strategies, interpreting and control of interpreter methods. 
73
73 Ibid.,
38.
83
83
JIIM entities are to be educated towards correctly employing and supporting SOF at operational and strategic level.
The next important institutional education that the USSF officers receive is the Senior Service College (SSC) that provides senior level education. For most USSF officers, SSC is provided by the US Army War College (USAWC), but they can opt for Sister Service equivalent schools or even various universities in the nation, provided the officer is already Joint Qualified. The USAWC educates the senior USSF officers in a JIIIM environment as strategic leaders to serve in military and national security organizations on SF specific positions. The USAWC education is corroborated with the USSF officers continued requirement to pursue self-development to enhance their CREL abilities, with focus on expanding their regional orientation 88 to match with their future assignments, especially for the civilian, interagency and international assignments. The education at SSC level will not only support the research in SOF strategic issues, but also provide SF SME advice for military and national strategies. In contrast, Romanian ARSOF officers have only the possibility of attending the Romanian NDU courses, without any SOF specific or senior civilian or interagency curricula.
A very important source of strategic level education can be accessed by senior level USSF officers by attending the Advanced Strategic Leadership Studies Program (ASLSP) at SAMS. The selected USSF officers that will serve as theatre and strategic level command and planners, and general staff officers will be educated through a complex mix of interactions with military national and multinational commands, as well that are looking to accomplish the same educational goals can be successfully utilized as a model for Romanian ARSOF, while factoring the national and regional characteristics.
The research structured the suggested recommendations for the Romanian ARSOF PME in two categories, based on their estimated implementation required time:
short and long term. The short term changes require one to four years to implement and generate a relatively low impact on the overall structure and organization of the Romanian Army and the Romanian ARSOF. This time interval also matches the Romanian Army financial short-term planning window. The long term changes require more than four years to implement, require a combined effort from multiple structures outside the Romanian ARSOF and Ro Army, but provide enduring advantages to the organization.
Short Term Changes -DOtmLPf-p Doctrine Romanian SOCOM, as the proponent of the Romanian ARSOF PME should implement a Romanian ARSOF officers' education model focusing on the requirements resulting from an increasing CF-SOF integration, increase joint and multinational integration, implement an interagency component of the education starting from the Romanian SFQC and emphasize the need for a dual CREL education: one focusing on the areas where war on terror is conducted and one on the regional area of Romania.
Additionally, Romanian ARSOF need to start the analysis and development of both of a Long Term Changes -DOTMlpf-P Doctrine Allow the access in the Romanian SFQC only for the officers in rank of captain, thus factoring the initial maneuver experience and junior leader experience. Additionally, a limitation to a maximum of two years on the initial leadership assignment (ODA) have to be implemented. This will satisfy both the required platoon level experience imposed by the Army, but also insure a predictable and continuous flow of junior officers in their initial command positions. This will provide the necessary maturity and conventional army experience for the SOF officers, as well as allow for a better selection pool for the SOF structures. This needs a change in Ro Army HR policy.
Romanian SOCOM, in direct collaboration with Romanian Army Doctrine Department, with inputs from ARSOF operational brigades should be the proponents for all the updates to the curricula for the ARSOF School and NDU SOF cell. This filling the education gaps identified as CF-specific that the ARSOF PME is not suited to cover as an internal product. Having an Army level approved concept will allow for a proper financial planning within all the services, as well as an efficient sequencing of the MTT rotation planning and deployment. By planning to utilize MTTs from operational units, the Romanian ARSOF officers would be educated in both the latest CF doctrinal details, as well as on the latest OE-identified trends, challenges and solutions that the CF units are developing. The additional advantage of having this MTT-type mission with the CF is that it provides another opportunity to educate the CF on the specifics of SOF