# ID: 5afb05dcd4b2476ab755fcd3d144cc30
# Title: Defining Joint Vision 2010's Dominant Maneuver
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
The monograph analyzes maneuver and proposes these questions. What is maneuver? What is maneuver, in the Joint Vision (JV) 2010 sense, and what makes it dominant?
To answer these questions, the monograph studies three stages in the evolution of warfare. The study shows that the objective of maneuver is to gain a decisive advantage in time and space. Critical elements that shape maneuver include command and control, equipment, and logistics. However, technology is not the whole answer. Militaries apply technological advances through innovative doctrinal and organizational approaches to gain a decisive advantage. Significant changes in doctrine and organization occur only when a military recognizes and responds to changes in the relevant military operational environment. These include changes in national policy, technology, and methods of warfare.
The monograph then analyzes changes in the current environment. This demonstrates that the objective of maneuver remains constant. However, maneuver becomes decisive when a joint force commander orchestrates simultaneous and successive precision operations with small, tailored organizations and achieves operational objectives. If in these operations the commander can achieve the maximum or near maximum capability of his forces and negate that of his opponent's, then he can execute a dominant maneuver.
Ideas are important. Born or adopted in particular historical circumstances, they affect man's understanding of his world and, therefore, influence behavior. Ideas are joined to form concepts and concepts are merged to form systems intended to achieve particular purposes.
Dr. Richard Swain 
1
2
In an attempt to answer these questions, this monograph studies three recent stages in the evolution of methods of warfare. The study shows that the essential objective of maneuver is to gain a decisive advantage in time and space over an enemy or a situation. Command, control, communications, computers and intelligence (C4I), equipment, and logistics are critical elements that shape maneuver. Essentially, as a force improves these elements, it potentially increases its ability to maneuver. However, technology is not the whole answer. Militaries must apply technological advances with innovative doctrinal and organizational approaches, tactics, techniques, and procedures to gain a decisive advantage. By applying technology through innovative operational and organizational concepts, maneuver will evolve and the space in which forces operate will expand while the time it takes to accomplish their task will decrease.
Significant changes in doctrine and organization occur only when a military recognizes and responds to changes in the relevant military operational environment.
Changes in national security objectives, technology, and changes in the methods of warfare are the most important. To a great extent, national policy and technology exert a strong influence on the methods of warfare. However, the military methods that armed forces employ determine whether a force achieves a decisive advantage or not. This monograph examines three historical campaigns to illustrate this process.
In the modern era, maneuver passed through three periods of significant change: Napoleonic; late 19th century; and the Second World War. Napoleon achieved a decisive advantage over the Austrians at Ulm because he understood his military environment better than his opponent. He took advantage of these changes through the adoption of innovative approaches in organization, command and control, and maneuver.
While Napoleon also made changes in his logistical support methods, logistics still hindered his ability to maneuver. A critical aspect of the Napoleonic-style of warfare included the division of his army into dispersed corps capable of fighting independently for limited periods of time. Arguably, with the formation of independent corps within the army, Napoleon broke the link with the massed maneuver and limited war aims that characterized the dynastic era. However, this required more decentralized control in execution. His opponent failed to make any similar adjustments and lost. Interestingly, Napoleon's dominance was not the product of major technological advances.
Arguably, the next stage in the evolution of warfare occurred in the 1860s. In this era, characterized by the Austro-Prussian war of 1866, the industrial revolution began to have a major impact on warfare. Inventions such as the railroad and telegraph offered major advantages to a country that exploited their advantages for military purposes.
Prussia, and in particular, her Chief of Staff, Helmuth von Moltke the Elder, recognized the important of these factors. His operational and organizational innovations gave the Prussians a decided advantage in the mobilization, deployment, and employment of their forces. This allowed armies to maneuver separately. Armies were only assembled on the field of battle. Moltke planned the campaign and only gave instructions in an attempt to keep the campaign on track. The critical elements that influenced their ability to maneuver were improvements in command and control, through the integration of the telegraph. The Austrians again failed to adequately understand and integrate the new factors in to their military methods.
The final stage in the evolution of maneuver occurred at the outset of the Second World War. Both France and Germany had access to the similar technologies. However different national objectives and different lessons learned from World War I (WWI) led to each nation adopting different operational and organizational concepts. The Germans successfully integrated tanks, artillery, motorized infantry, tactical air support, and improved communications into an offensive doctrine, blitzkrieg. Under this doctrine the Germans used very decentralized command and control to fight rapidly throughout the tactical depth of their opponent. Against the French and her allies, the Germans fought a series of distributed tactical battles to advance across France and achieve operational and strategic objectives.
Essentially, the evolution of maneuver shows that national objectives and technology influence a country's doctrine and organization. The analysis also provides key information about the nature of warfare. In todav's uncertain and chaneins environment, America requires armed forces that are highly mobile and capable of world-wide deployment. Advances in technology continue to make forces more powerful and lethal. This allows smaller combined arms forces to operate and control a much larger area. They do so using more distributed and non-linear methods. To achieve success in this situation requires improvements in communications and greater decentralization of command and control. It also requires systems with increased speed, weapons range and lethality, while still providing protection. Finally, it requires a logistical system that can support increasing resource demands.
Lessons learned from the historical analysis combined with an understanding of the current environment provide insights into what maneuver potentially might look like in the future. The conclusion from this study is that the objective of maneuver remains the same, only the means to conduct maneuver are more complex. This highlights the daunting task JV 2010 is attempting to accomplish. Essentially, JV 2010 represents the Chairman's attempt to guide Service doctrine development and acquisition programs, from the "top down." Inherent in this process is the assumption that joint operational doctrine will serve as the framework within which Service doctrine must fit. Today, joint doctrine is more planning oriented than operations oriented. JV 2010 is an attempt to make operational concepts, such as dominant maneuver, inherently joint operational capabilities. This is a reaction to the changing nature and methods of warfare briefly mentioned above. It is also a reaction to the fact that US forces, while arguably the best at joint operations in the world, still operate, with some exceptions, as separate Services.
JV 2010 seeks to break the prevailing pattern of inter-Service action. It is an effort to reduce both Service redundancies and increase the capabilities of joint forces at lower levels. The end result, given the guidance in JV 2010, is the emergence of a "tailor-to-task organizational ability" 5 that provides future joint force commanders with the ability to create small, yet highly capable, task forces rapidly to accomplish the assigned operational tasks. To achieve this goal requires a greater interoperability and precision in the use of military capabilities than currently exists. The key to achieving greater interoperability and precision lies in leveraging information technology. ADM Owens described this as "achieving systems synergism." 
6
Essentially, the US concept of maneuver does not change. Maneuver still seeks to gain a decisive advantage in time and space. However, maneuver becomes dominant when a joint force commander can tailor a specific organization, or even several organizations to accomplish specific tasks. The commander can then take these organizations and orchestrate a series of simultaneous and successive precision operations to achieve operational and strategic objectives. If in the orchestration of these The interrelationship between policy, technology, and techniques influence a military's operational approach to maneuver and other forms of operations. For example, national policy provides the forces and equipment with which the military conducts operations. These objectives also influence or even dictate the type of strategy the military adopts, such as an offensive or defensive strategy. The technology of the period influences the mobility, communications, and other aspects of the armed forces' capabilities.. The methods of warfare a nation adopts derive from the first two factors, the leadership of the military, as well as the military's history and lessons learned.
Intuitively, ideas about dominating an opponent or achieving decisive results in war run throughout history. Dr. Robert Epstein points out in his study of Napoleon that, over the last two hundred years, war seems to act like a pendulum that swings back and forth from decisive outcomes on one side to long protracted struggles on the other. He believes that the difference at the two extremes is the symmetrical or asymmetrical relationship between the two forces. When the relationship between the two opponents is asymmetrical, the potential for decisive operations exists." That is, armed forces become dramatically superior to their foes when they achieve a significant advantage in some aspect or dimension of warfighting. This advantage is typically the result of the successful integration of national policy, technology, and the methods of warfare.
Nations that successfully integrate these factors and produce asymmetrical as important for this study, maneuver or dilemmas concerning maneuver are important to the evolution of warfare during these periods. The American military draws on these periods, as well as others, in its expression of maneuver. Understanding the relationship between national policy, technology, and the methods of warfare in each period provides useful insights into the current environment.
In particular, each campaign demonstrates that significant changes occur only when a military recognizes and responds to changes in the relevant military operational environment. To a great extent, changes in national security objectives and technology, exert a strong influence on the methods of warfare. The resultant military methods that armed forces employ determine whether a force achieves a decisive advantage or not.
This monograph examines three historical campaigns to illustrate the successful integration of these factors. It emphasizes the significance of maneuver in each campaign and how changes in command and control, equipment, and logistics can make maneuver decisive.
The first coherent new concept of warmaking since that of Genghis Khan was demonstrated in the early campaigns of young Napoleon Bonaparte in Italy and Egypt. In his hands, this concept continued to dominate warfare for the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century, and its influence still persists.
Trevor Dupuy, The Evolution of Weapons and Warfare 
12
Napoleon sought a decisive battle at the point of his choosing. He planned the movements of his corps so that one could fix the enemy while the remainder maneuvered to cut the opponent's lines of communications. In this sense, independent movement of corps only represented semi-independent action. Napoleon always sought a maximum concentration of his forces at the decisive point. Changes in organization, command, communications, intelligence, and logistics facilitated Napoleon's improvements in the classic style of warfare. Dr. James Schneider viewed the development of the division and corps system within an army as "the beginning of the end of the classical style of warfare." 
13
National Policy.
The military methods of Napoleon resulted from changes in political, social, and economic factors. These factors also distinguished early Napoleonic France from the rest of Europe. The French Revolution brought a new national policy to France. As David Chandler described it, "once France had let the genie of nationalism out of the bottle, there was no way of controlling the consequences." 
14
15
Technological advances contributed little to Napoleon's style of warfare. There was very little improvement in the weapons or equipment used by Napoleon from that of Frederick the Great before him. Michael Howard stated that the armaments were virtually identical. I7 Martin van Creveld went so far as to hypothesize that the secret to Napoleon's success was in his ability to separate strategy from the technological and economic backwardness of his time.' x He simply made the best use ofthat available.
With the advent of the Nation-in-Arms, warfare changed from the limited dynastic style of war to nearly unlimited war conducted by Napoleon. The differences reside in the scale and objectives. Tactically, the Grande Armee fought much like the army of Frederick the Great. 
19
He still used the "strategy of a single point." 
20
Effective command and control of such a force by one man were nearly impossible with the old methods 
21
The creation of autonomous divisions and corps gave the army greater speed and flexibility since units could move along several roads simultaneously. Although the concept did not originate with Napoleon, Napoleon used it effectively with a large national army. During the years of relative peace prior to 1805, Napoleon reorganized his army into eight corps. Each corps was capable of independent movement and action.
This organization enhanced Napoleon's ability to outmaneuver his opponent. Archer
Jones provided an excellent description of this approach.
"Most important was the ability of an army dispersed in divisions to force combat. A dispersed army could turn positions, a maneuver long baffling to a well-concentrated force that had to fight as a unit. The French infantry's offensive attributes -marching rapidly and going into action quickly -compelled an opponent either to resist or retreat to the rear. It was no longer possible to retreat sideways or, as Montecuccoli had done at Turenne, to march away past a flank. Now such a retreating army had to meet a division, which would soon be reinforced by the rest of the army.""
The dispersed movement by corps accomplished several things. First, it provided greater mobility and speed to the army as a whole. Instead of massive movements along one or two approaches, the various divisions and corps converged on the enemy from multiple approaches. Second, it provided greater protection for the army as one corps was rarely more than a day's march from one or more of the others. This allowed Napoleon to fix with one force while other corps maneuvered to cut off and defeat the opponent. Finally, while logistical support proved difficult for all armies ofthat age, the movement of the corps eased the burden. Because corps generally marched on separate routes, resupply was somewhat easier. It also allowed them to live off the land more easily/
The Nation-in-Arms also provided Napoleon with a more reliable force.
Previously, mercenaries made up a large part of the dynastic armies. The units were often unreliable and prone to desertion. The increased reliability of soldiers aided in the viability of the corps concept. It also allowed Napoleon to increase greatly his intelligence gathering. His opponents still used their cavalry primarily for counterattack and pursuit. Napoleon trusted his cavalry enough to begin using them for reconnaissance and economy of force missions. 2:> The greater reliability of soldiers also made the use of skirmishers possible.
Arguably, the most revolutionary approach adopted by Napoleon was in his method command and control. David Chandler, in his detailed study of Napoleon, gave
Napoleon credit for establishing the first "fully comprehensive staff organization;'"' A larger staff was necessary given the expanded size of the army and its organization.
However, with eight dispersed corps under his command, Napoleon also decentralized the tactical command of the corps. He directed the large movements of the corps and, for the most part, observed the tactical battles. Decentralized command required several innovations. First, communications became inherently two-way. Corps commanders provided Napoleon with information on their activities and he provided them with direction. He also created a system that van Creveld called the "directed telescope."
This system allowed Napoleon to cut through the established lines of communications by having special adjutants general who visited units and reported what they saw. The combination of decentralized command, two-way communications, a general staff system, and directed telescopes provided Napoleon with greater control.
Napoleon's approach to maneuver resulted primarily from political, economic, and social changes that influenced national policy. The French national policy supported and maintained a large army. The proper employment of larger forces required changes in operational and organizational approaches. Most of the differences represented by the "doctrine" 
28
His opponents did not begin to make similar adjustments until after 1805. The coalitions that opposed Napoleon always had the capability to match and probably exceed the manpower that Napoleon mobilized. Only after limited reforms, especially in Austria and Prussia, did Napoleon's opponents transform their armies and defeat him.
At the outset of the campaign of 1805, Napoleon had eight corps garrisoned along the western coast of continental Europe. From these dispersed locations he began a strategic maneuver to position his forces against the Austrians at Ulm/ 10 Napoleon sought a decisive battle. In many ways, Napoleon's plan resembled the scheme of maneuver of his earlier campaigns, such as Marengo. However, the distance traversed was over five times longer than any attempted in the previous century. 
31
33
The Ulm campaign demonstrated how factors internal and external to a military created conditions for change. Napoleon still sought the decisive battle. However, he used the effects of the French Revolution to change the methods of warfare. In doing so, he created an asymmetrical relationship between his forces and those of the Austrians.
Through changes in organization, C3I, and logistics, Napoleon achieved a decided advantage in his approach to maneuver. He expanded the battlefield in time and space.
However, his strategy remained that of the single point. This advantage soon disappeared, as his opponents began to emulate his style.
Napoleon's strategy and methods greatly influenced early US military development. Two writers of the Napoleonic era, Jomini and Clauswitz, wrote principally about Napoleon. During most of the 19th century, the US Military Academy taught the Napoleonic style of warfare almost exclusively and did so mainly through the works of Jomini. 
34
3
36
37
39
40
Simply stated, they achieved superiority in strategic mobility and operational maneuver.
As a member of the coalition that defeated Napoleon, Prussia gained European prestige. However, the Austrian's hegemony remained until after Otto von Bismarck became the President of the Ministry and Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1862. His aspirations for a unification of the German states under Prussia led to the Austro-Prussian War in 1866. Perhaps, the rationale for the war came from Moltke when he said, "... it was a struggle long foreseen and calmly prepared for, recognized as a necessity by the cabinet, not for territorial aggrandizement, but for an ideal end ~ the establishment of
power.
Actually, tensions existed between Prussia and Austrian for years. Austria had essentially controlled the German Confederation since 1815. However, nationalism, liberalism, and the 1859 war with France forced Austria to attempt reforms within the Confederation and reestablish her hegemony. 
42
43
The conflict with Austria over Schleswig-Holstein changed the threat for Prussia.
Arguably, the Napoleonic wars promoted cooperation between Prussia and Austria for nearly seventy years. As cooperation became conflict, the alliance that fought Napoleon finally ended. Prussia either sought this end directly or welcomed it. Either way, preparations for such an event began when William I (1861-1888) ascended the throne.
In his first speech, he announced his intent to transform the Prussian Army into the Prussian Nation-in-Arms. 
44
The industrial revolution helped transform the Prussian Army. This age introduced the locomotive, telegraph, breach-loading rifles, and improvements in artillery. Each, in their own way, shaped the evolution of warfare. However, technology alone was not decisive. It was through their application in new operational and organizational approaches that changed the nature of war.
Prior to 1866, Moltke recognized that improved firearms, transportation, and communications, combined with the ability of nations to raise and maintain larger armies required changes in strategy, tactics, command, and organization. 
45
Moltke used the railroad lines to deploy the armies over a broad front. This expanded the theater spatially. The railroads also allowed the Prussians to reduce the time needed for mobilization and deployment by almost one half. The genesis for this superiority was Moltke's concept of "one continuous strategic-operational sequence combining mobilization, concentration, movement, and fighting." 
46
47
4
The Austrians on the other hand had significant problems during mobilization.
Lacking a well-developed system of railroads and facing a war on two fronts, Bohemia and Italy, the Austrians had to mobilize early in the crisis. Even so, the Prussians mobilized nearly the same size force as the Austrians in less than half the time. Given Prussia's smaller overall population compared to the other major powers, they clearly raised the mobilization process to a new level. Other European nations failed to realize, until too late, that the Prussians managed to combine large numbers, speed and quality in their concept of a Nation-in-Arms. 
50
Once mobilized, the Prussians clearly deployed their forces in an innovative manner. They did this in two notable ways. Moltke and the General Staff used the railway efficiently to deliver forces to the theater. The Prussians prepared detailed contingency plans. They coordinated effectively the mobilization, and planned the use of the railway and road systems to move forces rapidly to key strategic points. 
31
54
The deployment advantage meant that Moltke did not have to concentrate his armies until he identified the main avenue of approach for the Austrian army. This advantage allowed Moltke to develop a plan to outflank the Austrians in one continuous strategic-operational sequence that linked the mobilization, deployment and employment of the armies together to annihilate the Austrian army 
53
36
Once the battle began, he thought the subordinate commanders were in the best position to direct the fight. Therefore, he believed his responsibility was to coordinate the initial movements and set the stage for battle based on the overall strategy. 
3
While the railroad and telegraph solved some problems of movement and control, they did not solve all of them. The 1866 campaign revealed that an infantry force deployed by rail had limits. The size of the armies and the more specialized munitions, such as those for the needlegun and the artillery, meant that armies could no longer live almost exclusively off the land. The required supplies moved quickly to the railhead by train. However, soldiers unloaded the trains and then loaded the supplies on horse-drawn wagon for the slow movement to the front. 
58
Tactically, Koniggratz also represented a turning point in the conduct of warfare.
For the first time in centuries, European armies fought with weapons with different capabilities. Moltke recognized the impact of breach-loading rifles and rifled artillery.
Frontal attacks and bayonet charges were fruitless against the breach-loading rifle. The Prussian military was superior to the Austrians in all but artillery. The tactical battle was a contest between the Austrian artillery and the Prussian needle gun, each supreme in their own sphere. 
59
The Prussians failed to use their artillery inconjunction with infantry fire and maneuver in a combined arms role. The Austrians had rifled guns and used them better in support of the infantry. He won with flanking attacks and artillery. Subsequently, he outlawed bayonet charges within his corps. 
60
61
In each case, revolutionary change in the conduct of war required the advent or maturation of new military technologies (e.g., the internal combustion engine, armor, etc.), their integration into new military systems (e.g., the tank or long range bomber), the adoption of appropriate operational concept (e.g., the armored breakthrough and its exploitation), and finally, the requisite organizational adaptation (e.g., the Panzer division and the Clausewitzian approach to war embedded in the German troop regulations of the era.
Thomas Keaney and Eliot Cohen, Gulf War Air Power Survey Summary Report 
64
The Prussian Army applied lessons learned at Koniggratz in their victorious campaign against the French in 1870. In the wars of German unification, Moltke sought to encircle his opponent through strategic movement and operational maneuver. Then, using the superiority of the defense, he planned to destroy his opponents as they attempted to break out. He succeeded finally against the French at Metz and Sedan. This approach became known as Kesselschlacht. 
6
66
Before the WWI ended, the Germans attempted to solve the dilemma of trench warfare. In 1918, they promulgated a new warfighting manual entitled, The Attack in Positional Warfare. 6 * The manual prescribed methods to penetrate enemy defenses and methods to turn that penetration into a strategic breakthrough. Lupfer called this operational approach, infiltration tactics. Infiltration tactics emphasized a combined arms attack with close cooperation between infantry and artillery. The German offensives of 1918 used infiltration tactics and achieved success. However, the German army found itself exhausted by August 1918. 
69
The years between the two World Wars saw the further development of motorization and mechanization in most armies. However, the operational and organizational approaches taken by the various nations in response to similar technologies differed greatly. Germany advocated the offensive, while France adopted defensive. The results gave Germany the initiative which led to decisive victory.
The effects of Gentian national policy on their military doctrine were both simple and complex. At the simplest level, Germany still faced the threat of a two-front war.
Even though Germany had a treaty with Russia, many did not believe it would last. The threat of a two-front war contributed to an offensive strategy. The Treaty of Versailles denied German tanks, aircraft, and fixed field fortifications and limited the size of her navy. Freed from outdated weapons from WWI and without fortifications, Germany had to adopt at least a mobile defense strategy if not an all out offensive one. Reductions forced by the Treaty of Versailles, allowed Germany to develop an elite pool of military professionals. 
70
Finally, Hitler simply wanted war. Matthew Cooper, in his study of Germany and the war, summed up the National Socialist general strategy in three words:
Grossdeutschland; Lebensraum; and Weltmacht. 
71
For various political reasons, France adopted a defensive strategy against Germany. In his study of the interwar years, Robert Doughty pointed out various reasons for France's defensive strategy. First, France believed it could not win a war quickly with Germany. Their perceived lessons from WWI remained vivid. Second, France lost the Franco-Prussian War with a professional army. They won WWI with a return to the nation-in-arms. 
72
On March 16, 1935, Hitler renounced the Treaty of Versailles and began to fully rearm the Wehrmacht. 
74
During the interwar years, each military conducted their own struggle as to the best way to further overcome the stalemate of the Western Front. Again, national objectives and their individual lessons learned from history influenced the doctrinal development process as much as technology did. Arguably, each country had access to the same new weapons. The French reverted back to their theory of the primacy of the defense and built the Maginot Line. The Germans viewed WWI as a national failure, not a military one, especially at the tactical level. Therefore, their tactical development began with the premise that their infiltration tactics worked. Upon this premise, Germany created a new method of warfare prior to World War II, some called it blitzkrieg. They combined the various arms of armor, infantry, artillery, and tactical air support, into a self-supporting division structure and called it a panzer division. Along the same lines, the Germans also created motorized divisions to operate with the panzer divisions. By 1937 they formed panzer corps with one motorized and one panzer division. They enhanced their command and control system with a better communications system, in the form of vehicle mounted radios. This combination enabled the Panzer division to conduct the penetration and breakthrough operations that characterized blitzkrieg. However, the bulk of the army was still infantry.
Ken Deighton, in his book Blitzkrieg, noted that the name mattered little, what remained important was the fact that the basic concept was German. He stated that Blitzkrieg originated in the flank attack of Moltke and the encirclement theories of Schlieffen. The success of the WWI penetration and breakthrough tactics, or infiltration tactics, reaffirmed the viability of the offense. 
75
76
Physical destruction in one was supplanted by paralysis in the other as the primary aim; well-coordinated flanking and encirclement movements were replaced by unsupported thrust deep into the enemy's rear areas as the method; guarded flanks and unbroken, if strained, supply lines gave it velocity and unpredictability as the basic rules of operation; centralization of control was superseded by independence of action as the first condition of command; and the mass infantry armies, whether or not supported by tanks and aircraft, made way for the relatively small powerhouses of the armored divisions as the primary instrument of victory. 
77
One of lessons that Germany thought it learned after their failure to envelop the French in WW1 was that they had simply pushed the army beyond its logistical, movement, and endurance limits. 
78
France 1940
The German resolution to the conflict between the armored idea and a strategy of annihilation determined the initial war plans for the invasions of both Poland and France.
Cooper argued that the invasion of Poland remained a strategy of vernichtungsgedanke However, this still failed to represent Guderiarfs armored idea. The decisive maneuver, nevertheless, resulted in the destruction of the enemy. 
82
84
Germany created a new method of warfare prior to World War II, some called it blitzkrieg. They created highly mobile mechanized formations supported by a large number of infantry divisions. To facilitate the higher tempo of operations, they enhanced their command and control system with a better communications system, in the form of vehicle mounted radios. This combination enabled the Panzer division to conduct the penetration and breakthrough operations that characterized blitzkrieg. As the French failed to develop an equally effective doctrine, the Germans quickly overran them.
Germany and France had access to the same technologies. However, they developed different operational and organizational approaches. These resulted from each country's reaction to factors present in the environment at that time.
Interestingly, while Germany developed a viable doctrine for decisive maneuver, some, like Guderian, believed that the mobility of armor and motorized forces combined with tactical air support and enhanced communications created a formula for success other than through annihilation. Guderian believed that such a force freed from centralized control would paralyze the enemy, if further freed from centralized control.
The Soviets developed a similar theoretical mindset called Deep Operations Theory. Its founder, Marshall Tuckachevsky, developed this theory initially as a way to avoid the stalemate of trench warfare. His theories formed the basis for modern Soviet doctrine. 
86
Enhanced command and control, and much improved intelligence, along with other applications of new technology will transform traditional functions of maneuver, strike, protection, and logistics. These transformations will be so powerful that they become, in effect, new operational concepts: dominant maneuver; precision engagement; full dimensional protection; and focused logistics. These operational concepts will provide our forces with a new conceptual framework.
Joint Vision 2010 
87
First, successful maneuver requires the ability to adequately command and control the forces available for the operation. Second, new equipment like the breach-loading rifle, the locomotive, or the tank only provides a decisive advantage when applied through operational and organizational concepts. Third, the campaigns also demonstrate that logistics often "wags the dog." In each case, logistical concerns almost brought the operations to a halt. The logistical support for an operation requires careful planning and even then forecasts remained optimistic. Finally, these elements taken together define the characteristics of maneuver in a particular period.
The key characteristics of maneuver that distinguished each of these periods were the degree of dispersion between elements of a force and the rate of movement of those elements. In each case, the degree of dispersion increased with advances in command and control, equipment, and logistics. The increased dispersion gave that force an advantage in space as it relates to maneuver. Also, as dispersion increased, subordinate elements of the armies included the various arms or branches of service required for independent action during that era. Similarly, the rate of movement of the forces increased with advances in the same elements. The increased rate of movement gave that force an advantage in time as it related to maneuver.
Therefore, these campaigns demonstrated that the purpose of maneuver was to gain a decisive advantage in time and space. In each case, the victorious military was the one that recognized and responded to changes in the military operational environment and gained the decisive advantage in time and space. The application of advances in command and control, equipment, and logistics through innovative operational and organizational concepts changed each country's maneuver capability. The increase in maneuver capability resulted from the ability to effectively command, control, and sustain the movement of increasingly more complex forces in an increasingly dispersed manner faster than the opponent.
If dominant maneuver is the product of national policy, technology', and strategy and planning now focuses on opportunities. 
88
89
JV 2010 draws from the strategy of "engagement and enlargement" with a continental US-based force as opposed to the previous strategy of forward-basing for deterrence. The result is the need for a highly mobile force, capable of moving anywhere in the world. Inherent in this strategy is the requirement for forces that can conduct the full spectrum of operations. This also implies forces with multiple or varied capabilities.
This reinforces the trends identified in the campaign studies that with advances in command and control capabilities and technology, forces increasing become combined arms or even multi-service oriented.
The threats associated with National policy are also in the process of change. To cope with this situation, the US military now conducts defense planning based on capabilities instead of a specific threat. 
91
Lack of a true peer competitor suggests that the size of the US military may continue to decrease. This suggests the need for greater interoperability between the Services as the size of each decreases.  Arguably, the capabilities of US forces cannot improve significantly without advances in command and control and equipment. Several conditions currently exist that make effective command and control essential. First. US forces are very complex organizations. Second, movement rates continue to increase. Third, the unit level of combined arms formations is lower. This makes units more capable of independent operations and allows them to operate with greater dispersion. Independent, dispersed combined arms forces can conduct rapid simultaneous and successive operations.
The campaigns and the analysis of the currem environment reinforce our basic understanding of maneuver as an operational approach. In each, the intent of maneuver is the movement and positioning of forces to gain a decisive advantage in time and space.
This understanding provides more meaning to the current definition of maneuver:
the movement of forces in relation to the enemy to secure or retain positional advantage, usually to deliver ~ or threaten delivery of--the direct and indirect fires of the maneuvering force. Effective maneuver keeps the enemy off balance and thus also protects the friendly force. It contributes materially in exploiting successes, preserving freedom of action, and reducing vulnerability by continually posing new problems for the enemy.
Arguably, this definition still applies. However, the JV 2010 definition adds more emphasis on joint operations with its multidimensional application of joint forces. This indicates that maneuver, in the JV 2010 sense, will routinely involve more that one Service. For this to become reality, the Chairman and the Unified Commanders must reduce the reliance on Service redundancies and increase the capabilities of joint forces at lower levels. The end result, given the guidance in JV 2010, is the emergence of a "tailor-to-task organizational ability" 94 that affords future joint force commanders with the ability to rapidly create small, yet highly capable, task forces to accomplish the assigned operational tasks. The achievement of this goal requires a greater interoperability and precision in the use of military capabilities than the US currently has.
To achieve greater interoperability and precision, the Chairman clearly intends to guide Service doctrine development and acquisition programs, from the "top down'* with JV 2010. 
93
The key to achieving interoperability and precision comes from leveraging information technology. Based on these factors, JV 2010 makes several assumptions about future US military requirements and capabilities. First, US forces will achieve a higher degree of battlespace awareness through improvements in sensors and communications. Second, forces will share data about their battlespace and turn the data into information through advanced command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence (C4I) systems. This will give US forces a greater level of knowledge about the battlespace than their opponent. JV 2010 calls this dominant battlespace awareness.
Finally, US forces will then translate that information into precision force use. 
96
97
To paraphrase JV 2010, dominant maneuver requires the application of asymmetrical advantages in capabilities to position and employ forces so they can dominate the battlespace and accomplish assigned operational tasks. The positioning of forces relates primarily to movement and is therefore part of the equipment and logistics domains. C4I relates to the achievement of dominant battlespace awareness, the positioning and employment of forces, and the accomplishment of tasks. The asymmetrical aspects of these capabilities rest primarily in a force's degree of dispersion, rate of movement, degree of precision, and their interoperability, both joint and combined with other allies.
Understanding this provides tremendous insights into the dominant maneuver concept. Essentially, the US concept of maneuver does not change. The objective is still to gain a decisive advantage in time and space. However, maneuver becomes dominant when a joint force commander can tailor a specific organization, or even several organizations to accomplish specific tasks. The commander can then take these organizations and orchestrate a series of simultaneous and successive precision operations to achieve operational and strategic objectives. If in the orchestration of these operations, the joint force commander can achieve the maximum or near maximum capability of his or her forces and negate that of the opponent or situation, then he has achieved a decisive result and therefore executed dominant maneuver.
operations, the joint force commander can maximize his forces' capability and minimize the capability of his opponent, then he has positioned his forces to achieve a decisive result. Decisive results obtained in this manner constitute dominant maneuver.
operations, the joint force commander can maximize his forces' capability and minimize the capability of his opponent, then he has positioned his forces to achieve a decisive result. Decisive results obtained in this manner constitute dominant maneuver.
processors, software, and sensors, may improve US capabilities in long-range, precision guided, weapon systems.
annihilation. However, the changes in warfare brought about by the industrial revolution raised the question of whether or not the pre-industrial era theorists still applied. Moltke "violated" Jomini's principle of interior lines. The Prussian campaign in Bohemia in 1866 differed from Napoleon's Ulm campaign. The Prussians mobilized far larger forces in a shorter time over a greatly expanded area. Strategic mobility drastically reduced the deployment time. Initially, Moltke deployed on a broad front to protect the approaches to Prussia. The armies maneuvered and fought separate battles until they finally converged at Koniggratz. This distributed maneuver also played an important role in 1870 against the French. It became a characteristic of modern methods of war.