# ID: 5afc223de03a4076b830237340e44ab1
# Title: Mitigating the Backlash: US Airpower as a Military Instrument of Policy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
8.
Additionally, countries like Russia and China (the former fighting Chechnya and other separatist republics, the latter having violently put down uprisings by dissident elements in their own country as well as having fueled tensions with Taiwan) may have seen benefit in supporting the US to garner reciprocal support for (or at least lack of interference in) their own military operations.
9.
This supports the idea that countries supporting the US were balancing against al-Qaida because the countries that opposed US military efforts (primarily Islamic) would not have considered themselves likely or future targets for al-Qaida attacks, and would thus not have felt the need to balance against the terrorists.
universal disdain for the Taliban regime).
However, there is an added dimension that still provides support for Chapter 2 assertions that how the US conducts itself affects the way the world reacts to that conduct; namely, the fact that the US went into Afghanistan after having suffered an egregious attack by elements clearly hiding within that country (thus with potent justification), after having given fair warning to that country's government, without massive ground forces, and therefore without imperialist designs on taking over or occupying that country, made it more palatable for countries that otherwise oppose American hegemony to support military operations in this case.
Further bolstering that claim is the fact that a significant portion of the Afghani people themselves supported the US intervention there.
This, in a country whose historical record shows its competitive tribal elements normally band together against foreign invaders.
138 Clearly the US was perceived by both Afghanis and the rest of the world, largely by virtue of its lack of sizeable ground force presence, as entering Afghanistan merely to eradicate al-Qaida elements and support removal of the Taliban regime, just as it stated.
The gravity and strength of the support these observations lend to Chapter 2 assertions are significant.