# ID: 5b3c6f530ffe4e71818208b54b9b1cc3
# Title: Transforming change in the military: A systems approach
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
Why are military organizations resistant to change? In an attempt to answer this question, this thesis proposes the use of systems thinking to evaluate the military and its ability to effect change. Rather than investigate individual components of the environment, systems thinking dictates the study of the relationships between system components. We offer two frameworks to examine these relationships. The prescriptive framework, developed via literature, illustrates how each of the military subsystems of strategy, doctrine, and organization should interact. The theoretical framework shows how these subsystems interact in reality. A study of the theoretical framework illustrates differences from the prescriptive framework and where resistance to change within the military system actually occurs. We find there are many barriers to change to include doctrinal rigidity and a legacy force structure that is preserved by a dominant culture, the misuse of history, and the inability to learn from past failures. Systems thinking, as seen through these frameworks, can apply to every military organization and be very useful in not only realizing the need for change but understanding how these changes affect the entire system. More importantly, through systems thinking, the inhibitors to change can finally be realized and understood. vi
We would like to thank first and foremost, the man that posed the question in class one day, "Why are military organizations resistant to change?" Your guidance and faith in us made it possible for us to tackle such a difficult question; Thank you, Dr.
Gordon McCormick, for letting us help you answer it.
We also would like to thank our other two advisors, Erik Jansen and George
Lober. Erik, we couldn't have done this without your advice and direction. Your questions and comments motivated us to think outside the box and beyond our comfort zone occasionally, but truly guided us in this process.
George, as always we are humble admirers of your aptitude of the English language. We realized from the beginning that your assistance would be needed and wonderfully appreciated. Like the waves of the bay upon which we have had the privilege to gaze for our tenure at this institution, your expertise was what let this rough pebble of a paper become a polished stone.
We would be remiss if we did not thank the rest of the faculty in the Defense Analysis Department, each of whom guided our education and thought process for the past 18 months. We want to thank all those who, on their own time, lent their ears and eyes to this paper. Thank all of you for your interest in our project and support in finding the right approach.
Dr. John Arquilla, your initial guidance for research proved to be the foundation for the remainder of the thesis process. Thank you for your support in this endeavor and your own dedication to understanding the military, its transformation, its successes and failures.
Prof. Nancy Roberts, we want to thank you for your help in class and out. We realized early on that what we were dealing with truly was a "Wicked Problem," and you gave us hope that we could find a "way in."
Colonel (Ret) Pete Gustaitis, thank you for lending your military experience and critique to this thesis. During class and after you gave us insight and an understanding of xii the strategic aspect of the military, which we can only hope we will be a part of one day.
More importantly however, with respect to your victory at the last Golf Tournament, "We demand a rematch!!"
Prof. Doug Borer, thank you for letting us use your class as a testing platform for this thesis when it was in its beginning stages. Also thank you for your honest critique and reality check when it came to our writing skills! We hope this shows some improvement.
And we cannot forget Dr. Kalev "Gunner" Sepp. For once, with authority, we can tell you this undertaking was NOT a special operation! We appreciate your encouragement and feedback on our related articles.
Thank you to the library staff for allowing us to have a study room for so long and letting Jodi and Amber in when Jamie had taken the key somewhere and we couldn't find him. Also thank you to the folks at Hope for not erasing our whiteboard after the first incident.
For those that contributed to us maintaining our sanity and composure during times of stress and frustration with this thesis, we want to send a big Thank You and Cheers! The Trident Room staff: Pete, My, Lin and Crazy George, Thursdays will never be the same once we have left here. We will miss your hospitality, getting yelled at for not paying our tabs, and the half eaten popcorn Crazy has undoubtedly thrown back into the machine to be served again. Thank you for the happiest of happy hours!! Since this was a group thesis, there are some individual acknowledgements that each of us would like to make: Amber: I would just like to thank Jamie for letting me tag onto this project and then Jodi for letting us talk her into joining it also. I couldn't have asked for a better team to work with, or better friends to have gained. This was truly a "joint" effort and I thank you for everything you have taught me about the Air Force and Army.
xiii Jodi: Thank you Don, for your support and love throughout this whole school adventure. Amber and Jamie, it has been a truly interesting experience over the past few months. I appreciate the work effort and most of all, the chance to learn from you both.
Jamie: I would like to thank my wife, Susan, for her love and support. Garrett, my son, thank you for giving me a few breathers between sword fights and wrestling in order to work on this endeavor, your patience is duly noted. Last but definitely not least, I would like to thank my partners, Amber and Jodi, for having faith that we could answer such a daunting question and for always entertaining my suggestions and ideas with respect and kindness. Your professionalism, hard work, and honest (sometimes brutally)
dialogue was invaluable and the sole reason for our success.
We would also like to thank Pam Silva, not only for her help with the processing of this thesis, but for giving us the freedom to make this Acknowledgements Page whatever we wanted it to be.
If you have gotten to this part of the page, we especially want to thank YOU, and we hope that you will read the rest of the thesis with as much interest and fervor as you 
I'll be damned if I see the U.S. Army, its history, its doctrine, its institutions, alter just to win this lousy war. 1
In the corporate world, there are many examples of how organizations stay true to their established routines for doing business (i.e.,, their strategies, structures and processes), in spite of changes in the competitive landscape of their industry. For instance, in the 1990s Eastman-Kodak senior executives might have felt the sentiments of the Vietnam commander quoted above, saying something like, "I'll be damned if I'm going to let the digital camera boom distract me from being the leading producer of film in the world." In fact, why should Eastman-Kodak's leaders work to change its main production output from film to digital cameras? Current profitability had not declined, and Kodak's leaders believed "that its legendary marketing could postpone the inevitable" switch from film to digital. 2 However, when profits suffered a ninety-three percent decline in 2001, Kodak did go into crisis mode and realized it had to discard its traditional film output in order to remain viable. 
3
4
1 Michael Maclear, The Ten Thousand Day War (New York: Avon Books, 1981), 195.
2 Steve Hamm and William C. Symonds, "Mistakes Made On The Road To Innovation," BusinessWeek, November 27, 2006, http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_48/b4011421.htm (accessed January 17, 2007). 
3
4
"Don't confuse what your company does with how it does it." 
5
So how do an organization's participants realize the need to change or adjust to meet the changed demands of the environment? And when people arrive at the realization of the need to change, how do they persuade others to take action in the same manner? In an unstable and complex environment, the need for constant change is often in conflict with the mechanisms that have been put in place to reduce uncertainty within an organization. 
6
7
As exemplified by the Vietnam commander's quote, "I'll be damned if I see the U.S. Army, its history, its doctrine, its institutions, alter just to win this lousy war," the United States military is not immune from organizational inertia. That commander is aware that those things he values are not going to help him win the war. More importantly, he is -astonishingly -willing to sacrifice this objective in order to preserve U.S. Army history, doctrine, and the institutions.
In short, the United States cannot afford to have its military fail. How do military leaders realize that their 'business model', the strategy, doctrine, and organizational structure that brought the military to this present state will not be the same as that which will further the United States' security position in the future? Much like the situation that Kodak found itself in, it is possible that more than different military outputs may be required to operate in today's environment. The military may need to adjust the means by which it achieves the desired ends. 
5
In this thesis, we explain how the military remains steeped in tradition and doctrine, causing it to struggle with the concept of change and impeding its embracing innovative strategies. Failure to generate ideas that allow the military to achieve the goals set by the civilian authorities has the potential to bring about the demise of the United States. Military leaders need to have a wealth of tools with which to accurately detect changes in their environment and then take appropriate measures to remain viable.
The former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard B. Myers, stressed the need for this capability.
In today's world, there ought to be a premium for people who are thinking, innovative and are willing to take appropriate risks. If you don't try, and you stay locked in the doctrine that brought you there, you're going to fail. You are not going to be as good as you can be in terms of efficiency in the battlespace, and you're probably going to hurt your people. You've got to adapt. 
8
This thesis attributes the painstakingly slow change process to an insufficient framework for assimilating the relationships between the strategic, technological, doctrinal, and organizational components of the military's internal environment. A major by-product of this situation is a culture that holds organization and doctrine static, creating disequilibrium between the military and its external environment.
Militaries try to influence the external environment through changes in the strategic, doctrinal, and organizational areas. The difficulty lies in being able to frame the relevant environmental factors in such a manner as to be able to attain the desired end state without adverse affects in the other areas. As the environment becomes more complex and unstable, these tasks often appear to be insurmountable. 
9
10
11
12
13
Overwhelming complexity in today's environment makes the need for systems thinking ever more necessary. Systems thinking enables people to see interrelationships rather than linear cause and effect chains; to see processes of change rather than snapshots frozen in time.
14
In this thesis, we illustrate how systems thinking can provide a powerful framework for organizing environmental variables. In chapter two, we explore the definitions of change and systems thinking. In chapter three, we discuss how the socalled learning organization has been relegated to a catch all term by authors and military leaders alike. Not only has the military instituted the learning organization haphazardly, but the meaning of the learning organization is so diluted that it does not resonate with military members. The foundation of the thesis is based on two frameworks presented in chapters four and five. We present our prescriptive framework of military subsystems in chapter four. The prescriptive framework is derived from literature concerning military strategy, doctrine, and organizational theory. Here, we explain the desired relationships between the subsystems that the military has the power to change and those subsystems that are in the military's external environment. In chapter five, we present our theoretical framework of how the military subsystems interact. This framework portrays how the military subsystems interact from our point of view. It highlights how change is normally carried out by the military, and we can then see the barriers the military faces while trying to achieve effective change. The systems thinking framework also helps to identify the leverage points within each system to implement effective change. In conclusion, military leaders need to cultivate systems thinking skills as a means to frame the environment to develop and carry out military strategy which will bolster our national security.
In order to present a clear picture of our concepts, we must first establish some working definitions. Specifically, we address the concepts of change, paradigms, open and closed systems, and systems thinking.
Webster's Dictionary defines change as something, "to make different in some particular" or "to replace with another". 
15
16
17
Change within organizations, including military organizations, occurs on a daily basis where members take deliberate action to solve problems that stem from a dynamic environment. To many within the organization this frequent attempt to change constitutes the change in its entirety -even though the variable that the change was directed at remains the same. To these people, accusations such as "the military is slow to change" seem incorrect. Yet according to Dr. Van de Ven's definition, the act of change does not constitute change itself; much less assure internal changes keep pace with external changes. In this sense, the word "change" is used with varying denotative meanings that tends to create confusion or a false sense of accomplishment.
Nadler and Tushman organize types of change according to two factors: whether the change is anticipatory or reactive and whether the change is incremental or strategic.
These types of change are depicted in Figure 
1
22
23
18
19 
Nadler and Tushman,
79. 20
21
22
23 Lawler, 11.  because they are enacted in crisis situations that involve time constraints. Also, because "re-creations almost always involve a change in core values" there is likely to be more resistance to change within the organization. 
24
25
27
Following Imershein, we can argue that actors in military organizations also share paradigms that they rely on to solve the problems that they face. Paradigms provide military professionals with ways of thinking, defining, and solving "model" problems. In the 2001 Quadrennial Defense Review, Donald Rumsfeld discussed the need for a "paradigm shift" within the Department of Defense. 
28
24
25 Allen W. Imershein, "Organizational Change as a Paradigm Shift," The Sociological Quarterly 18, no. 1 (1977): 33-43, http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/abs /10.1111/j.1533-8525.1977.tb02160.x  (accessed January 10, 2007).
26 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 10.
27 Ibid., 6.
sense of what is happening and solve new problems. Even after "severe and prolonged anomalies", experts are hard pressed to discount a paradigm. 
29
The interdependent nature of events in the Information Age makes systems thinking a critical tool for analyzing one's environment. Rather than investigate components of the environment individually, systems thinking dictates the study of interactions between the components. This difference between traditional thinking and systems thinking makes it very effective for complex issues, issues that have dependence on the actions of others, and issues which stem from ineffective coordination of the people involved. 
32
When using systems thinking, it is helpful to categorize one's system as either relatively "closed" or "open". In relatively closed systems, activities may be influenced by outside events, but there is little exchange of work between the unit and the outside environment. 
33
On the other hand, actions in relatively open systems have an effect on an organization's external environment, and vice versa. Open systems consist of "a group of interacting, interrelated, or interdependent components that form a complex and unified whole." 
34
35
The emerging threat of non-state actors offers an example of a particular type of open system called a complex adaptive system (CAS). A complex adaptive system is:
self-organizing, adaptive, sensitive to initial conditions, and is vulnerable to minor events. 
36
33
If the military's environment has the characteristics of a complex adaptive system, it is evident that systems thinking is another way for senior leaders to view their environment Taking into consideration the interactions of organizational components, rather than focusing on just one, can set the stage for effective change actions.
Oftentimes, problems in one area may be symptomatic of problems in another area.
Systems thinking allows managers and leaders to identify these situations and identify leverage points for change actions. In any type of change, whether it is a Re-organization or Tuning, systems thinking provides a framework to categorize the variables within the dynamic environment the military works in today. This is the reason why Peter Senge includes it in his 'five disciplines' for a learning organization.
Senge's claim that learning organizations "expand their capacity to create the results they truly desire" must be enticing to many organizations, not just the military. 
38
37
38
When analyzing why military leadership chose the learning organization as the conceptual tool to facilitate change, it is important to first understand the roots of the concept. This chapter begins with the conceptualization of the learning organization as expressed by organizational theorists and both former and current military commanders.
Then, we examine the military's interpretation of the concept through the framework of the learning organization.
The learning organization is a concept that has developed out of the research of many organizational theorists. Donald Schön provided a framework for the idea of a "learning system": a system capable of continuous transformation, based on the idea that with increasing change comes a greater need for learning. 39 Eric Hoffer emphasized this point:
It is indeed remarkable how many of our present difficulties would be mitigated or even removed in a learning society….
[A] learning society would have a decided advantage in a time of rapid change: while the learned usually find themselves equipped to live in a world that no longer exists, the learner adjusts himself readily to all sorts of conditions. 
40
43
Since Joint Vision 2020 and other documents have expressed the need for the military to be more flexible and adaptable, it is clear why the military has adopted the learning organization as its conceptual tool. maybe the foremost learning organization in the world."
45
Examination of this research illustrates that there is a need for a tool to help the military cope with its environment and the army has selected the learning organization as the tool. In addition to the Army, organizations within the Air Force have adopted the learning organization concept. But is it the right tool for the military as a whole? Has the army chosen the right one? The following section seeks to answer these questions. First, we explain the difference between Organizational Learning and the learning organization and the significance of this difference. Second, we analyze the learning organization framework as it applies to the military. Finally, we provide an in depth look into the concept of systems thinking.
Critics of the learning organization, such as Matthias Finger and Silvia Burgin Brand, argue that the learning organization concept is still very vague. 
46
47
48
Sullivan and Harper introduce change as having a "dual nature": both a condition and a process. As a condition it is external and must be accepted as natural; as a process it is internal and is "ours to influence." 49 Their concept of change as a process runs parallel to that of Ang and Joseph's description of Organizational Learning.
However, Sullivan and Harper's fundamental argument to why the army is and has been a learning organization is founded solely around particular learning processes; specifically, the implementation of the After Action Reviews, or AARs. There are three questions asked in an AAR: What happened? Why did it happen? What should we do about it? It is with these questions, they argue, that the Army has a tool to assist in the learning process. It is a structured feedback process that is supposed to be open, all inclusive, and painfully honest. By way of incorporating the fundamental elements of trust and feedback to foster participation and innovation, it is possible to learn from each situation. 
50
Although widely embedded in our tactical training, Army institutional processes have not incorporated AARs to the same extent. To create a culture of innovation in the institutional Army requires that horizontal and vertical AAR processes be integrated into normal office battle rhythms, just as they exist as a normal part of all training. 
51
Nagl's work provides another example of how the terms Organizational Learning and the learning organization have been used incorrectly. In his first chapter, Nagl uses Richard Downie's definition for change: "a process by which an organization (such as the U.S. Army) uses new knowledge or understanding gained from experience or study to adjust institutional norms, doctrine and procedures in ways designed to minimize previous gaps in performance and maximize future successes." 52 He then defines another key term he calls institutional memory as "the conventional wisdom of an organization about how to perform its tasks and missions." 53 Using these two definitions, he concludes that it is in doctrine that the army codifies its institutional memory, and he claims the "published nature" of this doctrine is "convincing evidence of change Given the difference between the two terms, the process of Organizational
Learning is evident. However, there is no evidence that there is structure or a continuation of efforts that shows the British Army was a learning organization. With regard to the methodology of using case studies to determine if a military organization has been a learning organization, it is important to be aware that the case studies are a snapshot in time. Major Abb's study of the U.S. Army in the Philippine War through the framework of the learning organization comes closer to proving that more than just organization learning has occurred. Yet her conclusion still is limited by the fact that her analysis only covers the three years of conflict. 56
What do these studies tell us about our army now? The sustained ability to learn and adapt to change is fundamental to being a learning organization. And for the purposes of classifying a group as a learning organization, evidence of Organizational Learning is not enough. We can not say that the U.S. Army was not a learning organization in Vietnam, but was one in the Philippines. The fact that learning occurs during these case studies does give hope, since the fundamentals, the processes, such as AARs, are there. However, as Sullivan states, "Hope is Not a Method."
56 Abb, 12.
The following section extrapolates Senge's Five Disciplines of the learning organization and examines if and how the military has put them into practice.
Figure 
2
The Five Disciplines of a Learning Organization 57
Inherent to the learning organization is a shift in our way of thinking; one needs to be willing to see things from a different perspective and be open to deficiencies and criticisms. Personal mastery is the discipline of "continually clarifying and deepening our personal vision, of focusing our energies, of developing patience, and of seeing reality objectively" 58 This discipline is already fundamental to the military organization partly through education and intensive job training. Yet there is a need for more than just a focus on experts in the field. Personal Mastery requires critical thinkers willing to commit to this shift of mind. A majority of military personnel are educated and advanced by the military organization. Postgraduate education is required for promotion to senior ranks throughout the services. However, the content and scope of this education, as well as its availability, call into question the true significance of intellectual capital in the military.
The value that the officer corps places on intellectual development of their junior and senior officers is critical to understanding the system they operate in. While in the aftermath of World War I, the U.S. military began a serious study of the profession of 
57
60
This lack of emphasis is seen throughout the naval ranks. Surface Warfare Officers in the Navy, desiring a non-technical curriculum at the Naval Postgraduate School, now have to compete for their assignment. 
61
Colonel Robert Killebrew argues that "a teaching assignment at a service school should -must -be once again a prestigious and career-enhancing assignment in the services." 62
The military organization's desire to decrease the number of civilian instructors in order to purchase sophisticated computer systems, and its desire to decrease the time officers spend in the institutions, "reflect the attitudes of both the larger military culture and society: profoundly anti-intellectual." 63 This will lead to a decrease in intellectual capital. As a result, military organizations become less capable or likely to shift or develop alternative strategies before, during, or after conflict. A serious practice in Personal Mastery and an investment in intellectual capital within military organizations will pay large dividends in adaptation, flexibility, and innovation of the force. The upsetting possibility is that the military may be waning in its profession of arms, when our nation needs its military leaders to reclaim the intellectual high ground the most, due to an ever changing threat environment.
The discipline of Team Learning is viewed as "the process of aligning and developing the capacities of a team to create the results its members truly desire." 64 This discipline starts with the capacity of members of a team to suspend assumptions and enter into a genuine thinking together. Senge calls this collective thinking "dialogue". 
65
Students, faculty and the leadership were surveyed randomly for both quantitative and qualitative responses. Respondents were given the definition of a learning organization and asked to name three traits that were consistent with the definition and three traits that were inconsistent with the definition. According to the students and faculty, consistent traits were: "seminar or Team Learning," and "open, honest and nonjudgmental atmosphere." 67 In some respects Team Learning, as well as Personal Mastery, seem to be something that comes easily to the military. However, these capabilities are insufficient -although necessary -for a learning organization.
Shared vision is "the capacity to hold a shared picture of the future we seek to create." 68 When there is this genuine vision, people excel and learn, not because they are told to, but because they want to. However, in the military many leaders have personal visions, or "vision statements", that are never translated into shared visions that galvanize an organization.
Colonel Bucha's study showed that the discipline of building shared discipline was not evident from the perspective of the USAWC students and faculty. The traits that were inconsistent with Shared Vision were: "top-driven requirements", "too much conflict between departments" and the "dissynchronization between leadership/academic board and the seminar learning". 
69
70
In his testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, General Schoomaker gave insight to this topic: 
67
68
69 
Bucha,
22. 70
The strength of a football team is not the play that is called in the huddle and how well everybody knows the playbook. The strength of the team is when you get to the line of scrimmage and the ball gets snapped, what happens when everything changes? That is the difference, and that is the kind of Army we need. We have to have a common basic starting point, but, boy, once the ball has snapped, you know, we have to have people that understand the intent, understand what the end state is supposed to be and understand how they can contribute." 71
This "common basic starting point" that he speaks to is the shared vision that is needed not only in the Army but throughout the entire military system.
Mental models are "deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or even pictures and images that influence how we understand the world and how we take action." 
72
The come to us in the form of our core values, our codes of conduct, and even in doctrine. This discipline allows us to "turn the mirror inward," realize our models and assumptions, and hold them to the closest of scrutiny. 
73
74
In theory, doctrine as an engine of change works, but there is a danger that doctrine may get set in stone. If doctrine is to guide the military in "how to think," certain mental models can form such as "find, fix and finish". The tendency is to fit the problem to that doctrine well before realizing that it may be the doctrine that needs to be 71 Peter Schoomaker, U.S. Congress, House, Committee of Armed Services, Hearings on Army Transformation, 108th Cong., 2nd sess., July 15 and 21, 2004, 61. 
72
73 Ibid., 9.
74 Sullivan and Harper, 10.  changed. By scrutinizing these mental models with respect to the current environment, it allows for a critical look as to whether these models are hindering or enabling the success of the overall mission.
Evidence of each of the disciplines described above can be seen in the military.
Some are in practice more so than others with varied success. One example of successful implementation of the whole learning organization concept is Seattle's Engineer District.
The Engineer District's competitive environment and restrictions on military and civil construction budgets had forced it to adapt to these new changes. Lieutenant Colonel
Rigsby evaluates this organization to show how the district operates and truly learns in order to manage their changes. He concludes:
It is clearly evident that the elements of the five disciplines of a learning organization are present in the Seattle District. But this does not mean that the District is now a learning organization. …Learning organizations must always keep learning. It is about becoming, not being. It is a journey, not a destination. 
75
76
These four "core" disciplines provide even more evidence as to why the military, the Army especially, finds the learning organization such an attractive concept.
However, these disciplines by themselves practiced inconsistently and individually, fall short of what could be achieved if they were incorporated systematically. According to Lieutenant Colonel Gerras, …although the Army has been at the forefront of instituting processes to facilitate organizational learning, at the end of the day the Army is not a learning organization, and more importantly, we don't really understand what one looks like or more significantly, how to get there. 
77
78
But this concept is not yet fully understood or developed within the military as a whole.
One organization in the military has taken great strides in order to be successful in becoming a learning organization. In the last few years, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) has made both tremendous organizational and process changes to remain "relevant, ready, responsive and reliable" in their service. 
79
Given the dramatic changes in our national requirements, the dynamic shifts in national perspectives, the prominence of knowledge and service as the core of today's work, and the vast uncertainties before us -if we can only have one skill in the future, then it must be the ability to learn effectively and efficiently. 
80
81
McKinsey's 7-S systems model of organizations to "focus on the interactions of all 
78
79 "Who we are," Strategic Direction/Vision Page, U.S. organizational parts, and to align all parts with the corporate ideal future design". 
82
83
The first law of systems thinking is: "Today's problems come from yesterday's solutions." 84 Looking at past solutions critically via systems thinking can illustrate how the military's commitment to past successes could be the source of the resistance to change.
In his book, Learning from Conflict, Downie argues: That to explain doctrinal change a theory must account for the dynamic relationship involving both the external influences that make doctrinal change necessary and a military's institutional response to those influences. 
85
86
83 "News Room: Corps Points," U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, http://www.hq.usace.army.mil/cepa/corpspoints/8-25-06.htm (accessed on February 2, 2007). 
84
85
86 Ibid., 109.
considered. 87 However, there were none. He does show, however, that there was institutional learning in regard to the counter-drug doctrine used by the U.S..
To explain the reason why there was learning in some instances but not in others, he uses three theories: the Balance of Power Theory (from Posen), Organizational
Theory, and Institutional Learning Theory; the latter parallels Argyris and Schon's concept of Organizational Learning. Using the Institutional Learning Theory, he argues that a blocked institutional consensus, an incomplete learning cycle, and a creation of organizational defenses that prevented learning in the counterinsurgency cases. 
88
…should be viewed as a tool that leaders can use to design their organization's capability to: (1) analyze tactical and strategic environments;
(2) develop and enact strategies in response to environmental demands; and, (3) sustain an adaptive and productive organizational culture. 
89
However, in order to understand how to recognize the need and affect change, the systems thinking approach is necessary.
The U.S. Army, as a service, claims that the learning organization is the solution for coping with its dynamic environment. But through the iterations discussed, it has become bastardized to the point of misuse. Several Air Force organizations have come to the same conclusion. However, the Navy has remained deeply rooted in tradition with 
87
It is the purpose of the next two chapters to introduce two frameworks for the military, one prescriptive and one theoretical. These frameworks were created with an emphasis on the military as a system and the interactions of each of its subsystems among themselves and with their environment. The focus is not on the military as a learning organization, but rather, using the systems approach in order to determine what drives the need for change in the military and why there is resistance once a need to change is identified.
In the midst of day-to-day operations in the bureaucratic jungle, it is helpful to get your head above the trees every so often to see where these daily operations are guiding the organization. Systems thinking raises one's view in just this manner. Applying this concept, in this chapter we translate the literature on military strategy, doctrine, organization, technology, and culture as they interact with the each other and the external environment to build a prescriptive framework of military subsystems. This framework allows us to see the potential relationships between the strategic, doctrinal, and organizational subsystems which the military can influence. Following that, we discuss each component of the system and analyze the relationships between each subsystem.
Although this framework is not inclusive of every factor affecting military strategy, it remains a powerful approach to understanding the components involved in creating strategy. 
Historically, the military bureaucracy has been effective in creating a force to implement military strategy. Bureaucracies in general provide for "systematic and rational ways to organize and manage tasks too complex to be understood and handled by a few individuals, thus greatly improving the efficiency and effectiveness of large organizations." 
94
95
96
In the years since the end of the Cold War, significant changes have occurred in the environment due to increased political instability and the advent of the Information
Age. These changes have the net effect of increasing the complexity and instability of the environmental factors with which the military must contend. According to Mintzberg's theory, with these types of changes there should be a corresponding change in organizational form if the organization is to be effective in dealing with competitors.
In our model, we show that the external environment's influence on the organizational subsystem is routed via the strategic subsystem.
Civilian corporations are dealing with the same intensity of change and are coming to the "stark realization that the traditional bureaucratic approach is no longer suitable to support competitive positioning in this environment." 
97
98
In this unstable environment, bureaucracies have external and internal obstacles to contend with in order to operate effectively. First, the external environment may mutate faster than the internal formalization and standardization of procedures can be adjusted to assure a favorable outcome. Thus the procedures used in yesterday's wars, i.e., doctrine, may hamper efforts to fight the current conflict. According to Barry Posen, the military organization affects the doctrine because "military doctrines are in the day-to day custody of military organizations." 
99
Therefore, the organization "exerts[s] a powerful and distinctive influence on military doctrine." 100 As Douglass Macgregor exclaims, "revolutionary advances in war fighting will really depend more on organizational change than on technology alone." 101
Additionally, the current hierarchical structure creates a hierarchical approach to war "that currently characterizes U.S. military doctrine." 102
Second, a characteristic inherent to the bureaucracy is distributed power to particular individuals to assure tasks are accomplished. Posen claims this redistribution of limited power makes those empowered unmotivated to change: "Generally, it is not in the interests of most of an organization's members to promote or succumb to radical change." 103 Jeffrey Pfeffer, the author of Managing with Power, explains Posen's claim by saying, "Almost any innovation, of either a product or a process, inevitably changes power structures." 
104
From an organizational standpoint, even if the need to change is detected, the structural and individual interests often inhibit the motivation to actually change. strategy, doctrine, and organization should be as depicted in Figure 
3
The idea of paradigms may be applied metaphorically to the concept of military doctrine. Doctrine is ingrained in soldiers' minds and is to be applied in wartime situations as taught in peacetime. Imagine the opportunities that appear when doctrine is seen as a leverage point for change rather than a standard operating procedure. This method of looking at the current strategy, which is based on the current environment, encourages the military member to enact anticipatory change. He can then adjust the doctrine that won the last war in order to win the current war. To remain locked in the dated, albeit previously successful, doctrine is a recipe for failure.
Technology affects the context of how the military components interface with the external environment due to the interaction of new equipment and operational procedures. 
109
As seen from historical examples, technology and doctrine have an interesting relationship. In the American Civil War, "new technologies were …married to old concepts of operations." As a result, the war became one of attrition rather than one of "military genius". The magnitude of change in the technology subsystem may be small or classified as "shocks". Akin to the idea of the complex adaptive system, a small change in the technology subsystem may have "dam bursting effects" on doctrine. 
112
MIT professor Edgar Schein defines culture as:
The deeper level of basic assumptions and beliefs that are learned responses to the group's problems of survival in its external environment and its problems of internal integration; are shared by members of an organization; that operate unconsciously; and that define in a basic "takenfor-granted" fashion in an organization's view of itself and its environment 114
In our study of the military as an open system, it is interesting that Dr. Schein states that culture allows the organization to cope with its internal and external environment. Other organizational theorists state that culture is a by-product of the organizational structure, the types of tasks performed, the manner in which the tasks are carried out, and the types of people in the organization. 
115
Williamson Murray describes military culture and its role within the organization as "the sum of the intellectual, professional, and traditional values of an officer corps; it plays a central role in how the officer corps assesses the external environment and how it analyzes the possible response that it might make to the threat." 
116
In our prescriptive framework, we show culture as a by-product of the internal environment of the military system. Based on Dr. Schein's work, culture is also shown as a filter between the military's external and internal environment.
New technologies seem to arrive at a quickening pace, and it is difficult to determine which ones will give our side the decisive edge in battle. Innovations that have revolutionary effects on the nature of warfare often are unanticipated and rapid in nature.
These times of "punctuated equilibrium" are like those instances when the planets align; they don't happen very often, and a number of factors must fall into precise alignment for the event to occur. 
117
Our current environment is driven by the characteristics of the Information Age.
The technological advances are shaping the methods by which people interact, as well as changing the types of people who interact with each other. "At a macro level, the increased interconnections enabled by computers, communication technologies and global business networks have created a more complex economic and social environment." 
118
116 Williamson Murray, Military Innovation in the Interwar Period, ed. Williamson Murray and Allan R. Millett (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 313. 
117
Another byproduct of the Information Age is that the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of operation are compressed. Tactical events may have strategic implications, and the ramifications of an ill-chosen tactic loom large. Field Marshal Helmuth Graf von Moltke hints at this influence with, "[t]he demands of strategy grow silent in the face of a tactical victory and adapt themselves to the newly created situation." 
119
From the analysis of the subsystems covered so far, one aspect remains constant:
a change in the environment affects the other subsystems. As illustrated in our prescriptive framework, a change that occurs in one of the subsystems has an effect on the others. We have listed just a few examples of where there are many factors changing, but the concept of the relationships between the military subsystems remains stagnant within the leaders' minds. The question remains: Why don't leaders entertain changing these relational concepts just as eagerly as they embrace new technologies? Systems thinking should force leaders to raise their level of analysis and enables them to better understand relationships between the components within the military system.
There are a number of reasons why the military needs different methods to categorize its environment. The most obvious reason is that the military needs to make decisions that mitigate unintended effects. In the Information Age, the lines between the tactical, operational, and strategic levels of war are blurred; the traditional ways of defeating the enemy may have unexpected and profound effects. 
120
122
123
What is at issue is not whether or not change should occur. Ultimately there is no effective barrier to change. There are, however, numerous barriers to effective change. The distinction is in the final outcome.
Organizations in general and military forces in particular either emerge stronger and more capable of performing their mission, or they are defeated and replaced. 124
Literature . . . often portrays . . . change like a brisk march along a wellmarked path, while those in the middle . . . are more likely to describe their journey as a laborious crawl toward an elusive, flickering goal, with many wrong turns and missed opportunities along the way. 
125
Today, military professionals and politicians agree that the threats facing the U.S.
Army in Iraq and Afghanistan, while prosecuting the GWOT, are distinctly different than the threats that the U.S. military is prepared to fight. 
126
Army's Special Warfare Center conducted a study that concluded that "nearly every analyst and political and military leader agreed that pacification was the key requirement for building a viable national government and defeating the insurgency" in Vietnam. 
127
A generation has passed since the Vietnam War and the U.S. military system continues to be unable to effectively execute a viable strategy. How is it that the U.S.
military continues to disregard alternative strategies? Looking at the military system and its subsystems, using the principles of systems thinking, provides an answer to this 126 Macgregor, Transformation Under Fire: Revolutionizing How America Fights, 7.
127 Thomas Adams, US Special Forces in Action (London: Frank Cass, 1998), 143. 
128
The subsystems of strategy, doctrine (thinking), organizational force structure, threat environment, and technology become the most prominent variables when looking at the military organization using systems thinking. A significant discovery is that the flow of information between the subsystems is either restricted or seriously distorted in today's military organization. This distortion causes a less than optimal relationship between the subsystems. We call these distortions inhibitors to proper information flow within the military system. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the theoretical framework, identify inhibitors within the framework, and discuss how these inhibitors affect the relationships between the different subsystems operating within the military system. Again, we do not claim this to be an exhaustive list of all the variables that contribute to the functioning of the military organization. However, we do wish to narrow the analysis to specific variables that possibly have the most impact and from which agents of change may find the most leverage.
The theoretical framework of the military system shows how the military system actually works and reasons for its sub-standard performance. The first section introduces a framework of the military system of systems describing the causal relationships between the threat environment, technology, strategy, doctrine, and organizational force structure. The remaining sections focus on the specific inhibitors and how they relate to the various subsystems. The final section addresses the issue of defining culture as either the problem or the solution to change upon which academics, politicians, and military professionals focus too much attention.
The larger purpose of this chapter is not to suggest answers or solutions, but to offer an intelligent discussion of how military organizations change and what may cause the changes. By using systems thinking basics and simply identifying how the system and its subsystems interrelate, we may begin to understand the leverage points for change and how to move our military beyond the 21st century and current processes.
Why is the premier fighting force in the world, the U.S. military, losing control and influence in the Iraq and Afghanistan theaters after initial historic success? We argue it is because the U.S. military's system of operation is handicapped by several inhibitors.
The two major inhibitors to the military change process are the organization's rigidity of doctrine and its stalwart commitment to the current organizational structure.
These two distortions change doctrine and structure from being dependent on strategic plans focused on the threat environment to becoming fixtures that define the military organization, independent of the threat environment. This rigidity produces an inability for the organization to craft a viable strategy when the threat environment and the system are not most favorably matched. Additionally, this rigidity of the doctrine has, in practice, created a "paradigm filter" that influences not only how the military organization defines the threat, but also, the organization's strategic interaction with the threat environment.
In order to develop an optimal strategy, military doctrine and organizational force structure have got to become dependent on the strategic plan. Anthony H. Cordesman states, "Any 'new way of war' is built solidly on the past and the proper mix of new and old capabilities."
129
130
If you were to try and place a frog into a pot of boiling water, as you would expect, it will immediately jump out. However, if the frog is placed in room temperature water that is gradually brought to a boil, then the frog will not jump out of the pot. Like the frog, only after a sudden change in its environment will an organization, "sense" the need to change. 131 However, the organization must realize, before the environment becomes fatal, that the water in which it finds itself is changing. The threat environment, whether defined as a national force, a terrorist network, or an ideology, creates problems for the military organization. In this section, we address the absence, misinterpretations, or existence of external stimuli and their effects on the change process.
The absence of an external stimulus, either political or situational, makes change within a military organization less likely. For example, Geoffrey L. Herrera and Thomas G. Mahnken show that after the Napoleonic Wars, the British Army did not transform as the continental armies did in Prussia, Austria, and Russia because they saw no need to alter their composition and because they "had not suffered a traumatic defeat at the hands of the French." 132 Therefore, Britain was Napoleon's only adversary that did not depart from its long-established method of ground combat after the Napoleonic Wars. This found the British infantry "ill-trained, ill-equipped, and ill-prepared" for deployment on the continent prior to WWII. 
133
134
Correspondingly, the military organization will confidently validate the superiority of its doctrinal and strategic thought if its leadership suitably redefines its failures as "anomalies" or "unique situations." General Gordon Sullivan, in his analysis of Army Transformation, quotes Arie de Gues of Royal Dutch Shell, who said that it is key for leadership "to recognize and react to environment change before the pain of a crisis." Sullivan argues that this is very difficult. "Without a perceptible crisis to galvanize people to action, there is enormous resistance to change." 135 Therefore, the absence of a crisis creates a perception of success within the military organization. This perception can lead to an unhealthy evaluation of the organization's capabilities and ability to withstand environmental change, making it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to change a successful organization.
The mere existence of detrimental stimuli does not guarantee appropriate change, either. After 9/11, the external stimulus was painfully apparent. During Operation Enduring Freedom, the external stimulus that created overwhelming success was the political demand for the military to "act quickly." The political will and public pressure were too great for any reaction less than an immediate response. Because of the nation's impetus to act quickly, the United States Special Operations Command was the only organization capable of getting boots on the ground, in short order. Therefore, the President, through the Department of Defense, ordered a handful of Special Operations Forces from Fort Campbell, Kentucky to work "by, with, and through" the Afghanistan Northern Alliance. There is no doubt that "the war in Afghanistan demonstrated the power of U.S. unconventional warfare capabilities when merged with standoff conventional capabilities, such as precision air power." 
136
134
135
136 U.S. Congress. House, Committee on Armed Services, Panel on Gaps-Terrorism and Radical Islam, Special Operations Forces Capability, Capacity, and Posture Gaps for The Global War on Terrorism, 109 th Cong., 2 nd sess., October 26, 2005, 8.  to permeate the battle space. It has taken the U.S. military four years and an additional limited war in Iraq to begin to think about altering the strategic course in both theaters.
Unconventional strategy is beginning to find space in the conventional military's thinking with the creation of the Irregular Warfare Joint Operations Concept. However, the adoption and execution of this type of strategy is far more complex than the collaboration and writing of a joint concept.
It is not enough to identify the threat, as organizations must also understand the nature of the threat in order to defeat it. Current military doctrine focuses on mass and firepower to attrit the enemy's forces. In the GWOT, Macgregor recognizes that there is a different threat environment, but he does not understand the nature of the insurgent threat. The insurgent possesses the information advantage and, therefore, maintains the initiative and decides to attack when most advantageous to his cause. 
137
138
139
After the Cold War, the military executed a successful force shift from threatbased to capability based. This inward focus currently shifts attention from the threat environment which, in turn, prohibits the system from achieving optimal performance. Only when the external stimulus, the threat, is identified, can its weaknesses be discovered and then systematically exploited through a proper strategy. As Colonel Robert Killebrew notes in his recent Armed Forces Journal article, "Why Doctrine Matters and How To Fix It," the U.S. Army is beginning to discover that "capability based requirements are hollow." 
140
Knowing what the army does in war helps scientists and engineers with an eye on technology understand what the army needs to be successful in combat. 141
Technology or technical systems, as organizational theorists define it, affects the context of how the military components interact with the environment due to the implementation of new equipment and operational procedures. 
142
Technologies may be unable to deliver the foreseen applications, creating uncertainty within the leadership about the utility of the new technological advancement.
The limitation of the new technology can adversely affect the development of doctrines when the technology is less mature. "Technology-led military change may be hampered not so much by military conservatism as by the technology itself. "143 Chris Demchak claims that the U.S. military's high aspiration for revolutionary change in information systems may not be obtainable with today's technologies. Organizational leaders and operators thus may perceive that technologies have an adverse effect on the current command structure or operational practices of a presumably efficient and effective military. Such a perception may lead the military to disregard the possible quantum leaps 
140
141
142 Beyerchen, 268.
143 Theo Ferrell and Terry Terriff, eds. The Sources of Military Change: Culture, Politics, Technology (Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner, 2002), 14, http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=105515632 (accessed  September 12, 2006).
in advantages gained over their adversary because of fear of losing what they know and are comfortable with. 
144
According to Wilson, "some technological advancements are resisted for varying degrees because their use changes operator tasks and managerial controls." 146 Not only does doctrine affect technology, but once investments are made in technological advancements, it is extremely difficult for doctrine to change. Once abundant time and resources are used to develop and integrate a technological advancement into the military system, the path dependence of the technology, in essence, locks the military organization into a doctrine and strategy that are constrained by the available technologies. Furthermore, as the military organization becomes more dependent on technology, the technology begins to define the tasks. As Wilson points out, in Vietnam, "tasks were defined more by available technology...than by a clear understanding of what kinds of tasks were appropriate to the conditions of war in Vietnam." 
147
War II with the invention and fielding of the two-way radios in maneuver formations and possibly with the potential adoption of BattleSwarm Doctrine as information technologies become even more reliable.
149
According to the prescriptive framework, the organization must identify and understand the threat, then develop a strategy, adjust/create doctrine and organize itself to properly execute the strategy. In other words, once a strategy is devised, military tacticians must formulate doctrine based on the strategy and available technology.
However, as seen in Figure 
4
In the U.S. military organization, strategy is dependent on doctrine. This statement becomes more apparent after further examination of two separate definitions of strategy. B.H. Liddell Hart in his book, Strategy, discusses the differences between Clausewitz's definition of strategy and German World War II General H. von Moltke's definition. Clausewitz understands strategy as "the art of employment of battles as a means to gain the object of war." 150 This is the definition that the U.S. military is more likely to adopt. However, according to Hart, the main fault with this definition is that it allows the reader to "reach the conclusion that in war every other consideration should be subordinated to the aim of fighting a decisive battle." 151 This definition of strategy while elevating the prerequisite of battle may inadvertently downplay the importance of political context. On the other hand, Moltke's definition of strategy; "the practical However, once faced with strong opposition, the 5th Corps was able to suppress the population centers that they "anticipated addressing later, in Phase 4 stability operations." 
155
Not only is the strategy driven by the doctrine, but it is also implemented in order to justify the doctrine to some degree. During both World War II and Vietnam, the strategy was driven by the need to support the doctrine of strategic bombing. According to Bartiz, during Vietnam, the U.S. Air Force (USAF) strategic bombing doctrine dictated the USAF strategy.
The huge B-52s were wheeled out because they were at the center of the air force's most important function, strategic bombing of the USSR. If the air force had not been allowed to use these machines, it feared that its strategic-bombing role might be down graded after the war. 
156
157
Political risk, which establishes a political priority by national decision makers, also has a perverse effect on strategic decision making.  Thereafter, its success has spread into other terrorist sanctuaries. The strategy focuses on the SF advisors working "by, with, and through" the indigenous security forces using a holistic approach focused on local security and governmental assistance to the population in order to increase governmental legitimacy. According to Greg Wilson, who quotes a Pilipino battalion commander, "where once the people supported rebels and extremists because they felt neglected...the delivery of their basic needs...changed their attitudes and loyalty." 
159
Innovations in military doctrine will be rare because they increase operational uncertainty. Retired General Gordon Sullivan wrote in his book, Hope is Not a Method, that "doctrine is the engine of change." 161 This implies that strategy and organizational structure do not change unless doctrine changes. We explain the prescribed relationship between doctrine, strategy, and structure as one where strategy is the driving force of change rather than doctrine and doctrinal rigidity, in and of itself, is one explanation for why this relationship is altered in reality. One of the many benefits of doctrine is that it creates organizational paradigms that are instrumental in providing the individuals within the organization with mental models while attempting to solve given problems. Jeff Conklin has explained Thomas is constant, then you can expect it to become invisible over time." 170 During Vietnam, the military underestimated the number of enemy they were fighting due to their doctrinal biases. According to Loren Baritz, "the military command in Saigon was fixated on conventional, big-unit war, and therefore concentrated on the enemy's units that could engage the Americans in the sort of war the Americans wished to fight." 171 This "fixation" on conventional conflict and enemy military formations caused the "American military [to be] deaf and blind to the insurgency." 172 They concentrated on the conventional North Vietnamese forces and "wished" the insurgency away.
Additionally, these mental models function as filters through which the U.S.
military organization interprets, defines, and predicts changes in the threat environment.
They cause the organization to overlook, ignore, or blatantly disregard stimuli; thus, disregarding alternative strategies that are better suited to neutralize a given threat.
According to Wilson, "a strong sense of mission may blind the organization to changed environmental circumstances so that new opportunities and challenges are met with routinized rather than adaptive behavior." 
173
The problem with these biases are that they create instability within the change process and manifests dysfunctional relationships between the components. The U.S. Army continues to fight "a war of its own choosing instead of the war that [is] going on." 174
History is at best an imperfect guide to the future, but when imperfectly understood and interpreted it is a menace to sound judgment. 
175
A problem within military organizations that resist change is that they either misuse history or blatantly disregard it. The U.S. military organization has a problem of recognizing its history for what it is and then interpreting it through their doctrinal biases.
There are many historians that proclaim that "Generals prepare for the last war and that is why military organizations have a difficult time in the next conflict." 176 However, Murray and Millet argue that "most armies do nothing of the kind, and because they have not distilled the lessons of the last war, they end up repeating most of the same mistakes." 177 Rather than prepare for the last war, military organizations "quickly develop myths that allow escape from unpleasant truths." 
178
As noted in the previous section, the U.S. During Vietnam, General Westmorland wrongly perceived the insurgency as a "war of movement" and inaccurately also classified the American Civil War as such, attempting to draw similarities between the two. This inaccurate use of history along with a misconception of insurgency doctrine caused the U.S. military to depend heavily on "movement to contact" as their primary scheme of maneuver.
The concept behind "movement to contact" as a tactic is that it allows the enemy forces to initiate contact with the U.S. patrols, thereby identifying the enemy's strength and disposition. The U.S. patrol then requests support. These arriving additional forces allow the initial element, if it continues to exist, to counter punch and attempt to destroy the enemy force in detail; however, this tactic has many flaws when executed in an 
176
177 Ibid., 313-4.
unconventional conflict. First, the enemy has the initiative; they can decide time and place of the engagement. Second, the enemy has the option to disengage or break contact with the U.S. patrol before reinforcements arrive, thus controlling their casualty rate and maintaining the initiative. According to Andrew Krepinevich, Jr., ...as long as the government forces are out seeking battle with the guerrilla units, the insurgents are not forced to fight to maintain access to the people. Therefore, the initiative remains with the guerrillas,-they can 'set' their own level of casualties (probably just enough to keep the government forces out seeking the elusive big battles), thus rendering ineffective all efforts by the counterinsurgent forces to win a traditional military victory. 
180
The study of the organizational subsystem and how it affects the military system needs to take into consideration the structure and the processes within this component.
Together, the legacy structure of the military and service dominance impair the relationship of the components within the system. Processes within the organizational subsystem, such as recruiting and promotion, have a similar effect. 
The insular effect on service members, along with an unhealthy The potential advantages that might be realized by working together to create a 'system of systems' for changing joint warfare . . . are lost due to the fragmented, almost piecemeal nature of which information technology is being developed and applied. 
202
203
Overall, the net effect of the military organization's "service centric" structure deters the organization from efficiently realizing its matured capability. Joint organizations must be stressed and rewarded within the military organization in order to overcome the service dominance that has existed since the entrée of the military. If this is not possible, then joint is not the answer and an alternative solution is to make each service more mission specific, redefining their niche.
Failure to cooperate in combating terrorism and other matters occurs for many reasons besides what we suppose are the perverse preferences of civil servants. First, the very processes of government make cooperation difficult. 
204
The simple process of recruiting personnel, and the fact that all entries are at the lowest level of the organization, creates an educational bias toward upward progression within the organization. The military institution is a bureaucratic organization of several hieratical levels; therefore, in order to progress to the next level, individuals must come from the previous level of the organization. This promotion process self-perpetuates the reinforced ideals of the organization. While not always a "bad thing," this phenomenon can create strong opposition to change within the institution.
Because of the entry at the lowest level, there are no means of lateral entry into the organization. In civilian companies lateral entry provides a fresh mind and alternate perspectives when trying to solve the organization's problems. Lateral entry along with a promotion system based on skill rather than time in service could provide increased expertise and intellectual capital to the military organization.
Throughout history, military organizations have been and remain extremely reluctant to reward innovators; however, when innovators were rewarded and positively identified, change was possible. During the early 1900s, the Russians gave their innovators two bullets to the back of the head. French militaries retired their 
204
According to Ferrell and Terriff, "no serving officer will be enthusiastic about undertaking something new that contravenes both their self-or corporate identity and their understanding of their promotional prospects." 207 Career preservation within the military organization creates a limited desire to effect change when faced with strong opposition because it could be extremely detrimental to career advancement.
Avant and Lebovic, in their analysis of the U.S. military, have observed a linkage between new missions introduced to the officer corps and the officers' respective prospects for promotion. As suspected, the two variables were inversely related. 
208
209
205 Murray and Millett,
310. 206 Macgregor,
Transformation Under Fire: Revolutionizing How America Fights,
195. 207
208 Deborah Avant and James Lebovic, "U.S. Military Attitudes Towards Post Cold War Missions," Armed Forces and Society 27, no. 1 (2000): 37-56, http://www.csa.com (accessed September 2, 2006). 
209
operations was the burial place for the future of any officer who was sincerely interested in the development and application of guerrilla warfare." 210 No wonder alternative strategies and concepts, such as unconventional warfare and counter-insurgency operations remain supporting missions rather than supported missions, even though they are central components to winning the GWOT.
Breaking culture . . . takes time and [sic] leadership and patience to bring people along, not only intellectually, but emotionally, to buy into the culture shifts…." 211
Culture is given too much credit and too much blame. Culture is the "predispositions of members, the technology of the organization and the situational imperatives with which the agency must cope." 212 Therefore, analysts should place their attention on the particular tasks of the organization and how the organization performs the task or changes the task to create a "sense of mission." 
213
It is a byproduct of the organization and the tasks that it performs and how it performs 211 Schoomaker, 92. 
212
213 Ibid., 26.
214 Ibid., 31.
215 Ibid., 91.
problem or solution within an organization is to assume that an organization will have a single culture. 
217
As General Schoomaker indicated, in his review to the House Armed Services Committee, change is difficult in a strong culture especially if the new ideas are inconsistent with the culture of the organization. However, there is a common misconception that leadership can shift culture directly. Culture is itself a surfacing outcome of the organization's leadership, people, and tasks rather than a tangible component that is controllable. 
218
219
… the real study in that book is not about counterinsurgency, but it is about the difference in the British culture and our culture at those times and place and the difference in our learning organizations, our Armies as learning organizations, and the effect that culture had on them. … [W]hat we are trying to do is to educate, to roll lessons learned in, to train and to broaden and to become truly a learning culture in our Army so that we are adaptable and flexible... 
220
217
218
219 Nagl, 7.
220 Schoomaker, 92.
improve the organization's system. Culture is not a leverage point that is easily manipulated in an organization. On the contrary, an "organization is a complex structure, not just a culture that can be manipulated and shifted in order to achieve desired results." 221 Culture is a way to recognize that there is a problem in the organization. It is more of a measure of effectiveness in gauging an organization's capability to function, rather than a design factor that is easily manipulated or changed. Therefore, culture is not a problem or a solution, but rather a measuring stick that can become a tremendous source of inertia, if it emerges out of a dysfunctional mix of component processes.
This chapter makes one central assertion, that the current military's doctrine and structure determine strategy with little regard to the threat environment. This chapter attributes this dysfunction to four major impediments of the military organization:
recognizing and understanding the threat environment; implementing a strategy that is constrained by current technology; crafting a strategy that is dependent on a rigid doctrine; and developing a strategy that is confined by a legacy structure and its organizational processes and paradigms.
This list is by no means all inclusive, and the identification of a barrier does not suggest a unilateral negative meaning for the concept. The larger purpose of the chapter is to provide the innovator with a modest intelligence preparation of the battlefield of military change. Several concepts within this chapter can be found to stimulate change in one subsystem, while retarding change in another.
A bureaucracy, because of its foundation in equality and fairness, rules, regulations, and procedures, will have a difficult time overcoming these inhibitors of change. The military must realize that its subsystems are in conflict with each other. The rub lies between focusing on the threat and focusing on the organizational capabilities (i.e., doctrine, technology, and structure) in order to formulate an effective strategy.
When these systems are in conflict, bureaucratic principles will not lessen the struggle.
As General George S. Patton said, "it is not rules that lead to success in war but the indomitable spirit of the leader and his ability to motivate and inspire superhuman 
221
performance." 
222
Before the military begins to change, members must ask themselves two questions. One, what is our threat and therefore, our strategic rationale? Two, how is this change in rationale, strategy, or perspective going to affect the entire system? The current problem is that these questions require innovative and imaginative answers that must come from institutionalized minds within military organizations at the highest levels. Which begs the question, "Can institutionalized minds provide innovative answers?" That is a question worth exploring.
However, we argue in this thesis that we must step away from the idea of the learning organization. It is our contention that the true meaning of this concept has been so diluted by misunderstanding and misuse that its intended effects may never be achieved. Yet if we take one piece of this puzzle, the foundation of the concept, Systems
Thinking, we appreciate that it can apply to every military organization and be very useful in not only realizing the need for change but understanding how these changes affect the entire system. More importantly, through this approach, the reasons why military organizations are resistant to change can finally be realized and understood.
It was the purpose of this thesis, to answer the question, "Why are military organizations resistant to change?" Our hypothesis was that there are obvious barriers to change and specific learning disabilities within the military that create an inability and/or an unwillingness to adapt. What these disabilities were, we could only assume. What we found was that this resistance comes from the absence of a sufficient framework to understand the relationships between the strategic, technological, doctrinal and organizational force structure components and the environment in which the military operates.
By viewing the military as an open system, we offered two frameworks. The first, the prescriptive framework, illustrated how each of these subsystems should interact and how, according to the literature, change should be affected. The second, the theoretical framework, showed how different this prescriptive framework actually is from reality. This theoretical framework illustrated these differences and where the resistance within the military system actually occurs. What we find is that there are many barriers to effecting change to include doctrinal rigidity and a legacy force structure that is preserved by a dominant culture, the strength of mental models, the inability to identify or properly define the threat environment based on the misuse of history and the inability to learn from past failures.
In analyzing the military from a systems perspective it was never the goal to find the solution. Consequently, our sole recommendation is that these frameworks be considered as one way, a different way, of categorizing the internal and external environments. In doing so, military leadership will be able to realize not only the need for change but how that change, whether within the doctrine, organization or strategy, will affect the entire system. It is understood that due to constraints such as technology and political pressure, the prescriptive framework provided is an ideal. A systemic approach should serve military leaders well as they become more aware of what is causing the resistance to changes being implemented. Simply put, the systems approach to viewing change in the military can help identify sluggishness in the system and leverage points to help correct these deficiencies. Those that practice this way of thinking say that it truly becomes a way of life. 
223
outsiders or newcomers to the established discipline, such as Albert Einstein in the physics discipline, to create a new way of making sense of the discipline's problems, including the problematic anomalies. They are thus able to provide a challenge to the established paradigm. Once the members of the discipline accept the new paradigm,
49  
49  
52 Richard D. Downie, Learning from Conflict: The U.S. Military in Vietnam, El Salvador, and the Drug War (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998), 22. 53 John A. Nagl, Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and Vietnam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 6. 54 Nagl, 7. 55 Ibid. military
80 "Learning Organization: Roadmap to Transformation," Talking Points Section, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, http://www.hq.usace.army.mil/cepa/learning/talking.htm (accessed on February 2, 2007). 81 "Learning Organization: Roadmap to Transformation," FAQ Section, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, http://www.hq.usace.army.mil/cepa/learning/faq.htm (accessed on February 2, 2007).
88  
88  
102  
102  
111  
111  
119  
119  
146  
146  
156  
156  
results. In the words of Dr. John Arquilla, "military organizations have a selective pillage of history." 181 Fortunately, Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May in their book, Thinking in Time, have given decision makers conceptual tools in order to critically evaluate history and its value to making sound decisions.
results. In the words of Dr. John Arquilla, "military organizations have a selective pillage of history." 181 Fortunately, Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May in their book, Thinking in Time, have given decision makers conceptual tools in order to critically evaluate history and its value to making sound decisions.
181  
181  
Erik Jansen, (class  lecture, Organizational Design for Special Operations, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, March 2006).
Edward E. Lawler III, Built to Change (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2006), 11.
Peter Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization (New York: DoubleDay/ Currency, 1990), 3.
For further information, see Chris Argyris and Donald A. Schon, Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective (Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1978).
Senge, The Fifth Discipline,; NOTE: Senge's "Beer Game" is especially illustrative of these concepts.
Stephen J. Gerras, "The Army as a Learning Organization" (Master's Thesis, US Army War College,
March 3, 2002)
Virginia Anderson and Lauren Johnson, Systems Thinking Basics: From Concepts to Causal Loops  (Waltham, Massachusetts: Pegasus Communications, Inc., 1997), 5-7.   
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, "Change," http://www.m-w.com/dictionary/change(accessed  August 23, 2006).
Timothy J. Hargrave, and Andrew H. Van de Ven, "A Collective Action Model of Institutional Innovation," Academy of ManagementReview 31, no. 4 (2006): 866, http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bth&AN=22527458&site=ehost-live&scope=site (accessed
January 10, 2007)
Peter Senge et al.,  The Dance of Change (New York: Doubleday, 1999), 14.
Donald Rumsfeld, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, (Washington, DC: Department of Defense,  September 30, 2001), 17, http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs/qdr2001.pdf(accessed February 28, 2007).
Kuhn, 77.    
Hargrave and Van de Ven, 
Richard L. Daft, Essentials of Organization Theory & Design (Mason: South-Western College Publishing, 2003), 132.
Daniel Aronson, "Introduction to Systems Thinking," The Thinking Page, 1996, http://www.thinking.net/Systems_Thinking/Intro_to_ST/intro_to_st.html (accessed
February 5, 2007)
Gordon R.Sullivan and Michael Harper, Hope is Not a Method (New York: Random House, 1996), ix.
Matthias Finger and S. B. Brand, "The Concept of the 'Learning Organization' Applied to the Transformation of the Public Sector," in Organizational Learning and the Learning Organization, ed. Mark Easterby-Smith, John Burgoyne and Luis Araujo (London: Sage, 1999), 147.
Ibid., 
Mike Rigsby, "The Learning Organization: Concept and Application," (master's Thesis, U.S. Army War College, April 15, 1997), 26, http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA326355 (accessed on July 19, 2006).
Abb, ii.    
Gerras, 1.   
Duke Okes, "Complexity Theory Simplifies Choices," Quality Progress 36, no. 7 (2003): 35, http://libproxy.nps.edu:8080/login?url=http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did=370881671&Fmt=7&clientId =11969&RQT=309&VName=PQD (accessed
June 4, 2006)
Anthony H. Cordesman, The Iraq War: Strategy, Tactics and Military Lessons (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2006), 160.
Reference to Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld's answer to questions in an open forum with service members in Kuwait in December 2004. After a question from Army SPC Thomas Wilson, "Why do we soldiers have to dig through local landfills for pieces of scrap metal and compromised ballistic glass to up-armor our vehicles?" The Defense secretary answered: "You go to war with the Army you have. They're not the Army you might want or wish to have at a later time." Rahm Emanuel, "Remember Where the Buck Stops," Los Angeles Times, May 29, 2006, http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index=0&did=1043360531&SrchMode=1&sid=14&Fmt=3&VInst=PRO D&VType=PQD&RQT=309&VName=PQD&TS=1176144464&clientId=11969 (accessed 9 April 2007).
Gordon McCormick, (class lecture, Seminar in Guerilla Warfare, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, February 16, 2006).
Macgregor, Transformation Under Fire: Revolutionizing How America Fights,
10.
McCormick.   
Wilson, 44.    
Macgregor, Transformation Under Fire: Revolutionizing How America Fights, 16.   
John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, Swarming & the Future of Conflict (Santa Monica, CA: RAND,  2000), http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=104303749(accessed February 22, 2007).
B. H. Liddell Hart, Strategy (New York: First Meridian Printing, 1991), 319.    
Ibid.   
Arquilla and Ronfeldt,[76][77] 
Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, Thinking In Time: The Uses of History for Decision Makers (New York: The Free Press, 1986).
"Divisions," Global Security, http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/army/division.htm, (accessed 8 February 2007).
"USS Carl Vinson Returns from Deployment," USS Carl Vinson (CVN 70), July 31,
2005, http://www.cvn70.navy.mil/ (accessed April 9, 2007). 200 Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 83. 201 Ferrell and Terriff, 269. 202 Ibid. 203 David Tucker, Skirmishes at the Edge of Empire (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 1997), 124.
Ibid., 92.   
Sullivan and Harper, 182.   
See Senge, The Fifth Discipline; Anderson and Johnson, 17.   
In order to identify and understand these inhibitors and where they are located, we must look at the military as a complete and open system, as illustrated in Figure 
4
4
adaptation of the means placed at a general's disposal to the attainment of the object in view," 152 links the general to the government that he is serving, thereby acknowledging the importance of political influence and advice. The U.S. military organization seems to be partial to Clausewitz's definition of strategy; intently focused on the decisive battle or "center of gravity" at the expense of other strategies that may focus more heavily on political context and its relative importance.
Not surprisingly, conventional doctrine is continuing to dominate strategic thinking during the GWOT. The U.S. military organization continues to develop its strategy based on a doctrine focused on winning the decisive battle. This is evident when studying Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF). According to Lieutenant General Scott Wallace, 5th Corp Commander in Iraq, the war would be over once the decisive battle at the international airport was won. "For nearly a year, we had recognized collectively that once we were through the Karbala Gap, the fight would not be over until we seized the international airport in Baghdad." 153 However, the fight was not over in Baghdad in 2003 and continues to this day. Once the Saddam statue fell, the true fight for Baghdad had just begun even though the decisive battle for the Baghdad International Airport ended with a positive outcome.
In Iraq, the environment had changed but the strategy had not. Military commanders, collectively, had failed to identify the change in the environment and continued to execute a strategy that was ill suited to the environment and stood idly by as the control of the population slipped through their collective fingertips. As the U.S.
doctrine suggests, a strategist must focus on securing key terrain, such as bridges and airports during a conventional conflict. This strategic focus based on a conventional conflict caused military leaders to underestimate the importance of controlling the local population centers during the combat phase. Instead, they treated the population centers as an afterthought: a task to be completed once the fighting was complete. As Lieutenant General Wallace stated, "We never had any intention of fighting in those southern cities, because we felt that would put us at a disadvantage; so we intended to bypass them." 154 152 Liddell-Hart, 320. 
153
154 Ibid.
intricacies in this section. 
194
The military organization can not change doctrine as it relates to a counter-threat strategy without addressing service dominance within the military organization. "Jointness will have to broaden and deepen and be seriously regarded by all as a necessary condition for the rise of a doctrine that would seek to integrate both the data gathering and the fire capabilities of all the services." 195 environments. In contrast, the Army and its leadership felt relatively early that their organization and soldiers would be at the forefront of any and every battle against this seemingly new enemy. Perhaps this inclination led the Army to realize that there must be a way to handle this dynamic and complex environment and become more flexible in dealing with these changes.
From General Sullivan and Colonel Harper in 1996 to General Schoomaker today, Army leadership, and more recently the Air Force, have adopted the learning organization as the way ahead to become more adaptable to meet the growing demands of the ever-changing threat environment. Unfortunately, the concept has never been truly understood or even conveyed service-wide. Because of this, its successful implementation has been very limited. Systems thinking has yet to be institutionalized among the services, but it is the cornerstone of a learning organization and what makes the other four disciplines work in synergy.