# ID: 5b5cdb1440f948219e626a3b8220dfcb
# Title: Once an advisor: how security force assistance is essential for the American way of war and deterrence in strategic competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
With the 2022 Russian Invasion of Ukraine, the U.S.-led international world order awakens to a potential New Cold War between democracy and autocracy. Like the previous one, this Cold War will see numerous proxy conflicts through all instruments of national power, or DIME. State and non-state adversaries have learned from the American Way of War, allowing them to flow to an advantageous position in the gray zone below the threshold of Western War and avoid potential military collisions. Consequentially, partnership, posture, and position through security cooperation will become increasingly important as the U.S. should Go Byzantine by empowering the Free World to prevent and shape conflicts to be fortuitous to the American Way of War and policy. Our competition may be a partner's conflict, but we must choose the right partners. Through case study analysis, this paper will explore who are the right partners and how their DIME increase is essential for the American Way of War and deterrence in strategic competition.
v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I owe this paper first to my beautiful wife and daughter, Christina, and Faith.
Without your support this paper would not be possible. I hope that in some small measure this work will make up for the miss experiences through our life for the most precious gift I have with you both is your time and love. I would also like to thank my small group, 6A, and our instructors, Dr. Cupp, Dr. Steed, Dr. Thomas, LTC Woo, and LTC Ward. Your support, especially with research throughout the process allowed me to produce the best paper possible. You also constantly challenge my assumptions and demonstrate the limitations of deterrence and security force assistance. I must also thank my A221 MMAS group as you all helped me refine my thesis before its publication. And to the 2d SFAB advisors from Warrior Battalion and Paratroopers from 3rd Brigade, 82d Airborne Division, thank you for mentoring a young captain on the right ways to execute security force assistance and to be a future field grade leader. Our discussions about strategy and operations during multiple ACFTs and long rucks provided me the foundation for this paper. Thank you as well to my friends, MAJs Ryan Orsini, Clyde Daines, and Marco Hartanto who helped me get my committee together and provided critical feedback on my thesis. Finally, I would like to acknowledge and thank my committee, Dr. Cupp, COL Nauman, and LTC Vankirk for helping to guide a simple kid from Brooklyn to write this thesis. I hope it provides a greater purpose for military and civilian advisors as they execute the last 300 meters of American foreign policy. 
Authoritarianism is on the global march, and we must join with likeminded allies and partners to revitalize democracy the world over …America is back. Diplomacy is back. Alliances are back. We are looking irrevocably toward the future and all that we can achieve for the American people-together. Let's get to work.
-President Joseph R. Biden, Jr., Interim National Security Strategic Guidance, 2021 America's military has no preordained right to victory on the battlefield.
-Secretary of Defense James N. Mattis, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge
The current liberal, U.S. led, rules-based world order is under siege as Russia invades Ukraine, and democratic nations awaken to a possible New Cold War. 
1
2 Ronald O'Rourke, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense -Issues for Congress. Congressional Research Service Report for Congress R43838 (Washington, DC: Library of Congress, last updated March 10, 2022, U.S. and its allies have focused on other priorities, almost forgetting about the utility of the gray zone during the competition continuum. As demonstrated in figure 
1
The purpose of this study is threefold. First, U.S. Army must clarify its role in Phases 0-1 as building partnership, posture, and position to prevent and shape conflict through integrated deterrence and campaigning. This requires the Army and larger Joint Force to shift its paradigm for Security Force Assistance (SFA), stability operations, and how a Theater Army can set an AOR besides through sustainment. Instead of viewing SFA as simply a way to support counter-insurgency operations in conflict, the Army must understand how to best employ SFA in the gray zone during Phases 0-1 for the competition continuum as shown in figure 
2
Like the Byzantine Grand Strategy, the result of choosing the right partners globally should be a Force in Being, or an already prepared, politically aligned coalition ready to counter threats throughout the competition continuum to support the U.S.-led international order.
5
Second, this paper will demonstrate how SFA is an effective economy of force method for deterrence, American Way of War, and U.S. policy. Given the domestic political and economic environment, the Army must rely on more economy of forces means to achieve the same ways and ends. Ideally, the U.S. could field more Armored Brigade Combat Teams (ABCTs), but this is neither cost effective nor a way to counter adversaries from exploiting the gray zone. By employing a whole-of-government approach and a smaller conventional footprint, the U.S. can go small and longer for a more holistic deterrence effect. Finally, this paper will demonstrate the limitations of SFA while outlining tailorable options for senior leaders. Like all elements of national power, SFA has limitations and is not a ubiquitous solution to every problem. These limitations will also demonstrate how important choosing the right partner is for U.S. national interests and setting an Area of Responsibility (AOR) for a U.S. Theater Army. This study is valuable
to the military enterprise because it outlines a tailorable, cost-effective grand strategy for the U.S. and its allies to prevent or shape current and future conflicts. Given a budget-constrained environment and the multiple authorities for SFA, the DOD must take both whole-of-government and comprehensive approaches for employing SFA effectively for the right partner with other Allies and U.S. government agencies.
Additionally, given a limited budget for the next decade, the sustainability criteria for setting a theater with a minimal footprint becomes critical. Finally, the study will assess the patterns between all findings to define the necessity and limitations of partnership for advancing the U.S.'s position within an AOR.
This study applies a research strategy focused on qualitative case study analysis of SFA historical examples from Security Force Assistance Brigades (SFABs), National
Guard State Partnership Programs (NSGPP), to Special Operation Forces (SOF) and its impacts on partner capacity and posturing within a region to allow the U.S. an advantageous position compared to adversaries. It uses a case study qualitative analysis to examine the cost-benefit analysis for using SFA as a method for deterrence instead of historical means of U.S. Army hard power such as ABCTs and to understand how SFA affects a HN's capability for national power through a DIME model.
For conventional U.S. Army hard power forces, this paper focuses on ABCTs due to their more significant conventional deterrence effect compared to similar formations such as Airborne IBCTs. Additionally, with the loss of tanks in the Marine Corps, ABCTs are the most distinct formations that the U.S. Army can bring to the joint fight.
Finally, ABCTs are the costliest land maneuver formation to maintain and will bring the most economic and logistical strain on the U.S. Army. Regarding the first, due to the numerous factors involving SFA, it is difficult to establish a cause-and-effect relationship regarding SFA as a preventive tool, but RAND proved a positive relationship. There is a great breadth of research to validate this assumption, allowing the paper to proceed forward. Second, weak states allow states and non-state actors to exploit them, destabilizing a region.
7
8
The intent of this study is to provide tailorable cost-benefit options to Combatant Commanders (CCMD CDRs) for setting a theater to prevent and shape conflict to be favorable to the American Way of War and policy. This paper should also shift the U.S.
Army's paradigm from only conventional and nuclear deterrence to include gray zone deterrence by increasing host nation capacity and credibility, improving U.S.-led international order's posture and position. Additionally, the study will advocate for stability operations, especially SFA and SC, to be more proactive in both application and doctrine for the Army, Joint, and multinational Force. This study will also continue the extensive dialogue for further research synchronizing SFA efforts through both a wholeof-government and comprehensive approach given the bureaucratic limitations and budget constraint environment.
Through the Security Cooperation Plan, CCMD CDRs already employ SFA throughout their AORs, but it is at an inflection point. Until 2019, U.S. Army doctrine oscillated its position for SC and SFA as a stability task and the larger Joint doctrine views SFA as a reactionary measure for failing states rather than being proactive. SFA can prevent conflict by empowering a force in being, or a democratically aligned web of nations (DAWN). 
9
Additionally, the persistent nature of SFA combined with cost-saving methods provides a viable means for Theater Armies within CCMDs to shape the AOR during Phase 0 and 1 in the gray zone. This will counter many peers' ability to asymmetrically influence the AOR before engaging in conflict. This will also be a cost-saving measure as the U.S. paper seeks to address how a theater army can better synchronize SFA given the varying authorities and prevent advising fratricide. Third, this paper will add to the breadth and depth of academic and doctrine writing for SFA and SC. During a review of the current literature, it is evident that there is no depth and limited breadth to any academic or doctrinal writing for SFA. There are only five previous United States Command and General Staff Officer College MMAS or SAMS monographs addressing SFA. By adding another SFA MMAS, this paper will address an important topic that multiple senior government leaders emphasize for strategic competition. 
13
Without it, the U.S will lack a coherent strategy as Asymmetrical conventional hard power alone will no longer deter our adversaries. 
14
Adversaries have adapted to the American Way of War. Competing in the gray zone below conventional war to posture themselves in a position of advantage, adversaries seek to undermine the U.S.-led rules-based international system's center of gravity: its alliances and partnerships. 15 This is a major issue since the rules-based international order has lifted more people out of absolute poverty and improved the quality of life for people around the world.
16
China, Russia, and other adversaries seek to disrupt this system for their own gain, increasing their position of advantage on the world stage through multiple asymmetric means. 17 Unlike a Clausewitzian Collision, adversaries employ a strategy of flow to degrade their opponents before the United States and its Allies escalate to conventional war to deter enemy forces. 
18
19
18
19
20
To complicate the problem, strategic competition is an infinite game and does not have a finite set of rules. 
21
22
23
The American Way of War, Deterrence, and Strategy: More than Just a Battle As most of the Western World diplomatically boycotted the 2022 Olympic Games, Presidents Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin held a press conference asserting their new "no limits" partnership. 
24
Their narrative is simple but appealing. Considering the past two years, the current international order is a failure and autocracy is the better alternative. 
25
26
28
27
28 Rosa Brooks, How Everything Became War and the Military Became Everything: Tales from the Pentagon (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2017); Liang and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare, 141-146; Dugin, Foundations of Geopolitics; Steed, "Narrative in Culture, Center of Gravity, and the Golden Azimuth." for national ends. 
29
30
32
33
34
Consequentially, war has become the entire competition continuum, especially with an interconnect world through social media and globalization. This explains why elements of the executive branch such as the National Security Council have grown exponentially in respond to the growing intersection of domestic, foreign, and national security policy. 
35
In the past, the U.S. used a strategy of attrition to shape current and future crisis and conflicts by competing with adversaries through multiple instruments of national power.
While this American Way of War was suitable in the past, its efficacy has deteriorated in the new Cold War because our adversaries have adapted to it. 
36
37
38
national-security-council/2015/08/04/788f8a2c-3b06-11e5-b3ac-8a79bc44e5e2_ graphic.html.
government seeks to deter adversaries from taking malicious action. 
39
views deterrence as either in conventional or nuclear ways even though it executed gray zone deterrence in the past. 
40
Since the fall of the Soviet Union and victory of Desert Storm, our adversaries have adapted to the overwhelming U.S. nuclear and conventional advantage by refocusing efforts to the gray zone. Employing a strategy of flow, they achieve a position of advantage during strategic competition without the U.S. effectively deterring them.
Finally, our adversaries' gray zone activities can employ a strategy of exhaustion and/or coercion that targets the will of HNs and our allies, degrading their credibility to fight in future conflict. 
41
42
39
40
46
This gets to the heart of the new National Defense Strategy's way known as campaigning. 
47
52
53
54
52
55
56
55
56
By building host nation capacity, U.S. forces build upon its COG, its alliances and partnerships. 
58
59
57
65
66
65
1995-2008. 67
Many of these DIME elements become interconnected due to the small nature of SFA teams. As they advise HN forces, these small teams must synchronize all aspects of national power as they become U.S. representatives. Ultimately, this can lead to HNs https://www.ausa.org/articles/mission-ukraine-us-army-leads-multinational-traininggroup-counter-russian-threat. 
71
72
In conjunction with conventional deterrence, SFA units are a cost-effective means to achieve nation ends. For the conventional U.S. Army, an ABCT can cost up to the $100 million a year to train and maintain. That is a $1 billion fixed cost to maintain and train the current 10 ABCT fleet. 
82
83
84
86
87
88
86
87
88
This paper seeks to answer the research questions presented in Chapter 1 and build upon the limited SFA academic depth. Through a qualitative case study methodology, this paper will obtain a deeper understanding of the purpose and nature behind the research questions, potentially providing options for senior leaders, joint doctrine writers, and academics. This chapter will provide the methods for relevant data collection and discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the case study methodology.
Finally, this study will establish an additional SFA framework for future academic papers and doctrine to provide options for senior leaders as the operational environment evolves.
This study seeks to answer how the United States can deter state and non-state adversaries through SFA given the bureaucratic limitations and a fiscally constrained nation. It implements a case study qualitative analysis of historical examples involving conventional and SOF security force assistance advisors specifically focused on the U.S.
Army. By its infinite game nature, strategic competition and deterrence are subjective and difficult to quantitatively measure. The study also does not focus on testing a theory or hypothesis, but instead gravitates towards exploring ideas and themes related to SFA to potentially produce a theory that will inform senior leadership. A qualitative approach using case studies is necessary to understand these subjective and lived experiences with regards to deterrence in the gray zone, detailing how SFA can shape and deter current and future conflicts. This will help shift the Army's paradigm during Phases 0-1.
Due to the limited time available and the nature of the research questions, this methodology does not necessitate direct engagement with living persons. Its information collection is to open-source means, but this study will mitigate its limitations through a breadth of credible sources, including visual representations such as figures to help the reader better understand the comparison, especially regarding the DIME evaluation criteria. Reducing the complex nature of SFA operations is essential for communicating the conclusions to a larger audience.
The paper improves rigor through trustworthiness and validity, major academic cornerstone for qualitative studies. Despite its difficulty, this paper will improve trustworthiness by examining provided information through the lens of internal and external validity and transferability. Internal validity focuses on the precision and accuracy of data while external validity discusses the reliability and generalization.
Transferability is the generalization potential for a study's future research. 
91
92
Finally, this paper will assess diplomatic and information together because of limited time. Measuring hard power is easier to apply rigor as the economic instrument measured by GDP is the most objective. For the military, this paper will observe quantitative and qualitative measures like military spending, size, and ranking.
Chapter 5 will synthesize pertinent conclusions from Chapters 1 through 4, to provide a conclusive inference for the research questions. It will also propound how gray zone activities, deterrence, and SFA are not new for the U.S. military and will answer how SFA supports deterrence and the American Way of War. Finally, this paper's conclusion will demonstrate how SFA must have unity of effort through multiple activities to shape environments and deter adversaries. SFA does not solves every problem, but when employed correctly, can be a very effective and efficient way to achieve national ends. CHAPTER 4
This Chapters seeks to analyze the research questions presented in Chapter 1 through a qualitative case study methodology using the instruments of national power as variables while a country received U.S. SFA/SC. Organized into seven parts, this chapter analyzes four cases across different time periods and CCMDs. These cases are South Korea (1950-2020), Colombia (1980-2020), Lebanon (2007-2020), and Somalia (1990-2020). Since there is no recognized quantitative measurement for DIME, these case studies will use various qualitative and quantitative data points to analyze trends to ascertain pertinent trends and themes. Below are the results, listed on a descending DIME scale. Based on this paper's analysis, South Korea had an exponential DIME increase, Colombia and Lebanon had moderate to strong increases, and Somalia had a strong decrease.
Source: Created by author.
The analysis' four major trends are choosing the right partner, deterrence, unity of command, and setting the theater with a smaller footprint. Regardless of case study, the analysis reinforces literature review themes that choosing the right partner is critical and can be the most important factor for SFA. Choosing the right partner like South Korea can lead to exponential DIME increase. A right partner is a HN whose Clausewitzian Trinity of People, Policy, and Probability, align with U.S. interests. This increase simultaneously helps the HN's stability while also increasing their ability to deter adversaries. Additionally, relationships have two ends as the U.S. must demonstrate persistent commitment as well, sending informational and diplomatic signals to fence sitters and adversaries. Conversely, SFA is not a magic pill and picking the wrong partner can be disastrous. 
93
During and after the Korean War, South Korean SFA advisors through the Korean Military Advisory Group (KMAG) and later the United States Forces Korea (USFK) centralized under UNC transformed a broken and corrupt South Korean military into one of the best militaries in the world. 
94
95
There are two additional trends. First, SFA units provided a lower cost option to set a theater with HNs rather than expensively employ larger U.S. conventional forces.
Second, SFA requires a comprehensive approach. RAF missions are very expensive and demonstrated only conventional deterrence. In comparison, SFA operations provide a low-cost option or alternative for both conventional and gray zone deterrence. Lebanon provides the best example while using a comprehensive approach. With only 50-100 SOF military advisors executing SFA with UN advisors, the U.S. effectively employed a comprehensive approach that transformed Lebanon within 10 years. It went from a political puppet of Iran and Syria to a contested state that could handle a humanitarian crisis from Syria while defeating Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Many attribute this transformation to the LAF becoming a professional military force that acted as a counterweight to Hezbollah. 
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
Despite this paper originally assessed another Korean case study to be impossible, the current 2022 Ukraine-Russian War provides another succinct example. In a similar way to South Korea, Ukraine's Clausewitzian trinity aligns with U.S. and NATO political interests. 
110
Ukraine's shocking frustration of Russia's initial objectives during the conflict highlights how SC will probably become increasingly important in the future. The 2014 Ukrainian military would not have had the same showing as the U.S. and its allies transformed the Ukrainian security forces with $2.7 billion over 8 years of equipping, training, advising, and assisting. 
111
It is also a case study that involved a country that faced its greatest challenges from internal non-state adversaries. Despite numerous non-state entities such as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and Pablo Escobar causing instability within the region, Colombia transformed into a relatively stable, regional power. Through SC, the U.S. helped with this transformation as the DOS took lead. It employed various U.S. agencies such as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), Drug Enforcement Agency %202014%2C%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20U.S.,and%20improve%20interoperability%20wi th%20NATO. 
111
112 Chris Fitzgerald, "Why The Russian Invasion of Ukraine Has Galvanized the International Community," Geopolitical Monitor, March 1, 2022, https://www.geopoliticalmonitor.com/why-the-russian-invasion-of-ukraine-hasgalvanized-the-international-community/; Beauchamp, "Why the First Few Days of War in Ukraine Went Badly for Russia." more evident as the movie's song We Don't Talk about Bruno has become the number one most popular Disney song ever, influencing a global generation of children. 
123
124
125
126
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
133
134
135
136
133
Lebanon to have more agency despite Syria, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Hezbollah attempting to run the country. 
137
138
Famous American examples include Ralph Nader, Mark Esper, John Abizaid, Salma Hayek, Nassim Taleb. The diaspora goes on to include numerous heads of state, cultural icons, and prominent academics from nations across four continents. Even though the 
137
138 Brand Finance, "Global Soft Power Index 2021." increase in U.S. SC set conditions for both SOF and conventional SFA units to transform the LAF into a professional force. 
142
143
144
145
146
146
There are at least four other factions that claim sovereignty in Somalia besides the national government, various tribes, and VEOs within the region. 
152
153
154
Security Force Assistance and Deterrence, Partnership, and Posture There are four conclusions that align with the above research questions. The first and most critical conclusion is that choosing the right partner is essential for maximizing SFA effects. As described in Chapter 4, this paper observed a DIME increase for three of the four case studies with one being an exponential increase. Additionally, if it was not for the disastrous 2020 Beirut Port Explosion, all three of those case studies would have seen a strong or exponential increase in DIME. This demonstrates the first finding that 
156
20
By picking the right partner, it appears the U.S. increases that partner's credibility and capability across the DIME spectrum. This also furthers the U.S.-led international order's position, allowing it to achieve a position of advantage through the DIME spectrum or denying adversaries one. As our adversaries employ a strategy of flow to degrade an actors Will to Fight during competition, SFA can build capability and credibility essential for deterrence, American Way of War, and policy.
Second, Security force assistance and cooperation are not magic bullets. Though SFA and SC are low cost compared to RAF deployments, CSGs, and other means, it does not preclude it from disastrous results. Picking a poor partner such as Somalia after the civil war began can result in a continuous sunk cost for the U.S. government and its allies. Despite almost 20 years of oscillating strategy for Somalia, the U.S. continues to struggle with the conflict. Somalia saw a dramatic decrease in DIME probably because it is not a good partner. At best, the U.S. and its allies have adopted a strategy of containment to prevent the Somalian Civil War from destabilizing the region.  Setting a Theater with a Smaller Footprint For the fourth conclusion, there is strong quantitative evidence that SFA enables a theater army to set a theater by increasing HN capability and credibility to either prevent conflict or shape an operational environment that is fortuitous for the American Way of War. As with picking the right partner in the right location being the most critical aspect of SFA, the U.S. can improve its posture within a region to achieve or maintain a decisive position with a small footprint. Regardless of the DIME result, all case studies eventually were able to employ a smaller footprint because of SFA units. This was especially true for Lebanon and Colombia. In those case studies, the U.S. only employed a small force over decades through numerous government agencies to improve the host nation. SFA units in these case studies allowed the U.S. increased access within the region that has and can continue to influence the respective CCMD's theater posture plans. Additionally, these small forces empowered their respective case studies to become more independent and act as a counterweight to adversarial influences within their respective regions.
Recognized as a legitimate and professional organization by the international community, the Lebanese Armed Forces act as a counterweight to Hezbollah, ISIS, Al Qaeda, and other autocratic influences in the region. In a similar manner, Colombian security forces helped transform it from a narcodemocracy to defeating the FARC and reducing the cocaine trade. With the right partners, the U.S. can employ a small low-cost effective comprehensive approach to prevent conflicts or shape operational environments.
Although not a case study, this paper must acknowledge how Ukraine in the current context dramatically supports how a CCMD can set a theater with a smaller footprint. Despite only receiving $2 billion of SC and receiving 8 years of SFA from approximately 2,000 advisors, Ukraine unexpectedly frustrated the Russian military efforts to quickly oust President Zelenskyy and capture Kyiv. Though time will tell, this Kyiv Miracle probably could not have occurred without those eight years of SFA. In juxtaposition to Iraq and Afghanistan in which the HN's Will to Fight dissipated relatively quickly despite decades of SFA and SC, Ukraine held its own against the second most powerful military in the world with little military help besides SC from the outside world. By increasing both credibility and capability in Ukraine, the U.S. has shaped the current conflict to be fortuitous for its mass DIME attrition strategy as it wages a diplomatic, informational, and economic war on Russia.
It appears that picking the right partner can help shape an operational environment to be fortuitous for a strategy of annihilation or attrition like the American Way of War with a smaller footprint. Since a HN's credibility or Will to Fight is most malleable before conflict, SFA units appear to be the best means of military power to set a theater to prevent or shape conflict. If the U.S. builds a friendly actor's Will to Fight before conflict, then conflicts will become one of attrition or annihilation instead of exhaustion or dislocation. With a small force of a few hundred or less in Lebanon and Colombia and persistent commitment, SFA units shaped the operational environment in those regions. With Colombia, U.S. government agencies helped Colombia become a regional power while reducing the influence of numerous non-state adversaries. For Lebanon, it was even more pronounced. Under the Ambassador and CCMD CDR, advisors transformed the LAF, preventing the spread of Al-Qaeda and ISIS while dealing with a humanitarian crisis and countering the influence of Hezbollah.
When applying the same lens to Ukraine, SFA helped shaped an operational environment that may not have deterred Russia but became advantageous American Way of War and Policy. Though not legally or militarily at war with Russia, the U.S. has successfully waged a DIME war to isolate Russia at the geopolitical and strategic level in concert with Ukrainian galvanizing the democratic world against revisionist powers.
When the U.N. security council voted to condemn Russia's aggression, over 140 joined Ukraine and the West while only five nations voted with Russia. The Russian economy is in shambles as the Russian currency is only a fraction of its value from months ago.
attempts to either economically coerce countries around these LOCs or build new ones controlled by China. By empowering DAWN, especially through SFA/SC, the U.S. and its allies can provide another option to potential allies globally. For instance, the B3W should incentive potential actors, further countering revisionist strategies like the Belt and Road Initiative.
Go Byzantine does not require a dramatic change to the current U.S. Way of War or its ways and means. It requires SFA/SC to be proactive not reactionary. To prevent and shape future conflicts, the Go Byzantine Grand Strategy will require a comprehensive approach. In many regions of the globe, the pieces for DAWN already exist as with the partnerships such as the Quad or NATO. Empowering and building partnership will signal to U.S. policies to both potential and current allies while fulfilling the new 2022 National Defense Strategy ways: integrated deterrence, campaigning, and building enduring advantages. 
157
of Desert Storm. For a poignant example, the U.S. is learning from the current Russia Ukraine conflict to build enduring advantages and a more lethal force in the future.
The U.S. must be proactive for SFA/SC. Go Byzantine can help set a theater with a smaller budget and force, providing tailorable options. A whole-of-government approach to operationalize SFA and SC within each region. This will become essential during strategic competition as the DOS or other agencies will take lead. Supported by SC, SFA units such as SFAB can influence up to 150 nations across DIME globally for less than $5 billion dollars. This approach can also allow the U.S. to have permanent bases, but reducing RAF missions to a battalion task force, dramatically cutting cost. government and its allies. Third, there must be more research for the Go Byzantine comprehensive approach, especially for the CJTAAC concept. Though the USSC provides a historic framework for a SC headquarters, each CJTAAC must be different.
For example, France and United Kingdom have done SFA for decades in Africa. Equally important, there must be more research on where interests conflict between the U.S. and its allies within each CCMD. This can potentially create SFA and SC fratricide across the DIME, creating opportunities for autocratic adversaries to exploit. 
158
There may be investigator bias due to never serving in an ABCT formation and familiarity with SFA; however, this study mitigates the bias by integrating diverse a great breadth of sources with opposing views for SFA, deterrence, and ABCTs. This paper does not examine possible solutions involving Stryker and Infantry Brigade Combat Teams (SBCTs and IBCTs) because they lack persistent hard power deterrence for state and non-state adversaries. I assess that I am qualified to write this paper as a professional who seeks to bridge the gap between SFA operations and its lack of academic depth. As an Infantry highest level of U.S. government. Personally, I acknowledge my lack of ABCT and force management experience. I mitigate this through three methods. First, I have an extensive breadth for my literature review that incorporates opposing views. Second, I incorporate scholarly and credible sources from RAND Corporation, Army Office of Research and Statistical Analysis, JSTOR, and CARL. Third, I periodically had my staff group 6A, MMAS peers, and committee challenge this paper.
There may be investigator bias due to never serving in an ABCT formation and familiarity with SFA; however, this study mitigates the bias by integrating diverse a great breadth of sources with opposing views for SFA, deterrence, and ABCTs. This paper does not examine possible solutions involving Stryker and Infantry Brigade Combat Teams (SBCTs and IBCTs) because they lack persistent hard power deterrence for state and non-state adversaries. I assess that I am qualified to write this paper as a professional who seeks to bridge the gap between SFA operations and its lack of academic depth. As an Infantry highest level of U.S. government. Personally, I acknowledge my lack of ABCT and force management experience. I mitigate this through three methods. First, I have an extensive breadth for my literature review that incorporates opposing views. Second, I incorporate scholarly and credible sources from RAND Corporation, Army Office of Research and Statistical Analysis, JSTOR, and CARL. Third, I periodically had my staff group 6A, MMAS peers, and committee challenge this paper.
30  
30  
Dubik, "Deterrence." 41 Ibid.; Kilcullen. Dragons and Snakes, 10-20; Liang and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare, 141-146.
Dubik, "Deterrence." 41 Ibid.; Kilcullen. Dragons and Snakes, 10-20; Liang and Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare, 141-146.
Source: Michael J. McNerney, Angela O'Mahony, Thomas S. Szayna, Derek Eaton, Caroline Baxter, Colin P. Clarke, Emma Cutrufello, Michael McGee, Heather Peterson, Leslie Adrienne Payne, and Calin Trenkov-Wermuth, Assessing Security Cooperation as a Preventive Tool (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2014), 67. Security Force Assistance, Partnership, and Posture Security Force Assistance is an essential SC activity for maintaining partnership.
Source: Michael J. McNerney, Angela O'Mahony, Thomas S. Szayna, Derek Eaton, Caroline Baxter, Colin P. Clarke, Emma Cutrufello, Michael McGee, Heather Peterson, Leslie Adrienne Payne, and Calin Trenkov-Wermuth, Assessing Security Cooperation as a Preventive Tool (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2014), 67. Security Force Assistance, Partnership, and Posture Security Force Assistance is an essential SC activity for maintaining partnership.
143  
143  
Table 1. Security Cooperation Recipients ........................................................................36
MAJ James Dawdy and I came up with the term Force in Being to describe the web of partners that would work together to deter adversaries. Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahon's concept, a fleet in being, in his book, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1660-1783, inspired the concept;David Kilcullen,[10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20]  
67, 237-240.   
Jacob B. Sauders, "Better Together: SOF and Conventional Forces integration in Security Force Assistance," (Master of Military Art and Science Thesis, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 2017), 11-13.
Courtney J. Dean, "Why Security Force Assistance Fails," (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 2016).
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-07, Stability (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, November 2, 2016), IV-13 -14, https://jdeis.js.mil/jdeis/new_pubs/jp4_01_5.pdf.
Dean, "Why Security Force Assistance Fails."   
Department of Joint and Multinational Operations (DJIMO), "C206RB: Statement of Admiral Phillip S. Davidson, U.S. Navy Commander, U.S. INDO-PACIFIC Command before the Senate Armed Services Committee on U.S. INDO-PACIFIC Command posture (09 March 2021)," (Course reading, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, September 2021.
Kilcullen, Dragons and the Snakes, 1-30; Sun Tzu, "Attack by Stratagem, Verse 18," in Art of War (New York: Vintage, 2021), 11-14; Steed, "Narrative in Culture, Center of Gravity, and the Golden Azimuth."
Jahara Matisek and William Reno, "Getting American Security Force Assistance Right: Political Context Matters," Joint Force Quarterly 92 (1st Quarter
The World Bank Group, "Decline of Global Extreme Poverty Continues but Has Slowed: World Bank," The World Bank, September 19, 2018, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/09/19/decline-of-global-extremepoverty-continues-but-has-slowed-world-bank.
Simon Sinek, "The Finite and Infinite Games of Leadership," Talks at Google, June 19, 2017, 56:05, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_osKgFwKoDQ.
Kilcullen, Dragons and the Snakes,. This is especially important when considering KilCullen's Byzantine approach, allowing them to last over 1000 years
Reynolds, "Security Cooperation in the Gray Zone."
Tony Munroe, Andrew Osborn, and Humeyra Pamuk, "China, Russia Partner up against West at Olympics Summit," Reuters, February 4, 2022,
Munroe, Osborn, and Pamuk, "China, Russia  Partner up against West at Olympics Summit."
Editorial Board, "Beijing 2022 Will Be Remembered as the 'Scandal Olympics'," The Washington Post, February 21, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/ opinions/2022/02/19/beijing-2022-scandal-olympics/; "The Russia-Ukraine War: Latest News," The Wall Street Journal, accessed February 24, 2022, https://apple.news/ AdLLlQbtRQ7mtm4mvehHJzw; Elbridge Colby and David Ochmanek, "How the U.S. Could Lose a Great-Power War," Foreign Policy, October 29, 2019, https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/10/29/united-states-china-russia-great-power-war/.
Rose Lopez Keravuori. "Lost in Translation: The American Way of War," Small Wars Journal
(November 17, 2011)
Executive Secretary NSC, A Report to the National Security Council on United States Objectives and Programs for National Security; Jayamaha and Matisek, "The Strategic Crisis in the American Way of War"; Steed, "Military Strategies."
Ibid.
"The Growth of the National Security Council," The Washington Post, August 5, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/the-growth-of-the-
Dmitri Trenin, "Welcome to Cold War II," Foreign Policy, March 5, 2014, https://foreignpolicy.com/2014/03/04/welcome-to-cold-war-ii/.
Dean, "Why Security Force Assistance Fails,"; Knowles and Matisek, "Western Security Force Assistance in Weak States," 11-12.
Thomas I. Thornhill, "The Value of the SFAB," Infantry (Spring 2021): 21-22, https://www.benning.army.mil/infantry/magazine/issues/2021/Spring/pdf/8_Thornhill_S FAB.pdf; Pelham, Combat Multiplier.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Joint Doctrine Note (JDC) 1-18, Strategy (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 25, 2018), II-5 -II-7, https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/jdn_jg/jdn1_18.pdf.
Brand Finance, "Global Soft Power Index 2021," Portland, "South Korea," The Soft Power 30, accessed February 22, 2022, https://softpower30.com/country/southkorea; Lowy Institute, "Global Diplomacy Index," accessed February 25, 2022, https://globaldiplomacyindex.lowyinstitute.org/#; DOS, "U.S. Security Cooperation with Korea."
101 Lowy Institute, "Global Diplomacy Index."
"'Gangnam' Mania," The Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2012, https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390444620104578008230854641420; Portland, "South Korea,"; Brand Finance, "Global Soft Power Index 2021."
DOS, "U.S. Security Cooperation with Korea,"; Burroughs, "The Efficacy of Security Force Assistance in Countering Violent Extremist Organizations in Failed and Potentially Failing States,"; Sawyer and Hermes, Military Advisors in Korea.
Ibid.; Burroughs, "The Efficacy of Security Force Assistance in Countering Violent Extremist Organizations in Failed and Potentially Failing States."
"South Korea Military Spending/Defense Budget 1960-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/KOR/southkorea/military-spending-defense-budget.
  107  SouthKorea GDP 1960-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/KOR/south-korea/gdp-gross-domestic-product; Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and Korean Culture and Information Service
Burroughs, "The Efficacy of Security Force Assistance in Countering Violent Extremist Organizations in Failed and Potentially Failing States," 60-70; McCarthy, "The Globe's Top Cocaine Producers."
DOS, "U.S. Relations with Colombia,"; Burroughs, "The Efficacy of Security Force Assistance in Countering Violent Extremist Organizations in Failed and Potentially Failing States," 60-70.
"Colombia GDP 1960-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/COL/colombia/gdp-gross-domestic-product; "Colombia GDP Growth Rate 1961-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/COL/colombia/gdp-growth-rate.
Tom Joyner, "The Most Dire Collapse the World Has Seen -Worse than the Great Depression -Is Happening in This Country," ABC News, August 4, 2021, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-08-04/lebanons-collapse-continues-one-year-afterbeirut-blast/100343112.
Brand Finance, "Global Soft Power Index 2021,"; The Fund for Peace, "Country Dashboard," Fragile States Index, accessed March 6, 2022, https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/.
U.S. Department of State (DOS), "U.S. Security Cooperation with Lebanon," (Fact Sheet, Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, May 21, 2021), https://www.state.gov/ u-s-security-cooperation-with-lebanon/#:~:text=The%20United%20States%20has% 20invested,August%202020%20Beirut%20port%20explosion.
The Fund for Peace, "Country Dashboard."
Knowles and Matisek. "Western Security Force Assistance in Weak States,".  11-12; "2022 Military Strength Ranking," Global Firepower.    
"Somalia Military Size 1985-2022." Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/SOM/somalia/military-army-size; "Somalia Military Spending/Defense Budget 1961-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/SOM/somalia/military-spending-defensebudget; U.S. Department of State (DOS), "U.S. Relations with Somalia," (Bilateral Relations Fact Sheet, Bureau of African Affairs, April 15, 2021), https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-somalia/.
154 "SomaliaGDP 1960-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022, https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/SOM/somalia/gdp-gross-domestic-product; "Somalia GDP GrowthRate 1961-2022," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022.   https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/SOM/somalia/gdp-growth-rate.
This paper uses the term democracy to include all democratic constitutional republics and similar forms of government.
"Fact Sheet: 2022 National Defense Strategy," DOD.
This section is a direct result of A221 peer feedback, especially from MAJs Jerome Duval and Koon Gosh, our international students.
Essential for the American Way of War and Deterrence in Strategic Competition 5a. CONTRACT ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
of the biggest is attempting to make the HN a mirror image of the U.S. military. 
74
75
76
77
The U.S. faces great friction with achieving unity of effort towards national ends.
Legally, this becomes extremely difficult due to the different authorities and funding over 
Titles 10,
22,
and 50. 78
74
75
76 Ibid. 
77
78
beyond the military instrument of national power. This includes using other SC activities such as FMS to build military capacity and empower other parts of the HN government.
Finally, SC is an economy of force operation that allows the U.S. to build HN capacity, reducing fragility in key states that are good partners. credible sources, especially for the diplomatic and informational power. It will also be transferable by maximining the case study methodology.
For this paper's research questions, a qualitative approach is essential due to the subjective nature of deterrence because it involves the motivations of nations and leaders.
Since this paper has limited time, it will maximize the case study methodology through four case studies over different time periods and CCMDs to provide a Western and Eastern perspective. The case studies will involve 1960-2021 Korea, 1980s-2021   Columbia, 1990-2021 Somali, and 2007-2021 Lebanon. For the evaluation criteria, this paper uses a combination of quantitative/qualitative measurements for DIME. The biggest split is between hard and soft power, or between military and economic with diplomatic and information power.
Even though measuring DIME is difficult, its definitions are clear. Diplomacy focuses on engagement between actors while the information instrument involves government country of Lebanon may still be in turmoil, its culture and values continue to indirectly influence the world for the better. 
139
140
These qualitative changes coupled with increased SC and Lebanon doubling its military spending facilitated Lebanon's military transformation. Over 16 years, the LAF remained at 80,000 personnel, but its military spending more than doubled from $1.15 to $2.51 billion. 
141
8, abstract, 190-245. 140 Humud, Lebanon, 19-23;
Saab, "The United States Has Not Lost Lebanon." 141 "Lebanon GDP 1988
-2022
," Macrotrends, accessed February 22, 2022
Partnership leads to posture and a position of advantage for both the U.S. and the HN. With the SFA supported by SC helping to increase a HN's stability and DIME, the HN can become more of a regional or international power that supports the rules-based international order. Colombia is the best example which was fraught with numerous nonstate adversaries. With U.S. SFA, Colombia defeated most of them and helped increase democratic influence within the region. With this increase in influence, the U.S. and the rules-based international order increased its posture and position through partnership with minimal cost. Even if the U.S. cannot achieve a decisive position, it can at least negate an adversary's previous decisive position as with the LAF in Lebanon.
SFA empowers a HN's whole-of-government, not just security forces. In South Korea, Lebanon, and Colombia, the SFA units had unity of command under different U.S. agencies, but also empowered the larger governmental institutions that support those security forces. Diplomatically, informationally, and economically, the U.S. can deter both state and non-state adversaries with supply chains connected to Build Back Better Program (B3W). Who the U.S. partners with sends a message to the world about the rules-based international order's democratic values. Additionally, many nations do not have the same bureaucratic division between political and military entities like the U.S., leading relationship building between SFA units and a HN military to have local political effects as well. For instance, numerous Lebanese, Colombia, and South Korean political leader received U.S. SFA during their military service. These politicians and their supporters appear to act as a political counterweight to deter numerous state and non-state actors in the gray zone that attempt to coercive HNs to their agenda.
CHAPTER 5
The purpose of war is to make a better peace.
-Sir Basil Henry Liddell Hart, "Introduction," in Strategy It will not be easy, there will be costs… the darkness that drives autocracy is ultimately no match for the flame of liberty that lights the souls of free people everywhere.
-President Joseph R. Biden, Jr., Remarks on the United Efforts of the Free World to Support the People of Ukraine, 2022
The American Way of War is still suitable but lost some of its efficacy because our adversaries have adapted to it. In response to the tremendous U.S. conventional and nuclear deterrence such as Desert Storm, state and non-state adversaries target host nation Will to Fight in the gray zone during competition to achieve advantageous positions that will shape future crises and conflicts. With the Russian invasion of Ukraine on the 31st
Anniversary of Desert Storm ground campaign, the U.S. and rules-based international order awakens to a possible New Cold War between democracy and autocracy. 
155
proposed Go Byzantine Strategy, the U.S. can empower a democratically aligned web of   
The third conclusion is that unity of command is the biggest issue for unity of effort regarding SFA and SC. As with choosing the right partner, the U.S. will constantly have to employ a comprehensive approach as multiple allies will also train host nations.
For example, in the Lebanon case study, U.S. SOF and conventional advisors had to work with the UNIF-Lebanon mission involving Italian, South Korean, Colombian, and other militaries. Additionally, U.S. forces will advise under different authorities with different U.S. agencies taking lead based on the mission. All these entities executed SFA and SC simultaneously with Lebanon and with a constant requirement for coordination to prevent information and SFA fratricide. Though not impossible, the lack of unity of command made it exponentially more difficult Lebanon to increase HN capability and capacity.
Finally, the U.S. has won the narrative war, carefully releasing the truth about Russia's intentions before its misinformation campaign could take effect. This alerted the democratic media to the nature of the conflict before Russia could control the narrative.
Though the American Way of War has been successful so far at the strategic level for this conflict, its success rests on a Ukrainian foundation consisting of the Will to Our competition may be our partner's conflict, but their current conflict may be our future crisis. As with integrated deterrence and campaigning, this Grand Strategy builds enduring advantages. Supporting the NDAA 2017 mandate for SC assessments, SFA units must execute a JCIDS like assessment on HN forces. This report should help inform the Joint Force Management process to help product DOTMLPF-P solutions for current and future force structures. As detailed in Chapter 2, this technique is not new.
Under the auspice of SFA/SC, GEN Starry and TRADOC worked with Israel after the Yom Kippur War to learn valuable lessons about the conflict. Using their unprecedented access, they updated the U.S. joint doctrine and force management, resulting in the famed Airland Battle doctrine and the Army of Excellence that supported the devastating victory
Our adversaries have adapted to the American Way of War, reducing its suitability in the 21st Century. Though SFA is not a magic bullet to everything, a proactive approach has the potential to increase credibility and capability for current and potential democratic allies. As with every relationship, the U.S. must pick the right partner because our partners send a clear message to potential allies and adversaries. It also appears to help a Theater Army achieve an information advantage within the HN and larger region as well. As the world awakens to a possible New Cold War with the Russian invasion of Ukraine, this messaging will be essential for future competition. To counter this rise in authoritarianism and its coercive strategies, the U.S. can apply a strategy of flow to collision, or Go Byzantine Strategy, to augment the current U.S. DIME attritional strategy. In the past, the President signed a combined DOS and DOD SC strategy. Due SC's importance for deterrence and American Way of War, perhaps it is time for the that again. Through a comprehensive approach, the U.S. and its allies can employ SFA and SC to build Will to Fight and capability that will prevent and shape conflicts to become fortuitous for the American Way of War.