# ID: 5c719d4707c64ee1834ecfe9ae4d8798
# Title: The Relevance of the Commander's Estimate to The Army People Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Commander's Estimate, by MAJ Jonathan Proctor, US Army, 54 pages.
Beginning in 2019 the US Army began focusing efforts in readiness, modernization, and reform. This came after nearly two decades of reacting to the immediate threat of counter-insurgency and engaging in small unit tactical actions. Foundational to executing these efforts is the Army People Strategy. This strategy focuses planning efforts to recognize and capitalize on the unique knowledge, skills, and behaviors of members of the Army, and how to best employ them. One of the critical enablers of this strategy is culture. The strategy outlines that current Army culture must be maintained while incorporating new cultural elements to meet the challenges of the current operating environment. These elements include: inquiry and innovation, intellectual flexibility, knowledge sharing, systems thinking, and continuous learning. This study provides evidence to the relevance of the Commander's Estimate in the MDMP for developing the culture of US Army tactical organizations. This is accomplished through a case study of the creation of the Prussian General Staff along with the theories of generative learning and the theory of action for organizational learning.
iii
In 2019 the US Army began focusing efforts in readiness, modernization, and reform after nearly two decades of reacting to the immediate threat of counter-insurgency and engaging in small unit tactical actions. The US Army is poised through these focused efforts to successfully deploy, fight, and win in multi-domain operations (MDO) and excel in support of the Joint Force.
The Army People Strategy is foundational for the US Army to execute these efforts. 
1
1
2
4
5
6
7
Significant changes occurred in 2003 with the publication of FM 6-0, Mission Command:
Command and Control of Army Forces, and subsequently FM 5-0, Command and Staff Organization and Operations. These manuals introduced Mission Command, a concept from the 19th century Prussian military, as a doctrinal construct for command and control and removed the Commander's Estimate from the MDMP. The Commander's Estimate was reintroduced into doctrine with the 2010 publication of FM 5-0, but no longer as an input to the planning process.
The 2019 publication of ADP 6-0 defines the Commander's Estimate as a mental process linked to the commander's visualization. 
8
What is the relevance of the Commander's Estimate in the MDMP for developing the culture of The Army People Strategy in tactical organizations?
This study is a review of history, theory, and doctrine. A historical case study examines the creation of the Prussian General Staff during the 19th century. This case study provides a contextual understanding of the factors that led to the reformation of the Prussian military and the creation of the general staff. This understanding provides insight into the necessary cultural elements for the US Army to execute Mission Command. Next, the study examines two theories.
First, is generative learning theory which provides understanding of how commanders learn new information and what strategies are available to increase the transfer of knowledge to others. 
9
10
There are 5 chapters in this study. Chapter 1 is a literature review composed of research methodology, key sources, and significant conclusions. Chapter 2 provides the review of history and a case study on the formation of the Prussian General Staff. Chapter 3 is a US Army planning doctrinal review. Chapter 4 is a review of the theories of Generative Learning and Action Perspective. Lastly, Chapter 5 provides analysis and conclusions from the study with suggestions for future research.
The research for this study was primarily conducted at the Combined Arms Research Library (CARL) at Fort Leavenworth, KS. Resources used at this location were the books available by the library's open catalog, and historical documents maintained in the closed stacks research area. A variety of online resource catalogs were used for this study, accessed was gained through CARL.
Seven key resources were used for this study. Key sources for the history review were Finally, John Boyd's "Destruction and Creation" presentation was a key source that drove the investigation and research behind this study.
This study determines that the Commander's Estimate is relevant for developing the culture of US Army tactical organizations. It recognizes that there must be modifications to the current format and how it is incorporated into the MDMP. This understanding developed two suggestions for current practice. The first is that the Commander's Estimate format be modified to generate learning for the commander while providing staff and subordinates the process behind the commander's visualization. The second suggestion is that Commander's Estimate be employed into the MDMP similar to the current doctrine for the Army Design Methodology products, with the exception that the Commander's Estimate is published along with Warning Order 2.
The current US Army planning and command and control doctrine traces its origin back to the Prussian military in the 19th century. The Mission Command approach to command and control derives from the Prussian concept of Auftragstaktik (mission orders). The concept of occupy the country of Hanover after the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. Prussia previously sought to avoid war with France but began to mobilize their forces against France after receiving information that Napoleon offered Great Britain Hanover's sovereignty to negotiate a trade deal.
12
The Jena Auerstedt campaign began on October 8th 1806 as Napoleon entered Prussian territory with the French Grand Armeé. Moving in a battalion square formation with light cavalry and units of dragoons forward, Napoleon kept his force flexible to rapidly respond as the situation developed and prevented the Prussians from understanding French movements. 
13
Napoleon quickly issued orders in the early hours of October 12th for the Grand Armeé to pivot North-East and move to the vicinity of Jena and Auerstedt; the location of the Prussian Army. On the 13th of October the Prussians discovered that the French Army was near and threatening to envelop their forces. This resulted in a Prussian decision to attempt to retreat to the town of Auerstedt, while leaving a rear guard in Jena. 
14
15
16
The initial planning efforts for both belligerents greatly affected the outcome of the campaign. The Prussians initially determined to go to war with France in August 1806, but it was not until September 27th that the Prussian war council finally decided on a war plan. This plan would change drastically a few days after October 5th.
17
The lack of decision-making in the Prussian military was a second cause of the campaign outcome. The Prussian military relied solely on a centralized war council to make decisions, causing large delays in execution as information changed during the campaign. On October 5th the war council received information that Napoleon had mobilized and prepared to invade Saxony. 
18
The Prussians would restructure the military and develop system to enable information processing and orders created quickly. The use of information was a third gap that was decisive for the campaign outcome.
Napoleon had a greater advantage in the ability to collect information with the movement formations of the Grand Armeé, allowing him to spread out his subordinate units. Additionally, he had a system for information flow throughout the army, enabling significant shared understanding for an organization of that size during that time in history. The application of this information was reliant on a central node; the brain of Napoleon. This enabled orders to be produced from a single mental model developed by a military genius that had a near perfect visualization of the battlefield. This campaign demonstrates the military genius of Napoleon and the blatant weaknesses of the Prussian military structure in 1806. Napoleon's ability to command and control an army of 200,000 men spread out of 200 kilometers was a feat beyond the capabilities of his opponents.
Napoleon's command and control was aided by his understanding of information flow and his ability to make good decisions quickly. Understanding Napoleon's ability in contrast to their military failures would be a key to the reformation of the Prussian military. Napoleon's military genius allowed for shared understanding within his organization, even in centralized command and control system. Understanding that military geniuses are extremely rare, the Prussian military reformation sought to develop a system that would decentralize the command and control structure by implementing the elements of inquiry, knowledge sharing, and continuous learning into their culture.
The origin of the Prussian General Staff traces back to the Brandenburg Army of 1635. 
19
Quartermaster,
Paymaster,
Chaplain,
and Field Surgeon. 20
The Prussian General Staff saw two significant developments under the oversight of Frederick Great. In 1758, Frederick published instructions for his field engineers to survey ground, find and establish roads for troop movements, and perform reconnaissance of enemy camps and positions. 
21
Frederick the Great's second key development of the Prussian staff came in 1765 with the founding of the "Academie des Nobles", a school to train young wealthy men for military service.
Frederick founded this school as a result of the declining education of his officers within his army after the Seven Years' War between 
1756-1763. 22
The Prussian staff continued to evolve and develop over the next few decades. This changed with the death of Frederick the Great in 1786. The Prussian military then began to regress. This Prussian regression corresponded to the French Revolution beginning in 1789 and the rise of Napoleon as the great military power in all of Europe. It was these factors along with the strategic context already discussed that led to the failures in the Jena Auerstedt campaign in 1806.
After the failure in 1806 the Prussian Army appointed Major General Scharnhorst to head a commission of reorganization of the Prussian Army in 1807. 
23
The first key change resulted from orders issued by Scharnhorst in 1808 that developed the General Staff to be composed of 26 officers and were regulated by instructions approved by the king himself. 24 These instructions were followed up with a policy implemented in 1809 which positioned General Staff officers at Army headquarters. This policy assigned the General Staff officers directly to the Commanding General, and not the organization. This significantly improved the development of the relationships and attitudes of General Staff Officers. The exclusive relationship between the commander and his general staff produced an environment where the public testing of ideas was allowed and created an emphasis on inquiry. This sense of independence and exclusiveness increased with the attendance of schools; as education was the second key change in the reorganization. Scharnhorst focused on the education of officers, opening three schools for junior officers and reinvigorating the Kriegsakademie, the school for field grade officers. The design of these schools focused on generating knowledge within the students, not the transfer of information. War games and map board exercises focused on the student's decision-making abilities and were followed with questions on how they applied the information learned in school. This education required officers to question their own mental models and reflect on their decisions. This produced officers with intellectual flexibility and personal mastery in the art and science of war. The Prussian military would increase the level of mutual trust within the entire organization by spreading these highly useful officers across the formations.
In 1828 with an understanding of the usefulness of a General Staff a directive was issued creating field staffs down to the Corps level. Additionally, these staffs organized into four sections: General Staff, routine staff, legal, and departmental or intendance. 
25
A final important development in the Prussian military reorganization is giving the Chief of Staff for each organization a dual command with the Commander. This eliminated the concept of a Chief of Staff being subordinate to the commander, but as a partner in command. The commander had the final responsibility in the decision making, but both the commander and chief of staff shared in the outcome. This relationship empowered chief of staff to have a discourse with the commander and challenge his ideas. These four developments along with many other changes throughout the Prussian military created a revolutionary and highly effective organization. This organization now had the ability to produce a visualization of the battlefield through a combining multiple perspective and developing shared understanding. It was Helmuth Von Moltke that harnessed this organization along with additional system processes to use it to lead Prussia to victory on battlefields filled with uncertainty.
Helmuth Von Moltke became the Chief of the General Staff in 1858. 
26
27
By the latter half of the 19th century technology made command and control at the division and corps levels increasingly difficult. New technology created a rapidly changing battlefield, making it difficult for detailed orders to reach forward units in a timely manner.
Subordinates needed to understand what needed to be done not how to do it. Moltke accomplished this using mission orders.
The concept of using mission orders, or what is widely known as Auftragstaktik, sought to increase the independence of subordinate commanders by operating from senior commander's guidance of a given mission/task and the overall intent. This was opposed to specific instructions to subordinates on how to accomplish a mission. This concept was based on the idea that continual tactical successes would lead to strategic victory. Moltke argued for this concept by stating the division and corps commanders must be able to understand their organization's current situation and make corresponding independent decisions within the intent of the overall mission. 
29
30
Communication was an essential element for success to Moltke and the design of the Prussian military using mission orders. Moltke was heavily aided by the advance in technology and the introduction of the telegraph to communicate with his subordinates and allow subordinates to communicate with one another. Moltke stressed to commanders to understand the situation as a whole and communicate updates of changes in situation. While the changes may not be important to those directly influenced; it could be significant to others or to the whole. 
32
In conclusion, the formation and implementation of the Prussian General Staff and the concept of Auftragstaktik were created to compete the with the abilities of a military genius to visualize a rapidly changing battlefield and dictate that visualization through orders. Napoleon had the rare ability to develop a detailed visualization of the battlefield through generating learning from his subordinates across the battlefield. Understanding the rarity of a commander like Napoleon the Prussians reformed their military developing an organization where officers challenged their mental models. This led to an environment of public testing of ideas created by dialogue between a commander and his staff as depicted in Figure 
2
The origin of the US Army's operations process dates back to the writings of a young Captain in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas in 1909. Captain Roger S. Fitch published "Estimating Tactical Situations and Composing Field Orders" which turned into Army doctrine in 1910. This gave the first sequential methodology for developing tactical situational estimates. 33 Captain Fitch's writing provided a form for a five-paragraph field order that is similar to the one used today. An "estimate of the situation" developed by the commander provided the base of the field order. The estimate was a logical process of thought that enabled one to arrive at a definite tactical decision. 
34
35
In 1932 the US Army published the first manual for staff officers. This manual detailed the commander's estimate as a process to develop the five paragraph field orders. This publication indicated that the steps for the commander's estimate were to provide a "train of thought" and that in division and smaller units, the commander's estimate would generally be a 33 John Siegle, "Estimate of the Situation" (USAGSC Student Paper, 1966), 5. 
34
37
The purpose of the staff and the operations process remained unchanged in the first and The third revision of FM 101-5 produced in 1960 is a second significant point in the evolution of the US Army's operations process. This FM 101-5 presented a sequential decisionmaking process, called "sequence of actions in making and executing decisions". 39 This 10-step process is the start of the evolution into the MDMP steps that are present in current doctrine. The commander's estimate remained an important step in the sequence, as the fifth step. This publication is significant in the evolution of the operations process as the process for making decisions becomes an iterative deductive process. The staff and commander estimates provide analysis from individual perspectives on possible courses of action. From these analysis, a hypothesis would be chosen from which a second round of analysis occurs to create a decision. A fourth revision of FM 101-5 was produced in 1968. This publication provided an example commander's estimate that was eleven pages in length. This extremely detailed commander's estimate displays that the evolution of US Army doctrine was not aligning with the current technology of the time and the amount of information that was readily available to a Commander and his staff. The Commander's Estimate at this time was still an analytical tool to attempt to determine the best course of action; but with technology it was needed to evolve to be inductive process to understand the situation.
In 1964, the United States Army Command and General Staff College (USACGSC) conducted a study among the current class of US Army officers to determine the usage of the Commander's Estimate among the force. This study found that 59.3 percent of the students that had previously served on division staff reported the Commander's Estimate (format) was hardly or never used. An additional 57.5% of the students reported that they did not plan on using the estimate format after graduation. 
40
There would be small evolutions in the operations process over the next three decades.
The 1984 version introduced the term the Military Decision Making Process maintaining the same approach as the previously titled "sequence of actions in making and executing decisions".
The seventh and final version of FM 101-5 was published in 1997. This publication initiated a significant change in operations process, attempting to combine inductive and deductive reasoning in the MDMP.
The 1997 version of FM 101-5 did not provide a format for the Commander's Estimate, but developed the concept that estimates support the commander's visualization and that subordinate commanders must be able to envision the organization's end state. This evolution used the Commander's Estimate for inductive reasoning to synthesize information and generate a visualization. Without a format commanders were expected to be able to develop a visualization of the battlefield in private, and subordinates would not know when the current environment no longer aligned with the commander's visualization. This shift in adding inductive reasoning foreshadows the next key point in the evolution of the operations process with the introduction of Mission Command.
After the 1997 publication of FM 101-5 the doctrine on the US Army operations process was divided into FM 6-0 and FM 5-0. This FM 5-0 removed the Commander's Estimate from the decision-making process. It focused the commander on providing a description of his visualization, which is a product of inductive reasoning, through different outputs of the planning process. This visualization is the: Mental process of achieving a clear understanding of the force's current state with relation to the enemy and environment and developing a desired end state that represents mission accomplishment and the key tasks that move the force from its current state to the end state. 
41
The first revision of FM 5-0 in 2010 brought back the Commander's Estimate, retitling it as the Commander's Running Estimate but did not provide a format. In this version the estimate is used as a summary of the problem and all the variables that affect the mission, which is inductive reasoning, and is to supplement the staff estimates. This reintroduction of the Commander's Estimate did not undo the fabricated hierarchy that was created in 2005. In doing so organizations continued to be provided with a description of the commander's visualization without understanding the process used to create it. These concepts are primarily unchanged in the doctrine that is current today. FM 6-0, Commander and Staff Organization and Operations published in 2014 is the current doctrine providing tactics and procedures for exercising mission command. 
42
43
The current US Army doctrine publication for planning is ADP 5-0, The Operations Process. This publication describes the fundamentals of planning and how they fit within the guidelines of Mission Command, the US Army's approach to command and control. Throughout the operations process, the commander provides a fundamental role, and doctrinally is the most important participant within the process. 
44
47
The previous section of this study examined the evolution of the US Army's operations process doctrine and the Commander's Estimate. What once started as a form for deductive analysis evolved to an inductive process for the private development of a visualization. The section ended with the idea that a commander needs strategies to generate learning while formulating his visualization. This study examines a theory of how humans learn to be able to find applicability for commanders and staffs in order to produce a culture of inquiry and knowledge sharing.
There are two main schools of thought on how humans learn, cognitive theory and stimulus response theory. Cognitive theory postulates that learning comes from a person perceiving and reorganizing thoughts and ideas from an experience. It is the formation and modification of cognitive patterns in relation to their environment. 
49
50
Within the cognitive theory school of thought is generative learning theory. Generative learning theory attempts to explain how humans best learn. This study examines this theory to understand its applicability to the MDMP and the relevance of the commander's estimate. Generative learning theory was first introduced in 1974 through an article written by M.C. Wittrock, an American educational psychologist. His theory was that people generate perceptions and meanings that are consistent with their prior knowledge. 
51
52
54
According to Wittrock, the generative learning model: Predicts that learning is a function of the abstract and distinctive, concrete associations which the learner generates between his prior experience, as it is stored in long-term memory, and the stimuli. Learning with understanding, which is defined by long-term memory plus transfer to conceptually related problems, is a process of generating semantic and distinctive idiosyncratic associations between stimuli and stored information. 
55
52
54
56
57
58
The analysis of the generative learning theory case studies produced the call for action that to improve learning, teachers must focus on how relationships among concepts and experience are constructed while still structing new information in an organized format. 
59
60
To provide a framework of how to understand how learners are making sense of 56 M. C. Wittrock, "Learning as a Generative Process," Educational Psychologist 45, no. 1 (January 21, 2010): 42. 
57
58
59 Merlin C. Wittrock, "Generative Learning Processes of the Brain," Educational Psychologist 27, no. 4 (September 1992): 536. 
60
3
Summarizing is translating new information into one's own words. It is important that students do not copy presented words or sentences, but they are able to synthesize the information and generate their own interpretation of the information. 
63
64
65
The self-explaining strategy is having students provide an oral summary of the new material or information being provided. This strategy has been shown as highly effective with highly complex material or when given scientific texts. 
66
67
64
65 Ibid, 724. 
66
67
The previous section of this study examined generative learning theory to gain an understanding of how humans learn. The theory provided strategies to develop a Commander's Estimate format which can help produce a visualization while promoting a culture of inquiry, knowledge sharing, and intellectual flexibility. To further understand the relevance of the Commander's Estimate, it is important to understand how organizations learn, how organizations benefit from individual learning, and what structures or concepts promote learning for an overall organization.
There are many different theories on organizational learning. Theories on organizational learning largely depend on how an organization is defined or from what perspective an organization is viewed from. Some of the common categories from which to examine an organization are: as a group, an agent, a structure, a system, a culture, or as politics. 
68
69
Chris Argyris and Donald Schoen developed the theory of action perspective on organizational learning. This theory of action published in their 1976 book, Theory in Practice, was originally produced to describe interpersonal behavior. 
70
71
72
73
A theory of action perspective describes organizational learning by defining three different types of learning loops: single-loop, double-loop, and deutero-loop learning. Single loop learning is when organization responds to changes in their environment by correcting detected errors in order to maintain their current theory-in-use. 
74
75
76
Model O-I described by a theory of action perspective, models a limited-learning organization. The purpose of the model is to guide diagnosing organizations that are inhibited by their learning and provides a common mapping to use for intervention in improving organizational learning. 
77
4
78
79
This theory provides organizations a lens to understand why there is a difference between what they want to be (or believe to be) and what they actually do. This difference can result in errors and eventual failure of the organization. This theory identifies that organizations learn through action. Reflecting on their action is the way that organizations can identify that their espoused theory of action is different from their theory-in-use.
These models provide organizations with an opportunity to analyze themselves against a framework. The common issue is that organizations want to see themselves as mirroring Model O-II when they are much more aligned to Model O-I. This is using defensive reasoning to make their theory resemble Model O-II when the theory-in-use is Model O-I. In order to solve this issue and increase organizational learning, Argyris recommends that organizations focus on changing actual reasoning processes and actions as opposed to changing organizational structures or reward policies. 
82
In application to the Military Decision Making Process, this theory suggests the current Commander's Estimate creates dysfunctional group dynamics preventing double-loop learning.
As shown previously, the Commander's Estimate in current doctrine is a mental process a commander does in private to develop a visualization for the operation. By producing a Commander's Estimate for public testing in an environment focused on inquiry, the MDMP can create a double loop learning process.
This study has displayed the relevance of the Commander's Estimate. Analysis has shown a need for a modification of the format and the need for its incorporation into the MDMP.
Further study is necessary to implement these changes and the possible larger organizational impacts from the conclusions. This study concludes with providing recommendations of a Commander's Estimate format, changes to US Army planning doctrine, and for future study.
The purpose of modifying the Commander's Estimate format is to enable generative learning for the commander while enabling a process to develop his visualization of the battlefield. According to the current doctrine, the commander's visualization includes understanding the current situation, the desired endstate, and an operational approach as shown in figure 
4
Incorporating the OA into the Commander's Estimate provides the commander the opportunity to frame his planning guidance for the staff later in the MDMP. Through this format, the staff and subordinate organizations can understand the visualization and mental process used to develop the problem state, commander's intent, and planning guidance for an operation. This recommended format is shown conceptually in Figure 
9
85
Currently, ADM products are used during the Mission Analysis step of the MDMP, with reframing done throughout the process as necessary. 
86
87
Additionally, the estimate should be a part of Warning Order 2, which is produced and distributed after the Mission Analysis step. 
88
87
88
89
90
In conclusion, the Commander's Estimate has historically been the central product of the US Army planning process, just as the commander is the central person driving the process regardless of decentralized execution. In order to develop the cultural imperatives outlined by the Army People Strategy, tactical organizations must create a planning process that is conducive to that environment. This study has shown that the Commander's Estimate can be a catalyst for organizations to develop their culture and it is imperative for successful execution of Mission Command. This makes the Commander's Estimate a relevant and necessary product for the Military Decision Making Process.
In closing, this study has concluded the relevance of the Commander's Estimate in developing the culture in US Army tactical organizations. Throughout history, the Commander's Estimate has been integral to the planning of military operations and that cannot change; regardless of decentralized execution. Analysis and recommendations have been made to further study suggested modifications of the Military Decision Making Process to enable mutual trust and shared understanding. MDMP does not need to go away, instead leaders must view the 89 Deborah Ancona, "Sensemaking: Framing and Acting in the Unknown," in The Handbook for Teaching 
Leadership: Knowing, Doing, Being, ed. Scott Snook, Nitin Nohira, and Rakesh Khurana (Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 2012), 4. 90 Ibid., 4.
50  
50  
73
73
US Department of the Army, The Army People Strategy (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
2019), accessed 24 February 2020, https://www.army.mil/e2/downloads/rv7/the_army_people_strategy_2019_10_11_signed_final.pdf, 3.2 Ibid., 5, 9, 12.
James Hittle, The Military Staff: Its History and Development (Harrisburg, PA: The Military  Service Publishing Company, 1944), 179.    
Ibid., 3.   
James Hittle The Military Staff, Its history and development (Harrisburg, Pa: The Military Service Publishing Company, 1944), 3.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 101-5, Staff Officers' Field Manual The Staff and Combat Orders (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1940), 37.
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 5-0, Operations Process (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1-12.
M. C. Wittrock, "Learning as a Generative Process," Educational Psychologist 45, no. 1 (January 21, 2010): 41.
Chris Argyris and Donald Schoen, Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective (Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1978).
Michael Leggiere, Napoleon and the Operational Art of War: Essays in Honor of Donald D. Horward (Leiden, Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill, 2016), 174.
Michael Krause and Cody Phillips, Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art (Washington DC: Center of Military History, 2010), 45.
Ibid., 48.   
Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard, Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press, 1984), 102.
Michael Leggiere, Napoleon and the Operational Art of War: Essays in Honor of Donald D.  Horward (Leiden, Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill, 2016), 195.    
Michael Krause and Cody Phillips, Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art (Washington DC: Center of Military History, 2010), 38.
Ibid., 38.   
James Hittle, The Military Staff: Its History and Development (Harrisburg, PA: The Military Service Publishing Company, 1944), 51.
Ibid., 52.    
Ibid., 56.   
James Hittle, The Military Staff: Its History and Development (Harrisburg, PA: The Military Service Publishing Company, 1944), 57.
Ibid., 65.    
Bronsart Von Schellendorff, The Duties of the General Staff, 4 th ed. (London, England: Harrison and Sons, 1907), 24.
James Hittle, The Military Staff: Its History and Development (Harrisburg, PA: The Military Service Publishing Company, 1944), 70.
Terence Zuber, The Moltke Myth (Lanham, MA: University Press of America, 2008), 15.
Helmuth Von Moltke, Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings, ed. and trans. Daniel J. Hughes, trans. Harry Bell. (New York, NY: Ballantine Books, 1993), 184.
Williams Hollis, "A Revised Commander's Estimate", Military Review (Fort Leavenworth, KS,  1976), 50.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 5-0, Army Planning and Orders Production (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2005), 1-9.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 6-0, Commander and Staff Organization and Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), vi.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 6-0, Commander and Staff Organization and Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), 8-1.
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 5-0, Operations Process (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1-8.47  US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 5-0, Operations Process (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1-8, 1-12.
Chris Argyris and Donald Schoen, Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective (Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1978) , 321.
Ibid., 331.   
Chris Argyris and Donald Schoen, Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective (Philippines: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1978), 131.
Ibid., 137.   
Chris Argyris. Organizational Traps: Leadership, Culture, Organizational Design (New York,  NY: University of Oxford Press, 2010), 194.   
I would first like to thank my family, 
Courtney, Charlie
Jane Kennedy
Boden
Dr. James Greer
COL Jim Reese
This study conducted reviews on history, doctrine, and theory. Examining history reinforced the facts that the Prussian general staff and system was created to overmatch the military genius of Napoleon and reviewed the origins of the US Army planning process. The review of US Army doctrine has shown the evolution from deductive analysis to a process of inductive and deductive analysis. Connecting understanding of the theories studied to the history and current application of US Army doctrine provides analysis to the relevance of the Commander's Estimate in developing organizational culture. By creating a format and incorporating it into the MDMP the Commander's Estimate can increase the cultural elements of inquiry and innovation, intellectual flexibility, knowledge sharing, and continuous learning. This is evident in how a Commander's Estimate format can generate learning, promote the public testing of ideas, and allow for continuous feedback. A Commander's Estimate can allow for generative learning. Generative learning theory shows that summarizing new information into one's own words enable learning. By creating a Commander's estimate that provides a summary of information, commanders can learn and begin to connect relations. Understanding relationships of new information generates learning and inductive analysis which lead commanders to want to inquire for more information. This is similar to Napoleon's decision making cycle in 1806. His cycle focused on synthesizing information and inquiring subordinates for more information through reports and battlefield circulation. The current US doctrine does not have a specific format for the Commander's Estimate. It currently uses the same format as a staff running estimate, which is a format for deductive analysis. Developing a format that uses summaries, models, and graphics enables generative learning and guides a commander through inductive reasoning. With a format of this type a commander can take a leading role in incorporating the cultural imperative of inquiry into his organization during the planning process. A commander that is actively seeking information and learning will have a positive effective on the rest of the organization. By using this format as an input into the MDMP the Commander's Estimate also creates a culture of knowledge sharing.
Producing the Commander's Estimate in the MDMP promotes the culture of inquiry and knowledge sharing. This is evident in comparing the MDMP to the Model O-II for organizational learning. By producing the Commander's Estimate the commander's visualization of the battlefield becomes public. This allows for public testing and the surfacing of disconfirmable statements, which are the possible cognitive bias the commander used to develop his visualization. These are both elements of the Model O-II theory-in-use and generate an environment of knowledge sharing. Producing the Commander's Estimate also promotes inquiry as the staff and subordinates can then question and dialogue the process the commander used to develop his visualization, allowing for error detection to refine the visualization. This is similar to the outcomes of the Prussian military reformation. Their educational focus on inquiry of mental models and decision making generated increased knowledge sharing with the General Staff and Commander, creating a visualization of the battlefield through a cyclic process of inductive and deductive analysis. This visualization was operationalized by being placed into organizational system that focused on continuous learning, allowing the visualization to continue to adapt as the battlefield changed with a rapid tempo. The Commander's Estimate provides the opportunity for continuous learning. This is shown through the theory of action perspective. Producing a Commander's Estimate in the MDMP allows the organization to operate of the elements of the Model O-II theory-in-use which allows organizations to detect errors in the commander's visualization. By providing the Commander's Estimate to subordinates they can diagnose errors in the visualization as they act from its guidance. This causes the subordinates to invent a new response and then evaluate the impact, generating double loop learning and continuous learning. This continuous learning is imperative for a successful Mission Command approach. Subordinates need to operate off the Commander's Intent, but also be able to understand when the battlefield has changed enough to generate a reframing of the commander's visualization. In this occurrence, subordinates must invent a new response to understand the changing battlefield, and then inform the commander. This action is using disciplined initiative to aid in continuous learning of the organization and can only occur in environment of mutual trust and shared understanding. This type of environment can be established through the use of the Commander's Estimate. The Commander's Estimate is relevant for changing the culture in US Army tactical organizations. Modifying the format of the estimate and incorporating it into the MDMP presents the opportunity for implementing the cultural elements of inquiry and innovation, knowledge sharing, intellectual flexibility, and continuous learning. This study also suggests that the Commander's Estimate is a vital element for the execution of Mission Command as it enables an environment of mutual trust and shared understanding while allowing disciplined initiative to aid in organizational learning. In increasingly complex and rapidly changing environments the Commander's Estimate is especially important. It provides the ability of subordinates to inform the commander when the battlefield no longer resembles his visualization, which can mean that his commander's intent is no longer valid. This analysis has shown there is a need for modifying the Commander's Estimate format and how it can be incorporated into the MDMP. The next section of this study provides these conclusions along with recommendations for further study. process from a new paradigm. The process is for detailed planning to produce an order, but the learning that occurs during the process and the environment that it facilitates creates the shared understanding of the situation and mission. This enables the execution of mission command.