# ID: 5c7a87b1d7364fdaa5e609cf3d545754
# Title: The US Army War College Guide to National Security Issues, Volume I: Theory of War and Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
During the period 1848-1871, the wave of nationalistic political and social revolutions that swept over Europe in 1848-1849 strongly challenged the system, and the gradual breakup of the Ottoman Empire in Europe, which led to the Crimean War of 1856, further taxed it.
The processes of Italian and then German national unification were severe tests for the state system and deeply affected the balance of power, but even these events involved short, limited wars that were not allowed to become general European conflicts.
The forces of nationalism were managed without recourse to general war.
Italy was united under the Kingdom of Piedmont-Savoy through the diplomatic virtuosity of Prime Minister Camillo di Cavour, who joined the Franco-British alliance against Russia in the Crimean War (1854-56).
This gained him the British diplomatic support and French military assistance he needed to defeat the Austrians (1859) who ruled northern Italy and to begin the unification process completed by his successors in 1870.
Prussian Chancellor Otto von Bismarck united Germany by isolating France diplomatically, while constructing an anti-French coalition among the smaller German states to defeat France in 1870 and proclaim the creation of the German Empire in 1871 with the Prussian king as Kaiser.
Lord Palmerston put British naval and financial might to work to influence the balance of power on the continent to London's advantage.
The American Civil War did not tempt the European powers, especially Britain and France, to serious intervention, either militarily or diplomatically.
U.S. diplomacy, aimed at keeping the Europeans out of the issue, bested Confederate diplomacy-which sought European intervention and eventual recognition of the Confederacy as a legitimate, sovereign state.
Even under the difficult conditions created by a rising tide of nationalism and political and social revolutionary sentiments, the European powers managed to regulate their state system without recourse to general war or war between certain powers for more than a few months.