# ID: 5d33f12af59f4bea846da5ff61a543dc
# Title: Rethinking Cultural Influences on Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph presents a method for military planners to operationalize an adversary's culture during conceptual planning. To present this methodology, the monograph asks the question, is a Western way of war distinctly different from a non-Western way of war. Victor Davis Hanson's description of a Western way of war is examined to develop an ordinal scaling methodology that allows cultural variables to be operationalized by a planning team prior to the onset of war.
The four variables used by Hanson to describe a distinctive way of war are discipline, infantry, technology, and individualism. Through examination of participants in the Russo-Japanese War, the Korean War, and the Sino-Vietnam War, ordinal scaling reveals there is a distinctive Western way of war, but highlights the nuances of cultural influences on warfare. At best, Western and non-Western warfare are only rough categories with vague boundaries, not clear dichotomies. Western warfare may be distinctive, but a state's approach to warfare can adopt characteristics from both Western and non-Western warfare, creating nuances not recognized by Hanson.
In the decades to come the states of Asia will begin to look outward to expand and consolidate control based on perceived national interests. 
3
Recent changes to the national security strategy and the re-focusing of U.S. national power in the Pacific region make this part of the world critical for military planners to understand. 
4
Events during the latter half of the 20 th century, such as, the Vietnam War, the Sino-Soviet War, the continuing Taiwan Strait crisis, and the impressive rise of China have increased the quantity of scholarship conducted to understand this region's trajectory as military powers.
The fascination with comparing Western versus non-Westerns approaches to war has sparked academic studies about the potential of culture to explain the conduct of war. 
5
7
5
6
7 John Keegan, A History of Warfare (New York: Vintage Books, 1993), 48 and 12. 
8 Hanson,
4.
Since the publication of Carnage and Culture, historians have continued to pick apart the historical details of Hanson's book and criticize his selective use of history. Any attempt at a broad argument such as Hanson's that seeks a single explanation for Western military dominance is bound to be critiqued, but this monograph is not interested in Hanson's interpretation of historical events such as whether Alexander was a brutal monarch or the head of a democratic polity. Nor does it examine why Rome is regarded as more Western than Carthage, although each demonstrated a capitalist tradition, which Hanson identifies as crucial to military success. 
9
11
Although aspects of Hanson's argument is attractive from the perspective that it highlights the importance of culture in war, Hanson's analysis provides misleading conclusions for military planners seeking to understand how culture influences warfare. At best, Western and non-Western warfare are only rough categories with vague boundaries, not clear dichotomies.
Western warfare may be distinctive, but a state's approach to warfare can adopt characteristics from both Western and non-Western warfare, creating nuances not recognized by Hanson.   Warfare and military culture is more varied than Hanson suggests and the commonalities between Western and non-Western warfare dismiss any assertion of the inherent mutual exclusivity of these forms of warfare. This monograph will first demonstrate that as military planners attempt to operationalize culture, a more nuanced approach is required than Hanson suggests. Secondly, this monograph will provide military planners a method to operationalize culture in order to anticipate an adversary or allies approach to warfare.
The structure of this paper first provides a literature review on the cultural analysis of war from notable scholars and highlights the methodological challenges inherent in the cultural study of war. Second, this paper reviews Hanson's argument in order to build a valid and practical methodology for military planners to conceptualize culture and its influence on warfare. This methodology section provides a way of operationalizing culture through ordinal measurements, which can offer the military planner an alternative to Hanson's methodology of nominal measurements. Finally, this monograph examines three historical case studies to test if Western warfare is distinctive from non-Western warfare and to demonstrate the value of ordinal measurements in operationalizing culture.
Cultural approaches to understanding war vary in degree, but tend to accept that culture at some level profoundly shapes choices and that people act and think based on the influences of culture. "In the language of security studies, cultural theories claim that ideational factors (i.e. ideas and norms) explain things better than realism, the approach that stresses objective interests and material balances of power."
12
Patrick Porter advocates a school of thought often referred to as cultural realism, which recognizes that culture is flexible and changing. This basic assumption creates a useful lens for viewing "others" than schools that see culture as acting upon and imposing a fixed set of traditions on its inert subjects. 
13
14
The turn towards culture to explain war has grown out of the U.S. strategic crisis and its cognitive failure to understand foreign societies in Asia and the Middle East. 
15
16
17
18
19
22
21 Porter,
[7]
[8]
23
24
25
26
The turn toward gaining a cultural understanding overcomes the influence of ethnocentrism and the mirror imaging of our cultural values on to another culture with its own history. Scholars according to John Ferris present cultural theories to remind us that the stakes or "referent objects of war," such as national interests, "war aims," or "victory," are not mere selfevident things but a combination of things and ideas about them. 
27
29
28 Porter,
56. 29 Ibid.,
170.
John Lynn offers an analysis of how culture influences warfare in his book Battle, arguing for the contextual reality of war and the development of a theory concerning the "interaction between the ideal and the real in warfare." 
30
31
By recognizing that conflict affects society, many different segments of that society generate the discourse on war, and "as a result, a culture has no single discourse on war. Rather, a number of discourses comprise the values, expectations, etc., of varied societal groups that harbor potentially very different, and at time opposing interests and points of view." 32 According to Lynn, this prevents the development of a singular way of war such as the Western way of war posited by Hanson. The reality of war also differs from the discourse of war, which normally leads to an adjustment of ideas about war. At the extremes, cultural historians sometimes insist that reality is simply what is perceived, and thus culturally determined, but Lynn claims this belief goes too far and fails to recognize the modification and adjustments a society makes to how it conducts warfare. 
30 Lynn,
331. 31 Ibid.,
xiv. 32
The debate on the effectiveness of studying culture to explain war counters the belief in universal principles. For some scholars like Michael Handel, strategy has a logic and rational direction of war, which is universal. 
33
34
What is needed, and what will be presented later in this monograph is a systematic method for integrating culture into the analysis of an adversary, which does not become victim to the challenges of methodology.
John Keegan engaged in a cross-cultural study in his book A History of Warfare (1993).
Keegan's cultural approach to war opposed Clausewitz's dictum that war is politics by asserting that war "is always an expression of culture, often a determinant of cultural forms, in some societies the culture itself." Keegan bases much of his thesis on Victor Davis Hanson's book The Western Way of War: Infantry Battle in Classical Greece (1989) which is later expanded on in Carnage and Culture (2001). Keegan describes culture as a prime determinant of the nature of warfare and highlights "Oriental warmaking" as something "different and apart" from Western warfare. 
35
34 Robert D. Kaplan, "A History for Our Time" Atlantic Monthly 299 (January 2007): 78-84. 
35
One of the first challenges of examining culture is determining its definition. Precise definitions are paramount to any valid study. First, it allows us to tell others exactly what we have done to obtain our measures so that the work can be evaluated. Secondly, a precise definition allows one to operationalize variables and eliminate rival explanations that claim conclusions were drawn through flaws in the measurement process. 
36
39
40
42
43
The second challenge to the study of culture is measurement. Measurements should be not only accurate, but also precise; measurements should contain as much information as possible about the attribute or behavior being measured. When observing the relationship between two variables, the more precise the measures, the more complete and informative the test. 
45
Even in a seemingly simple example, the U.S. military cannot be classified as purely Western. At the Battle of Cowpens in the American Revolution, the Continental Army employed deception to overwhelm a numerically superior British Army. The U.S. fought the Mexican War with a limited force utilizing an indirect strategy; ten years later in the Civil War, the U.S. fought a war of attrition and maneuver. The Chinese military in the Korean War demonstrated both a tendency toward deception as a key element in their operational plan, which Keegan points to as a non-Western characteristic of war, and the massive use of infantry, which Hanson points to as a Western characteristic of war. As military planners seeking to operationalize culture to better understand an adversary, we must design an instrument that is sufficiently broad to detect and measure as many of these component elements as possible, but be sufficiently concise to allow a 45 Janet Buttolph Johnson and Richard A. Joslyn, Political Science Research Methods  (Washington: Congressional Quarterly Inc, 1991) 77.
summary in some meaningful way the relationship between culture and warfare while recognizing its limitations. Neither Lynn nor Porter provide this instrument but do lay the groundwork for understanding the nuances of culture and its limitation in anticipating future behavior.
The third challenge to the study of culture is oversimplification, which is often a product of examining culture from the aggregate. For example, studying the non-Western way of war, instead of limiting the study to simply China creates a broad generalization that is not a homogenous culture. There is a recognized cultural difference throughout the so-called non-Western world. One of the pitfalls of conducting a cultural examination of war is to make broad generalizations that prevent precision in understanding how a society conducts war. Lynn points to this several times by contrasting China with South Asia. He notes that during the Warring State Period, China fielded large armies composed of conscripts capable of large-scale infantry attacks at close-order. In contrast, around 500 B.C., South Asian forces seem not to have preferred infantry combat with shock weapons. This single example of diversity within non-Western warfare shows broad generalizations about cultural approaches to war to be false. In addition, the Chinese style of combat during the Warring States Period had more in common with Greek forms of battle and suggests that any belief in the mutual exclusivity of cultural traits in war is false. 
46
47
The fourth challenge to the study of culture is the conception that culture is fixed in time or at the very least semi-permanent. Farrell argues that culture itself is more or less consistent; but it must be viewed as an open system vulnerable to external or internal shock. 
48
50
51
52
53
54
Machiavelli and Liddell Hart. 58
67
According to Hanson, the characteristics of Western warfare include the superiority of Western discipline, the supremacy of landed infantry, the singularity of Western technology, and individualism. Ultimately, Hanson develops the concept of a universal Western way of war, and by implication an equally universal and stereotyped non-Western, or Oriental way of war.
Although the Chinese civilization gave the world gunpowder, according to Hanson it never developed the prerequisite receptive cultural environment that would allow those discoveries to be shared by the populace at large. The effective use of technology required the combination of rationalism and capitalism with an egalitarian tradition that did not exist in non-Western cultures.
The absences of what Hanson implies are mutually exclusive characteristics allowed the West to achieve military dominance and that cases of non-Western victory over Western powers were most likely due to poor generalship by Western militaries as well as "Luck, individual initiative, and courage." 
68
As noted above, Hanson's use of nominal measurements is at best limited in its explanatory power and most likely an invalid measurement for a subject as complex as culture.
Hanson's use of nominal measurements is akin to using a ruler to measure weight. The way in which we measure a variable is important because it allows us to specify abstract concepts so that meaningful comparisons are made between a variable and the phenomenon. Inaccurate measurements interfere with testing and often lead to erroneous conclusions. 
69
An instrument such as an ordinal scale obtains indicators of the degree to which a variable exhibits value. The difference between a variable and a value is important to appreciate.
A variable allows us to translate an abstract concept like culture into empirical terms. The value reveals the magnitude of a variable and subjects it to comparison or even statistical description if desired. The advantage of an ordinal measurement over a nominal measurement is simply that it provides more information. An ordinal measurement allows us to not just categorize and to rank order a phenomena, but allows us to associate a number with each case, which not only tells us the differences and similarities between cases, but also how it relates to other cases in terms of how much value of a variable it exhibits.
The use of an ordinal measurement therefore allows us to observe if cases have more or less of a variable. Ordinal measurements also allow the use of both inference and basic descriptive statistics to draw conclusions. Examining the median and mode of an ordinal measurement indicates the central tendency of cases, which can lead to pattern development. By examining the dispersion of measurements, the range of cases is revealed, the more cases that are examined the more predictive results can be. This monograph only examines three cases and therefore will rely on inference to draw conclusions. An important limitation to ordinal measurements is that it is not able to examine the exact difference between values, but only which cases demonstrate more or less of a variable. 
70
The advantages inherent in ordinal measurements and the ability to develop a single number or score to represent a complex behavior offers a valuable method to conceptualize culture and determine if Western warfare is distinct from non-Western warfare. This section now turns its attention to the development of an ordinal scale that captures Hanson's variables of Western warfare and is capable of assigning value to each variable following the examination of a case. In order to construct a scale we must identify and combine a number of relatively narrow 
70
71
An important caveat to this methodology is on the subject of intercoder reliability, a widely used term for the extent to which independent coders evaluate a characteristic of an event or variable and reaches the same conclusion. Because this monograph develops its own ordinal 
71 Hanson,
Carnage and Culture,
[289]
[290]
[291]
[292]
[293]
Because this monograph does not ensure intercoder reliability, differences among results of replicated studies should be expected given the dynamic and inductive ways in which qualitative researchers generate and interpret data. Therefore, the analysis and scoring of participants in each case study were based on the personal assessment of the author. This ordinal scale utilizes uses a three point scale, because ordinal measurements do not include equal or even known intervals between values, the coding is free to employ numbers of any magnitude. 
7273
The coding scheme in table 1.1 summarizes the indicators used in the study with their associated values when analyzing the variable discipline. The advantage to creating a coding scheme is that it creates an operational definition for each variable, something that Hanson never does when describing his variables. There is no explicit way for a reader to know exactly how Hanson operationalizes and interprets his variables, so this monograph relies on subjective analysis and professional judgment. A coding scheme satisfies this requirement and provides a guide for what we are looking for when analyzing a case study. 
72
73
Indicator Value Discipline 1) Military system based on coercion or forced impressments of soldiers.
2) Tactical actions are spontaneous or haphazard with minimal planning effort with limited practice of operational art.
3) Only limited warfare experience at senior levels of command.
1 1) Military system is maintained through regular salaries and contracts for supply.
2) Operational art is conducted at senior levels of command, providing a shared vision for the conduct of operations.
3) Some combat experience exists at the tactical and operational levels of a military organization.
2 1) Military system is built around regulations that allow the sustainment of soldiers with food, clothing, and pay.
2) Military force demonstrates constant communication between units horizontally and vertically to achieve unity of effort.
3) Combat experience exists at all levels of command and includes an experienced formation of soldiers. Infantry represents a nuanced cultural assertion not just describing the preferred method of warfare (static vs. mobile), but the political status of soldiers who comprise a military force and the doctrine or history that informed tactical innovations. Table 
1
74 Hanson ,
146.
Variable Indicator Value Infantry 1) Soldiers comprising a military force are subservient to an ideology or are a product of serfdom.
2) Military demonstrates a preference for mounted attack to outflank or unhinge an adversary by rapid movement.
3) Professional military education did not examine an operational level of war.
1 1) Soldiers are volunteers and some civilian control exists over the military.
2) Military conducts frontal attacks at the tactical and operational level of war with limited effort to shape the deep fight.
3) Only limited doctrine exists within the military force to inform commanders on the operational level of war.
2 1) Military force is not only comprised of freemen, but civilian control of the military exists in which civilians are subject to audit after battle.
2) Military attempts to achieve shock throughout the depth of an adversary to enhance the effectiveness of the close fight.
3) Professional military education integrates theory with history to provide commanders with pragmatic advice on operations.
3
The critical role of Western technology in warfare according to Hanson was birthed from a Hellenic tradition of natural inquiry. This tradition of technological superiority developed from a propensity to "think abstractly, to debate knowledge freely apart from religion and politics, and to devise ways of adapting theoretical breakthroughs for practical use." 
75
1
75
Variable Indicator Value Technology 1) A general absence of a systematic approach to abstract learning and science.
2) Only able to sustain a campaign for short durations prior to culmination. 1 1) Military force demonstrates the ability for ad hoc development of technology to adapt to an adversary.
2) Capable of campaigning, but eventually induces culmination due to a lack of logistical support and operational reach.
2 1) Military force not only demonstrates ability for ad hoc development of technology, but also is reinforced by an industry, which ensures obsolescence almost simultaneously with the creation of new arms.
2) Capable of sustaining a military force without inducing culmination.
Hanson describes Western warfare as placing a premium on individualism, while non-Western warfare is characterized by willingness to subordinate individuality completely to family, village or nation. 
76
77
Flexible military commands provide broad mission order to allow individual decisions and impromptu ingenuity. 
78
1
76 Ibid., 369.
77 Ibid., 370.
78 Ibid., 384-386. 2) Supreme civilian or military authority in which subordinate commanders follow formal and dogmatic protocols.
1 1) Authoritarian government or obeisance to imperial or divine authority, which subjugates the individual to the society.
2) Centralized military authority in which detailed orders create a reluctance to adapt.
2 1) Constitutional government that explicitly promotes personal freedoms.
2) A flexible system of command that promotes and accepts alteration to orders by subordinate commanders.
This methodology for operationalizing culture allows for an analysis of case studies to identify indicators and determine to what extent a participant in a conflict displays a specific variable of culture. If Hanson's thesis is correct, then Western warfare will be observed at a value of 3 and non-Western warfare will be observed at a value of 1. For this monograph, the ordinal scale is applied to analyze three historical case studies to determine if Western warfare is distinctive from non-Western warfare.
The criterion for selection of cases is first to choose historical cases in which the indicators for each variable are observed through the research of primary and secondary sources.
Second, cases were selected to cover the range of possible participants in the modern era of warfare. 
79
Case study sections provide a brief historical background followed by an analysis of the major participants, which summarizes the indicators. Each section contains a table that explicitly assigns a value to each variable for the respective participant. The first case study selected is the 1904-1905 Russo-Japanese War in which Russia demonstrates a more non-Western approach while Japan demonstrates a more Western approach to warfare. The second case study is the Korean War (1950-1953) in which China and the United States is examined as the two major participants. China is expected to demonstrate a non-Western approach to war, while the U.S.
represents a Western approach to war. The final case study is the Sino-Vietnam War (1979) in which we examine two non-Western states and their approach to warfare.
The Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905)
In 1904, it was the Japanese who were more prepared than the Russians to wage a war.
The Japanese operational plans established objectives of neutralizing the Russian Pacific Squadron, then landing two field armies, one to seize Port Arthur and the other to seize Liaoyang before Russia could deploy additional forces to Manchuria. Through the course of the war, the Japanese demonstrated careful preparation, surprise, initiative, speed, and flexibility to exploit Russian weaknesses while maximizing their advantages. 
80
81
82
83
Over the course of the war, Japans efforts to modernize its military forces would surprise and prove devastating for the Russian military. In the mid-nineteenth century, Japan was still a feudal society and had little interest in foreign relations, but their desire not to be exploited by foreign powers motivated Japan to enter the industrial age. The following decades were marked by Japan changing from a feudal society to a market economy much like Europe, which included modernizing not just its society but also its military force. In 1867, Japan integrated French instructors to teach the army new methods of warfare and opened a military academy. In 1885, Germany also began to train and instruct the Japanese army in which the German Chief of Staff, General Moltke (Sr.), approved the education programming of many of the Japanese generals that 81 James Sisemore, "The Russo-Japanese War, Lessons not learned," (Fort Leavenworth, KS: School for Advanced Military Studies, 2003), 5-10.
Table 
2
Prior to the arrival European forces in the far east, Chinese military thought developed in a context very different than that of most Western military thinking. European states had to face the likelihood of a real external threat to their national existence. Due to the size and geography of China, "no such threat existed until the advent of Western imperialism in the nineteenth century." 
96
97
The proclamation of the People's Republic of China in October of 1949 did not necessarily mark the end of conflict in China. China's domestic infrastructure was shattered and required massive amounts of economic aid. Hyperinflation and destruction from the past several years of war was even more complicated by military requirements to suppress remaining opposition in Taiwan and Tibet while protecting its continental borders from Guomindang naval and air power. In June 1950, Mao began to demobilize the PLA and the restructure the budget, allocating less than 10 percent of the budget for the military compared to over 40 percent in 1949. 
98
99
100
98
101
Prior to entering the war, a Chinese intelligence report provided a clear contrast between U.S. and Chinese technology and capabilities, "an American corps (composed of two infantry divisions and a mechanized division) has 1,500 guns of 70mm to 240mm caliber, including tank cannons and anti-aircraft guns. In comparison, each of our (PLA) armies (composed of three divisions) has only 36 such guns." 102 Chinese military leaders also knew the U.S. would dominate the air, while Chinese pilots were just starting to be trained.
China entered the Korean War under the name of the People's Volunteer Troops, having massed 320,000 soldiers in Manchuria. Upon their entry into the war, the Chinese army enjoyed certain advantages, first there was a 75-mile gap between Eighth Army and the Tenth Corps.
Second, the United Nations ground forces were outnumbered with only 247,000 soldiers. Third, the Chinese soldiers were more experienced in battle and more disciplined than American Soldiers. 
103
101 Max Hastings, The Korean War (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987), 58-73. Chinese officers and soldiers were not well educated, were products of experience, and did not have a doctrinal base of knowledge. Instead, Chinese officers formed their beliefs from the communist ideology.
107
105
108
109
Although China demonstrated civilian control over the military, the military system was not flexible as evidenced by China's decision to enter the Korean conflict despite the reservations of many senior military commanders. PLA field commanders repeatedly requested better equipment and a delay of the intervention. "As early as August 1950, the commanders of the Thirteenth Army Group suggested in a joint letter to Zhu De, the PLA's commander in chief, that adequate air cover, anti-aircraft guns, and logistic supplies were vital to a possible victory in Korea." 
110
Following the first offensive, Chinese field commanders in December 1950 believed that "CPV forces had already been stretched to their limit and a continuous push would drain their strength and spirit." 111 Peng Dehuai, a field commander did not want to undertake an all-out request despite reservations. 
112
The Sino-Vietnam War is traditionally portrayed as a punitive campaign in response to technology but pursue correct military theory and establish a modern command system as well." 122 From this statement and others, we can observe that advocates of military modernization were engaged in a campaign against the traditional resistance to modernization of weaponry and military thinking. However, before modernization could begin, the war with Vietnam started and it was fought with out of date equipment and under the strategy of people's war.
Deng Xiaoping was named the overall commander of the punitive campaign and additional authorities came directly from the CCP central command. Two fronts were created, the Northern and the Southern Front commanded by military leaders. Along both fronts China massed a numerically superior force along the border following Mao's strategy that "in every battle, concentrate an absolutely superior force." Manpower was placed by the PLA as the decisive factor with military objectives being the occupation of key provincial towns, destruction 
120
121
Vietnam, 1979: Issues, Decisions, and
Implications (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 1987), 98. 122
of Vietnamese military forces, and destroying Vietnamese economic bases. 
123
124
Despite heavy losses on both sides, the PLA had achieved about half of their limited objectives and maintained initiative following closely its plan for advance and retreat. The PLA managed to operate in unfamiliar, rugged terrain, and adapted well to the guerilla tactics of Vietnam conducting anti-tunnel and anti-mine warfare. Although the numerically superior PLA partially destroyed several Vietnamese regular divisions their primary weakness in addition to a lack of modern weapons and logistics, was the lack of battle experience. This is demonstrated first by the inability to low ranking officers to make independent judgments and coordinate operations at critical moments and secondly by low morale which is cited as a reason for some of the ineffective assaults. 
125
123
124
125
The purpose of this study was to determine if Western warfare was distinctly different from non-Western warfare. Central to this study was the development of an ordinal scale that allows cultural variables to be operationalized in their examination of case studies. Ordinal scaling allows the measurement of abstract concepts by examining indicators. The examination of three cases appears to support Hanson's theory of a distinctive Western way of war, although some cases fail to capture many of the nuances that exist in warfare. Instead of visualizing a dichotomy in warfare, it seems more accurate to describe two categories of war with blurred boundaries, in which societies are free to borrow, adopt, or share different characteristics of warfare. A larger number of cases need to be examined to provide a definitive conclusion as to the merit of Hanson's theory, as well as the establishment intercoder reliability to provide validity to the conclusion. Based on personal assessment of three cases using the ordinal scale outlined above, Western warfare appears distinctive from non-Western warfare.
More important for the purposes of this monograph is the utility of ordinal measurements to examine culture prior to the onset of war. In the era of globalization, a military planning team's ability to understand and apply culture in ways that provide meaningful insights is of increasing importance. A planning team attempting to examine the operational environment of an adversary with the goal of being able to potentially anticipate its approach to warfare often relies on broad generalizations, which are far to open to interpretation and lack precision. Ordinal measurements offer a more systematic method to examine culture and assist a planning team in anticipating an adversaries approach to warfare. Any planning team attempting to use ordinal measurements must still be aware of its limitations. First, ordinal measurements are still open to interpretation and subject to influence by an individual or a team's inherent biases, assumptions, research, and goals. Human agency is not removed from this process and the possibility of misinterpretation or mirror imaging remains possible and must be guarded against. Secondly, ordinal measurements may assist a planning team in anticipating an adversaries approach to war, but it is not predictive. Culture is always subject to change, as Lynn theorizes, the discourse of war and the reality of war are rarely equal.
In addition, culture is not a determinant of warfare, strategic positioning, economic means, and military capability along with other variables all influence warfare and need to be considered appropriately by a planning team. For these reasons the continuous need to reassess the operational environment is paramount to the iterative nature of military planning. Through this monograph and the case studies above military planners are provided a way to operationalize culture and apply it to create a better understanding of how an adversary will approach warfare and this methodology could provide potential benefits to a design team's attempt to understand the operational environment and its influences on warfare.
49  
49  
112 Ibid., 99-103.
112 Ibid., 99-103.
Robert M. Citino, "Military Histories Old and New: A Reintroduction," American Historical Review (October 2007),
1085-1086.10  Hanson, 51. See also Lynn's critical analysis of continuity between Greek warfare and imperial Rome, 15-19.11Hanson, 348.   
Patrick Porter, Military Orientalism: Eastern War Through Western Eyes (New York: Columbia  University Press, 2009), 12.    
Dave Clemente, "Book Reviews," International Affairs 87/6 (November 2011): 1520.
John Shy, "The American Military Experience: History and Learning," The Journal of Interdisciplinary History 1 (Winter 1971): 205.
Ibid., 206.    
Porter, 56.    
U.S.Army, 
Lynn, 70.   
Jeffrey S. Lantis, "Strategic Culture: From Clausewitz to Constructivism," Center on Contemporary Conflict, http://www.nps.edu/Academics/centers/ccc/publications/OnlineJournal/2005/Oct/lantisOct05.html (accessed December 2011).
Hanson, 23.   
This monograph considers the modern era to be best represented by conflicts of the 20 th century onward in which mechanization and firepower were observed at unprecedented levels. The 1904 Russo-Japanese War is considered by many scholars to be the first modern war.
Bruce W. Menning, Bayonets before Bullets: The Imperial RussianArmy 1861-1914  (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), 153-155.   
The Russo-Japanese War: Russian Official Account, part 1 trans. ClaudineWannamaker, 1937,  Special Collections, Combined Arms Research Library, USACGSOC, Fort Leavenworth. 37-38.    
Alexei Kuropatkin,  The Russian Army and the Japanese War. vol 1 trans. A. Lindsay and ed. E. Swinton (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1909), 270.
Jonathan R. Adelman, Symbolic War: The Chinese use ofForce, 1840-1980 (Taipei: Institute of  International Relations, 1993)  32.
Bruce A. Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 1795-1989 (New York: Routledge, 2001), 237.   
John Whiteclay Chambers, To Raise an Army: The Draft Comes to Modern America(New  York: Free Press, 1987), 255-256.    
Bevin Alexander, Korea:  The First War We Lost (New York: Hippocrene Books, 1986), chapter 41.
Charles Patrick Fitzgerald, The Southern Expansion of the Chinese People (New York: Praeger, 1972), 19-24.
Adelman, 222.   
Teachings emphasizes the selection of warriors and the use of rewards and punishments to build cohesive armies. 
65
In summary, the cultural study of war, although offering potential insights, is not without its methodological challenges. First, the difficulty in defining culture as an independent or dependent variable offers methodological challenges often ignored by scholars. John Keegan in his book A History of Warfare presents a thesis that war is an expression of culture and not politics without ever defining culture. Failure to define culture creates conceptual confusion, but the creation of a rigid definition fails to recognize that culture is an abstract and open system.
Second, the use of nominal measurements provides the least information about phenomena and gives only a set of discrete categories to use in distinguishing between cases. Nominal measurements do not explain how much of the characteristic exists nor does it allow a rank order, but simply sorts cases into groups designated by the names used in a classificatory scheme. 
66
This challenge can lead to a failure to understand the complexity involved with a cultural examination of the conduct of war. Finally, the expression of culture in deterministic or dogmatic conclusions draws oversimplified conclusions that mislead the reader who is unaware of the malleable nature of culture. An examination of culture must recognize the role of human agency 
65
66
primary weakness was the single-track railroad for resupply of both material and personnel, which prevented Russia's ability to seize the initiative throughout the war. 
92
93