# ID: 5d4735bac343409e8c2e30276be16ec7
# Title: Chasing success: Air force efforts to reduce civilian harm
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
casualties depicts the true strength of our Air Force and demonstrates the best attributes of a military operating inside a democratic society. It is in this spirit of open dialogue that we present Dr. Sewall's work on a very timely and emotionally charged subject.
Discussions concerning civilian casualties in warfare continue to elicit very emotional responses among the public at large. Dr. Sarah Sewall, in Chasing Success: Air Force Efforts to Reduce Civilian Harm, depicts the US Air Force's efforts over the past twenty-plus years being at the vanguard of minimizing civilian harm in conflict while still effectively pursuing military objectives. When the Air Force Research Institute turned to Dr. Sewall to write this work, we understood that warfare is a messy business. At its core, when other elements of national power have failed to persuade and deter, warfare is about forcing one's will upon an adversary, including applying controlled violence. History is rife with examples of civilizations falling after their armies in the field are defeated and their cities are sacked, looted, and burned. The nature of modern warfare extracted an increasingly high toll on civilians as weapons became more deadly. As early as our own Civil War, the American military has become increasingly aware of civilian casualties-as has the international community, following the close of World War II. Nazi Germany's attacks on London utilizing terror weapons, such as the V-1 and V-2, and the Allied bombings of Dresden and Hiroshima demonstrated the totality of warfare in the modern era. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 attempted to define the basic rights of not just wartime prisoners but also to establish protection for civilians in and around a war zone.
Warfare has become increasingly more complex. Some organizations, like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are following the old historical examples in which they convert, enslave, or murder the civilian residents in conquered territories. In other conflicts, with the rise of insurgencies across the globe, standing militaries no longer meet on a battlefield where identifiable fronts and protected zones exist. In Iraq and Afghanistan, adversaries hiding within civilian populations have become the norm rather than the exception.
Precision-guided munitions (PGM) have enabled more accurate delivery of kinetic effects, improving airpower's effectiveness while reducing risk to friendly forces. PGMs have also enabled airpower to reduce collateral damage and civilian casualties through more precise targeting. Yet PGMs, and the humans who deliver them, are not infallible, nor is the targeting information obtained during wartime perfect. Thus, unintended effects can be reduced but never completely eliminated. An open dialogue on such controversial issues as civilian
The United States Air Force (USAF) has led the way within the US armed forces and globally in its efforts to minimize harm to civilians during combat operations. Given the frequency with which newspapers document errant air strikes that have killed many noncombatants, this claim may seem counterintuitive. Yet when evaluated in historical and comparative perspective, modern US-led air campaigns cause surprisingly few civilian casualties.
This development-the increased ability to minimize civilian harm-was not inevitable. Yes, evolving technology made it physically possible to become more discriminate and precise in the use of force. However, the refinement and use of that technology reflected conscious choices. These choices were not undertaken for moral reasons, because Airmen already believed that they were acting in accordance with the law and with ethical requirements. Rather, the world's changing normative views about the use of force, in tandem with the transparency and scrutiny accompanying every bomb, shaped the evolution of US airpower. These developments led to increasing political constraints upon how the military applied airpower and even raised questions about airpower's continued salience in modern limited war.
Fundamentally, the USAF's pathbreaking focus on preventing civilian harm reflected its institutional interest in sustaining airpower as a tool of choice in war and ensuring maximum freedom of operations during air campaigns. This exemplary transformation of processes, tools, and thinking offers important lessons for the US military and for the future of armed conflict.
Beginning in the 1990s, the USAF began making-in discrete but mutually reinforcing ways-conscious efforts to help the service more effectively minimize civilian casualties during air operations. In this book, I explain how discrete operational experiences-reflecting broader trends-prompted innovation. These innovations began initially during ongoing air operations but later catalyzed a deeper institutional change that shaped the future of airpower. Ironically, perhaps, these improvements in turn heightened expectations that civilians could be spared the horror of war. Thus, the USAF began chasing its own success. In this book, I seek to explain and trace this process.
Fighting with integrity, and in particular minimizing civilian harm, offers benefits for a professional military force and the nation it represents. Respect for civilians reflects the United State's moral identity and helps maintain its global reputation and legitimacy. Fighting well reinforces the military's professionalism and ethical standards. Minimizing civilian harm also provides an essential psychological bulwark for individuals legally sanctioned to kill other human beings in armed conflict. A moral approach to warfare can (but is not guaranteed to) also yield tactical, operational, and strategic advantages. Yet an institutional commitment to avoiding noncombatant deaths also entails diverse costs, which suggests that, even when undertaken, it may remain fragile.
Skepticism about the need to expand protection of civilians reflects several misconceptions. One common misconception is that civilian protection inherently increases risk to American troops. My field research in Afghanistan demonstrated that this is not necessarily true; many win-win solutions exist, and more remain to be developed. The nature of airpower and the likelihood of US air superiority may allow airpower more such opportunities than can be found for land forces. Even where risks do shift, minor additional risk to combatants may greatly enhance the safety of those who play no role in armed conflict. Combatants' willingness to help assure civilian safety is the essence of "fighting well, " according to political philosopher Michael Walzer. 
1
A second source of resistance to civilian protection revolves around the expectation itself. Some express a resigned fatalism toward civilian death in armed conflict. More commonly, though, the notion that they are not already doing everything possible to minimize civilian casualties offends military actors. They believe that they are doing everything they can (which is what US officials often assert), and they can recall specific efforts to avoid killing noncombatants. They assume this illustrates sufficiency of effort-exhausting the possibilities of protection.
Others argue that standard is purely a legal matter and that the strong US commitment to upholding international law axiomatically ensures adequate civilian protection. Yet the law of armed conflict is quite forgiving. While prohibiting belligerent parties from purposefully targeting civilians, international law accepts indirect or accidental introduction ix civilian harm in war under certain conditions. US warfighters are required to uphold the law, and they take solace in the fact that they do not intend to kill noncombatants even when combatants die. Largely satisfied with the standard of legal compliance, the military long eschewed a deeper examination of morally desirable or operationally possible capabilities and behaviors that might exceed the floor established by the law of armed conflict.
However, expectations of what it means to fight well, and therefore of airpower, have changed in recent decades. Today, even when armed forces make assiduous efforts to avoid inflicting harm, they are still criticized when civilian deaths result. This is especially true of US military forces, which have long been regarded as omnipotent. More stringent normative expectations-largely those of foreign nations and publics-have exerted a growing influence on the US conduct of war. This was often evidenced by the operational restrictions political and military leaders felt compelled to impose in the aftermath of civilian casualty incidents during military operations in the 1990s.
Developing tools and techniques to proactively avoid civilian harm offered the USAF a route to preserve its relevance and operational flexibility. The right thing and the smart thing became synonymous. Accordingly, the USAF developed new tactics, technologies, and concepts that saved countless noncombatant lives. Instead of asserting the legal sufficiency of its actions or arguing that it showed more care than did its adversaries, the USAF led the US military toward a deeper awareness and institutional commitment to avoid killing civilians.
Over the past two decades, I have worked closely with many actors who figure centrally in this story of US military adaptation. In the early 1990s, I served as the inaugural deputy assistant secretary for peacekeeping in the Department of Defense, helping the military adapt to post-Cold War requirements. More recently, I helped revise US counterinsurgency (COIN) doctrine and led a team to create US doctrine for responding to mass atrocities. I initiated and directed the seminal 2010 Joint Civilian Casualty Study to evaluate the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, providing operational and long-term institutional recommendations for the US armed forces to reduce civilian harm. 
2
3
This book emerged from conversations with Gen John A. Shaud, USAF, retired, then the director of the Air Force Research Institute (AFRI), who encouraged me to help the USAF think critically about the topic of civilian harm. I am grateful for his vision and openness in welcoming a different voice into the airpower discussion. I am especially indebted to Dr. Dan Mortensen, the recently retired dean of AFRI. This writing hinged on his insightful questions, inexhaustible patience, and personal inspiration. Finally, I thank Dr. Chris Cain for his thorough and exacting comments and corrections.
This book examines how international expectations intersected with the USAF's fight for autonomy and utility, explains how the USAF began to change, and asks how airpower-and the US military as a whole-might further deepen its efforts. I hope the book expands perspectives on assessing and directing the use of airpower and inspires further work to maximize both mission accomplishment and civilian protection. The recent evolution of US airpower offers inspiring, if incomplete, evidence that the conduct of war can become more humane while remaining effective. Technology, adversaries, and the goals of armed conflict will continue to evolve, but the central challenge of humanizing war will endure. This volume is just a first, tentative draft of a story that today's USAF has yet to finish.
I have organized the book into two parts. Part one outlines the challenge that contemporary expectations about the American use of force pose for airpower. The first chapter describes the emerging norm of minimizing civilian casualties and the increased scrutiny of US airpower. The second chapter provides historical context for evaluating US military operations, reviewing the relationship between airpower and civilian casualties from airpower's beginnings through the Cold War. This history alternates between tracing operational experience and showing how Americans reconciled airpower's claims of precision with its record of inflicting civilian casualties. The third chapter looks in depth at the law of armed conflict, highlighting key controversies and showing why the law's requirements (particularly as understood by the US military) fall short of the contemporary expectations of minimizing civilian harm.
The second part of this book describes the USAF's adaptation to modern expectations of civilian protection, tracing operational experiences during the 1990s and the consequent operational and institutional innovation. The fourth chapter details how civilian casualty incidents during Operation Desert Storm and Operation Allied Force led to operational restrictions on airpower and convinced the USAF to proactively shape its ability to minimize civilian harm. The fifth chapter chronicles those efforts and shows how they helped prepare airpower for success in COIN operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The sixth reviews additional challenges and the limitations of change to date. The seventh chapter concludes with an outline of what "chasing success" ultimately demands of the entire US military.
Chapter 1
In June 2009 the United States Air Force's (USAF) Office for Analyses, Assessments and Lessons Learned, known as "A9, " released a report entitled Kinetic Airpower and Civilian Casualties. 
1
The A9 staff had studied US airpower in previous conflicts with an eye to improving capabilities for the future fight. These true believers had tolerated a lot of public grousing about airpower's successes over the past decade. After the 1999 Operation Allied Force in Kosovo, critics disputed that aerial bombing had been responsible for the victory. The airpower-driven 2001 rout of the Taliban from Kabul renewed resentment about airpower's starring role. The Army and Marine Corps claimed vindication after the 2003 combined arms "march to Baghdad, " and they stressed the need for staying power in the form of boots on the ground. Ensuing years of counterinsurgency (COIN) operations required the USAF (and the Navy) to suppress doctrinal passions for strategic effects and labor dutifully in support of ground forces.
However, by 2009 the complaints about airpower picked up again, now focused on civilian harm. The air staff was accustomed to human rights activists, the media, and international watchdogs like the United Nations (UN) High Commissioner for Human Rights criticizing bombing for causing civilian casualties. In fact, the nongovernmental organization Human Rights Watch (HRW) had just issued a report entitled Off Target that mixed praise with pointed charges against USAF targeting practices. Now the internal criticism about airpower causing civilian deaths was heating up, A9 wrote, with "numerous articles and letters to key national and international leadership . . . published/sent in the past few weeks/days." 
2
3
4
The ironies were rich. The Army and Marine Corps had blazed their way to Baghdad, keeping safe by shooting anything that moved while asking airpower to pave their way. A ground commander had requested almost every USAF bomb dropped in Afghanistan. The subordination of Airmen to Soldiers or Marines was hard enough for a service that highly valued its independence and strategic contributions. However, if airpower was harming noncombatants in the tactical COIN fight, it was the ground commander's call. Since the ground commander often called upon airpower to protect his Soldiers or Marines, it hardly seemed appropriate to blame the folks who came to their rescue. More important to the analysts at A9, the implications just did not ring true.
A9 set out to do "root cause analysis and data fireproofing, " but they had little data with which to work. 
5
6
7
8
9
Therefore, it was hardly surprising that when ground forces in Afghanistan were more active, airpower followed suit-as did civilian harm. The analysis suggested that civilian casualty levels should be seen as a function of ground force activity and air strikes.
A9 also sought to assess the scale and meaning of the civilian casualty incidents in Afghanistan. This was a more challenging proposition, given the scarcity and unevenness of data. HRW does not pretend to capture all incidents of civilian harm; it analyzes the cases it is able to fully document. Other collections of data were equally or more flawed. 
10
The principal purpose of the A9 analysis was a "worst-case [civilian casualties] airstrike rate of approximately 0.9%. " 
11
Nonetheless, even if the civilian casualty figures were low, one could double or triple the numbers, and they would still comprise an extremely small percentage of US air strikes. This standard, the percentage of total strikes, conjured up a different picture than that suggested in newspaper coverage of significant incidents. A big part of the problem, as A9 saw it, was that "Air induced CIVCAS incidents always make the headlines!" 
12
The A9 analysis offered an alternative narrative about civilian casualties, one that focused on the frequency of incidents as part of an overall pattern of military activity in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, other observers had a different perception of how and why civilian casualties mattered. In addition, while US airpower had been a powerful magnet for critics, fundamental changes in the nature of war, communication, and society were shifting the terrain, heightening both the scrutiny and expectations of airpower. I review these changes below.
Airpower has always received special scrutiny. 
13
Dramatic modern images of bombing cities evoke the total devastation of World War II. The filmed "shock and awe" air campaign in Operation Desert Storm, indeed almost any visual depiction of aerial attacks in urban areas, conveys an impression of massive destruction even when the reality may be quite different. 
14
Airpower is often the focus of humanitarian criticism simply because of the relative ease of observing it. Ground forces generally employ multiple simultaneous and overlapping fires, while airstrikes are discrete events, more readily traced, attributed, and analyzed. The mission reports used by A9 analysts are just one example of this transparency. Many aircraft feature onboard video cameras to record their strikes. Pilots provide detailed mission reports on their bombing runs, and the USAF conducts thorough safety investigations whenever a problem arises. The learning is swiftly cycled into mission preparations and throughout the force. This works to airpower's advantage for refining and improving performance. The flip side is that outsiders also have more data regarding air strikes.
Furthermore, when airpower goes wrong, the results can be spectacularly horrific. Because the impact of a 500-or 1,000-pound bomb exceeds that of a single bullet or tank round, the resulting civilian harm can be enormous. Obviously, any weapon can cause mass casualties depending upon the frequency and context of its use; artillery shelling in populated areas is a common historical source of high collateral damage. 
15
US responsibility for air-delivered bombs is easier to determine than is the patrimony of a shell or bullet. Re-creating the facts in a firefight is far more complex than finding an enormous bomb crater. Where a US-led coalition is effectively the only belligerent flying aircraft, as has been true in recent decades, the responsibility for physical damage is undisputed and national responsibility easily assigned.
The actual reasons why civilians were killed may be complex and remain opaque to outsiders. For example, airpower is often faulted for civilian deaths that result proximately from faulty intelligence or from an adversary's refusal to allow civilians to leave a building. 
16
Less tangible factors may also shape perceptions. In recent decades, US aircraft have not faced a real competitor in the sky, and Airmen have rarely been shot down or lost their lives during combat operations. Sometimes (as in the wars with Iraq) the threat was real, but the United States was able to neutralize enemy air capability early in the conflict. In other cases, adversaries were so militarily weak (e.g., Yugoslavia or Afghanistan) that their air forces offered no meaningful threat.
Adversary air defenses remained a threat to US aircraft, but Airmen could generally mitigate these threats. This was a very different reality than that facing US ground forces in the wars in Iraq or in Afghanistan. Perceptions of greater physical risk to ground forcesbased on US casualties in recent conflicts-may result in greater tolerance accorded civilian harm inflicted by Soldiers and Marines. Fair or not, the relatively lower casualty rates among aircrews likely increases the opprobrium when airpower causes civilian casualties.
Some analysts have even suggested that demographic trends within industrialized nations, in particular low birth rates, have reinforced sensitivities to the loss of human life overall. The claim originated as an explanation of alleged casualty aversion in the United States and Western Europe. 
17
Humanitarian criticism of US military operations is partly a result of those operations' success. Success breeds expectations. Although civilian suffering increased dramatically during the world wars, the United States and its allies fought subsequent conflicts with relatively fewer noncombatant deaths. 
18
19
20
21
22
The United States' overall strategic superiority after the end of the Cold War shapes assessments of its military performance, including how discriminately and precisely it should employ force. Observers presume that states with far greater power have greater control or choice in their actions. Perceived imbalances among combatants' military power reduce tolerance for the "unintended consequences" imposed by the stronger force. Even as adversaries adopt illegal tactics, their relative weakness appears to insulate them from equivalent expectations about the precise and controlled use of force.
Specific technologies reinforce impressions of omnipotence. The United States may have done itself a disservice by so triumphantly touting its precision weapons. In 1991 US officials released images of "smart" weapons maneuvering to their targets during Operation Desert Storm. This created an indelible impression that the United States could fully control the effects of war. 
23
24
25
Pledges to avoid civilian harm also heighten expectations. In 1991 Pres. George H. W. Bush emphasized that the world's quarrel was with Saddam Hussein, not the Iraqi people, and said the United States was "doing everything possible" to minimize casualties during Operation Desert Storm. 
26
27
28
29
It is not just airpower, or the United States, that faces greater scrutiny today. The use of force generally receives far more attention and analysis than was true during the Cold War. There are more actors monitoring conflicts, it is easier to monitor and disseminate information about conflict, and the changing nature of conflict invites a humanitarian critique.
Human rights ideals have been a driving force in reshaping expectations of war, and they have drawn new actors into the assessment of armed conflict. The UN's Declaration of Human Rights captured a post-World War II international consensus that the person, not just the state, had independent rights and standing in the world. This idea has been developed and codified in a growing body of international and national law.
Human rights are at the core of the "principle of distinction" in Western moral and legal reasoning about war. In 1977 moral philosopher Michael Walzer recast the need to distinguish between combatants and noncombatants during armed conflict as the need to preserve a civilian's fundamental right to life. 
30
Human rights advocacy has become institutionalized within governments and international institutions and through an abundance of nongovernmental organizations (NGO). Many of these organizations are now engaged in monitoring armed conflict, once largely a preserve of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). 
31
Aligned with these groups are the humanitarian "doers"-actors who provide humanitarian assistance directly to the victims of conflict. This includes such organizations as Oxfam, Doctors without Borders, Save the Children, and other organizations around the world. 
32
33
34
35
As evaluators and interpreters of military activity from the humanitarian angle, these actors articulate and help drive rising expectations surrounding civilian protection. They contribute to the development of law and the development of a broader public understanding of military operations. In the public debate, their perspective challenges, balances, or augments official government accounts of how wars are fought. Major American human rights and humanitarian organizations number only in the dozens, yet their impact is magnified because others-the press, public, civil society, other governments, etc.-rely upon them to understand or assess the use of force.
Changes in the reasons why the United States and its allies use armed force have also shaped evaluations of how force is applied. It has been almost 70 years since the world has seen total war. Subsequent US conflicts were limited wars, wars of choice, and humanitarian wars (or all three). These limited armed conflicts cast humanitarian consequences in sharper relief and raise questions about the limits of necessity itself.
If a war has limited objectives, logic suggests that its military means will likewise be constrained. This linkage can be controversial, as was the case during the Vietnam War. 
36
A separate factor shaping judgments of war is the emergence of humanitarian intervention. It is harder to justify killing innocents during a war fought for humanitarian purposes. NATO experienced this reality during Operation Unified Protector in Libya. The emergence of the global concept of "responsibility to protect" has attracted greater humanitarian interest in the use of force, albeit interest that is deeply sensitive to the contradictions of using force in the name of protection. The end of total war and its stark necessities now casts civilian harm in a harsher light.
Modern telecommunications and other technologies magnify public sensitivity to the human consequences of war. 
37
All these factors help explain why observers criticize military forces, especially US forces, and particularly the USAF, for harming noncombatants. 
38
The contemporary norm is a variation on an ancient theme, one that raises the bar from doing "enough" to "doing everything possible" to minimize civilian harm during armed conflict. 
39
The US armed forces long considered civilian harm a legal issue and believed that compliance with the law of armed conflict (LOAC) meant that forces were doing enough to minimize noncombatant deaths. 
40
Here, I consider the character of the modern norm and why-unlike the LOAC-the norm is so challenging for the US armed forces. First, and most significantly, the norm judges results-not intent. Second, it applies an elastic-not a universal-standard that demands more of more capable parties. Third, the primacy of effects and elasticity of the standard leaves zero civilian casualties as the only unquestioned success. These three distinctions, detailed below, make the modern norm a vexing standard for any military, one that US service members experience as a "zero civilian casualties" norm.
In recent decades, the standards applied by outsiders to US military actions demonstrate that good intentions are no longer enough. A compelling example is the 1991 US bombing of the Amiriyah bunker in Baghdad, Iraq. The US military unintentionally killed hundreds of civilians taking shelter in a military facility. 
41
Modern observers of war focus on the effects of military action upon civilians rather than the intent or context of the action that is so vital for applying legal standards. Opprobrium and associated political costs attach to the fact of civilian harm, regardless of its justification. 
42
43
44
45
The second respect in which the modern norm is more demanding, particularly of the United States, is its elasticity. Compliance with most norms cannot be reduced to "a static set of clear sharp-edged rules. " 
46
It is not only the United States that faces different standards of judgment today. Russian attacks on Grozny, capital of the breakaway republic of Chechnya, prompted widespread public criticism from the United States and other foreign governments. 
47
48
The second respect in which normative standards are elastic pertains to an actor's perceived relative ability to control the harm it inflicts. Expectations of omnipotence are never realistic, of course. Even American pilots cannot necessarily anticipate when a train will cross the bridge in their sights, and weapons still go awry, landing in crowded markets because they have malfunctioned. 
50
Imagine if the United States had adopted Russia's tactics against Grozny or Sri Lanka's methods in its recent civil war. As much as those two governments were pilloried, the United States would have faced a more scathing backlash for adopting the same tactics. The world expects the most of the most capable forces.
Elastic expectations in turn embolden weaker parties to claim that they cannot be held to the highest standards. During the 2009 war in Gaza, Hamas leaders lobbed hundreds of unguided rockets into Israel, killing three Israelis. Vastly superior Israeli forces killed some 1,600 Gazans. While the United Nations criticized both sides for LOAC violations, Hamas sought to defend its attacks on the grounds that it lacked true precision capability. 
51
52
A sliding scale formula still raises the ultimate question of compliance. States, international bodies, and NGOs that advocate minimizing civilian harm do not articulate how many casualties would be too many or specify how many would be acceptable for whom under what circumstances. Their criticisms indicate only that military forces should cause as few civilian casualties as possible (and possible is presumed to vary, in part by capability).
The critique's lack of consistency and clarity is a source of great discomfort for military actors engaged in the use force. There is neither consensus nor specificity regarding how many civilian deaths is "a lot" or "too many. " How should one even contextualize the scale of civilian harm? Overall, by war? Per aircraft sortie? Per tons of weapons dropped? In relation to the number of combat troops deployed? Should the level of harm be a function of the population density in the conflict arena? Or should the assessment lie instead in the ratios of combatant deaths to noncombatant deaths? Each of these metrics has been applied or suggested by various analysts, activists, or scholars. 
53
54
55
Expectations this fuzzy or lofty might be dismissed for lack of rigor and specificity. However, as norms scholars have noted, "We only know what is appropriate by reference to the judgment of a community or a society. We recognize norm-breaking behavior because it generates disapproval or stigma and norm-conforming behavior either because it produces praise, or, in the case of a highly internalized norm, because it is so taken for granted that it provokes no reaction whatsoever. " 
56
The standards for judging the conduct of war have changed dramatically over the last two decades, and they have hit airpower hard. US airpower doctrine has never endorsed the direct targeting of civilians, and the US military was among the first to adopt a legal code of conduct. 
57
A9 struggled with the question of standards regarding civilian casualties in its study. The math indicated that only a small proportion of US air strikes resulted in civilian casualties. However, the math raises more important questions. Was 1 percent or 3 percent of air strikes too much collateral damage? Compared to what? Would it be preferable to not act at all (perhaps ceding initiative or allowing US forces to be overrun)? Should ground troops instead rely on rotary gunships or on indirect fire? What do the numbers mean compared to how the USAF operated in Vietnam or how the Russian air force operated over the city of Grozny?
A9 did not pretend to address such questions, but it recognized something even more important: simply justifying airpower's performance was an insufficient response to the critics. The key issue, the analysts concluded, was improving performance. "We need to go beyond addressing just the IO [information operations] impact of CIVCAS and be willing to put ourselves under the strongest microscope of scrutiny to ensure we consistently further our ability to contribute to the joint fight. " 58 A9's assessment was exactly right, and this has been the direction in which the USAF has been fitfully headed for the past two decades. This is the story of how that change began. Airpower's prominence in the conflicts of the 1990s made it the target of humanitarian criticism. The USAF was forced to confront the growing gap between the military's understanding of the LOAC and the heightened public expectation that civilians should not die in war. These expectations combined with longstanding airpower tenets and institutional selfinterest to set in motion a promising chain of adaptation.
Viewed in historical perspective, the evolution seems revolutionary. Told of a particularly discriminate air mission during Operation Iraqi Freedom, a retired US general wrote facetiously, "Blood thirsty brutes in uniform are trying to avoid destroying an unknown building 30 meters from their assigned target? I am struck with the notion that the world has changed. " 59 Today, airpower continues grappling with normative expectations and chasing success further into the future. 38. This discussion is not meant to suggest that there are no instrumental or political reasons for such criticism.
39. Norms have been defined as "collective understandings of the proper behavior of actors. " Jeffrey W. Legro, "Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the 'Failure' of Internationalism, " International Organization 51, no. 1 (Winter 1997), 33. Laws are also norms, but I will refer to them in this book exclusively as laws in order to distinguish law from the moral and social norms pertaining to minimizing civilian casualties. I will use the terms expectation and norm interchangeably to describe this "collective understanding. " 40. In chapter 3, I explore the content and role of law in armed conflict. 42. In Afghanistan in 2009, the United Nations, international and local NGOs, the Afghan government, and the international coalition compiled civilian casualty statistics. Ban Ki-moon, Report of the Secretary General pursuant to Paragraph 40 of  Resolution 1917 (2010) 43. In the case of RTS, NATO attempted to argue that Serbia was at fault for forcing civilian employees to work in a facility that it had been warned would be attacked. See Amnesty International, NATO/Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: "Collateral Damage" or Unlawful Killings? Violations of the Laws of War by NATO during Operation Allied Force (London, UK: Amnesty International, June 2000), 45, https://www. amnesty.org/en/library/asset/EUR70/018/2000/en/e7037dbb-df56-11dd-89a6-e712e728ac9e/eur700182000en.pdf. The United States has also deflected criticism by arguing that the Taliban seeks to put civilians in harm's way. See Steve Holland, "U.S. Blames Taliban for Afghan Civilian Casualties, " Reuters, 20 May 2007.  44. Even after the US-led international force in Afghanistan subsequently began using civilian casualty figures to evaluate its performance, the data remained classified. Aislinn Simpson, "British Army Officer Arrested over Military Secrets Leak, " Telegraph (UK), 4 February 2009.
45. The Amiriyah bunker incident is one example. 46. Andrew Hurrell, "Norms and Ethics in International Relations, " in Handbook  of International Relations, ed. Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse, and Beth A. Simmons  (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2003), 143.
47. There were two different phases of the conflict and criticism during the same decade. Carlotta Gall, "Foreign Powers Step up Criticism, " The Moscow Times, 31 December 1994. Emblematic of Russia's approach during the second conflict was a missile attack against an alleged military target in a central market that caused some 140 civilian casualties. 
Theory, Practice, and Rationalization of Civilian Harm
In this chapter, I place contemporary expectations about civilian casualties in context by reviewing the early US theory and practice of airpower through the Cold War period. I explain the persistent tension between stated US goals of strategic bombing and the ways in which air campaigns actually affected civilians. I show how the US public and military intellectually reconciled the humanitarian tensions between airpower theory and practice. I conclude by showing that tactical constraints on the air war in Vietnam foreshadowed airpower's future, despite the political and military backlash they immediately provoked.
Additionally, I outline the synergistic changes in technology and strategic bombing concepts that began to emerge after the Vietnam War. Consistent with enduring principles of airpower, these developments laid the groundwork for future United States Air Force (USAF) adaptation to reduce civilian casualties.
For most of the twentieth century, the "American way of war" reflected a curious dualism. 
1
Russell Weigley described the US approach to war as one of substituting technology and mass for manpower. The United States sought to harness its industrial might so that it could achieve military victory through destruction and sheer attrition. 
2
Since the total wars of the mid-twentieth century, US leaders have regularly imposed limitations upon US conduct of war. Nonetheless, US military operations have often killed significant numbers of civilians. Until very recently, the goal of US doctrine, training, and weapons development continued to apply overwhelming kinetic power at the tactical and operational levels. Consequently, a gap remained between the US view of its conduct of war and its actual effects-even in limited war. Such a gap was not unique to the United States, but America was extreme both in its fervent faith that it fought humanely and in its simultaneous doctrinal and technological commitment and ability to inflict destruction. 
3
Americans developed several closely related ways to reconcile the gap between collective identity and military practice. These included emphasizing the importance of intent in war, embracing the concept of collateral damage (and distinguishing it from "atrocity"), relying upon the law to justify civilian harm, and arguing that decisive and overwhelming force reduces the overall death toll in war. In this chapter, I explore the divergence of theory and practice as it pertains to airpower-and principally strategic bombing-and show how the United States has consoled itself about its own morality while imposing grave harm upon civilians. US commanders used aircraft primarily in a tactical role: flying in support of ground troops. Pilots attacked enemy aircraft and balloons, bombed and strafed ahead and behind enemy lines, and conducted reconnaissance. The war featured discernable uniforms, battle formations, and lines of advance. Aircraft remained close to their targets, and pilots used their own vision for targeting. While this targeting was imprecise, civilians were largely absent from the slow-moving battlefield. Aircraft played a celebrated role, helping halt a German advance at Château-Thierry and supporting campaigns at Saint-Mihiel and Meuse-Argonne.
Civilians were not exempt from the effects of airpower, however. Germany used zeppelins and planes to bomb British cities and killed more than 1,000 civilians; the British did the same to urban areas in Germany. 
4
As strategists began to imagine airpower's transformative uses, there were portents of greater danger for civilians. Many early airpower advocates believed that because air bombardment could directly undermine a nation's will to fight (via attacks on its population and cities), airpower offered a more efficient route to victory. Compared to the stalemated ground combat of World War I, airpower's destructive powers suggested an alluring decisiveness.
Watching Italy's aircraft attack Libya in 1916, Italian Giulio Douhet became convinced that airpower would become the determinate method of war. Airpower could use the "third dimension" to directly target enemy population centers, since civilian morale was the center of gravity in total war. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
International concern about the humanitarian impact of the airplane prompted renewed legal efforts to restrain aerial bombing. 
20
21
22
Public (and often personal) moral sensibilities would figure prominently in the development of US targeting strategies. US public opinion in particular opposed aerial attacks on civilians, a fact to which United States Army Air Force (USAAF) leaders remained sensitive. 
23
24
25
26
The isolationism of the interwar period and the division of responsibilities between the Navy and the Army also pushed US airpower in a more discriminating direction. 
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
As the war unfolded, both the executive branch and Congress criticized fascist states-particularly the Japanese in 1937 and 1938 and the Italians in 1938-for bombing civilians. 
36
37
38
39
40
Although US air planners would disparage the British Royal Air Force (RAF) for abandoning precision during the war, the US airpower story followed a similar arc. Mindful of both limited air assets and the vulnerability of its own cities, the RAF began constrained daylight "precision bombing" in World War II but faced high losses with limited results. 
41
42
43
44
45
46
Regardless of nationality, airpower doctrine confronted uncomfortable realities. Governments had fully mobilized populations for war, and industrialization ensured that even those citizens not in uniform often participated in making war-related products. Enemies viewed civilians working in arms factories as legitimate targets. 
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
US aerial operations in the Far East similarly mocked preferred strategic targeting theories. A newly installed 20th Air Force commander, Gen Curtis LeMay, was under great pressure to deliver results in early 1945. His predecessor had failed to master the cloud cover that constrained US attacks against Japan or the jet stream winds that impeded formation flying as a compensating tactic. LeMay's solution was to adopt low-level incendiary bombing. He described his new methods as "radical" efforts to achieve results. 
61
62
63
64
65
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
During World War II, the USAF had emphasized its intentions (bombing industrial targets) rather than the results of its actions (firebombing that inflicted a massive death toll). In his extensive study of the postwar debate, Sahr Conway-Lanz found that Americans eventually came to accept an analogous distinction as they struggled to reconcile their role in the mass killing of civilians with perceptions of themselves as "a humane people. " 
75
76
77
78
The Navy, on the other hand, harnessed the human costs of strategic bombing to its 1949 critique of the USAF's Convair B-36 Peacemaker intercontinental bomber. 
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
This intellectual recalibration continues to shape American public views regarding war. The belief that the United States did not intend to target, let alone harm, civilians offered psychological consolation at home. Nevertheless, good intentions eventually became insufficient to excuse military actions that predictably caused civilian harm.
The Korean War was a limited war-a different kind of beast than World War II. Airpower struggled for a strategy, pulled into providing close air support (and later, interdiction of enemy ground forces) for US and United Nations (UN) forces, while seeking a strategic role in inducing a political settlement. Early on, US airpower was tightly constrained, although it became markedly more destructive after the Chinese intervened months into the war. The war's "limits" did not extend to civilians, who suffered enormously. While unreliable, most estimates suggest that over a million civilians died on each side of the conflict. 
90
91
92
The United States maintained rules-written and verbal-dictating the need to spare civilians in bombing attacks, but the rules proved difficult to follow. 
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
Strategic bombing posed a greater direct threat to noncombatants, and again the USAF created tensions between an official policy of avoiding civilian harm and its tactics of firebombing and destroying dams. The July 1950 campaign against North Korea was "conceived much along the lines of the major offensives of World War II" with industrial sites being the nominal targets but morale remaining a primary objective. 
101
102
103
104
105
106
After MacArthur's dismissal and the halting of the communist offensive in spring 1951, the USAF struggled to calibrate its "destruction" campaign in the face of sensitive armistice negotiations. 
107
108
109
111
Reliance on the primacy of intent in assessing aerial bombing gave way over the 1950s to defining civilian harm as "collateral damage. " During World War II and the Korean War, the United States focused on its good intentions-its desire to avoid targeting civilians directlyto sustain perceptions of itself as a moral actor. During the Cold War and beyond, the negative, if unintended, results of bombing came to be called collateral damage. The concept of collateral damage was swiftly married to a legal and ethical understanding of the circumstances in which this harm was acceptable.
Phrases such as "collateral devastation" and "collateral effects of the damage" first emerged during efforts to model nuclear blast effects in the 1950s and early 1960s. 
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
122
124
125
126
128
Collateral damage as an organizational frame. For the USAF, the early concept of "extra" damage in the nuclear realm simply migrated into conventional military thinking, a function of what scholar Lynn Eden describes as "organizational frames. " She has shown how socially constructed organizational knowledge (frames) shapes an institution's perceived reality and its future choices. In other words, the way that institutions define problems shapes solutions as well as the identification of future problems. 
129
130
131
The collateral damage issue devolved into a technical problem belonging largely to the targeteers, modelers, and weaponeers. Moreover, because civilian casualties were subsumed under the category of targeting, civilian casualties per se were not a subject of analysis, learning, or material solutions. Civilian protection did not garner independent attention as the services sought to anticipate, resource, and prepare for future operational challenges (what is often referred to as the doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities [DOTMLPF] process). 
132
While the framing of civilian casualties as collateral damage naturally flowed from the USAF's approach to nuclear weapons modeling, the framing also suited the institutional interests of the USAF. First, it cast negative effects as inevitable, if unintended. Second, the concept of collateral damage emphasized the acceptability of those consequences rather than stressing affirmative responsibilities to avoid them. Finally, it kept the USAF focused on intent and the targeting process instead of broader issues of strategy, capabilities, or operational culture.
Overall, the Cold War concept of "collateral damage" helped the USAF come to grips with-and justify-bombing's negative effects upon civilians in the face of American faith in its high moral purpose and sensitivity to human rights. The concept's relationship to the LOAC enhanced its legitimacy for strategists and operators. Furthermore, a desire to emphasize the primacy of intent in the conduct of war may help explain the US perspective toward the law itself. (The character and perversities of the law of war are discussed in greater detail in the next chapter.) The refinement of collateral damage as a legal, and therefore doctrinal, element at a time when US air capabilities were exceedingly blunt helped reconcile the gap between the intent and the effects of the American way of war.
While aerial bombing in Korea was operationally constrained, it nonetheless proved massively harmful to the civilian population. In broad strokes, one could say the same of the US air campaigns in Vietnam. 
133
Given Vietnam's contemporary association with "free-fire zones, " napalm, and the secret bombings of neutral countries, it may seem counterintuitive to ascribe restraint to the air war in Vietnam. Certainly compared to what we expect of US airpower today, or even what the world witnessed during the 1991 Operation Desert Storm, aerial bombing in Vietnam was brutal. However, even if estimates of civilian casualties from the two phases of aerial bombing were low (52,000 killed during Rolling Thunder, 13,000 during Linebacker), they compared favorably to previous air campaigns. 
134
The two main phases of strategic bombing of North Vietnam had distinct purposes. The Rolling Thunder campaign (1965-68) sought to incrementally increase damage to Vietnamese industry. While planners conceived it initially to undermine the North's support for the southern Vietcong guerillas, US officials quickly began to suspect that the bombing would not achieve these goals. 
135
136
137
138
139
In 1972 newly elected President Nixon adopted a strategy of "Vietnamization, " turning the ground war over to South Vietnamese forces. Nixon's Linebacker I and II air campaigns aimed to compensate for the withdrawal of US ground forces by attacking the North's conventional military capabilities. 
140
141
The strategies and tactics of the air campaigns in Vietnam were more sensitive to noncombatants than those in prior wars. 
143
144
146
147
149
By the end of 1967, though, Johnson had lifted many political restrictions, allowing attacks on most industrial and transportation targets in North Vietnamese cities and the new Chinese buffer zone. 
150
151
Still, the frame of collateral damage-and the supporting deliberation that it demanded-required military actors to weigh civilian harm against military advantage in targeting choice. The target ap-proval process evolved to include estimates of civilian harm, which factored into decision making. 
152
155
156
157
158
To argue that constraints on the air war were meaningful is not to suggest that airpower was safe for civilians. Although the figures are suspect, the total number of South Vietnamese civilian deaths is believed to be between 195,000 and 430,000, and the number of North Vietnamese is 65,000. 
160
162
163
164
165
Airpower's dualism of constraint and destruction was reflected in the antiwar movement's rhetoric and the frustration of the US security establishment. Airpower first came under significant criticism in 1966, when the cloak of reassuring US rhetoric was pierced by New York Times correspondent Harrison Salisbury's first-person description of bombing's effects on Hanoi. 
166
167
From the humanitarian perspective, US strategic bombing in Vietnam represented progress. The dominant political logic was no longer an effort to justify area bombing, as had been the case in World War II and Korea. The military faced more restrictive "red lines"-formally factored in civilian casualties when planning attacks-and was under instruction to adopt precautions to minimize civilian harm. These measures yielded imperfect results, but they were meaningful steps toward greater considerations of the civilian in war.
America's loss in Vietnam soured many Americans on the concept of constrained military activity. Leaders in military and conservative circles condemned what they deemed the "half-hearted" application of force doomed by political niceties. Vietnam prompted a political backlash regarding how leaders should use force, rekindling an idealized American vision of unrestrained military power. As a result, consideration of the foreign civilian-and the associated constraints on the use of force-was largely absent from the post-Vietnam political discourse about war.
The preferred alternative approach was to fight "wholeheartedly" with the "clear intention of winning"-a view encapsulated in what ultimately became known as the Weinberger-Powell doctrine. 
168
Powell. 169
170
171
Instead, military lawyers assumed stewardship of the civilian on the battlefield. This developed in response to an Army unit's infamous 1968 murder of hundreds of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai. Although the Army called the event an aberration, the service nonetheless instituted routine training on the LOAC. Lawyers were assigned responsibility for ensuring that troops understood the need to avoid civilian harm pursuant to the principles of the laws of war. Ironically, this innovation pushed the issue of civilian casualties toward the eddies of military activity rather than into the mainstream. Lawyers, rather than military commanders, "owned" the problem. Highlighting the issue as a legal problem rather than an operational priority effectively marginalized the concern. 
172
173
174
In the 1990s the USAF became more responsive to the operational demands of minimizing civilian harm, a process traced in later chapters. USAF adaptation was partly a function of the external environmentprincipally the changing norm described in chapter 1. The longstanding tenets of airpower also facilitated this adaptation, and the modern realization of two factors in particular-precision and strategic effects-proved critical.
While the application of airpower principles has constantly evolved, the core principles of airpower have remained constant. Aircraft offer enormous operational responsiveness in a wide range of roles: strategic bombing, close air support, intelligence gathering, transporting forces and equipment, and fighting adversary aircraft. 
175
176
177
178
179
The USAF's current ability to minimize civilian casualties stems in large part from capabilities and ideas that were only just emerging in the 1980s. Two developments in particular-true precision and effects-based operational thinking-paved the way for reducing civilian harm, as future operations confirmed that constraints on airpower had become an enduring fixture of the American way of war.
While modern observers associate precision with "smart weapons, " these are only one manifestation of airpower's longstanding quest for precision. Many factors shape the ability to bomb with accuracy. The way that targets are defined; the intelligence supporting the targeting process; and the tactics, techniques, and procedures of delivering weapons also shape an air crew's ability to deliver a bomb on target. Faith in the transformative impact of the Norden bombsight illustrates the varied routes toward enhancing precision. The earliest "breakthroughs" also underscore how the operative definition of precision is relative and has changed dramatically over time. 
180
Thus, precision offers many additional advantages beyond efficiency. It increases airpower's flexibility as a tool of military power, justifies new weapons systems, better protects pilots (by requiring fewer sorties and allowing weapons release at greater standoff distances), achieves a wider range of strategic effects, and reduces civilian casualties. Precision thereby advanced other institutional objectives as well, such as making airpower a more appealing tool of choice for national command authorities. 
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
Enhanced precision was not directed toward minimizing the application of violence. Greater precision was fully consistent with the US objective of bringing maximum conventional force to bear against its primary strategic rival. "The only reason we had developed bigger bombs was to compensate for inaccuracy in delivery, " Lieutenant General Deptula explained. 
189
191
Disputes about how best to achieve game-changing impact from strategic aerial bombing remained a central intellectual preoccupation of airpower advocates, and strategic bombing to affect enemy morale continued to hold great allure, despite controversy about its record. 
192
193
During the 1980s a group of young Airmen, led by Col John Warden III, was tasked with helping reenvision the USAF's role as a decisive strategic force. 
194
195
196
Warden sought to harness precision and economy of force principles to targeting strategies. His strategies would reject destruction in lieu of focusing on effects. The result would be more selective use of force and reduced collateral damage-including civilian harm. This thinking permeated different iterations of the air campaign plans for 1991 Operation Desert Storm. 
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
Seemingly validated by the US-led coalition's 1991 victory in Iraq, EBO gradually became the dominant framework for USAF thinking about air operations. 
204
205
The transition from destruction to effects as a focus of US aerial bombing reflected the synergistic evolution of the USAF's belief in precision and its emphasis on strategic effects. This combination explains why strategic bombing in the twenty-first century looks nothing like the bombing of Tokyo and only faintly echoes Linebacker II. The United States still has the capacity to create indiscriminate damage, but this is no longer how the country chooses to use its power. US aerial bombing today focuses not on maximizing destruction but instead on precisely attacking targets selected to achieve particular effects while minimizing civilian harm.
The conventional view of aerial bombing in 1948 was very straightforward: "The purpose of bombing is damage. " 206 During the Vietnam War, the damage was constrained, but destruction remained the objective of airpower. After Vietnam, advances in precision made it possible to envision new purposes for bombing. Today, the USAF notes that destruction through attrition is "rarely the key objective in modern war" and touts airpower's ability to offer to contribute to precise, coordinated power that forces enemies to comply with US national will. 
207
A willful focus on military intentions (rather than judging their operational effects) was America's way of reconciling the most morally problematic aspects of US military power. Even as the United States adopted the framing of collateral damage, factoring in civilian casualties as effects, the emphasis upon intent remained strong. Collateral damage was defined in terms of the LOAC, suggesting that compliance with law was the proper standard for judging civilian casualties.
It followed, then, that if good intentions exonerated actions and if collateral damage were lawful, civilian casualties were not a pressing problem to solve. There was little incentive to take additional actionsuch as adjusting operational practices or developing new capabilitiesto reduce civilian harm. Throughout the Cold War, US military doctrine made virtually no mention-other than noting the laws of war-regarding how to plan, organize, train, or equip forces to avoid harming civilians during military operations. 
208
In chapter 3, I revisit the issue of standards of performance for the USAF regarding civilian protection. I explore the difference between the norm-expectations regarding civilian protection-and the standards of the LOAC. The military and the humanitarian communities approach these issues from competing perspectives. They see the law in different lights and sometimes confuse the requirements of law and higher normative expectations regarding minimizing civilian harm. Their differences help explain why outsiders criticize actions that the US military deems consistent with ROE and international law and why the military's legal defense of civilian casualties is unlikely to satisfy critics.
1. According to Dr. Antulio J. Echeverria, currently of the Strategic Studies Institute and a retired USAF lieutenant colonel, the term refers to "fundamental ideas and expectations, albeit modified in practice, that the U.S. military profession and U.S. political leadership have, or have had, about war, and their respective roles in it. These ideas and expectations, in turn, contribute to the assumptions that inform political and military decision makers in matters of strategic planning, budgeting, and concept and doctrine development. " Antulio J. Echeverria, Toward an American Way of War (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, 2004), 1.
2. Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1977). The approach was captured in the Vietnam War-era slogan "Expend shells not men. " For more information, see Guenter Lewy, America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 268. Contemporary analysts have updated this theme by describing "new" American ways of war that depart from overwhelming force and utilitarianism but continue to focus on technology and information while minimizing exposure of US service members. For more information, see Ronald R. Fogleman, USAF Chief of Staff, "Air Power and the American Way of War" (paper presented at the Air Force Association Air Warfare Symposium, Orlando, FL, 15 February 1996); and Max Boot, "The New American Way of War, " Foreign Affairs 82, no. 3. Some refer to this as exceptionalism. See, for example, Michael Ignatieff, ed., American Exceptionalism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005); Charles Lockhart, The Roots of American Exceptionalism: History, Institutions, and Culture (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003); Seymour Martin Lipset, American Exceptionalism: A Double-Edged Sword (New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1997); and Walter Russell Mead, Special Providence: American Foreign Policy and How It Changed the World (New York: Knopf, 2001). During the 1991 Persian Gulf War, President Bush and others reiterated that the United States was "doing everything possible" to minimize casualties and to avoid civilian sites, "despite the fact that Saddam is now relocating some military functions . . . in civilian areas such as schools. " Johanna Neuman, "Saddam Keeps Focus on Civilian Toll, " USA Today, 7 February 1991.
4. Conrad C. Crane, Bombs, Cities, and Civilians: American Airpower Strategy in World War II (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1993), 14. Crane cites a captured zeppelin commander who insisted that Germany had not "set out to kill women and children. We have higher military aims. . . . Such things happen accidentally in war. 8. The related argument that overwhelming destruction offers the most humane approach to war by ending it swiftly or deterring it altogether has been continuously recycled, emerging in subtler form in the contemporary debate. 9. Reynolds, "Collateral Damage on the 21st Century Battlefield, " 11. 13. The persistence of this view, in the face of so much historical evidence to the contrary, remains puzzling. See the critique of morale targeting claims in Pape, Bombing to Win. For the United States, precision munitions allow strategic targeting that undermines morale without widespread civilian deaths. Such strategic targeting nonetheless threatens to undermine legal distinctions between civilian and military targets. This issue is explored in chapter 3.
14. Mitchell's ideas grew closer to Douhet's in the 1930s; both men faced official sanction for their unorthodox views of airpower. Crane, Bombs, Cities, and Civilians,  15-18.  15. Alfred F. 30. Essentially an analog computer, the Norden Mark 15 bombsight allowed pilots to calculate a weapon's trajectory, greatly increasing the accuracy of bombing. The Navy initially developed the technology, declining to share it with the Army Air Force. In practice, its impact was less revolutionary than anticipated. Maurer Maurer,  Aviation in the U.S. Army, 1919-1939 (Washington, DC: United States Air Force,  1987) 47. Debate persists regarding when civilian personnel working in particular capacities are legitimate targets and when they retain their protected status as civilians, solely factored into proportionality analysis for attacks on military objectives. I further discuss the debate regarding which activities constitute direct participation in hostilities and which facilities or objects qualify as military objectives in chapter 3. 74. Indeed, polling suggested that most Americans approved of the strategic bombing campaigns. For more information, see George E. Hopkins, "Bombing and the American Conscience during World War II, " Historian 28, no. 3 (1966): 451-73. Most media was silent or supportive. Alternative sources of information might have tempered American views, but the contrast between apparent wartime support and a critical interwar view of bombing was stark. Some observers have noted additional differences in US perspectives toward European versus Japanese civilians and combatants. Biddle  (New York: Harper, 1947), 5-7, 15-17, 149-50.  78. The term "strategic" is used primarily to differentiate attacks from those aimed directly at an adversary's military forces. For example, Michael Sherry defines "strategic" air war as an attack on "an enemy's capacity and will to sustain military operations, rather than on those operations. " Sherry, Rise of American Power, 12n. According to Robert Pape, strategic attacks aim to force enemy capitulation without destroying enemy forces or occupying terrain. Pape, Bombing to Win, 321.
79. Arthur W. Radford, commander of the Pacific Fleet, warned that mass area bombings of urban areas were "politically and economically senseless" and questioned whether Americans would support such a strategy. Strategic air warfare, Rear Adm Ralph A. Ofstie testified, "is militarily unsound and of limited effect, is morally wrong, and is decidedly harmful to the stability of a postwar world. " House Committee on Armed Services, The National Defense Program -Unification and Strategy: Hearings 81st Congress, 1st sess., 1949. The Navy's view evolved after the service acquired a strategic capability.
80. Omar N. Bradley, The Collected Writings of General Omar N. Bradley, vol. 4,  Testimony, 1946-1949 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1967)  23, 26, 63.  116. This is a common complaint of human rights groups, which also criticize antiseptic military parlance such as "servicing a target. " An example was one German organization for the preservation of language in 1999 awarding collateral damage the distinction of "bad expression of the year. " Andru E. Wall, ed., Legal and Ethical  146. This is a striking contrast between American public attitudes toward civilian deaths during the Vietnam War and the public's views decades later during humanitarian interventions and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. In chapters 4 and 5, I show that public pressure on US forces to reduce civilian casualties was largely external. As of this writing, the use of drones to conduct targeted killing seems to have revived an American debate about the use of force and civilian deaths.
147. Civilian leaders initially rejected the USAF's original proposal to destroy North Vietnam's industrial base, a strategy that Robert Pape dubbed the "genteel Douhet" approach. The supporting rational for imposing widespread destruction in what would include urban areas was undermining the population's morale. Pape,  Bombing to Win, 180-1.  148. White House instructions on a 1966 raid on Hanoi and Haiphong petroleum targets included the need to instruct pilots on avoiding civilian casualties, awaiting good weather, selecting an axis of attack that avoided populated areas, and limiting the suppression of ground to air threats to those sites outside populated areas. W. Hays  158. Parks argues that the laser and electro-optically guided weapons had a "pronounced effect" on the war. "Linebacker, " 11, 13; and Clodfelter, Limits of Air Power, 191.  159. Pape argues that the campaigns' primary impact was not on morale but rather on North Vietnam's conventional war strategy-which was more vulnerable to bombing than its earlier guerilla war. Pape, Bombing to Win, 176. The Washington Post editorial of 28 December called the bombing "the most savage and senseless act of war. " Editorial, "Terror Bombing in the Name of Peace, " Washington Post, 28 December 1972, A20.
160. The time frame for these estimates is from 1965 to 1974. For a review of estimates of civilian casualties, including total Vietnamese casualties, see Charles Hirschman, Samuel Preston, and Vu Manh Loi, "Vietnamese Casualties during the American War: A New Estimate, " Population and Development Review 21, no. 4 (December 1995), 790.
161. Pape, Bombing to Win, 190, 208.  162. Ibid., 190.  163. Compared to historical figures and overall Vietnamese casualties, Pape regarded Rolling Thunder's civilian deaths as "exceedingly low" and Linebacker campaign figures as "small numbers. " Pape, Bombing to Win, 190, 208.  164. Lewy, America in Vietnam, 268. 165. Hirschman, Preston, and Vu, "Vietnamese Casualties, " 790. 166. "Contrary to the impression given by the U.S. communiqués, on-the-spot inspection indicates that American bombing has been inflicting considerable civilian casualties in Hanoi and its environ for some time past. " Harrison E. Salisbury, "Visitor to Hanoi Inspects Damage Attributed to American Raids, " New York Times, 26 December 1966, 1.  167. Fall described the United States as choosing "to wage unlimited aerial warfare inside the country at the price of literally pounding the place to bits. " Bernard  Fall, "Vietnam Blitz, " New Republic, 9 October 1965, 17-21.  168. Indeed, while Powell specifically meant to avoid another Vietnam-like war and formally countenanced the role of peace operations in US military strategy, military and conservative figures used the doctrine to dismiss humanitarian intervention and "operations other than war" during the 1990s. For additional information, see Kenneth J. Campbell, "Once Burned, Twice Cautious: Explaining the Weinberger-Powell Doctrine, " Armed Forces and Society 24, no. 3 (Spring 1998)  Affairs 64, no. 4 (Spring 1986): 686-7. Powell's key additions were acknowledging the place of peace operations and humanitarian intervention ("a given"), insisting on an exit strategy, and assessing the risks and costs involved in the use of force and achievement of the objectives. Colin L. Powell, "U.S. Forces: Challenges Ahead, " Foreign Affairs 71, no. 5 (Winter 1992), 37, 39.  170. Prussian general Helmuth von Moltke's words have been translated with some variation, but each version conveys his view that wars should be prosecuted vigorously and concluded swiftly. He does acknowledge, however, that some (undefined) limits on warfare should exist. "The greatest good deed in war is the speedy ending of the war, and every means to that end, so long as it is not reprehensible, must remain open" (emphasis in the original  Power, 17 February 2000.  177. This thinking was articulated in 1942: "Land power and air power are coequal and interdependent forces; neither is an auxiliary of the other. " United States Army Field Manual (FM) 100-2, Command and Employment of Air Power (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1942), 1. A more modern variation is that "it is possible to directly affect adversary sources of strength and will to fight by creating shock and destroying enemy cohesion without close combat. " Air Force Doctrine Document 1, USAF Basic Doctrine, 17 November 2003, 17-18.  178. "Control of available air power must be centralized and command must be exercised through the air force commander if this inherent flexibility and ability to deliver a decisive blow are to be fully exploited. " War Department Field Manual 100-20. The desire for USAF control of airpower was evident in the case of Gen Chuck Horner's desire for independence in Desert Storm and Lt Gen Michael C. Short's disputes with Gen Wesley Clark in the Kosovo campaign, as I describe in chapter 4.
179. A USAF publication on irregular warfare notes that "regardless of the size, composition, or command structure established for conducting an IW campaign, commanders should still adhere to the tenet of centralized control and decentralized execution. " Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 2-3, Irregular Warfare, 15 March  2013, 11.  180. The Norden bombsight, like many technologies that followed, was initially oversold. Promoters claimed it would be able to drop a "bomb into a pickle barrel, " although this was never the case. It was resilient, however. The same basic system "soldiered on" for decades and was even resurrected to provide a cheap and reliable means of dropping acoustic sensors on the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Chapter 3
The law of armed conflict (LOAC) regulates the modern US use of force, but law's impact today is more limited than either the military or its humanitarian critics might like to acknowledge. The LOAC, also called international humanitarian law (IHL), does not require the degree of restraint and civilian protection that human rights actors often claim. Nor does the law provide the normative justification for how the United States uses force that military actors assert. 
1
In this chapter, I explore two key reasons for the law's limits. First, the law rarely provides a definitive standard of behavior on the most controversial aspects of the US use of force. As I will explain, one can discern the LOAC's clarity on vexing questions only at its outer edges. Thus, law infrequently provides a bright line; more often, it suggests a direction, a sensibility, and a process for weighing and arguing about battlefield actions. In a domestic context, the law's meaning would be articulated and refined through court decisions about specific questions, but the limitations of international adjudication have failed to clarify many important LOAC provisions. 
2
The second reason for the law's limited impact is the rise of normative expectations, as explained in chapter 1. The nonlegal expectation that US forces will minimize civilian harm imposes a higher standard upon the conduct of combat operations. The norm judges only effects (not intent), and the dead and wounded can be starkly quantified. The US military has been slow to recognize the divergence of legal and normative standards. Faith in the law's power to justify civilian harm lingered long after the United States had in practice abandoned the legal "floor" and begun adapting to the more demanding norm, at least in the limited wars the country has fought since the end of the Cold War. In chapters 4 and 5, I will detail the process by which the military came to recognize the importance of the norm as a standard that exists independently of the LOAC. Today, the level of effort to minimize civilian harm that characterizes US air operations generally exceeds the requirements of the LOAC-certainly as the United States understands the law. The civilian casualty norm has now overtaken the LOAC in influencing US military actions.
In this chapter, I discuss the range of interpretations and uses of law in contemporary debate about armed conflict. I review the LOAC's sources, principles, and roles in military operations. I then outline generic differences in the military (or "inside") and humanitarian ("outside") approaches to the LOAC and show how these approaches shape understanding of a legal provision that is particularly important for airpower-the definition of "military objectives. " I end with an analysis of the role of law in expert and public discourse. The use of law as a framework for assessing how US use of force affects civilians is problematic both because the disagreements about law are rarely acknowledged and because the US military is grappling with standards that far exceed what it believes the law requires.
It is said that international law lies at the vanishing point of jurisprudence. 
3
4
5
6
The LOAC serves several purposes. Conceptually, the law's primary goal is balancing necessity with humanity, providing a counterweight to kriegsraison (the position that morality permits whatever actions are required to win a war). 
7
Thereby, compliance with the law can provide critical reassurance to both American society and its military forces. It enables Americans to reconcile a fierce approach to war with a conception of themselves as moral actors. The United States pioneered the LOAC during the American Civil War through what came to be known as the Lieber Code. 
8
9
The "legalization" of armed conflict provides service members with confidence in their actions. Faith that one has acted lawfully is extremely important in helping individuals retain their moral integrityeven when civilian harm results from their actions. 
10
11
The law's core principles are intuitive. They include military necessity (the use of force must be a requirement to "win"); distinction (the requirement to target only combatants); and proportionality (the need to ensure an appropriate relationship between noncombatant harm and the military benefits of force). 
12
13
The principal tension in the LOAC is that between humanity and necessity. Since the law governs war as a permissible activity, the law is not intended to make war impossible to fight or win. The LOAC effectively prioritizes sovereignty (the right of states to make war) over noncombatant protection (individual human rights). 
14
The law is also highly contextual and relational. It focuses more on the processes of balancing and judging than on the post-facto outcomes and effects. This provides the war fighter great latitude. Since the law emerged from customary conduct, combatants retained significant authority in determining how to balance necessity and humanity.
The principle of proportionality provides an illustration of these phenomena. Determining the proportionality of a military act requires weighing civilian costs and military benefits when taking military action. 
15
16
17
18
Disputes about the meaning of law influence overall assessments of US performance in military operations. Thus, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and human rights nongovernmental organization (NGO) Amnesty International (AI) reached starkly divergent assessments of Operation Allied Force, the 1999 NATO operation regarding Kosovo. NATO argued that there was no "armed conflict in the history of modern warfare where there has been more discipline and care taken to comply with the laws of war. " 
19
20
21
22
23
For our purposes, the community of international law experts can be divided into two general categories: those who prioritize the principles of humanity within the LOAC and those who prioritize the principle of necessity. While generalization about such complex issues risks oversimplification, these two "ideal type" perspectives highlight key differences of opinion regarding international law's protection of noncombatants.
The first perspective (of the humanitarians, progressives, or outsiders) promotes the philosophy of IHL-enhancing protection of noncombatants. 
24
25
Groups such as AI and Human Rights Watch (HRW) couple onthe-ground investigations of armed conflict with public relations and advocacy work. They work to publicly pressure governments during the course of armed conflict, and, in the longer term, they seek to influence development of the law. Some humanitarian groups use the law as a yardstick not only for evaluation but also as a form of legal "discovery" of the facts. HRW staffers, for example, argue that military actors give professional colleagues "quite a bit of latitude when facts are ambiguous or scant. " 
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
US military lawyers have a different outlook on the role of law. They recognize that law regulates conflict, yet allows belligerents to fight ferociously. Legal constraint cannot come at the expense of victory because the law is meant to be consistent with effective war fighting. Given the US historical experience, this view appears to be shared by civilian political leaders who direct the use of force. 
33
34
35
36
37
38
In seminars and discussions, as part of the opinion juris process shaping custom, military lawyers work to "preserve" the balance between necessity and humanity in the LOAC. Some express skepticism about how humanitarian interlocutors aim to interpret and shape the law. Groups like AI and HRW, writes one military lawyer, "have the not-so-hidden agenda of promoting rules that would make the legal conduct of war impossible, in order to end warfare itself-at least by law-abiding states. " 
39
Not all militaries share the conservative US approach. Even some of America's closest allies, the progressive states within the NATO alliance, disagree on key points. 
40
41
42
Each legal community's positions include some roughly analogous weaknesses. Military attorneys are uncomfortable with broad definitions of civilian harm (for assessing proportionality), which parallels the human rights community's unease with broad definitions of military advantage. Each community would define the other's core concern (necessity or humanity) as concretely and objectively as possible, while preferring a broader, more subjective definition of its issue of primary interest. They both seek maximum interpretive freedom in the arena they most value.
Both perspectives are inconsistent in their respective emphases upon the intent of action versus the effects of action. For example, the human rights critique finds intent critically important in identifying morale bombing. Yet humanitarians reject the military's claims about the importance of a commander's intent in defining military objectives. It is problematic to cherry-pick the context in which intent matters. Likewise, it is inconsistent for the military to insist upon the importance of intent except where not doing so might yield greater targeting freedom. The US military argues that capabilities to reduce civilian casualties enable proportional targeting of dual-use objects. Yet it rejects civilian effects as a metric by which others might judge US airpower.
Today when outsiders criticize US military activities on legal grounds, they generally typically focus on three main issues: 1) an attack's proportional benefits and harms, 2) the precautions taken to reduce civilian harm, and 3) the lawfulness of target choice. 
43
Our prior consideration of the main difficulties in assessing proportionality revealed that judgments will be clearest at the furthest margins-where a strike is grossly damaging and of marginal utility or where the military utility is evident and collateral damage is negligible. Moreover, because US airpower has, on the whole, become more accurate and accordingly causes fewer civilian deaths, proportionality arguments have become less prominent in the public debate. As a result, where civilian harm occurs today, critics are likely to focus on the question of feasible precautions.
Belligerents are required by law to take "all feasible precautions" to avoid causing civilian harm. 
44
In addition, the standards themselves can become blurred. Sometimes human rights actors dress normative claims in legal analysis, as when they assert that the military is required to adopt all possible precautions. 
45
46
Disputes about law also extend to areas far outside the influence of the strengthened norm of civilian protection. The best example is the contemporary controversy regarding defining military objectives. Outsiders see law as constraining military choices to a narrow range of targets; insiders instead view law as facilitating targeting choices that the United States has long favored in air war. While outsiders emphasize the need for a target to be directly connected to the enemy's war fighting capabilities, the US military holds that attacks on a wide array of targets that would only indirectly affect civilian lives and morale are lawful. Ironically, the United States' progress in limiting civilian casualties during airstrikes has only reinforced its interest in pursuing a broad array of military objectives.
Air campaign planners and targeteers are consumed with the question of which objects to target and why. They work from a doctrinal philosophy or set of assumptions about military effects, often supported by empirical historical evidence. 
47
Defining what is a military objective is the initial threshold for targeting choice, the question to be answered before considering proportionality or the feasible precautions in launching the attack. The determination of a military objective is reached independently of risks of civilian harm. The definition of a military object has particular significance for airpower and the debate about strategic targeting. The debate about military objectives has been shaped by changes in warfare, technology, and conceptions of how to attain victory. In the nineteenth century, combatants sought to destroy military forces and equipment in set battles. Victory lay in defeating military capability. During the world wars, however, combatants targeted virtually all aspects of industrialized society: the means of economic production, transportation networks, energy sources, and so forth. They sought tangible effects on the enemy's ability to fight, and they also hoped to destroy the morale of the adversary's population at large. The ensuing physical destruction was immense.
American air planners continue to believe that strategic, including psychological, effects offer an efficient alternative to tactical attacks on fielded forces. The allure of strategic targeting has only increased as technological advances allow more focused destruction. Airpower advocates see the possibility of achieving decisive effects with minimal civilian impact as the most humane strategy. Ironically, though, airpower's ability to attack a wide range of strategic targets without causing massive destruction has intensified legal debate about the definition of military objectives.
The Geneva Convention's Additional Protocol I defines military objectives more broadly than simply troops and tanks. 
48
49
50
51
52
For targeteers, the spectrum of military objectives runs from military forces and fielded military equipment (what the United States Air Force [USAF] would consider tactical targets) to objects with a less direct relationship to military force. 
53
Attacking "dual use" facilities that inherently serve both military and civilian purposes, for example, electricity or transportation grids, is not inherently illegal. 
54
Almost by definition, dual-use objects can be expected to affect civilians. Thus, a distinct principle of international law-proportionalitycomes into play. Combatants must weigh the anticipated civilian harm against the attack's expected military advantage. In air attacks on dual use objects, the civilian harm generally raises more humanitarian objections than the legal status of the target itself. 
55
A purely civilian object in peacetime may become a military objective in war. Factual dispute may arise regarding the question of whether infrastructure is dual use or a civilian object is a military objective. In this regard, a key question is whether an object's current or potential use makes an effective contribution to military action under the definition's first prong.
Humanitarians often argue that an object's military contributions must be actual or reasonably expected-not simply possible. In their view, US military lawyers are either wrong as a matter of law about the law's flexibility or they are overly credulous of operators' claims that civilian objects might have a military purpose. 
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
A related controversy revolves around the requisite directness of an object's "effective contribution to military action" in order for that object to be considered a military objective. 
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
American military lawyers would dispute the characterization of this interpretation as broad. Many regard the US position as simply the longstanding American view, backed by the historical record of US attacks on war-sustaining objects. The Operational Law Handbook provides little consolation for humanitarian critics. 
71
A related concern is how easily belligerents can skirt the intent of AP I simply by asserting a lawful reason for attack-even if that reason is not the principal motivation. This reflects a historical pattern of targeting rationalization that we earlier traced through World War II, Korea, and Vietnam. The United States often attacked legitimate military objectives in the hope that their destruction would yield additive or alternative results (e.g., degradation of citizens' morale). It requires only a small additional step to attach a legitimate rationale to an air strike of dubious legality. For this reason, one critic maintains that the law prompts "belligerents to give hypocritical justifications for their attacks. " 
73
74
75
The United States and other allies see no reason to refrain from attacking lawful targets that might also yield psychological or political benefits. "Otherwise lawful targeting which secures a coercive dividend is legally unobjectionable, " said a NATO military lawyer. 
76
77
78
We have seen how insider and outsider perspectives on the issue of defining military objectives diverge on various grounds. This summary has only touched upon debate regarding the first prong of the criteria for military objectives; however, disagreements attend the second prong as well. 
79
The discussion also illustrates an emerging irony regarding the law and civilian protection. As will be shown in chapter 4, normative concerns regarding civilian casualties increasingly drive US behavior, although the United States continues to hew to its more permissive interpretation of the LOAC. Yet even when the United States is able to avoid harming any civilians in a particular strike, tensions between views of the law may persist. On the question of military objectives in particular, the US ability to reduce civilian harm may actually exacerbate disagreements about the law. From the military's perspective, humanitarian interpretations of military objectives can have perverse effects on civilians.
Changing military capabilities can upend the law's humanitarian priorities. Advanced USAF capabilities and concepts, as described in chapter 2, have reignited debate about strategic targeting in at least two respects. The first is the breadth of targeting, familiar from the above discussion about military objectives; the second respect is the relationship of temporary effects to military advantage and contributions. Overall, precision and effects-based operations suggest new targeting possibilities that will cause few civilian deaths and contribute to ending conflict. However, new possibilities sometimes run afoul of a humanitarian logic demanding destruction that is directly connected to the enemy's military action.
Some airpower advocates argue that a strict interpretation of the law undermines its humanitarian intent by removing key targets from attack even where their destruction would not cause civilian harm. Precision capabilities enable the United States to target a wider range of objects without causing or with reduced collateral damage. 
80
The Kosovo air war provided examples of this thinking. As mentioned earlier, the NATO alliance sought to bomb the economic interests of cronies of Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic in the belief that they might pressure him to stop the violence. The idea of attacking economic infrastructure was not new; the novelty lay in prioritizing attacks on facilities (copper smelter, iron works) that were owned by political supporters of the Serbian leader. 
81
82
83
84
It is tempting to want to apply rules differently to the United States. After all, Americans regard themselves as the good guys who do not seek to kill civilians and who employ unequalled capabilities to reduce noncombatant harm. However, the LOAC does not apply only to the United States. It is a universal system of rules. It is theoretically possible to parse its standards more finely, calibrating them for states with different characters, causes, or capabilities. For example, one could say in a particular type of war, these specific targets would be military objectives, or if a state had x capabilities, it would be able to deem y type of target a military objective. As a practical or political matter, such nuance is infeasible. Even starting down that route might prove a slippery slope, compromising the law's bedrock principle of distinction. In addition, few foreign militaries can approximate the United States' capacity to attack objects without harming persons. Because LOAC rules must extend to all, not just those nations at the forefront of collateral damage mitigation, their potentially perverse effects are the price of maintaining a legal regime for diverse actors. The humanitarian community is attuned to this need but perhaps less aware of how its push for ever-higher LOAC standards might undermine the global legal regime. 
85
While in this chapter I have emphasized differences in perspectives on the LOAC, those differences lie along a spectrum. At the core of the professional LOAC community lies a small fraternity that intensively debates the law's meaning and application. Familiarity among individuals from diverse perspectives helps deflate suspicions and misunderstanding and sands the rougher edges of disagreement down toward their smaller nubs. Where lawyers are free of their institutional affiliations, they can more easily acknowledge imprecision and subtleties in applying law. 
86
IHL principles and language allow the civilian outsider to analyze war and engage with military actors. The spread of IHL beyond legal circles and into the mainstream of policy, press, and public discussion reflects the growing human rights movement and the role played by NGOs that monitor the conduct of armed conflict. Engaging the military through law has significant appeal for nonmilitary actors. First, it provides a point of entry into the evaluation of military activity for actors that lack any formal authority over belligerents. The LOAC provides a framework for the human rights critique and a universally recognized lexicon-unlike the operational syntax of a military campaign. LOAC principles are accessible, even if the specific meaning of legal provisions can be arcane. Thus, the law structures a debate in which outside actors can participate. To its adherents, legal argument may appear more powerful than policy or religious or ethical exhortation. Law describes a required, not just desired, standard of behavior for all bound by it. Reference to law can therefore strengthen a moral argument or political claim.
As LOAC concepts permeate the public consciousness, they create greater awareness of the costs and challenges of war and increase pressure on national forces to "fight well. " However, this mainstreaming of LOAC concepts also risks contaminating careful legal analysis with legal posturing and normative opinion. This democratization of the LOAC adds greater uncertainty to the meaning of legal standards. As observers increasingly use legal concepts and language, they often do so without acquiring deep legal expertise. Humanitarians have promoted mainstreaming IHL in order to boost the law's relevance and impact. 
88
89
90
91
These advocates may regard the interweaving of legal and normative argument as strengthening the humanitarian interpretation of the law, but it can create misleading impressions about the legality of states' actions. Some humanitarian advocates privately acknowledge the distinction between a legal floor and higher ethical standard of behavior in war. In a closed session, one NGO representative told US service members, "There are lots of things the United States could be doing that arguably would be legal. But morally, it's better not to do them, especially if they're simply not necessary. " 
92
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights also seemed to confuse the law with morality. During the air war in Kosovo, she suggested that military actors must be certain that civilians would not be harmed before using force. 94 "If it is not possible to ascertain whether civilian buses are on bridges, " she asked, "should those bridges be blown?" 
95
The law does not require fighting with a handicap. The military may pursue lawful advantage in order to reduce the length and costs of the conflict, including the costs to belligerent forces-a sore spot with humanitarians who claim that the law requires forces to assume more risks for civilians. 
96
Both the military and its critics would do well to acknowledge and respect the distinction between the norm of minimizing civilian casualties and the standards of the law. Humanitarians may wish to make normative or pragmatic arguments that do not rely on contested claims and may in fact be more compelling for military logic. 
97
As normative standards have gained power to shape US military actions (as the next chapter shows), the armed forces learned that they could not hide behind claims of lawfulness in explaining civilian deaths. Military forces can act lawfully and still fail to satisfy their humanitarian critics, particularly when those actions cause civilian harm. The US military, with its permissive view of the law, can defend its actions as lawful even where civilian harm results. However, where the underlying objection is civilian casualties-a normative objectionthe military's legal defense simply misses the point. The USAF learned this the hard way during the 1990s.
The law has become less useful for understanding how airpower affects civilians. The LOAC continues to play a role in justifying US military activities internally and externally. It remains the primary frame and lever for critics of US military action. But the law is not a trump card in either military or humanitarian hands. Nor is it the most powerful standard regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Emphasis upon legal compliance may even be counterproductive in promoting US protection of noncombatants in war.
While outsiders have long hoped that regulating war through law might lead to its abolition, the United States has seen law as a means to legitimate and facilitate its "short, sharp wars. " 
98
99
Today, though, the USAF has nearly left the law behind as it pertains to civilian protection. Technology and longstanding USAF tenets of efficiency have combined to create new tools and concepts for a different style of war. Precision targeting combined with effectsbased operational logic made it possible to create less destruction and kill fewer civilians while pursuing campaign objectives.
During the 1990s, these capabilities combined with political pressure to reduce civilian deaths as described in the following chapters. The USAF's main humanitarian project became reducing civilian casualties. While it continued to use the law to explain its actions, the USAF became more responsive to concerns about civilian harm-a norm that exists outside of the LOAC and is generally more demanding than the LOAC. Ironically, the law's relevance for airpower is greatest where the US ability to reduce civilian casualties has reinvigorated debate-as in the broader interpretations of military objectives and how reduced destruction changes calculations of military utility.
Despite the impact of higher normative expectations, humanitarians continue to evaluate US military operations through a legal lens. This is limiting for several reasons. First, military leaders and nonmilitary outsiders will continue to insist on their understanding of what the law requires. Institutional imperatives preclude compromise on questions of law. For humanitarians and military alike, too much is at stake in reevaluating their longstanding views. As a result, the legalization of the critique of US actions freights the exchange with a defense of respective legal positions.
Second, the democratization of IHL has brought legal concepts and language into the mainstream, where they readily mix and fuse with normative arguments. This frustrates military actors, who take LOAC compliance seriously and expect credit for exceeding legal requirements in their use of force. At the same time, it precludes humanitarians from leveraging the power of the normative expectations. When normative expectations are cast as legal requirements, they can be beaten back with the military's understanding of the LOAC.
Finally, a debate about law impedes more constructive discussions about protecting civilians and obscures the power of norms (rather than law) to shape military behaviors. Both the military and humanitarian communities can hide behind law. It is more productive for outsiders to engage military actors in dialogue about operational choices, practical effects, and future capabilities than to focus on fault-finding in a legal context.
Law is not the primary factor shaping the conduct of war. The next chapter shows how normative-not legal-concerns have translated into very real constraints upon military action, providing a de facto enforcement mechanism for normative change. Outsiders should credit the USAF for responding to these nonlegal expectations and recognize the power that norms can hold for shaping the future of armed conflict. Notes 1. I am concerned here with the LOAC's provisions pertaining to the use of force during combat, as distinguished from LOAC provisions concerning treatment of prisoners, occupation responsibilities, neutrality, or other matters.
2 After the Nuremburg Tribunals, juridical silence followed for a half-centurywhile nations enforced law within their ranks and battlefield practices evolved. Beginning in the 1990s, ad hoc tribunals and now the permanent International Criminal Court began offering limited additional clarity about war crimes. For enforcement, self-help in the form of reprisals was long the primary means of ensuring reciprocal state compliance. See John Fabian Witt, Lincoln's Code: The Laws of War in American History (New York: Free Press, 2012).
3. Thomas Erskine Holland, The Elements of Jurisprudence, 13th ed. (1985, repr., Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1924), 392.
4. Powerful countries may face legal judgment, but no independent enforcement power exists for international law-a fact that contributes mightily to skepticism about the law itself. Enforcement of the law hinges on individual states, whose views or actions may be expressed through regional or international bodies. For example, the International Court of Justice ruled against the United States in 1984 in the case related to US support for the Contra guerillas and the mining of Nicaragua's harbor. The United States was able to block UN Security Council (UNSC) enforcement of the judgment. See Harold G. Maier, "Appraisals of the ICJ's Decision: Nicaragua V.
United States (Merits), " American Society of International Law 81, no. 1 (January 1987): 77-183. In other instances, such as the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, support from the UNSC and actions by states to seize or relinquish suspects allowed the successful enforcement of international law.
5. See discussion in Adam Roberts and Richard Guelff, eds., Documents on the Laws of War, 3rd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 7-10.
6. The United States is not a party to the Additional Protocols but regards some of its provisions as customary law. See Michael J. Matheson 8. Named after its author Francis Lieber, a German-American legal scholar with experience in combat, the code sought to distill "the laws of war for the age of democratic nations and mass armies. " Witt, Lincoln's Code, 231. 9. By 1983 the role of operational lawyers was greatly expanded, and they have continued to be deployed at lower echelons in the field. Steven Keeva, "Lawyers in the War Room, " American Bar Association Journal 77, no. 12 (December 1991), 55.
10. See, for example, Shannon E. French, "When Teaching the Ethics of War Is Not Academic, " Chronicle of Higher Education, 21 March 2003.  11. American government officials stress the legitimacy of US actions (as in the case of the 1991 Amiriyah bunker bombing explored in chapter 4) and emphasize the illegality of adversary tactics (e.g., Victoria Clarke, press briefing, US Department of Defense, 29 March 2003).
12. Roberts and Guelff, Documents on the Laws of War, 9-10. 13. The United States objected to several aspects of the Protocol Additional (I) to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977, also known as AP I; some are discussed below. For a detailed US military perspective, see William Hays Parks, "Air War and the Law of War, " Air Force Law Review 32, no. 1 (1990): 112-45. Among Parks's objections to AP I is what he sees as the shift of responsibility for the protection of the civilian population away from the host nation and "almost exclusively onto the attacker, " 112. Parks regards AP I as a humanitarian deceit aimed at "off-setting any military advantage a superior enemy force might have-particularly an air power, " 218.
14. Walzer reconciles this rights dilemma as privileging the defense of collective rights over individual rights. See Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars (New York:  Basic Books, 1977), 136.
15. Roberts and Guelff, Documents on the Laws of War. For a discussion of the jus ad bellum and jus in bello meanings of proportionality, see pages 9-10. The condition that proportionality judgments be based upon information reasonably available to the commander at the time is known as the "Rendulic Rule, " stemming from post-WWII war crimes trials.  Government, Washington, DC, 1992-1996. This source will hereafter be referred to as NSHR Proceedings.
32. Pokempner et al., "Off Target on the Iraq Campaign, " 113-14. 33. The United States has often loosened prior constraints on the use of force if those constraints appeared to preclude military success (e.g., urban area bombing toward the end of WWII or the expansion of permissible targets during 2011 Operation Odyssey Dawn in Libya). However, it is important to note that where this has occurred, the restrictions had been regarded not as legal requirements but as political constraints (i.e., more restrictive than required by the LOAC at that time). Therefore, even when constraints were eased, American officials and lawyers still regarded US military actions as lawful.
34. Witt, Lincoln's Code, 5-6. Francis Lieber, author of the civil-war code of conduct believed that "when war is begun, the best and most humane thing is to carry it on as intensely as possible so as to be through with it as soon as possible, " quoted in Witt, Lincoln's Code, 235.
35. NSHR Proceedings. The concern is not without foundation. As Roberts and Guelff explain, the term IHL "can also encompass relevant parts of the international law of human rights. " The authors go on to note that the term IHL "could be seen as implying that the laws of war have an exclusively humanitarian purpose, when their evolution has in fact reflected various practical concerns of states and their armed forces on grounds other than those which may be considered humanitarian. " Roberts and Guelff, Documents on the Laws of War, 2.
36. W. Hays Parks's entire article could be said to embody this view. Parks, "Air War and the Law of War. "
37. This example appears to affirm that the norm of minimizing civilian casualties is powerful.
38. One JAG officer explained that air commanders sometimes sought to minimize collateral damage during air operations. "That would have made pilots unnecessarily vulnerable, " the colonel explained. "We had to tell them that they can take a more liberal approach. " Steven Keeva, "Lawyers in the War Room, " 57. "LOAC does not specifically direct a part to take more risk, " a US Air Force deputy judge advocate general said. Maj Gen Charles Dunlap, interview with the author, Washington, DC, 4 December 2009.
39. Frederic L. Borch, "Targeting after Kosovo: Has the Law Changed for Strike Planners?, " Naval War College Review 56, no. 2 (Spring 2003): 64-81; and on the origins of the ICRC and the humanitarian agenda of abolishing war, see also Witt, Lincoln's Code, 341.  40. It should be noted that state positions can be wrong, as evidenced by Iraq's claim that its 1990 invasion of Kuwait was lawful or by Pres. George W. Bush's claims regarding the legality of certain "coercive interrogation" techniques. While there is little formal adjudication of international law, minority views generally lack standing equal to those of the majority (unless those minority views are supported by a history of customary practice). 41. A prime example is the legitimacy of attacking "war-sustaining" targets, which is discussed below. 61. Ibid. The US Army's operational law manual states that "while the criterion of purpose is concerned with the intended, suspected, or possible future use of an object, the potential military use of a civilian object, such as a civilian airport, may make it a military objective because of its future intended or potential military use. "
62. University Centre for International Humanitarian Law Geneva, Targeting Military Objectives (proceedings from an expert meeting, Centre de Conférences de Varembé in Geneva, Switzerland, 12 May 2005), 7.
63. Sassòli, "Legitimate Targets of Attack under International Humanitarian Law, " 3. 64. Article 52 (2) in the AP I also requires that the destruction, capture, or neutralization of the objective offers a "definite military advantage. " Roberts and Guelff, Documents on the Laws of War, 450.
65. US Army, Operational Law Handbook, 23. The logic yields interesting arguments. For example, the Navy's law handbook in 1995 instructed: "economic targets of the enemy that indirectly but effectively support and sustain the enemy's warfighting capability may also be attacked, " citing the example of raw cotton, which Union forces targeted during the American Civil War because it was a source of revenue for the South. US Navy, NWP 73. Sassòli uses several examples from the Kosovo air campaign to illustrate his point. Attacking power stations in order to induce regime change, while justifying the attacks as being against dual use facilities is one example; another illustration focuses on attacking private industry in order to undermine regime supporters while claiming that the strikes aimed to keep cigarettes from enhancing the military effort. Sassòli, "Legitimate Targets of Attack under International Humanitarian Law, " 5.
74. Critics charged that NATO attacked bridges on the grounds that military forces might use them in the future, whereas the coalition's primary motivation had been to destroy military communications (fiber-optic cables) that had been installed in the bridges. "Human rights organizations did not accept the military value of the bridge alone and did not understand that the purpose of the strike was to disrupt command and control. " Burch, " 79. The United States considers the question holistically. The value of each attack is not seen tactically but must be "linked to the full context of war strategy. " Parks, "Asymmetries and the Identification of Legitimate Military Objectives, " 90. European human rights lawyer Francoise Hampson insists that even a broad view of an attack as a whole must be finite or it would erase the distinctions between jus in bello and jus ad bellum analysis. See comment in Francoise Hampson, "Means and Methods of Warfare in the Conflict in the Gulf, " in The Gulf War 1990-91 in International and  English Law, ed. Peter Rowe (London: Sweet and Maxwell, 1993), 94.
80. In fact, some observers have argued that becoming so discriminate and precise undercuts the psychological impact and full benefit of strategic bombing. 91. An example of the tensions between careful analysis and attention-grabbing public impact can be found in the titles of HRW reports that are more sensational than the analysis within (e.g., Off Target).
92. NSHR Proceedings. 93. Amnesty International, NATO/Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: "Collateral Damage" or Unlawful Killings?, 25.  94. Steve Boggan, "War in the Balkans: NATO Is Warned on War Crimes, " Independent (UK), 5 May 1999, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/war-in-the-balkansnato-warned-on-war-crimes-1091503.html. 95. Ibid. 96. The ICTY's ruling that the NATO flight deck was not unlawful reaffirmed the statist perspective. ICTY, Final Report, para. 56.  97. The case for assuming additional risk and minimizing civilian harm during counterinsurgency operations is fundamentally pragmatic, based on assumptions about the requirements of operational success when fighting insurgents. 98. Witt, Lincoln's Code, 184, 279.  99. Quoted in Witt, Lincoln's Code, 235.
PART 2
Every bomb is a political bomb.
-Gen Michael E. Ryan, USAF, retired Chapter 4
Civilian Casualties Lead to Operational Restrictions
As airpower took center stage during US military operations during the 1990s, it faced unprecedented scrutiny and criticism for causing noncombatant casualties. The heightened scrutiny of airpower was somewhat ironic. By 1990 improved technology had combined with the longstanding airpower tenet of "economy of force" to increase dramatically US airpower's accuracy and ability to discriminate among targets. Yet as explained in chapter 1, heightened normative expectations combined with other factors such as the transparency of war to make civilian deaths a key criterion by which the world judged the American way of war. Despite airpower's progress, the expectations were higher still.
This chapter traces how US leaders began to internalize the more stringent expectations of minimizing civilian harm. Chapters 2 and 3 showed that while American political and military leaders sought to avoid intentionally targeting civilians during war, they also relied upon an interpretation of the law of armed conflict (LOAC) that easily accommodated collateral damage. However, the 1990s operations in the Middle East and the Balkans revealed that civilian casualties could be highly costly for political or operational reasons. As a result, US planners became more sensitive to civilian harm in the design of air campaigns. More notably, when significant civilian casualty incidents occurred, US leaders routinely responded by imposing further operational restrictions on airpower.
Over the course of the decade, the United States Air Force (USAF) concluded that civilian casualties led to operational constraints. This realization ultimately prompted institutional change within the service-not simply adaptation during air operations. The USAF noted the new realities in professional military education curricula and in doctrine. 
1
This chapter reviews key events during military interventions of the 1990s in order to illustrate how heightened expectations of civilian protection shaped understandings and restrictions on US airpower.
Operation Desert Storm was Pres. George H. W. Bush's successful coalition effort to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Formally launched on 17 January 1991, the war featured 42 days of air campaign followed by 100 hours of ground war. The conflict was dramatic-with the visual debut of precision weapons and CNN's coverage of "shock and awe" air strikes in Baghdad-but brief, concluding on 28 February 1991. The US-led coalition of states eventually numbered 34 members, including several Arab states whose support was particularly crucial for political reasons. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
"10
In addition to targeting choice, planners instituted a variety of procedural and other precautions, improving upon earlier precautionary tactics of the Vietnam War. According to a Department of Defense report, "Attack routes were planned to minimize the results of errant ordnance; the norm was to use PGMs [precision guided munitions], rather than less-accurate gravity weapons, in built-up or populated areas. Attack procedures specified that if the pilot could not positively identify his target or was not confident the weapon would guide properly (because of clouds for example), he could not deliver that weapon. " 
11
12
13
When civilian casualties inevitably occurred and international criticism ensued, the United States responded by deflecting blame and stressing the coalition's good intentions. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
For a month this approach appeared to suffice. There was limited domestic American criticism of the war, and allies largely reiterated the US public commentary in response to civilian casualty allegations. 
22
23
The realities of war's impact on civilians broke through on 13 February 1991. 
24
25
26
27
The bombing was neither reckless nor careless, yet its consequences were severe. The decision to target the shelter was made only after extensive study and deliberation, and it was clearly believed to be a traditional military target-not an esoteric military objective. Ultimately, the decision to strike the shelter located in a middle-class suburb of Amiriyah, which Allied forces called Al Firdos C3 bunker, hinged on the quality of the intelligence. Central Intelligence Agency analysts believed it was a war command bunker that Iraqi secret police had occupied. 
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
The news dominated international headlines and airwaves for days, although the international response to the civilian deaths varied. Governments that had opposed the war predictably seized upon the incident to attack the United States. There were massive demonstrations in Jordan. Libya called the event an appalling crime committed by America. Sudan's foreign ministry called it a "hideous, bloody massacre" that aimed "to destroy the Iraqi people. " 
37
38
39
40
41
The incident plainly illustrated the vast difference between a legal strike and a violation of the civilian protection norm. One observer noted, "The American claim that [the bunker] had been a legitimate military target . . . became irrelevant once it was revealed that three hundred women and children from families of the military elite had sheltered there and had been incinerated. " 
42
While the Pentagon and US Central Command (USCENTCOM) publicly "circled the wagons" after Amiriyah, according to two seasoned observers, "privately it was a different matter. " 
43
44
With the massive civilian carnage, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and his deputy believed a political threshold had been crossed. 
45
46
47
48
50
51
52
54
55
After Amiriyah, Powell questioned whether each target's destruction was required for prosecuting the war. 
56
58
60
Air commanders sought to maintain their operational freedom. When Brigadier General Glosson recounted the new restrictions, Lieutenant Colonel Deptula proposed redefining "downtown Baghdad. . . . How about making it just the central business district?" he suggested. 
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
In fact, US operational leaders were wrong about political sensitivity at home. The Amiriyah bombing had little effect upon American public opinion, in part because US citizens largely believed what their government had told them about the incident. Accordingly, 80 percent of Americans blamed the Iraqi government for the civilian deaths. Only 13 percent said the United States should take greater precautions to avoid civilian casualties. 
68
From the end of Desert Storm until the invasion of Iraq in 2003, the United States, along with the United Kingdom and other nations, maintained "no-fly zones" in the south and north of Iraq. The northern effort began with Operation Provide Comfort, a relief and protection operation to help Iraqi Kurds fleeing government forces. In January 1997 the effort transitioned to a pure no-fly zone called Operation Northern Watch. 
69
Maintaining the no-fly zones for over a decade proved operationally challenging. Avoiding civilian harm remained a significant concern throughout the course of the operations. Iraq placed its antiaircraft batteries near civilians and protected sites in an effort to induce the coalition to cause civilian casualties. Pilots were allowed to strike Iraqi antiaircraft threats only under strict ROE designed to avoid escalation and civilian harm. 
71
72
The air operations generally stayed below the political radar. Apart from a friendly fire incident in April 1994, the coalition avoided aircraft losses. Iraq sporadically reported civilian casualties, and the United States occasionally admitted that its bombs had hit civilian areas-even if US forces could not confirm deaths. 
73
In 1998 the United States and United Kingdom launched an additional four-day air campaign called Operation Desert Fox. This was a short but intense aerial bombing effort designed to degrade Iraqi capabilities to produce weapons of mass destruction. The campaign both followed and intensified the breakdown in the UN inspection regime against Iraq. Iraqi officials said that as many as 70 civilians had been killed. 
74
No-fly zones and the associated attacks in Iraq continued. However, humanitarian attention instead focused on the suffering caused by international sanctions. The civilian death toll from this "nonlethal" tool of foreign policy was staggering, and losses were exacerbated by the Iraqi government's cynicism and selfishness, as well as physical damage to infrastructure inflicted during the first Persian Gulf War. Sanctions were estimated to have caused hundreds of thousands of Iraqi deaths. 
75
76
77
Airmen had endeavored, with significant success, to avoid civilian casualties while enforcing the no-fly zones, going so far as to experiment with a nonexplosive bomb (discussed in chapter 5). They viewed their ability to minimize collateral damage and avoid escalation as an unsung success, receiving little recognition or reward from Washington. Avoiding civilian casualties was a "nonbarking dog"an achievement that was invisible until it suddenly failed. USAF leaders were frustrated that the operations consumed massive human and material resources yet garnered so little credit. 
78
While the Persian Gulf remained a busy theater of air war for over a decade, the Balkans diverted global attention from the Middle East and prompted two separate US/NATO aerial bombing campaigns in the mid-1990s and then in 1999. Shortly after the fall of the Soviet Union, the state of Yugoslavia began to dissolve into widespread armed conflict among Serb, Croat, and Bosniak factions. The Bosnian Serb Army's genocide against Muslim Bosniaks-and particularly the brutal siege of Sarajevo-came to define the conflict, although all factions committed atrocities. The UN provided largely ineffectual peacekeeping forces, and UN leaders evinced discomfort in employing the NATO airpower dedicated to support the UN effort. In July 1995 the Bosnian Serb Army massacred some 8,000 Bosnian Muslim males in the town of Srebrenica, while UN peacekeepers on the ground failed to intervene (their requests for airpower having been denied by higher-ups). 
79
80
81
While coalition forces in Iraqi no-fly zones sought to reduce civilian harm during their enforcement efforts, planners viewed limiting collateral damage as a prerequisite for NATO's use of airpower in Bosnia. This was not an official requirement formally imposed upon Gen Michael Ryan, USAF, commander, Allied Air Forces Southern Europe, and leader of the air campaign. General Ryan regarded the need to minimize civilian harm as self-evident. 
82
83
84
85
86
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
From 24 March to 11 June 1999, NATO conducted Operation Allied Force (OAF) to pressure Yugoslavian president Milosevic to halt human rights abuses in Kosovo. 
96
For both political and military reasons, then, airpower was again the tool of choice and NATO again provided the coalition architecture for the operation. The United States contributed most of the military assets and capabilities. 
97
98
Coalition members sometimes had different views of the conflict, divergent approaches toward the use of force, and competing understandings of the civilian protection norm and international humanitarian law more broadly. 
99
100
102
103
Targeting: From Tactical to Strategic NATO's initial strategy of gradualism was an effort to reconcile the tensions between protecting forces and protecting civilians. The strategy also sought to balance attacks on tactical or traditional military targets (derided as "tank plinking") with attacks on strategic targets that might yield more decisive effects. As General Clark later wrote, political leaders were holding the Airmen back, "because they wanted something more limited, more diplomatique. " 106 NATO hoped that minimal bombing would suffice, as had been true during Operation Deliberate Force. Unfortunately, as chroniclers of the conflict wrote, NATO had no backup plan. 
107
108
This complicated an already complex process of selecting and phasing attacks on targets. 
110
113
114
115
117
118
119
120
121
122
As the air campaign continued through April without apparent success, civilian harm became a growing concern. Preventing civilian harm in a campaign of this magnitude was impossible. 
124
125
126
Military communications and video technology also enhanced real-time oversight from higher military and political levels, and with this came restrictions and second-guessing about decisions that previously had been judged only in hindsight. 
127
128
129
130
132
133
134
135
137
138
140
141
142
In addition to exercising veto power over bombing in Belgrade, the allies raised specific concerns after each high-profile incident in which civilians died. 
144
One of the most dramatic changes entailed forcing pilots to fly at lower altitudes, thereby assuming greater risk. Lieutenant General Short had imposed a 15,000-foot flight deck on pilots, requiring aircraft to fly above the height of small arms and shoulder-launched FIM-92 Stinger missiles. 
146
While increasing force protection, the flight deck challenged pilots' ability to see what they were bombing. Flying at 15,000 feet made it more difficult to visually identify targets or confirm the presence of civilians at risk. As Lieutenant General Short acknowledged, "Under the limitations I had placed on the crew, it was inevitable that we were going to drop a bad bomb. " 
147
148
149
150
Thus, shortly after the Djakovica bombing, Short's deputy, Brig Gen Daniel P. Leaf, proposed an adjustment to address civilian protection. 
151
152
Particular weapons proved controversial-beyond the general question of their precision. During the Kosovo campaign, fewer than 30 percent of the munitions were precision weapons, a lower percentage than that used during Operation Deliberate Force four years earlier. 
154
The main concerns within and outside NATO revolved around the use of depleted uranium and cluster munitions. 
155
156
157
158
One politically sensitive air strike prompted General Clark to temporarily halt all bombing in the Serbian capital and illustrated the interplay between the concrete effects of civilian casualties and operational restrictions. On 7 May, NATO bombed the Chinese embassy in Belgrade and killed three Chinese nationals. 
160
161
Sensing the resulting loss of momentum in the air war, however, General Clark decided within days to resume attacking Belgrade but with even greater caution. 
163
164
While airpower advocates considered Kosovo a triumph for strategic bombing, many nonetheless were troubled by the gradualism and initial ineffectiveness of the campaign. Some suggested that General Clark, an Army commander, could not be expected to understand how to employ airpower. Yet service affiliation was not the critical factor shaping the SACEUR's decision making. Clark was responding to pressures that would have shaped a USAF officer's thoughts as well-just as they had shaped General Ryan's decisions during Operation Deliberate Force four years earlier.
Political and strategic pressures, not parochial interests or professional bias, were determinate. The short-term responses to civilian casualty incidents, as evidenced by Brigadier General Leaf 's proposal to Lieutenant General Short, illustrated the critical role of civilian harm in shaping tactics as well as the overall operation.
Concern about civilian deaths was not simply a function of respect for the law, nor was it the result of misreading LOAC (as has been alleged regarding the air war in Vietnam). 
165
Divergent reactions to attacks against similar targets illustrate that the sensitivity to noncombatant deaths, not the target choice, was the critical source of public concern. On 23 April, a NATO air strike killed 16 Serb office workers in a radio and television station. 
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
Over the 1990s, the USAF had come to appreciate the political salience of civilian casualties and began developing new tools and processes to minimize civilian impact (described in the next chapter). One US innovation proved particularly crucial as an enabler of operational freedom during OAF. The Collateral Damage Estimate Tool (CDET) could model information related to a planned strike, taking into account munitions choice, tactics, and other adjustable parameters. The model predicted the full range of effects, including the strike's estimated impact on noncombatants.
The number of estimated civilian deaths was supposed to be one element of the overall target analysis, but because alliance members were so sensitive to civilian harm, CDET played a critical role in coalition target approval. The estimate determined the level of political scrutiny that a target would receive. If an air strike was predicted to result in 20 or more civilian deaths, it automatically required approval at the highest levels of the US government. 
173
As the war continued, NATO juggled two competing impulses. It increased tactical restrictions on how targets could be attacked. It simultaneously widened the categories of acceptable dual use targets, attacking infrastructure, media, and private businesses. The Kosovo campaign illustrated that the real issue of sensitivity was not legality but effects upon civilians. If the actual standard had been legal compliance, it might have been more difficult to justify the attacks. Because popular expectations primarily concerned effects upon civil-ians rather than the nature of the target itself, these controversial strategic targets became easier to justify.
As the United States became frustrated with the ineffectiveness of NATO attacks on military equipment, it pushed to broaden attacks on strategic targets. 
174
175
The civilian casualty number assumed a life of its own, and it eventually drove the entire targeting process. 
176
177
178
179
180
Airpower had been through a crucible of criticism and constraints, and as a result, the USAF had begun the process of not just operational adaptation but also institutional change. CDET was one manifestation of that change; the USAF also developed new munitions and capabilities specifically designed to minimize collateral damage. These institutional innovations, which continued throughout the next decade, are detailed in the following chapter.
On the operational side, airpower benefited from this new attitude and these new capabilities when the United States attacked Afghanistan in 2001 and when it launched its war against Iraq in 2003. There was very little strategic bombing in Afghanistan; instead US aircrews quickly found themselves supporting Afghan insurgents and US special forces (SF) in an irregular warfare campaign (and then, much later, in a counterinsurgency effort). Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) featured strategic bombing at the outset, with painstaking monitoring of targets in Baghdad and use of discriminate weapons systems. 
183
184
185
Airpower sensibilities had changed significantly since the Cold War, and this created a sharp contrast with the ground force perspective. For the USAF, civilian casualties were no longer just a question of adherence to the LOAC; they had become a central issue of operational concern. Sensitivity to civilian harm was now a routine aspect of war planning and operations. Airmen expected to produce collateral damage estimates, they knew to select the least destructive weapons that could achieve the desired military effects, and they anticipated that the targeting process might become more complicated when civilian casualties were anticipated. Civilian protection had indeed become more "like the weather" in Airmen's minds.
However, land power had not been forced through an analogous crucible regarding the operational impact of civilian casualties on its freedom of action or effectiveness. Ground forces also remained more vulnerable to immediate fires, including threats from actors that appeared to be civilian in nature. This meant that infantry Soldiers were forced to assume greater risks when averting unintentional harm during combat operations. The combination of airpower's changing institutional mind set and ground forces' greater physical exposure created frictions as the two components began working together in combat.
Airpower's primary sustained mission during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan was close air support. For the first time since Operation Desert Storm, the USAF performed the critical function of supporting deployed ground forces. This was a different ball game from strategic targeting. In addition to honing attacks while taking collateral damage into account, aircrews now faced another competing imperative: protecting US personnel on the ground. This was not a pressure they had experienced during most of the 1990s when they were enforcing no-fly zones or conducting the Balkan air campaigns. With US forces on the ground, aircrews feared that their hesitation or miscalculations might jeopardize the lives of American Soldiers. 
186
187
Frustrated with pilots' questions, SF Soldiers on the ground began to play a "terminology game" with the aircrews to entice them to drop their weapons. 
188
189
190
191
Guerilla warfare is an ancient asymmetric approach to war. Insurgents can deprive US forces of many advantages upon which they rely in conventional conflict. Traditional US military strengths such as advanced technology, a detailed assessment of the enemy order of battle, commitment to ethical and legal standards, and sheer destructive power can be vitiated, or even become liabilities, in counterinsurgency (COIN) struggles. Guerilla tactics increase the physical and psychological risks to COIN forces. Because guerillas disguise themselves as and shelter among civilians, counterinsurgents have great difficulty distinguishing adversary from noncombatant. There are rarely front lines or rear areas in which to take respite. The insurgents' use of improvised explosive devices and the early US response to the threat exemplified the challenge facing US forces in Iraq, and later, in Afghanistan.
These realities on the ground further stressed the air-ground partnership. However ambiguous a situation might appear from the air, ground forces could not afford to be ambivalent about seeming portents. 
192
The divergence in perspectives was all the wider because the US military lacked any doctrine for fighting COIN. After Vietnam, the armed forces had decided that COIN was not a mission for which it would prepare (only SF had any training for irregular warfare). Thus there was no doctrine, education, or training to prepare the joint force for what it faced in Afghanistan and Iraq after toppling the national political leadership.
The gap between air and ground forces' operational experiences during the 1990s, coupled with their starkly different risk profiles in COIN operations as well as the absence of COIN doctrine, complicated the air-ground interface in Afghanistan and Iraq. When aircraft operated as close air support, the commander on the ground literally called the shots. His desire to neutralize potential threats to his forces, though, could conflict with the awareness of civilian harm that had become more engrained in Airmen.
Airpower essentially had to wait for ground forces to catch up to its awareness of the impact of civilian casualties. It was not until well into the Iraq war, and even later in Afghanistan, that a new COIN doctrine began to permeate the Army and Marine Corps (USMC). Even then training lagged behind, and committed leadership remained vital for inculcating a counterintuitive approach to combat. Only after ground forces better understood the long-term operational impact of civilian harm were they able to adapt their employment of airpower.
Change came first to Iraq, the fight that US policy makers prioritized. Gen David H. Petraeus, US Army, took command of the coalition operation in 2006, having just directed the revision of US Army and USMC COIN doctrine to emphasize the protection of civilians. 
193
194
195
196
With the new directive and General McChrystal's constant reinforcement of the rules, ISAF was able to significantly reduce the number of civilian casualties caused by fixed wing aircraft over the following year. Ironically, though, airpower continued to bear the brunt of public and Afghan blame for civilian deaths. It is ironic that airpower-and its most prominent proponent, the USAF-continued to attract such criticism given the USAF's intellectual, operational, and (as we shall see in the next chapter) material leadership in minimizing civilian harm.
However, few observers differentiated among the diverse actors and platforms that launched weapons from the air. Neither Afghans nor the general public distinguished the pedigrees of air-to-surface fires. Fixed-wing naval forces were involved in the fight alongside USAF aircraft. However, Army and USMC forces frequently relied on their own organic helicopters for close combat support. These forces use different procedures than those for fixed-wing aircraft. 
197
198
The USAF's recent history has been characterized by a consistent, even growing, challenge to maximize operational effectiveness while minimizing civilian harm. The USAF led the way in responding to these pressures, even as it confronted new variations of civilian casualty challenges during COIN operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The number of noncombatant dead might be over 200, as in the Amiriyah bunker incident, or as few as three in the Chinese embassy episode, or it might be a dozen deaths repeated each week in airstrikes in Afghanistan. However, the international community, national leaders, and local citizens no longer accepted that these deaths were simply collateral damage. Outside observers did not evaluate civilian effects in terms of their value relative to military advantage, as LOAC demands. Instead, the civilian deaths galvanized international opinion. Even if air campaigns succeeded in minimizing civilian harm by historical standards, USAF leaders feared growing restrictions on their use of force.
Normative expectations shaped the conduct of air operations, and the operational USAF adapted on the fly. It sought to reduce civilian harm in targeting choice and tactics in order to ensure the continued viability of aerial bombing as a tool of choice for US policy makers. The next chapter details how the USAF also began longer-term institutional adaptation-developing new capabilities and tools to address collateral damage concerns in future operations. The CDET that became available for use in Kosovo in 1999 was one such innovation; new weapons and supporting capabilities also emerged to address the changing operational environment.
Had airpower not faced heightened normative expectations in the 1990s, civilian casualty mitigation likely would have continued to improve as an unintended side effect of other USAF objectives. However, the intensity and operational impact of normative and political concerns instead prompted the service to undertake dedicated institutional efforts to reduce civilian harm during that decade. The combination of wartime innovation and institutional change placed the USAF at the forefront of collateral damage mitigation efforts within the US military. 3. "Each service was given the opportunity to apply its own ethos to the war, with few constraints from on high. " Michael R.  11, no. 3 (Fall 1997), 21, http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil/airchronicles/apj/apj97/ fal97/owen.pdf.
84. The Secretary of the Air Force subsequently explained that the operation was "politically fragile. With the first report of civilian casualties, the entire operation would have been put at risk, but that report never came. " Sheila E. Widnall, secretary of the Air Force, "The Air Force in the New World Order, " to the Orlando Air Force Association Symposium, speech, 16 February 1996, http  91. Pollock, "Roads Not Taken, " 431-32.  92. Owen, "Operation Deliberate Force, " 64.  93. "For example, because smart bombs that went 'stupid' generally struck long or short of their targets, Ryan directed that bridge attack runs be made along the rivers they crossed, even though this tactic theoretically placed the crews at risk to antiaircraft weapons arrayed along the banks. At one barracks facility, Ryan allowed the bombing of an outer row of munitions bunkers, but not an inner row, to minimize the risk of damage to potentially inhabited buildings. " He also insisted on use of the "smallest weapons capable of taking out targets rather than the largest available weapons their aircraft could carry. " Ibid., 64. This meant that "A-10 fighters flew into the threat envelops of Serbian MANPADs [man-portable air-defense system] and light AA [antiaircraft batteries] in order to use cannons, rather than bombs, to cut down a microwave relay tower and to destroy the contents of a warehouse, both of which were located near civilian dwellings. While normal procedure called for attacking aircraft to minimize their exposure to enemy defensive systems by dropping all of their weapons in single passes, General Ryan required many aircraft over Bosnia to make multiple passes, dropping only one weapon at a time, and only after the dust from previous weapons had cleared. " Ibid., 65.  94. Richard L. Sargent, "Deliberate Force Targeting, " in Deliberate Force: A Case Study in Effective Air Campaigning, Final Report of the Air University Balkans Air Campaign Study, ed. Robert C. Owen (Maxwell AFB, AL: Air University Press, January 2000), 278. This would mean about one civilian casualty for every 30-40 weapons. The number is small, but the number of munitions deployed was also relatively small. Thus, compared to other conflicts, this is a high ratio of civilian deaths. See Owen, "Operation Deliberate Force, " 63. Chief of Staff of the Air Force Gen Merrill McPeak subsequently revealed that there had been about 20 cases of collateral damage, although it was unclear whether he meant civilian deaths, injuries, or damage to property. "The Art of War, " Online NewsHour, 16 June 1999, http://www.pbs.org/ newshour/bb/europe/jan-june99/lessons_6-16.html.
95. One analyst concluded that "NATO's successful blending of precision air power and humanitarian credibility led its leaders to expect a reprise of Deliberate Force in their confrontation with Serb misrule in Kosovo. The Alliance's confidence that Kosovo would replay Bosnia extended to restricting military planners to preparing for a two-or three-day war only, with air attacks restricted to military installations unlikely to produce collateral civilian casualties. " 
During the 1990s operational constraints stemming from political and military leadership concerns about limiting civilian casualties became a defining element of US air warfare. United States Air Force (USAF) leaders gradually moved from criticizing and resisting these constraints to accepting them as an enduring aspect of modern war. This set in motion the process of institutional adaptation, distinct from the operational adaptation described in the previous chapter.
Preparing future air capabilities to minimize civilian harm hinged upon the USAF recognizing and accepting the importance of the challenge. Adapting future war-fighting capabilities through doctrine, tactics, weapons, and training is a service responsibility, distinct from the operational responsibilities of the combatant commands (COCOM). 
1
Beginning in the late 1990s, the USAF took incremental institutional steps to make civilian protection a goal in its own right, rather than viewing it solely as a derivative benefit of airpower's technological evolution. The service developed new weapons designed to reduce civilian harm and developed new capabilities to predict civilian impact of airstrikes. The USAF's evolving approach to civilian protection contrasted starkly with the absence of innovation in ground force planning and capabilities with regard to reducing civilian harm during combat operations. 
2
In the years immediately following the Gulf War, airpower proponents resisted seeing avoiding civilian casualties as a new institutional responsibility or an independent requirement. For the USAF, the Gulf War was a vindication of airpower-not a call for institutional change. Many perceived the Amiriyah bombing as a "glitch"-a singular incident. Moreover, it was not even considered a mistake of the USAF's making. Instead, leaders deemed Amiriyah to be either an intelligence failure or Saddam Hussein's fault for placing civilians at risk-or both.
In fact, to some airpower experts the Gulf War provided additional evidence that efforts to avoid civilian harm could undermine military success. Military historian Williamson Murray argued that Operation Desert Storm had failed to cause enough collateral damage. The coalition's careful air targeting looked cautious, he wrote, and failed to inflict the destruction necessary to compel Saddam Hussein's swift capitulation. 
3
4
There were other institutional reasons to avoid considering alternatives; reducing civilian harm entails several distinct types of costs. Force protection might be jeopardized. USAF voices warned that collateral damage constraints posed significant risk to the aircrews enforcing the Iraqi no-fly zone operations that followed Desert Storm. 
5
Over the next two decades, though, three factors combined to change the USAF's perspective. First, the sheer consistency of the constraints on airpower, imposed during different types of military operations and through both Republican and Democratic administrations, indicated that concern about civilian casualties had become an enduring factor in using airpower. Second, accommodating these constraints was in some respects-although not entirely-consistent with the desire for greater precision and the use of effects-based targeting concepts that the USAF already had been pursuing. Finally, there was a demonstrable payoff in developing tools to demonstrate airpower's ability to address civilian casualties. What came to be called collateral damage mitigation (CDM) offered a route toward regaining greater operational freedom and ensuring airpower's role in future conflicts. Thus, once airpower leaders came to view collateral damage constraints as unavoidable, they recognized that satisfying these constraints served USAF institutional objectives.
Growing familiarity with the constraints and concerns further eased USAF opposition. The service continued over the next decade preparing its crews for missions in which collateral damage mattered. Aircrews devised and trained on tactics that ensured greater attention to civilian harm-whether flying routine no-fly zone missions over Iraq or engaging in a high-profile humanitarian intervention. 
6
8
Aircrews performed brilliantly in the face of the new demands, and there were few discernable costs. US aircrews would face serious air-to-air challenge only in a handful of notional high-intensity wars now that the Cold War was over. Aircrews still faced varied threats from surface-to-air fires. However, devoting more effort to avoiding civilian deaths did not directly translate into American casualties.
From the no-fly zone enforcement through the air campaigns in the Balkans, hundreds of Airmen gained individual experience in operating-successfully, even if at nominally higher risk-within severe collateral damage constraints. Many of these individuals would go on to serve in USAF staff roles in which they then shaped institutional views and choices. 
9
Airmen-most prominently Kosovo air commander Lt Gen Michael Short-still complained about gradualism and micromanagement. 
10
11
12
The civilian leadership's perspective on operations in Kosovo was indeed broader and more sensitive to the political context of using force. While American military commanders, having studied Clausewitz, intellectually understood this reality, many still longed to practice "pure" doctrinal concepts (and advance institutional interests) as they conducted war. European air leaders appeared more accustomed to political constraints and less sympathetic to US airpower complaints. 
13
14
15
16
Fortunately for the USAF, the service already had been heading in a direction largely compatible with this goal. The USAF had been seeking greater precision, less destruction, and economy of force. This contrasted with the sustained ground forces focused upon applying massive destructive power at greater standoff distances. USAF efforts therefore had naturally, albeit inadvertently, supported civilian protection objectives.
Two new synergistic avenues of adaptation emerged in the late 1990s. Advances in precision enabled more tailored and discrete approaches to targeting, which in turn demanded measuring effectsincluding civilian casualties. This motivated efforts to improve capabilities for the specific purpose of limiting civilian harm. In small steps that flowed logically from and reinforced one another, the USAF gradually changed its attitude toward civilian protection. It no longer assumed that civilian protection was an inherent or subsidiary aspect of the American way of war. It began, haltingly, to regard civilian casualty reduction as an independent goal and an institutional responsibility.
After Desert Storm, the USAF emphasized the value of its strategic, rather than tactical, contributions to the fight. It saw the war as vindicating an effects-based approach, one that provided decisive results more efficiently and with reduced loss of life for Americans. 
17
18
19
20
21
The most obvious way to assess civilian harm is to document the actual effects on noncombatants in war. The United States did so after WWII. The resulting Strategic Bombing Survey sought to measure not just the destruction of infrastructure and enemy forces but also to estimate civilian casualties. 
22
23
During the 1980s humanitarian and human rights groups began documenting civilian deaths and injuries that US forces caused in Central America. By the 1990s this work had become a central occupation of many American and international nongovernmental organizations (NGO) and regional bodies, and the United Nations also began counting civilian deaths.
It was not until 2005, in Iraq, that the US military began compiling civilian casualty data. Despite vociferously resisting this responsibility for some 50 years, international expectations about war, transparency of the battlefield, and American claims of good intentions combined to demand greater awareness of the results of using force. 
24
For the USAF, the lack of empirical data posed an obvious challenge to improving effects-based targeting, particularly since political guidance increasingly demanded fewer civilian casualties. The failure to measure actual effects on civilians also prevented the USAF from substantiating its claims to support the protection of civilians during military operations. To advance its pursuit of precision and EBO, the service followed a different path to assess civilian harm.
The USAF chose to focus on prediction-theoretical modeling of what would happen-rather than on empirical data regarding civilian effects. This approach was born of its organizational history and culture. As primary guardian of the nuclear mission, the USAF had already developed tools for predicting "collateral damage" from nuclear explosions. Modeling civilian effects of nuclear strikes "fit less well with the assumptions and aspirations of precision [nuclear] strategic bombing doctrine" because it exposed massive human suffering. 
25
26
A major impetus was a technical puzzle from Operation Desert Storm-one that threatened to undermine the USAF's effects-based targeting approach. US airpower's destruction of Iraqi infrastructure was effective. It also contributed to unintended second-order effects of disease and death for up to 100,000 Iraqi civilians. 
27
The initial interest lay in improving airpower's ability to attack urban infrastructure. However, once the challenge was no longer defined as maximizing destruction, the analysis assumed a fresh and inexorable logic. Launched on the path of minimizing specific effects, the modeling community developed ways to estimate the direct physical impact on physical persons.
The value of modeling civilian casualties proved significant. "Modeling provides the ability to demonstrate to your political masters how you can achieve the results you want, " Lieutenant General Deptula observed. "You can lift these restraints if you can demonstrate the particular effects of specific weapons, and that will allow for greater application of force. " 
28
The first phase of the effort was creation of a collateral damage estimation tool (CDET) that provided an automated inventory of weapons to set parameters and calculated the effects of particular munitions. As discussed in chapter 4, this tool was still evolving as NATO commenced OAF in 1999. USAF strategists previously had lacked useful data about the potential civilian impact of bombing. However, in the Kosovo air campaign, civilian casualty estimates became a critical element of the target approval process. In fact, the predicted number of civilian casualties often determined whether a target or an air strike would be approved or not. Adjusting the parameters of the strike to yield a smaller predicted number enhanced the prospects for strike approval and helped preserve a central role for airpower. 
29
30
31
32
33
US modeling capabilities are highly sophisticated, yet they remain flawed in important respects. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
43
44
45
Collateral damage estimates "are meant to inform decision makers and commanders and are not decisions themselves. " 
46
Data can easily assume a life of its own, even in a process recognized as complex and interpretive. Fighting the tyranny of numbers in the targeting process remains a challenge. Numbers not only can become just the key to political oversight but also can sometimes-as in OAF-function as the de facto criteria for targeting. This can be undesirable from a variety of perspectives.
With the focus on the CDE, a consideration of civilian impact can be divorced from military effects. 
47
48
The CDET process had the potential to blind operators as well, substituting a number for a real effect. One modeler complained that others "want to maneuver the system so they get the results they want for airpower. They think 'If I get approval for this, I need to know what to tell the tribal sheik the impact will be. ' They aren't thinking about how the locals will view the hole and the buildings. They're thinking how many, the numbers, to get approval. " 
49
CDET was originally developed for preplanned attacks against fixed targets; it was not initially envisioned to have tactical applications. CDET modeling required extensive information on the materials in the target, population density, terrain, aim points, munitions, and so forth, and it took at least four hours to run the modeling software. 
50
Accordingly, the JWAC in 2002 developed a simplified version of CDET called "FAST CD. " This software drew a blob-like two-dimensional footprint of a proposed air strike's estimated blast radius (giving it the unfortunate colloquial name "Bugsplat"). 
51
Approved for use during the planning of the invasion of Iraq, FAST CD quickly became the primary process for estimating civilian casualties. United States Central Command (USCENTCOM), the command with oversight of operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, in 2004 assumed responsibility for most collateral damage assessments. 
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
Overall, the emergence of the CDE process was a qualified triumph for civilian protection. It represented an unprecedented investment in understanding-and limiting-the effect of military action on civilians. It had important limitations. First, the systems were not calibrated to empirical data about actual effects of military force. The second limitation lay primarily in how CDE was used, since the numbers created an illusion of certainty and control and risked driving decision making. On the other hand, CDE allows political and military leaders to anticipate better the potential civilian harm in specific targeting choices and to decide whether to risk the potential civilian cost regardless of the legality of taking action. CDE also highlighted tradeoffs in how a given target might be attacked (in addition to whether to attack it), in many cases allowing mitigation of collateral damage through actions that brought the United States little, or zero, additional risk, such as choosing a more appropriate munition or altering the angle at which the aircraft approached the target. CDE enables win-win solutions to reduce civilian deaths and injury without undermining US military objectives.
After the first use of laser-guided munitions in Vietnam, the United States acquired a small arsenal of precision weapons and the enabling technologies: lasers, computers linked to satellite position systems, gun cameras, explosive technology refinements, and unmanned surveillance drones-the latter of which the USAF now refers to as remotely piloted vehicles (RPV). However, precision did not make its true public debut until Operation Desert Storm in 1991, where it was arguably overhyped in videotape extolling the virtues of laser-guided missiles. Only about 8 percent of munitions deployed during conflict were smart bombs; precision-guided munitions (PGM) remained a nascent capability. 
60
61
62
63
64
Cost remained a key hurdle for PGMs, however. As late as 1996, the former USAF chief of staff complained that the price of highly accurate cruise missiles made them impractical to actually use in war. 
65
The USAF also refashioned air delivery platforms and improved surveillance and reconnaissance systems, including the development of relatively inexpensive unmanned systems. RPVs "not only improved situational awareness and the ability to discriminate visually, they eventually became deadly weapons in their own right. Able to stay "on station" far longer than manned aircraft, RPVs were better suited to awaiting complex target approval processes and provided a means to avoid any risk to pilots. 
67
68
69
70
So, for example, the USAF in 2001 awarded a contract for a 250-pound small diameter bomb (SDB). The USAF noted that the weapons increased flexibility and allowed greater numbers of bombs per platform, but the primary utility lay in reducing collateral damage. 
71
72
73
74
75
The USAF subsequently sought modifications to existing munitions to reduce their blast and secondary effects. In 2002, when USCENTCOM identified a need for a nonexplosive area munition to destroy soft targets, Eglin was able to respond within an astonishingly short 98 days. 
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
By 2011 the USAF was able to portray itself as moving into a new era of civilian-friendly weaponry. 
91
92
93
94
95
Col Tom Ehrhard was one such innovator. While serving in Afghanistan, he had promoted collateral damage-mitigation tactics. These included substituting 500-pound bombs for the 2,000-pound weapons that were preferred early in the conflict and for eliminating "z-axis" error by employing air weapons at a 90-degree angle, which significantly reduced circular error probability in mountainous terrain. 
96
Upon returning to Washington, DC, Ehrhard decided to tackle the longer-term challenge of improving air-launched munitions. "I come from the nuclear community, " Ehrhard explained. "My lesson from the nuclear business is stockpile to target discipline. A bomb should only go off if everything goes right. I walked into the conventional community where no one regarded weapons that way. And, I was energized by engagement [on civilian harm] with the [Harvard] Carr Center dialogue; so, I started seeing the problem through that lens. I thought we could fix some things through technology, like a fuse that would prevent a misguided weapon from exploding. " 
97
98
99
Despite the progress that was made throughout the 2000s, then, countervailing pressures limited the USAF's investment in collateral damage mitigation. A 2003 Defense Science Board study concluded that a variety of institutional factors prevented DOD from supporting low-collateral-damage capabilities "to the extent possible and the degree necessary. " 100 These institutional factors include an incomplete understanding of likely enemies; absence of comprehensive effects assessment and failure to fully develop tools to shape and monitor effects; weakness of anticipatory, collaborative contingency planning processes; and the intellectual development to support these objectives. 
101
Nonetheless, the USAF had come to recognize collateral damage mitigation as an independent-not derivative-objective for the development of capabilities. The new capabilities were win-win propositionsmore effective for the mission and less deadly for the civilian. Furthermore, the service no longer viewed collateral damage exclusively in the context of legal compliance or moral obligation. Addressing civilian protection was important to the service because it could help ensure that airpower would remain relevant and effective.
In the dozen years that preceded US engagement in COIN operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, the USAF had begun integrating civilian casualty mitigation not just into its conduct of operations but also within its institutional ethos. During the 1990s, the USAF had come to accept that operational constraints to avoid civilian casualties were likely unavoidable, and accordingly the service began to accommodate civilian casualty mitigation into its longer-term institutional capabilities and concepts.
The USAF turned its response to civilian harm from a liability into a virtue. Today, the service emphasizes its abilities to reduce civilian harm and portrays those abilities as advancing institutional goals. The USAF's analytical arm, A9, argues that collateral damage minimization helps maintain airpower's asymmetric advantage. 
102
104
2. During the 1990s, ground forces faced a different adaptation challenge related to civilians on the battlefield. US infantry during that decade repeatedly were deployed to peace operations, which are doctrinally distinct from conventional combat operations. In peace operations, the primary challenge for the US Army and Marine Corps was learning to work effectively with local villagers, representatives of nongovernmental or international organizations, and US government civilians during reconstruction and Chapter 6
The US military's adaptation to civilian casualty (CIVCAS) prevention varied by service but was driven largely by operational pressures to reduce harm to noncombatants. Airpower hit these pressures during the 1990s, while land forces confronted them the following decade during counterinsurgency (COIN) operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Adaptation occurred in the field, but institutional, lasting change was uneven. In 2006 the Army and Marine Corps created new doctrine (FM 3-24, Counterinsurgency) that placed civilian protection at the heart of military operations. The two services then sought to apply this doctrine in the field. But, while the Army took further steps to institutionalize civilian casualty mitigation, overall institutional progress has been halting.
Terminology indicates a changed military awareness of civilian casualties. Noncombatant deaths were once considered, and spoken about, as a subset of collateral damage. However, by the 1990s, that term seemed out of step with international sensitivities, and US officials began referring more frequently to civilian casualties than to collateral damage. By the end of the 2000s, the military had adopted a new acronym for its internal use: CIVCAS. Some military voices began pushing the Department of Defense (DOD) to do more to prevent noncombatant deaths. Air Force major Patrick Shaw's 1997 thesis disaggregated potential causes of civilian deaths and offered related military mitigation strategies. 
1
2
Even so, adaptation in the field remained stovepiped, ad hoc, and less effective than it could have been. Key lessons learned the hard way in Iraq never made it to operations in Afghanistan. As late as 2010, International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) leaders had difficulty tracking, let alone integrating, disparate ISAF efforts to prevent and mitigate civilian harm. Operational leaders at different levels sought to address particular aspects of preventing civilian harm, but they lacked a common conceptual framework and a comprehensive understanding of the challenge. 
3
Because the services were slow in adapting, forces had to learn on the fly. For example, when Gen David Petraeus, US Army, in spring 2008 directed an offensive against insurgents in Baghdad's densely populated and politically charged Sadr City, US air and ground elements had to create new tactics and a concept of operations to enable precision engagements to halt indirect fire with minimal civilian casualties. 
4
5
6
1
While the study's framework was not revolutionary, it filled a critical void. It captured the complexity and multidimensional nature of the problem, drawn from field analysis in Afghanistan. It highlighted the responsibilities of the institutional force-the services-in tackling the challenge, and it provided a template for designing and monitoring those efforts. Using this template, even the US Air Force (USAF), pioneer in this arena, could identify those phases of response that require more attention. 
7
8
The fundamental issue facing the US military, particularly the Army and Marine Corps, remains the need for institutional changeinternalization within the services that civilian casualty reduction is not something that automatically happens but rather requires dedicated attention: technology, tactics, training, and so forth. The present decade began with some encouraging efforts to elevate civilian casualties within the joint force and the Army, as described below, but these do not appear to have been sustained. Real progress will require attention in several key areas: data, learning, analysis, expertise, institutional responsibility, and evaluating US success. These challenges are discussed in turn.
One of the most important indicators of an institution's priorities is what it measures. The military came late to measuring civilian harm, and it is unclear whether the military will extend this practice beyond COIN operations. In the 1990s, the DOD developed models for predicting civilian casualties from air strikes but did not-and still does not-test those models against the actual results of strikes.
The armed forces began systematically recording civilian deaths only in 2005 in Iraq and even later in Afghanistan. These efforts had weaknesses related to the information that was (and was not) collected. The wide variability of formats for collecting data, confusion of relevant terminology, and uneven collation processes combined to undermine the utility of the data. 
9
Moreover, the type of data collected was not ideal for operational learning. Tracking casualties captured failure, not success. Since instances of avoiding civilian casualties were not typically recorded, best practices largely remained matters of personal experience. Many service members were left to make their own tragic mistakes instead of learning from those that preceded them. 
10
11
Until 2011, the Joint Lessons Learned Information System (JLLIS) had no formal civilian casualty category. The index of subjects covered through the JLLIS was extensive, and by examining other JLLIS topics, such as fire control, civilian casualty lessons could be gleaned.
However, a new captain searching JLLIS to learn how best to lead or train a company to avoid civilian casualties would have struggled to piece together that knowledge.
The fragmentation of civilian casualty learning stood in stark contrast to friendly fire, which had been identified as an independent issue within the database, although its lessons, too, must be drawn from a variety of other JLLIS topics, such as fire control or communications. The designation of an independent category for friendly fire has helped ensure ongoing operational analysis and institutional remedies for friendly fire incidents.
The same can be done for civilian casualties. In late 2011, the Joint Staff J7 took an important first step by creating a civilian casualty "community of practice" within the JLLIS system, consolidating the civilian casualty studies conducted since 2009. 
12
To better understand civilian harm and military operations, the military must build a cadre of subject matter experts. Yet civilian casualty expertise is limited-in part because the topic is rarely studied. This vicious cycle underscores the importance of prioritizing civilian casualty as an ongoing concern of the institutional force, regardless of whether the topic is dominating headlines at the moment.
In 2009, after almost a decade of combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, Jacqueline Henningsen and Cliff Tompkins initiated the military's first official analysis of the relationship of airpower to civilian casualties. 
13
14
At approximately the same time, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Adm Mike Mullen, directed the Joint Center for Operational Analysis (JCOA), then part of Joint Forces Command, to study the 4 May 2009 Farah air strike in Afghanistan. The strike had killed a large number of civilians and had become a source of tension within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and with the Afghan government. The case study examined various contributing factors and highlighted areas for potential improvement in using airpower in the future. It examined only one airpower incident, but two of the study's analysts went on to help lead other civilian casualty studies. 
15
The JCCS was the first comprehensive study of civilian harm in a US military operation. 
16
17
18
19
Developing and sustaining expertise remains a dilemma for the DOD. If an organization fails to develop its capacity to see a problem, it may not be able to see that problem. This is especially true if the organization largely dismisses external feedback (and the DOD often distrusts civilian casualty critiques from the press, nongovernmental organizations [NGO], and international organizations). Yet if the organization does not see the problem, it has no incentive to develop the requisite capacity to understand and address the issue. This may be a hole into which civilian casualty is now falling. Even after the USAF began adapting to civilian protection, civilian casualty has yet to become part of what Lynn Eden has called the "enmeshing of organizational goals and disciplinary knowledge. " 
20
21
Civilian casualties have long been considered an issue of morality. While chaplains help service members grapple with their personal qualms regarding the use of force, since Vietnam, lawyers have assumed increasing responsibility for assessing civilian harm. They advise commanders and train service members regarding when and how targets can be attacked lawfully. Lawyers write ROE and review campaign plans. Commanders (and in some cases, the national command authority) make the final decisions, but the lawyers consider civilian casualties as part of their legal assessment of proposed targeting choices.
However, as explained in chapter 3, an opinion about what is legally permissible is not equivalent to a judgment about whether the potential for civilian harm is reasonable, advisable, or preventable through alternative approaches. Nor does a legal judgment account for the political effects of civilian deaths on an ally, a local population, global opinion, or domestic support. In other words, lawyer approval remains necessary, but it may no longer be sufficient in modern war.
The sensitivity of civilian death is a primary reason why the United States created civilian casualty thresholds, known as the noncombatant casualty cutoff value (NCV). These have been used in air campaigns since Kosovo. When a proposed strike triggers the NCV by predicting the threshold level of civilian casualties, the targeting decision is automatically pushed to higher political authorities-regardless of the presumed legality and the importance of the target.
In the military realm, neither lawyers nor chaplains have the institutional stature of members serving in the combat arms. Operators tend to be the most respected and influential part of the uniformed force, setting the unit tone and priorities. Yet even in 2009, some units in Afghanistan looked to lawyers or chaplains as the experts most responsible for understanding civilian casualties. 
22
23
There is no enduring institutional or bureaucratic proponent or constituency for reducing civilian harm. As a result, there is no obvious destination for the lessons captured in reports posted on JLLIS. Even highly useful but seemingly routine work may be left undone. Who in the USAF, Navy, or Army is responsible for advocating and budgeting for new nonlethal capabilities? Who is responsible for the analysis and effort to correct false claims about civilian casualty concerns depriving American troops of crucial air support? Whose job is it to scrub the military's deliberate plans to ensure that civilian harm has been thoroughly considered, and how do they know enough has been done? Whose promotion is enhanced if the military fights effectively with fewer unintended deaths?
Although great progress has been made in enabling US forces to reduce civilian harm, that progress may not be sustained without institutional sponsorship. For example, much of the airpower technology that enabled civilian casualty reduction was developed for other reasons. 
24
The May 2009 civilian casualty incident in Farah, Afghanistan, pushed responsibility for institutional adaptation into the office of the CJCS. In December, Admiral Mullen established a Joint Staff civilian casualty working group of dual-hatted joint officers, meaning that they maintained their ongoing responsibilities. The group, which occasionally briefed the service operations deputies, aimed to ensure that the services implemented the appropriate civilian casualty prevention lessons from the Farah incident. 
25
26
27
28
29
Earlier doctrine had treated civilian harm as a question of law or a parenthetical planning consideration, except in COIN. Now, Soldiers have publications that could help them understand and prepare to address multiple aspects of civilian casualty prevention. The two publications are therefore significant for the Army, although their practical impact on doctrine, organization, training, materiel, and leadership remains unclear.
Even if each service and the Joint Staff have assigned clear responsibility for improving capabilities to minimize civilian casualties in future conflicts, how would an entity know whether it is exerting enough, or the right, effort to address civilian casualties? Metrics for performance in the field-actual civilian casualties-are not the same metrics that are needed to guide institutional efforts.
The services can always do "more, " but in the absence of expertise and standards, it is challenging to assess change and impact. 
30
One way to build or strengthen this expertise is to partner with outside groups that study civilian casualties. Enormous gaps in perceptions and understanding exist between the military and humanitarian communities and between the military perspective and that of the broader public. The bottom line is that while the military may not have fully exploited opportunities to minimize civilian harm, outsiders do not fully appreciate the difficulties and tradeoffs inherent in improving civilian protection. Nonetheless, the two communities share the goal of minimizing civilian harm and can learn from one another.
Focusing on the how-what the United States can do to protect civilians-opens up an evaluation of the costs and tradeoffs associated with different options and forges common cause toward shared goals. 
31
Humanitarian voices are needed to push the military to consider the outer limits of adaptation. Because military actors traditionally prioritize mission and forces, they will always benefit from external prodding-from civilian leadership, from outside advocates, from other countries, and from international norms and law-to continue testing the assumption that the military is doing everything possible to prevent civilian harm in war.
While limited humanitarian air wars prompted USAF adaptation in the 1990s, it was the operational impact of civilian casualties during COIN operations that pushed civilian casualties into the joint institutional consciousness by the end of the 2000s. Yet the character of US military operations has now changed. The Obama administration focused on extricating US forces from large-scale COIN operations while retaining a robust global counterterrorism campaign using remotely piloted vehicles (RPV). This is exemplified by the fact that in 2014 the United States rebuilt an international coalition to destroy the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-largely relying on airpower.
The future of civilian casualty prevention efforts may be linked to broader questions about the US military's focus in the coming decades. What kinds of wars will the United States prepare to fight? How much does avoiding civilian harm help or hinder those operations? The Obama administration's "pivot to Asia" emphasizes air and naval power as well as cyber capabilities to preclude a competitor from destabilizing or dominating the region. Reorienting military capabilities toward large-scale conventional conflict tempts a return to earlier paradigms of war. In this environment, ground forces in particular risk misperceiving civilian harm as purely a function of COIN, rather than, as the USAF has learned, an enduring modern phenomenon.
A major conventional conflict-the standard unit of US military planning -might suggest reduced sensitivity to civilian casualties, just as global war in the 1940s exerted enormous pressure on American leaders and prompted use of the atomic bomb. On the other hand, how would South Koreans judge US military support that had failed to do everything possible to mitigate harm to Korean citizens in the name of defending them? Meanwhile, civilian casualties remain a controversial aspect of counterterrorism operations using RPVs and have begun to emerge as a vulnerability in the counter-ISIL air campaign. 
32
33
Today's military attitudes have changed, but there is nothing inexorable about the military's institutional prioritization of civilian casualty mitigation. During the Vietnam War, the secondary effects of civilian harm undermined the mission, and while field operations sought to adapt to this reality, the services resisted translating this lesson into lasting institutional change. 
34
Chapter 7
The United States Air Force (USAF) has enjoyed great success in minimizing civilian harm in war. While this success emerged as the collateral benefit of a technological evolution, the USAF also began to promote purposefully the goal of mitigating civilian casualties (CIVCAS). During the 1990s, conscious efforts to innovate in weapons development, targeting methodologies, and tactics, techniques, and procedures enabled the USAF to achieve its military objectives while reducing risks to noncombatants. Since airpower's birth, USAF doctrinal principles, such as the economy of force, had predisposed the service toward precision. Yet through much of the twentieth century, technology had limited airpower's ability to be precise. As the Cold War neared an end, however, advances in munitions; intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; and delivery platforms enabled the USAF to envision, and then demonstrate, the ability to focus on achieving specific effects in armed conflict, rather than focusing primarily on the destruction of enemy military capabilities.
The reshaped security landscape also increased the feasibility ofand the incentives for-USAF efforts to address civilian casualties. With the demise of the Soviet Union, the prospect of a global conflict between two superpowers gradually diminished, and US military planning began to focus on less existential scenarios in which rules and limits on the use of force appeared more germane. Furthermore, US military superiority-and specifically its dramatic airpower advantage over potential adversaries-reduced key risks and costs to pilots as they experimented with new tactics. A diminished air-to-air threat allowed the USAF to concentrate on targeting and support of ground operations.
Finally, US military operations increasingly revealed civilian casualties as an operational constraint, as a coalition wedge, as a propaganda vulnerability, as a reflection of national values and "soft power, " and even as counterproductive for operational success. Airpower planners began facing these realities a full decade before ground forces were forced to reckon with the same issues. From the searing experience of the Al Firdos bombing during the 1991 Persian Gulf War to the recurring front-page civilian casualty incidents during the two Balkans air campaigns, civilian casualties imposed real costs. Chastened by criticism for killing noncombatants during the 1990s, the USAF began to dedicate additional investments, new tools, and different approaches to further reduce the risks to civilians.
Perhaps most critically, the USAF had begun to change its way of thinking. The service no longer needed to focus on destruction in the name of ensuring results; the new planning mind-set sought instead to identify specific targets that could achieve equivalent effects with reduced destruction and collateral damage. The USAF moved beyond reliance on the "floor" of the law of armed conflict and instead sought to minimize civilian harm as an operational priority.
As a result, farsighted and far-reaching institutional adaptation began. Rather than simply adjusting in the field to operational restrictions resulting from sensitivity to civilian harm, the USAF invested in lasting innovations, including the collateral damage estimation process, discriminate capabilities, and an effects-based orientation. These suggested a deeper, institutional commitment to civilian casualty prevention. And as the USAF pursued technology and developed new targeting concepts consistent with USAF tenets, new opportunities to mitigate harm emerged.
Over the past 20 years, the USAF has been at the vanguard of addressing what the US military now refers to simply as civilian casualties. This has benefited the United States in many respects, but it has also benefited the USAF and airpower. The USAF has been able to advance its normative intent without impeding its operational effectiveness. Its institutional adaptation has reduced the likelihood that operators would have to make zero-sum choices among civilian protection, self-protection, and mission accomplishment. Moreover, by addressing high-level political concerns about the impact of civilian harm, the USAF has advanced its institutional interest in maintaining freedom of action. Improving civilian casualty mitigation also helped ensure that airpower would remain a capability of choice. Finally, this progress has been consistent with key tenets of airpower and has "cost" the service relatively little in time and resources. 
1
Since the early days of the republic, the US armed forces had considered fratricide, like civilian casualty, an unavoidable aspect of war. And, as in the case of civilian casualty, the American military has always sought to minimize the accidental killing of friendly forces. However, through most of the military's history, fratricide was not an independent priority for the institutional force. That is to say that while fratricide was a constant operational concern and an inherent element of training, it was not regarded as a problem that could be addressed effectively on its own. Instead, reducing friendly fire would be a collateral benefit of other improvements in military capability. Fratricide lacked an institutional proponent pushing for dedicated solutions. While a constant concern of Americans and the US military, fratricide was almost invisible from an institutional and organizational perspective.
This situation changed after the 1991 Persian Gulf War. Americans and the US military began to see fratricide in a different light-as a tragedy that could be greatly reduced, if not permanently eliminated. 
2
3
Public concerns about civilian casualties in war seem to "stick" most to airpower, even during combined operations when ground commanders control air strikes. This is ironic given that airpower led the way in developing new approaches to reduce civilian casualties. Airmen fear that US power, and airpower in particular, may never be good enough because it is always chasing its own success. They have a point. Thus, it is essential that we applaud and recognize the progress achieved to date.
It is precisely because US leaders assert, and Americans believe, that the armed forces do everything possible to minimize civilian harm, that this is the standard to which the USAF and US military more broadly should aspire. Therefore, civilian casualty prevention must become not just a goal during combat operations but also an essential element of improving capabilities and options for the next armed conflict. The USAF, which learned this lesson over a decade ago, must therefore continue chasing its considerable success. Notes 1. The costs may vary dramatically among the services; in particular, air and land forces face very different risks in tactical actions to avoid CIVCAS.
2. An estimated 24 percent of all US combat deaths were due to friendly fire, a rate that was considered shockingly high both because of the small number of total combat deaths and due to a historical underestimation of fratricide rates. Office of Technology Assessment, US Congress, Who Goes There: Friend or Foe? (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, June 1993), 1.
3. Anne Plummer, "DOD Attempts to Tackle Fratricide Problem That's Lingered since 1991, " Inside the Army, 22 March 2004.  
national Law and the Changing Character of War, International Law Studies 87, ed. Raul A. "Pete" Pedrozo and Daria P. Wollschlaeger (Newport, RI: US Naval War College, 2011), 318. 5. Tompkins, "Kinetic Air Power and Civilian Casualties. " 37. See, for example, Wesley K. Clark,
Fabian Witt, Lincoln's Code: The Laws of War in American History (New York: Free Press, 2012). 58. Tompkins, "Kinetic Air Power and Civilian Casualties. " 59. Gen Charles Horner, USAF, e-mail to the author.
Fabian Witt, Lincoln's Code: The Laws of War in American History (New York: Free Press, 2012). 58. Tompkins, "Kinetic Air Power and Civilian Casualties. " 59. Gen Charles Horner, USAF, e-mail to the author.
21. Adam Roberts and Richard Guelff, Documents on the Laws of War, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 139-53. 22. Biddle calls the effort "a legal and political failure. " Biddle, "Air Power, " 148. 23. Ronald Schaffer describes Army Air Force leaders, courting popular opinion in their efforts to create an independent air force, as seeking "to convince the public that AAF bombing methods did not violate ethical principles widely held at home. " Ronald Schaffer, Wings of Judgment (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), 37. 24. Pape, Bombing to Win, 65-6. 25. Ibid., 66; and McFarland, America's Pursuit of Precision Bombing, 82. 26. Henry H. Arnold and Ira C. Eaker, Winged Warfare (New York: Harpers & Brothers, 1941), 134. 27.
61. Ralph, "Improvised Destruction, " 512. 62. Department of War, US Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS), Field Report Covering Air Raid Protection and Allied Subjects in Tokyo, Japan (Washington, DC: Civilian Defense Division, 1947), 63.
61. Ralph, "Improvised Destruction, " 512. 62. Department of War, US Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS), Field Report Covering Air Raid Protection and Allied Subjects in Tokyo, Japan (Washington, DC: Civilian Defense Division, 1947), 63.
91. Ibid.; and Charles Hanley, Sang-Hun Choe, and Martha Mendoza, 
153. Thomas, Ethics of Destruction, 153.  154. Parks, "Rolling Thunder, " 19.  155. Lewy, America in Vietnam, 268.  156. Ibid., 233-4.  
153. Thomas, Ethics of Destruction, 153.  154. Parks, "Rolling Thunder, " 19.  155. Lewy, America in Vietnam, 268.  156. Ibid., 233-4.  
56
56
other 
US government agency
Lafayette Escadrille, 24 law of armed conflict, 38, 69, 70, 102,  190  law of war, 40, 71, 117, 155  Leaf, Daniel, 121,123  LeMay, Curtis, 31,56,58  Lewis, Lawrence, 179  Lewy, Guenter, 43, 44, 53, 62, 63  Libya, 25, 107  Lieber Code, 71 Lilienthal, David 33, 58  limited war, 24, 34  Lincoln, Abraham, 71  Linebacker (Operation), 40  low-collateral-damage capabilities, 164  MacArthur, Douglas, 36, 59, 60  Martinez, Jerry, 171  McChrystal, Stanley, 130, 131, 144,  179  McDonald, Brian, 149, 166  McKiernan, David, 16, 22  Middle East, 102, 112, 152  military necessity, 33, 71, 73, 90, 104,  155  Milosevic, Slobodan, 83, 86, 114, 117,  125, 149  Mitchell, William, 26, 45, 52, 55  morale, 25, 26, 29, 30, 36, 42, 50, 52,  77-80, 83, 85, 181  Mullen, Michael, 178, 182  My Lai, 45, 71  Nagasaki, 32   Niš, 121  Nixon, Richard, 40, 41, 42, 62  No Gun Ri, 35, 36  no-fly zone, 111, 147, 148  noncombatant, 28, 33, 43, 46, 71, 72,  87, 102, 104, 123, 125, 126, 128,  131, 153, 155, 173, 180, 191  noncombatant casualty cutoff value,  153, 180  norms, 88, 92, 184  North Atlantic Treaty Organization,  73, 119, 179  Northern Watch (Operation), 111  Obama, Barack, 184  Oxfam, 11  Pape, Robert, 27, 28, 42, 44, 54, 55, 56,  59, 62, 63, 66,  Parks, W. Hays, 19, 30, 58, 62, 63, 64,  65, 80, 93, 94, 96, 98, 140, 142  Persian Gulf War, 112, 189, 191  Petraeus, David, 129, 130, 144, 174,  186  Powell, Colin, 64, 107, 109, 110, 135,  146  precision, 27-30, 32, 33, 37, 44, 46-53,  85, 91, 103-106, 108, 114, 121, 147,  149, 151, 152, 157-160, 162, 163,  174, 189  professional military education, 102,  175  proportionality, 71, 72, 77-80, 87, 123,  148, 153, 155  Protocol Additional (I) to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 82  Provide Comfort (Operation), 111,136  public opinion, 27, 109, 110, 119  Quintet, 115, 118, 119  Ralston, Joseph, 148, 166  refugees, 30, 35, 36, 121  Rolling Thunder (Operation), 40, 41,  42, 43, 62, 63, 142  Roosevelt, Franklin, 28, 32, 56  Royal Air Force, 28  rules of engagement, 43, 104, 114, 173  Russia, 42  Ryan, Michael, 101, 113, 114, 123, 137  Sadr City, 174   index │ 225   Sarajevo, 113  Save the Children, 11  Schwarzkopf, Norman, 109, 134, 135  Schweinfurt, 29  Scowcroft, Brent, 109  Serbia, 81, 120  Short, Michael, 65, 117, 118, 120, 121,  141, 148, 166  skepticism, 75, 76  small diameter bomb, 160  smart weapons, 47  Southern Watch (Operation), 111, 138  Soviet Union, 35, 46, 112, 189  Spaatz, Carl, 29  special forces, 126, 128  Spires, Andrew, 162  Srebrenica, 113  Sri Lanka, 15, 19, 22  Stimson, Henry, 32, 57, 58  Strategic Air Command, 158  strategic bombing, 23, 24, 30, 33, 36,  41, 43-45, 47, 50-53, 122, 126, 150,  151  strategy, 27-30, 34, 35, 39, 41, 44, 79,  104, 113, 116, 126, 146, 149  surface-to-air missiles, 42, 105, 120  tactics, techniques, and procedures, 47,  174, 182, 189  targeting, 25-28, 30-35, 37-40, 42, 47,  49-52, 76-80, 82-85, 91, 102-105,  109, 113-117, 124-127, 132, 146,  147, 149-152, 155-158, 161, 162,  173, 180, 181, 189, 190   Thanh Hoa, 48  Tokyo, 31, 32, 34, 51  Tompkins, Cliff, 18, 19, 22, 144, 168,  171, 178, 186, 187, 188  Trenchard, Hugh, 26, 54, 56  Truman, Harry, 35, 58  Tucker, Michael, 3, 4  Unified Protector (Operation), 12, 187  United Kingdom, 111, 112, 115  United Nations, 34, 107, 108, 151, 180  United States Central Command, 156  Vietnam, 23, 40-46, 48, 52, 71, 83, 85,  103, 104, 106, 123, 129, 146, 147,  151, 158, 161, 180, 185  von Clausewitz, Carl, 50, 146  von Moltke, Helmuth 45, 64  Wald, Charles 118  Walzer, Michael, 10, 20, 58, 93  war crime, 73  Warden, John III, 50, 66, 103, 104  Warsaw Pact, 46, 49  war-sustaining, 80, 82, 83, 85  Weinberger, Casper, 45, 51, 64, 128,  146, 161  Westmoreland, William, 41  World War I, 24-26  World War II, 23, 26, 28, 32, 34, 36, 37,  42, 44, 45, 52, 83  Yugoslavia, 84, 112, 113  Zemin, Jiang, 122  