# ID: 5d98e5f032364f7684fef0503786678a
# Title: The Historic and Current Relevance of Mission-type Orders
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1920.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions
command philosophies like mission-type orders will remain vital. The US military can therefore exploit the lessons learned during the 200 years long practice of mission-type orders to ensure that it also prevails on the future battlefield, despite the rapid technological development affecting the military sphere. The 2018 National Defense Strategy assessed that the future battlefield will be more complex than ever before, characterized by great power competition, grey zone conflicts, and new domains such as cyberspace and space. 
3
After the catastrophic Prussian defeat at Jena in 1806, the Prussians realized they had to evolve and develop a Prussian way of war to compete with the Napoleonic armies of the time.
Realizing that they were incapable of competing in size and numbers, the Prussians initiated several reforms addressing the quality of their army. Prussian leaders grappled with how to compete against a military genius when one of their own was not forthcoming. In their mind, especially the reformist Gerhard von Scharnhorst's, one could not leave the fate of an entire army or a nation on the shoulders of one man. Almost two centuries later, in the 1980s, the United States (US) found itself facing a superior enemy. After ending the Vietnam War, the United States realized it had lost a decade of development compared to the Soviet Union.
Consequently, America again turned its focus towards the Soviet Union, which not only exceeded the US in numbers but also in doctrinal development. To compensate for this shortfall, the Americans opted to pursue a cognitive approach to compensate and, hopefully, overmatch the Soviet Union's numbers and doctrinal development. The answer both in 1806 and in the 1980s was mission-type orders. 
4
5
6
Just as Shamir's definition represents a constant over time, in many ways, the security situation the US military faces in 2020 also resembles the ones in 1806 and the 1980s when mission-type orders gained prominence. The US faces peer competition from China, and to a certain degree Russia, and has realized that it is not able to compete in production numbers and frequency. 
7
8
Mission-type orders are a key element to succeed under such circumstances. The relevance of mission-type orders on future battlefields is supported by maneuver warfare theorist William S.
Lind. He argues that decentralization of command and authority enables an army to make decisions at a pace the enemy cannot keep up with, creating confusion and uncertainty within the enemy, leading to opportunities own forces can exploit at a rate the enemy is not able to keep up with. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
The Kriegsakademi was a vital institution for Prussia, and then Germany, to educate and instill mission-type orders into their officers, making mission-type orders a natural and everpresent part of their military life. Under the influence of reformists and great thinkers like former Chief of the Prussian General Staff Gerhard von Scharnhorst, his successor August von Gneisenau, and Carl von Clausewitz, the Prussian army sought to institutionalize military excellence. 
15
16
Scharnhorst viewed the Kriegsakademi as the primary tool for institutionalizing military excellence. He personally directed the reconstruction of the Kriegsakademi. Its restructuring continued until the unification of Germany in the latter part of the 19 th century. 17 Then risk the chance for success," to "be quick to recognize favorable situations or turn of events and promptly utilize to your own advantage," and that "speed and surprise can make up for a considerable numerical inferiority." 
24
Most activities at the school were done under the influence of friction, and they learned that "when confronted by a vague situation and difficult circumstances, as is often the case in war: Be active. Seize and maintain the initiative. Do not expect or await hints or suggestions from the enemy, relative to your next move." 
25
From 1936-38, the Kriegsakademi was an important institution for the German Army that instilled a mindset of mission-type orders into its officers.
Wedemeyer described an environment where students and instructors could speak freely and critically. It was non-attributional with a close relationship between the students and the instructors. Both these characteristics helped create an environment where discussions were not limited to the classroom, but also took place during hours after school. 
26
Having visited the German army, Wedemeyer had a similar observation, saying he had "been impressed with the thoroughness, with which the military force as a whole is being trained to seize and maintain the initiative. An aggressive spirit is being inculcated in the leaders of all grades." 28 Therefore, the Kriegsakademi not only instilled a mindset of mission-type orders to its own students, but the institution helped foster it in the German Army as a whole. By doing so, the Kriegsakademi helped close the gap between doctrine and practice in the German army.
However, a mindset based on mission-type orders was practiced by several institutions, not only in the realm of PME.
The Germans developed doctrine during the inter-war era that served as a common theoretical platform, and that outlined tenets and skills for how to fight on the battlefield. It was "designed to give them a set of intellectual tools to apply in complex and ever-unique warfighting situations." 
29
30
41
Citino the Germans characterized regimental maneuver as aggressive, risk-willing, bold, flexible, and within higher unit's mission. 
42
Conger observed that training and exercises were designed and evaluated according to mission-type orders when he visited the 3d Infantry Division in vicinity of Berlin. During a conversation, a German officer told Conger that the German approach differed from the French by "developing tactical proficiency in all officers and men, encouraging individual enterprise and initiative, and keeping orders from superiors to an absolute minimum. For success, the same officer said, we look…to the individual initiative and right action of subordinates at the front who take advantage of every local opportunity." 
43
Wargames were a cost-effective way to practice tactics and leadership for the German army, an activity that allowed for numerous repetitions in the realm of decision-making and mission-type orders. The German army used wargames in most parts of its army: in PME, regular units, and during wartime. Citino describes the purpose of wargames under Seeckt as "to place officers and commanders in the midst of realistic wartime situations, force them to decide on the appropriate action." 
44
45
46
However, the use of wargames was nothing new in the German army.
The assault detachments (stormtroops) were created by Germany during WW I. They used wargames to teach their new techniques to other units and soldiers. The stormtroops differed from the regular German units of the time by fostering and encouraging decentralization, initiative by the individual soldier, risk acceptance, and aggressiveness. 
47
Stormtroop Tactics, wargames "drove home the point that each individual squad was no longer an anonymous group of men being fed into a firing line formed for a purpose unknown to its members. Instead, the squad had become an irreplaceable element in a plan." 
48
Seeckt's and the stormtroops' emphasis on wargames demonstrates that together with PME, doctrinal foundation, and training and exercises, wargaming was an important ingredient to instill mission-type orders in the German army. However, the mindset must coincide and also encompass the part of an officer's life taking place outside of work for mission-type orders to be institutionalized.
Cultural and Societal Influence on Mindsets -Prussian Nobility Successful implementation of mission-type orders must take advantage of the existing culture, strengths, and trends already present in the respective society for the military to accept the mindset as their own. Successful utilization of society as a foundation for a command and leadership mindset existed in Prussia in the 19 th century. The officer culture in Prussia during the 19 th century was an example of a military mindset exploiting the social structure of its society.
Mission-type orders in Prussia in the 19 th century reflected the social structure of the time which emphasized the tenets required for mission-type orders and reflected the Prussian officers' way of life and professionalism. German military historian Franz Uhle-Wetter supports this view that the social and cultural context in which the Prussian officers grew up and lived in were key ingredient for mission-type orders. He observed that "at the root of the German victory is an unbelievable readiness to act independently, a readiness displayed at all levels down to the very lowest and displayed on the battlefield as well as in other matters." 
49
50
51
Citino pointed to the relationship between the Prussian king and his Junker nobility when he explained the social contract that existed between them The contract made the Junkers declare loyalty to the king in return for "near total dominance over the serfs, and later the peasants, on their domain." 
52
53
Martin van Creveld, an Israeli military historian and theorist, described similar observations of Prussian officers' life in his book Fighting Power, where he provides examples of Prussian regimental commanders who exercised complete control in their own area. One of these examples is a regimental commander who himself was responsible for recruitment and selection of officers and how to manage his regiment. At the same time, centralized governance was kept to an absolute minimum, exemplified by an annual inspection as the only interference by higher echelons. 
55
56
57
59
It encourages subordinates to exploit opportunities by empowering them to take the initiative and exercise judgment in pursuit of their mission; [and] alignment is maintained through adherence to the commander's intent." 
60
61
62
According to Shamir, Moshe Dayan, the former military leader and Minister of Defense, personified bitsuism and mission-type orders through his belief in initiative, aggressiveness, and risk acceptance. 
63
64
In the 1940s and 50s, the IDF was still a young organization, and these tenets were therefore more likely to be part of the social structure and society in Israel at this point in time, rather than something being introduced through the military system. As a result, officers displaying tenets required for mission-type orders at this point in Israeli history were doing so based on a mindset derived from bitsuism, which created a holistic approach to the command philosophy of missiontype orders that encompassed both the personal and professional life of Israeli officers of the time.
Exploiting strengths already present in a country's society and culture helps military organizations create a mindset that aligns personal and professional life of an officer. Both
Prussia and Israel succeeded with this by exploiting Prussian nobility and Israeli bitsuism. By doing so, both countries and their armies created a holistic approach to mission-type orders, enabling it to encompass all aspects of their officers' lives. As a result, these countries effectively eradicated the gap between doctrine and practice, and between personal and professional life. The German army organized special assault units called stormtroops, which were given specific training in decentralized operations relying on small-unit initiative, aggressiveness, and risk willingness. These stormtroops encapsulated mission-type orders and became the template when Germany reconstructed its army in the interwar era and for how they fought during WW II.
In the stormtroops, "lieutenants and NCOs became key decision makers upon whose shoulders rested complete responsibility or the outcome of the one of the thousands of little combats into which battle had disintegrated." 
73
The effectiveness of the stormtroops were demonstrated during the German Peace offensive against the British in March 1918.
The goal of the stormtroops was to penetrate 8,000 meters across no man's land to the British field artillery within twelve hours. 
75
76
77
78
These three examples from WW I demonstrate that mission-type orders were a key ingredient in several of the successful battles fought during the war and shows that it worked as a force multiplier for those units who were able to utilize it. Furthermore, it shows how missiontype orders can be a tool to solve challenging or disadvantageous situations, hence, it is as relevant today as it was during WW I. The German experiences from the Great War were developed further during the interwar era, being displayed by both Germany and Russia during WW II.
The German attack on France in 1940 displayed a willingness to take risk that completely shocked the allies. Condell and Zabecki, the two translators of Truppenführung, state that "For years after the 1940 campaign the German victory was explained by Germany's employment of masses of tanks, motorized forces and aircraft against an enemy bound to the Maginot Line and a defensive strategy. However, we now know that in terms of numbers of troops and weapons, the Wehrmacht in 1940 held few advantages. Indeed, it was often at a disadvantage against the Allied forces." 79 What was it, then, that enabled the German army to defeat the French army, and push the British army over the English Channel within a matter of days? According to historian Karl-Heinz Frieser, the German plan for the attack was an example of how the tenets of missiontype orders played an important role in the German success.
At every level of command, there were multiple examples of mission-type orders and the accompanying tenets being practiced with great success. One example was the dilemma Guderian faced after he penetrated the French defenses and crossed the waterways in vicinity of Sedan. He was faced with either waiting and securing his flanks or exploiting the situation and continuing the attack. Guderian's orders from Panzer Group Kleist said "success springs from speed. The important thing is to forget about your right and left flank and to push quickly into the enemy's depth and to take the defenders again and again by surprise." 80 This phrasing corresponded well with the original Sickle Cut plan which Guderian knew well, having been Erich von Manstein's panzer expert during its development. 
81
82
83
84
During an attack in 1940, Rommel lost radio communications with his higher headquarters. Even before this occurred, Rommel had already exceeded the scope of the operation. No one had foreseen that such progress was possible. Instead of waiting for orders, and with little or no understanding of the overall situation, Rommel decided to continue the attack under the cover of darkness. Attacking during nighttime in 1940 was no easy task, and the limited ability to observe meant it contained considerable risk. The result of the attack was spectacular. The following day when Rommel halted due to lack of ammunition, he had defeated a French corps and a French division, taking 10,000 prisoners while only taking 36 own casualties. 
85
Rommel displayed an understanding for the overall intent of the campaign, initiative, responsibility, and risk willingness. These two generals are good examples of successful application of mission-type orders, and the monumental effect it can have on military operations when executed by officers who are educated, trained, and exposed to a mindset of mission-type orders. However, such undertakings took place at every level of the German army at the start of WW II.
During the crossing of the Meuse River, one of the first German companies across found itself completely isolated when arriving on the far-side of the river. Instead of waiting for reinforcements, the company commander remembered his orders, which told his battalion to cross the river and break through the Maginot Line. He, therefore, immediately launched an attack, knowing well that the company's flanks were exposed and that he had no communications means to higher echelon. He still took the initiative and proceeded to fulfill the intent of the orders he received prior to going into battle. 
86
87
Mission-type orders played a significant role in the outcome of several of the successful battles and campaigns undertaken by both the German and Soviet armies during WW II.
Decentralized command and authority, intentions, initiative, risk, and accepting uncertainty and friction are key parts of the German and Russian success. In addition, the ownership and feeling of responsibility assumed by subordinates is worth noting. Even though the basis and reasons behind mission-type orders differed substantially between Germany and Russia, the tenets for successfully executing mission-type orders are the same and demonstrates how it can be utilized in complex and challenging situations also today. After the end of WW II, mission-type orders caught the interest of several scholars, mainly to explain the initial German success in WW II.
The practitioners of mission-type orders during the Cold War, however, were far between. The introduction of nuclear weapons and the start of the Cold War overshadowed the relevance of mission-type orders. However, there are a few exceptions, mainly from Israel and Russia.
Post-World War II Shamir described command in the Israeli army during the Suez Crisis in 1956 in terms resonating well with the definition of mission-type orders. Israeli historian Martin van Creveld supported this view of Israeli leadership, stating that the IDF was able to institutionalize a system resembling German Auftragstaktik. 
93
These traits were decentralized command, a clear intent, willingness to take risks, boldness, aggressiveness, and creativity. 
94
96
Egyptians, while 10,000 were lost in action. 
97
98
99
The analysis of Prussian, German, Israeli, and Soviet history demonstrates that missiontype orders have contributed to success on the battlefield on numerous occasions since the emergence of mission-type orders following the battle at Jena in 1806. When practiced within a holistic mindset, mission-type orders have proved to be a military tool helping commanders and units prevail in challenging and problematic situations. Mission-type orders have survived modernization and technological developments, and while technology become old and outdated, command philosophies like mission-type orders will remain vital. The US military can therefore exploit the lessons learned during the 200 years long practice of mission-type orders to ensure that it also prevails on the future battlefield, despite the rapid technological development affecting the military sphere. Former CJCS, General Dempsey, expressed a similar view in 2012.
Dempsey said he regarded mission-type orders as "critical to our future success in defending the nation in an increasingly complex and uncertain operating environment." 104 Dempsey's view was also reflected in the 2018 National Defense Strategy, which assesses that the future battlefield will be more complex than ever before, characterized by great power competition, grey zone conflicts, and new domains such as cyberspace and space. 
105
American author Pete Nealen, a former Reconnaissance Marine and veteran of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, argues in an article that "risk aversion has led to…micromanagement and the death of small-unit leader initiative." 
107
108
To remedy this situation and to ensure that mission-type orders are a force multiplier also in future conflicts, the US military must nurture a more holistic and deliberate approach to mission-type orders. To achieve this, it must review its doctrinal foundation of mission-type orders to ensure it fosters the tenets required, reward and promote personnel displaying and living mission-type orders, and focus on risk willingness among its officer corps. If the US military is able to do this, they have a foundation for successful utilization of mission-type orders. Furthermore, they have reduced the gap between doctrine and practice. As an example, the German army in the 1930s implemented a mindset of mission-type orders through a holistic the subordinates are to a larger degree held responsible for practicing mission-type orders. This is a nuance critical for instituting mission-type orders as a mindset exercised in both PME and during training and exercises. Focusing on the mindset established through these two US doctrines will help mitigate the gap between doctrine and practice. Another aspect creating a gap between theory and practice is the organization of American politics and the military.
The US military is under civilian control and it is therefore inevitable that they are exposed and directed through civilian forms of management. The difference between the Prussian king and his nobles and the American democracy is significant. As a result, the social contract and the accountability are quite different. In contrast to a king in the 19 th century, a democracy answers to its people. Consequentially, the result of such a form of governance is that civilian bureaucracy begins to influence the military establishment. Promotions and appointment
to key positions are indicators of which skills and qualities an organization rewards.
American sociologist and author Morris Janowitz argues that the US military unavoidably will be influenced by the liberal American society.
One of the consequences of this is that the US military will adopt more of civilian  how to reward and promote people practicing mission-type orders, and how to counter risk aversion. Succeeding with institutionalizing mission-type orders will give America a competitive advantage towards its peer competitors at the future battlefield, giving the US military a tool that has proven its utility and ability to help solve new problems for centuries.
century the Prussian officer corps mostly consisted of nobility and aristocracy. With this in mind, it was therefore natural that such an officer corps embraced a culture rewarding initiative and individual action.
58
century the Prussian officer corps mostly consisted of nobility and aristocracy. With this in mind, it was therefore natural that such an officer corps embraced a culture rewarding initiative and individual action.
OMB No. 
0704-0188
04/20/20
04/20/20/ Historic
Current Relevance of Mission-type Orders: How a Mindset of Missiontype Orders Can Help the US Military in Future Conflicts