# ID: 5dcfa7a559e542d995fa88de06860ba0
# Title: What lessons can operational planners infer from the NATO Partnership for Peace Program for the execution of contemporary US Regionally Aligned Force and UK …
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
Democracies tend to have low tolerance for policies that do not show swift gains, and tangible results were not intended in Pericles' clever design.
-Everett Dolman, Pure Strategy   In truth, the acme of the military art is to get the enemy to "give in" in advance and to do so discreetly, by intervening upstream before the conflict unfolds and thus without having to join serious battle subsequently.
Since 2012, the armies of the United States and the United Kingdom have placed security cooperation as a means of pursuing strategic objectives at the center of their respective visions of the future operating environment. The hypotheses behind the overseas engagement elements of the US Army Regionally Aligned Forces (RAF) and the British Army Adaptable Force (AF) concepts are broadly similar; judicious and early engagement in building partner capacity will increase regional stability thus negating the need for costly interventions further down the line.
Security cooperation has long been a feature of both army's activities. One example that both armies have made significant contributions to in recent times is the NATO Partnership for Peace (PfP) program. This is a comprehensive initiative that since 1994 has enabled substantial Security Sector Reform (SSR) in Eastern European and Central Asian countries.
Security cooperation is a complicated and dynamic activity that includes interrelationships at multiple levels over extended timeframes. The military is but one part of the whole of government approach required to effect meaningful change. Generally, the military is an instrument of national power that seeks decisive outcomes in the near term. Consequently, in relation to security cooperation, there is a potential mismatch between more open systems of strategic aspiration with more closed systems of tactical determination. Accurately appreciating the nature of the systems and factors involved with security cooperation will avoid the potential pitfall of privileging the tactical over the strategic. Resolving the tensions between the strategic and the tactical requires the effective application of operational art. A failure to appreciate, reconcile and exploit these tensions when conducting security cooperation increases the risk of undesirable conditions or tendencies emerging. Amongst others, these risks include irrelevance and incongruence with policy makers at home, unintended security dependencies or even increased regional instability.
The thesis of this paper is that PfP provides empirical evidence demonstrating security cooperation is a proven means of pursuing strategic objectives. It is possible to use this evidence to draw inferences for the application of operational art in contemporary security cooperation initiatives pursuing similar desired strategic conditions.
The purpose of this study is to provide a historical grounding for the ongoing application of contemporary security cooperation programs by assessing the impact of PfP on the Euro-Atlantic security environment. In particular, this study analyzes whether PfP provides relevant evidence that can directly contribute to the application of contemporary operational art in the execution of the RAF and AF missions. The design and execution of PfP offers insight not only on the pursuit of strategic objectives through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space and purpose but primarily on their integration with other national and international policy objectives. As such it is a relevant case study for expanding the general understanding of operational art and specific doctrinal concepts such as Unified Action (American) and Integrated Action (British).
The wider significance of this study is as a contribution to the understanding of security cooperation as a means for pursuing strategic objectives. It does so by testing the underlying hypothesis behind upstream capacity building as a cost effective measure that delivers regional stability through effective SSR. The specific significance of this research monograph is in response to the following documents. First, the analysis is in direct support of US-UK Bilateral Strategic Vision (BVS) statement signed by the American Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) and the British Chief of the General Staff (CGS) on 27 March 2013. 
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
If security cooperation is the means with SSR as the way, then regional stability is the end with which this study is concerned. One ready method of defining regional stability for this paper is to defer to former Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart and appropriate his famous definition of pornography, "I know it when I see it". 11 It is a subjective assessment of numerous 6 conditions made by strategic actors that defies easy categorization. Nonetheless it is more than just a self-evident desirable condition. Another measure of regional stability as a strategic objective is deduced as part of its overall contribution to maintaining positions of relative advantage amongst allies and between adversaries. As such, pursuing regional stability forms part of a competitive strategies approach. This approach seeks to employ limited aims in times of peace to deter potential adversaries thereby avoiding potentially ruinous contingency costs. 
12
The first hypothesis states that PfP provides evidence that security cooperation is a proven means of pursuing strategic objectives. This will be tested by determining if the Policy, Strategic & Military Objectives behind PfP were met by NATO. This analysis will be supplemented by exploring the relationship between the cost of PfP to the perceived Return on Street Journal, last modified September 27, 2007, accessed August 18, 2015, http://blogs.wsj.com/law/2007/09/27/the-origins-of-justice-stewarts-i-know-it-when-i-see-it/.
Investment (RoI). If PfP represents good value for money, then it is a worthy starting point for framing contemporary security cooperation efforts that seek to offset future contingency costs by judicious upstream investments in capacity building.
The second hypothesis contends that there is a mismatch in the integration of ends, ways and means in contemporary American and British security cooperation initiatives. This hypothesis will be tested by determining the specific US and UK strategic objectives that the means of contemporary security cooperation support and what measures thus far have been taken to integrate them by the armies of both countries. Potential tensions identified in current approaches may benefit from attenuation based upon understanding the historical instance of PfP.
The third hypothesis argues that it is possible to use the example of PfP to draw inferences for the application of operational art in resolving the dilemmas inherent in contemporary American and British security cooperation initiatives. This will be tested by determining the applicable differences and similarities between PfP and current security cooperation initiatives in terms of strategic context and considering the role of operational art.
The basic assumption this study relies upon is that PfP is a proven initiative that has applicability today. It assumes that operational art played a role in successfully resolving tensions between strategic and tactical by integrating tactical imperatives firmly into international and multilateral policy objectives. It assumes that the multilateralism and whole of government approach that characterized PfP is not reflected in the more unilateral and DoD/MOD focused approach to the RAF/AF concepts. Therefore, there is a risk that these tactical level activities will not similarly contribute to improved strategic conditions. The present desire of the lead RAF and AF units to go forth and do good things at the tactical level based upon the assumption that over time they will constitute strategic success does not in and of itself guarantee effective integration of ends, ways and means. If accurate, these assumptions portend poorly for the success of contemporary security cooperation initiatives given the tensions inherent in the twin epigraphs set out at the beginning of this study. This research paper is organized into sections as follows. This section, the introduction, is followed by a literature review in Section II that will survey the current discourse on the field of security cooperation. Section III lays out the structured focus methodology of the case study that comprises Section IV. The case study section is broken down into three sub-sections that examine PfP, contemporary security cooperation and relevant inferences respectively. The synthesis of the findings from the case study are presented in Section V, the conclusion. The study is limited to unclassified reports, assessments and doctrine covering 1994 until the present. This limitation will constrain detailed analysis of specific ongoing security cooperation missions.
The literature surrounding security cooperation, Security Sector Reform (SSR), and regional stability is vast. As discrete topics, they go to the very heart of international relations and the functioning of the international system. This section will survey the broad theory of constructivism that links them and then focus on the key concept of operational art pertinent to this study. It will then consider empirical analysis of the intent behind PfP and its similarity to the genesis of contemporary American Regional Aligned Forces (RAF) and British Adaptable Force (AF) concepts. This will demonstrate the underlying rationale of using Partnership for Peace (PfP) as an applicable case study for the application of operational art in executing contemporary security cooperation initiatives.
In his 2013 review of International Relations theory and security cooperation, Harald Müller finds "none of the theoretical perspectives on security cooperation is fully satisfactory". 
13
14
16
Müller. 17
The purposeful creation of mutually beneficial security cultures aligns with goals laid out in both the US and UK policy statements regarding strategy and security cooperation. 
18
19
20
21
19
This mediating function between the strategic and tactical levels was the primary observation of Shimon Naveh in his explanation of operational art. 
22
23
24
25
23
25
26 Naveh, 7.  As such, in this idealized and aspirational form, operational art is an open system that exploits the interrelationship between strategy and tactics in novel ways that ought to ensure continuing advantage when executed effectively. In turn, this reflects an understanding of strategy, as espoused separately by Everett Dolman and Lawrence Freeman, as a continuous interplay of positioning whereby creating power more than the linear sum of its constituent parts is the driving aim of the system. 
27
28
US: "The cognitive approach by commanders and staffs-supported by their skill, knowledge, experience, creativity, and judgment-to develop strategies, campaigns, and operations and organize and employ military forces by integrating ends, ways, and means", Joint Publication 5-0 (JP 5-0) Joint Operation Planning (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 11 August 2011), GL13.
However, as Antulio Echevarria notes , "the literature on operational art does not adequately cover critical topics, such as stability and reconstruction operations, the very activities whereby, some would claim, wars are really won". 
29
30
31
32
In broad context, F. Stephen Larrabee, situated the underlying rationale behind PfP as part of a wide-ranging effort to "build a new NATO" ready for the challenges of the Post-Cold War "New Strategic Era." 
33
34
36
Shalikashvilli's conception of PfP. 
37
39
It is the thesis of this paper that PfP provides empirical evidence demonstrating security cooperation is a proven means of pursuing strategic objectives that offers good value for money.
It is possible to use this evidence to draw inferences for the application of operational art in contemporary security cooperation initiatives pursuing similar desired strategic conditions. The next section will generate the hypotheses and research questions that test this thesis.
This section demonstrated how a constructivist approach to IR theory serves as a theoretical framework that situates the relationship between security cooperation, SSR and regional stability. Furthermore, it illustrated how the historical unfolding of PfP prefigures similar dilemmas and responses today. These considerations demonstrate the applicability of PfP as a case study for contemporary security cooperation initiatives. The concept of operational art is a model of how to apply theory in exploiting the inherent tension between the more open systems of strategy with the more closed systems of tactical actions. The following methodology section will hone in on the criteria for selecting variables for analysis in line with a structured focus approach to the case study.
The following section details the research questions that will form the case study of this paper, the sources used and the process of analysis as it relates to the original thesis. This research project will follow the methodology set out by Alexander George and Andrew Bennet in Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences in which they specifically designed the structured focus approach to "study historical experience in ways that would yield useful generic knowledge of important foreign policy problems". 
41
The previous section explained the rationale for selecting a constructivist approach to security cooperation as the unique phenomena under consideration in this paper. George and Bennett identify the requirement to select "variables of theoretical interest for purposes of explanation. These should include variables that provide some leverage for policymakers to enable them to influence outcomes". 
42
The second group of research questions focuses upon current US, UK security cooperation initiatives and the specific policy objectives they support. The broad aims of supporting a norms based international order and enhancing regional stability to mitigate the threat of transnational issues associated with globalization are common to both British and American strategies. 
43
The third and final group of research questions will contrast current British and American security initiatives with the PfP case study to determine what the applicable differences/similarities are. This determination will enable analysis of key inferences from PfP for the application of operational art today. In line with Bennett and George's methodological aim of yielding actionable variables, the conclusion will synthesis the findings from the case study and summarize this monograph. 
44
43
1
45
45
The following case study consists of three parts. The first part examines Partnership for Peace (PfP), the second part analyzes contemporary US and UK security cooperation initiatives and the third part compares the first two to draw out inferences for the contemporary application of operational art. Together the case study is as an exemplar of the theories and concepts laid out in the previous sections to assess the validity of the original thesis. Namely, PfP provides empirical data that demonstrates security cooperation is a proven means of pursuing strategic objectives. PfP represents a successful integration of means (security cooperation), ways (Security Sector Reform) and ends (regional stability) that exploited the inherent tension between strategy and tactics. As such, it represents effective operational art. Consequently, PfP serves as a ready example for contemporary practitioners orchestrating the missions of US Regionally Aligned Forces and UK Adaptable Forces in pursuit of their respective national strategic objectives. This section begins with a short overview of the context underlying the case study before answering the structured focus questions outlined in the preceding methodology section.
The unravelling of the Cold War paradigm that took place between the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the dissolution of the USSR in 1991 created multiple dilemmas for security stakeholders on both sides of the now defunct Iron Curtain. Successor regimes, who rapidly replaced the old communist order, sought to secure themselves and cement the postcommunist transition from autarchy to democracy. Multiple overlapping strands made up this enormous societal transformation. Economic and political reforms built new liberal and democratic institutions. Judicial reform and lustration defanged the yawning divergence between reconciling and punishing previous regimes' crimes. Military and police reforms placed armed forces and law enforcement agencies under democratic political control. In broad conceptual terms, the administrations of the newly democratic countries sought to legitimate their existence under the aegis of supranational and intergovernmental institutions who could provide assistance in managing difficult transitions in each of these spheres and more.
At the same time, pressing security issues presented themselves on the agenda for the extant NATO states. These ranged from the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, the securing of the former USSR's nuclear stockpile to the violent and protracted collapse of Yugoslavia. The latter case in itself presents a microcosm of the level of violence that could have manifested itself in the wider post-communist space were the transition not actively managed by Euro-Atlantic institutions and national stakeholders.
Tracing the arc of intergovernmental institutional development in the nineties, it would be ahistorical to imagine that there was an underlying overall systematic design. Instead, it was haphazard and ad hoc. This exemplifies the emergent properties of the international system following the collapse of the Cold War paradigm. Nonetheless, is it accurate that there was appetite in both existing members and post-communist states for constructing new security structures and relationships; in effect to conduct SSR as a way to achieve stable and normative relations between former adversaries. The level of appetite varied over time and space with consensus built up as relationships evolved.
As a rule of thumb, the closer the capital of a post-communist state to Moscow the lesser the appetite to embrace fully the transition from autarchy to democracy. 
46
46
47
48
49
47
48
The first structured questioned that is examined determines the specific NATO allied policy, strategic and military objectives for PfP and to what degree they were achieved. It finds 
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
Both documents iterate the bespoke nature of the program in a fashion that is indicative of an open system approach. "At a pace and scope determined by the capacity and desire of the individual participating states, we {NATO member states} will work in concrete ways towards transparency in defense budgeting, promoting democratic control of defense ministries, joint planning, joint military exercises, and creating an ability to operate with NATO forces in such fields as peacekeeping, search and rescue and humanitarian operations, and others as may be agreed". 
58
Assessment of the relationship between inputs and outputs must contextualize proportionate metrics such as money invested with wider and more intangible factors such as perceived returns that drive future behavior.
Given the open and extended nature of this framework, assessing the success of the original policy goals and strategic objectives threatens to be a laborious process. It need not be for the purpose of this paper. On a purely institutional level the fact that NATO has expanded the menu of 1400 activities eventually conceived as part of PfP to all its partnerships is a strong indicator of success. If PfP had been unsuccessful as a means for enabling political military cooperation it would not have been replicated as a model for all NATO global partnerships in 2011. 
59
60
61
Therefore, from a practical standpoint, containing such tendencies with an alliance of 28 nations, pondering, for example, how to defend the "Suwalki Gap" against Russia (and presumably its reluctant vassal, Belarus) is self-evidently preferable to an alliance of 16 nations seeking to defend the Fulda Gap facing the Soviet 3rd shock army and associated Warsaw Pact forces. 
62
64
65
66
67
Regrettably, the UK's National Audit Office (NAO) has not seen fit to conduct similar levels of audit of MOD foreign military aid spending as the GAO does for the Pentagon.
Likewise, there is no dedicated think tank program such as the Security Assistance Monitor to independently analyze such spending. It is possible to extract broad figures on defense spending on security cooperation from the Treasury's annually published Public Expenditure Statistical Analysis (PESA). The overall spend is not insignificant. For example, in 2009 annual UK foreign military aid peaked at £3.6 billion, representing almost ten percent of the defence budget. 
68
Requests by the author under freedom of information rules for specific amounts did not yield usable figures. 
69
Regardless of the prima facie strength of the argument that prevention is better than cure, in an age of sustained budget pressure, being meticulous in justifying every pound spent would seem a prudent measure.
Nonetheless, assessing RoI in security cooperation is necessarily a matter of perception and not just a simple cost benefit analysis. For example, in 1997, a GAO report found that in regard to PfP the impact 'cannot be measured in quantifiable terms'. 
70
71
Taken as a whole, the series of GAO reports are a valuable source of assessment in determining perceived RoI. As an objective and impartial observer, the GAO is dedicated to 
70
To further assess perceived RoI it is important to situate US investments in PfP within the wider context of related spending. For example, the State Department also plays a significant role in security assistance. A 2002 US Office of Management and Budget report on assistance to NATO aspirant countries found that DoD and State programs were not always complimentary but nevertheless rated the overall assistance as 'moderately effective' meaning that the assistance 'set ambitious goals and is well-managed'. 72 This is one further indication of a positive perception of the RoI of which PfP was a crucial part.
Within the DoD itself, the Warsaw Initiative Fund sits alongside multiple other initiatives. 
73
75
73
74
75
76
77
Arguably, in line with constructivist theory as discussed in the literature review, PfP engendered security relationships that resulted in vast fiduciary benefits for the wider US economy. In this regard, a total investment of $550 million in PfP over the period 1994-2010 contributed to an annual windfall between 2001-2010 of $154 million spent in FMF by PfP countries on US products. The relative importance of this contribution is debatable. FMF is by no means limited to PfP countries. Nonetheless, it is worth considering that the billions of dollars' worth of FMF sourced US hardware now in the hands of the so-called Islamic State, courtesy of the Iraqi Security Forces, is an example of the perils of extending credit to countries with whom you do not share a strong security culture. 
78
In addition to assessing perceptions of RoI in the United States and in the lamentable absence of equivalent evidence to do the same for the United Kingdom, academic analysis of the outcomes of PfP provides alternative perspectives to assess the worth of the initiative. As strategic commentators, albeit with varying levels of access and influence, academics contribute to and very much reflect the policymaking milieu. Consequently, they provide further perspective on the perceived RoI regarding PfP and the wider security architecture it contributes to.
Frühling and Benjamin Schreer. Their policy recommendations for streamlining extant partnerships and elevating them to a central position in the NATO Strategic Concept were adopted wholesale, initially in 2011 and then fully at the Wales Summit in 2014. 
79
80
81
82
The next two structured focus questions move on to examine contemporary American and British security cooperation initiatives. This is to enable effective comparison in the final set of questions in this case study. They test the hypothesis that there a mismatch in the integration of ends, ways and means in contemporary American and British security cooperation initiatives pursuing certain desired strategic conditions. The analysis finds the hypothesis only partially supported. Mostly, this is because they are nascent. Unlike PfP, which has been running for over twenty years, the current American and British initiatives are in their infancy and therefore the relevant data does not yet exist to judge them in equivalent fashion. Furthermore, from an ontological perspective, analysis of the direction and guidance issued alongside initial assessments of the measures undertaken thus far demonstrates significant integration of ends, ways and means. The measures undertaken seek to employ open systems that anticipate complexity in the operating environment using operational art to resolve inherent tensions between the strategic and tactical to ensure positions of relative advantage are maintained. In short, they ought to work in the same way that the open nature of PfP worked in delivering against set objectives with corresponding high levels of perceived RoI.
In order to test the mismatch hypothesis, it is first necessary to define the specific relationship between the ends, ways and means relevant to the strategic conditions being pursued by the United States and the United Kingdom. This enables the subsequent assessment that forms the fourth structured question evaluating the measures taken thus far.
Given the plethora of policy and strategic guidance issued by the governments and militaries of both America and Britain between 2010-2015, it is perhaps surprising that there is a remarkable degree of overlap. Nevertheless, there is significant alignment between the strategic objectives of both countries, their approaches and commensurate levels of transformation and investment in resourcing the means of security cooperation as one way amongst many to achieve those objectives. This common interrelationship between national ends, ways and means is illustrated in the headline analysis of relevant American and British policy and strategy documents issued between 2010-2015 as presented in Table 
1
One of the primary means to achieve this shared desired condition is through enhanced security cooperation with partner nations across the globe. Enacting these means aims to both build partner capacity to contribute to regional security and improve American and British understanding of regional power dynamics to enable better management of potentially destabilizing events. Both countries also envision and aspire to a whole of government approach that integrates all elements of national power in delivering against these objectives.
Focusing upon the land component contribution to this approach, the key document for this study, and perhaps the single most remarkable illustration of the degree of overlap between American and British national and military strategies, is the Bilateral Vision Statement (BVS) issued in March 2013 by the respective heads of both armies, the American Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) and the British Chief of the General Staff (CGS). The statement represents both a distillation of all the various policy guidance given to them by their political masters and the outcome of their successful anticipation of changes in the operating environment that underpinned the transformation efforts of both armies that is discussed further below.
The BVS document sets out three shared objectives: Contingency, Security Cooperation and Engagement. 
83
Prior to and since this combined direction was issued in March 2013, both armies have undertaken significant measures to integrate the ends, ways and means identified above.
Identifying and assessing these measures is the aim of the fourth structured question in order to further test the hypothesis that there is a mismatch in contemporary ends, ways and means relating to security cooperation. Transformation is the primary measure that both armies have undertaken in the period 2010-2015.
The scale and scope of the structural changes made to both the British and American armies' over the past five years is extensive. Transformation was the response of both armies to anticipated changes in their respective operating environments. 
85
2
Testing the hypothesis that there is a mismatch in the current integration of ends, ways and means relating to RAF and AF contributions to security cooperation is therefore partially supported. There is evidently a large amount of operational art in the integration and design underlying concepts behind RAF and AF. However, as yet the narrative linking strategic aspirations with tactical activity is not as compelling as it is relating to PfP. This deduction reveals an inherent dilemma in the integration of ends, ways and means as it relates to security cooperation, capacity building/SSR and regional stability. This is because it demands the proof of a negative in circumstances where causality is unlikely to be linear. It reflects the classic dilemma posed by deterrence theory as captured by Everett Dolman whereby, "The absence of a challenge alone does not prove that the fielded force…was the reason or cause of the lack of combat…the measurable criteria of victory are difficult if not impossible to assess". 
88
88
A key further applicable parallel is the open and systemic approaches designed to enable PfP and security cooperation initiatives today. Both PfP and contemporary initiatives in America and Britain as reflected in the direction, doctrine and evaluation represented in Tables 
1
2
For example, the expansive menu of 1400 activities that exist under PfP is a form of efficiency diversity that increases the probability of success by offering large amounts of choice. 
89
90
In this aspirational and idealized form, security cooperation, well executed, increases the likelihood of successfully identifying and achieving leverage in a system. This harnessing of systemic tendencies to create power greater than the sum of its parts reflects Freedman's definition of strategy. 
91
92
94
95
The first key difference lies in the assumption on the value of security cooperation as a commodity. Contemporary military strategy on both sides of the Atlantic assumes there is sufficient "demand" from potential consumers for the proposed increase in American and British "supply". Whilst in the nineties consumer demand was clearly articulated in forums such as the North Atlantic Coordination Council, which eventually led to shared understanding and common approaches between suppliers and consumers, it is far less clear that there are mechanisms for demand to be modulated in a like manner today. The perils of a purely supply side approach to security cooperation match the economic dangers of assuming trickle down effects automatically producing net benefits in any given system. There is a risk that the means of security cooperation justifies and becomes the end itself without the interspersed mediating function of ways such as multilateralism or shared security sector reform goals to match supply and demand.
A corollary risk of the means of security cooperation becoming the end in itself lies in the contention that RAF and AF concepts are forces in search of a mission. According to this line of argument, both armies have thus far undertaken multiple bilateral security cooperation initiatives under the aegis of RAF and AF driven more by a need to demonstrate the success of their respective transformation programs. Therefore, it is arguable that tactics is driving strategy. This portentous tendency is evident in the work of Huw Strachan; "Cowper-Coles {former UK Ambassador to Afghanistan} is right when he identifies the current generation of soldiers as shrewd political operators who have managed to manipulate politicians who are both in thrall to their professional expertise and naïve about war. He is justified in his criticism of what he has called 'supply-side strategy', in other words that strategy becomes defined in terms of its means not its ends". 
96
Perhaps the most consequential difference between the circumstances of today and the post-cold war period is the nature of the environmental frame. The problem of Euro-Atlantic security in the nineties was less complex. The very fact that the six syllable refrain of "A Europe whole and free" served as both vision and unifying purpose is emblematic in this regard. 
97
The broad theoretical approach of neo-liberal institutionalism delivered unparalleled human security and development over the last fifty years in general and twenty-five in particular.
As measured by the median increase in the Human Development Index since 1960 or the declining rate of battle deaths since 1945, the world has never been so secure nor have the traditional sources of insecurity such as poverty been so thoroughly ameliorated. 
98
For instance, the quantitative analysis cited above crucially fails to take into account evolving perceptions of security held by the vast majority of stakeholders in the west reacting to the increased impact of non-traditional actors in the international system. The proposed paradigmatic shift to "wars amongst the people" of the digital age, away from industrial age "interstate war" as articulated by General Rupert Smith, has dramatically altered conceptions of security. 
99
101
102
1
In addition to this perceived strategic miasma, the re-emergence and re-prioritization of state based threats in both the 2015 American National Military Objectives and the 2015 British Strategic Defence and Security Review demonstrate changes in the strategic context that further increases the complexity of the operating environment. Although General Smith argues that industrial age interstate war is a thing of the past, it is instructive that the latest security strategies of both the United States and the United Kingdom elevate the risk of interstate war compared to their 2010 iterations. 
104
105
106
1
105
106
107
108
108
The second direct inference therefore is wherever possible to seek multilateral ways through recourse to IGOs like the UN, AU, OSCE to modulate the proposed supply of security cooperation with the demand of partner nations. The integrating concept of Security Sector Reform (SSR) serves as a further way to sustainably match supply and demand using IGOs involved in development aid. Such a multilateral approach using familiar and tried concepts such as SSR will facilitate trust over time increasing the potential for positive tendencies. The primary risk of multilateralism lies with the increased opacity inherent in involving third party organizations. This is a risk for generating evidence of value for money. However, this is outweighed by the increased likelihood of burden sharing by and avoidance of duplication of effort amongst allies as well as reducing the risk of creating bilateral dependencies.
The success of PfP is itself a testament to the effectiveness of multilateralism. The explicit aspiration to emulate this multilateralism in the BVS is instructive. 
109
PfP, especially since NATO made partnerships central to its strategic concept, offers a significant body of reference to substantiate narratives about the nature and intent of security cooperation with Euro-Atlantic institutions. PfP generated a plausible narrative that consistently appealed to a broad range of security actors.
The third key inference is the need for applying operational art with regard to security cooperation is the need to consistently substantiate narratives aimed at multiple domestic and foreign audiences. Narrative is emerging as a concept in both British and American military doctrine. Initially, it focused inward and was premised upon generating more accurate understanding of the specific military problem at hand. 110 Nonetheless, more recently, the Integrated Action concept in the UK and the latest US Army Operating Concept both envisage information and associated narratives as objects to be contested. 
111
In order to increase the likelihood of security cooperation successfully contributing to enhanced regional stability, effective narrative substantiation will be essential in generating requisite levels of perceived RoI in domestic audiences; appropriate levels of moderated demand in partner audiences and sufficient uncertainty to deter adversarial audiences. In front of each of these audiences, narratives will be contested by alternative and competing narratives deployed variously by partners and adversaries seeking to make sense to their own multiple audiences. As Dolman posits, any given strategy, "is qualitatively-not quantitatively-judged. It is better or worse, relative to another strategy". 
112
113
114
The aim of this research paper was to test the thesis that Partnership for Peace (PfP) provides empirical evidence demonstrating the soundness of using security cooperation as a means for pursuing the end of regional stability modulated by Security Sector Reform as a way.
In turn, the inferences from this evidence will prove useful for military planners executing contemporary security cooperation initiatives pursuing similar conditions.
Analysis of the evidence surrounding PfP considering the goals it was originally set by NATO and in relation to perceptions of Return on Investment (RoI) amongst key stakeholders demonstrated that the program was an unqualified success. This part of the thesis is fully supported. Inferences drawn from PfP are useful but the increased complexity of the contemporary environmental frame demonstrate the requirement to apply contextual understanding. Consequently, support for the second half of the thesis is caveated and predicated upon understanding how circumstances have evolved and the tendencies they portray in the international system.
In drawing inferences from the success of PfP, modern practitioners, seeking to integrate ends, ways and means and apply operational art, must take into account the differing perceptions of security and varying degrees of freedom that operate today. Yet, especially when applied through the lens of complexity theory, the similarities between both circumstances are evident.
Designing and operating open systems that anticipate complexity, learn from previous instances and adapt to changing circumstances was as central then as it is now to the application of effective operational art.
It is also significant that the analysis of PfP demonstrated how security cooperation, well executed, contributes to effective strategy in the sense of it as understood by Freedman, Dolman and Gray. Respectively, that strategy is the art of creating power that enables the gaining and maintaining of positions of relative advantage which above all is reflective of a fundamental human activity to pursue security through collective action. To wit, security cooperation is a central feature of British and American visions of the future operating environment precisely because it forms a fundamental component of the definition of effectiveness that underpins much of western strategic understanding.
Nevertheless, in spite of this observation, the primary concept for turning ideas into action in western militaries, operational art, remains predominantly preoccupied with physical maneuver and the reification of decisive action. Forcing decision is one strategy amongst many others. Privileging it above all others is not conducive to balanced or prudent decision making at all levels.
Practically speaking, four key inferences for modern day operational art from the analysis of evidence surrounding PfP as a case study were determined. Taken together they demonstrate how operational art in relation to security cooperation should be conceived as the conduct of strategies and not the pursuit of decisive action.
The first inference is that contemporary security cooperation must adopt an experimental approach to account for the increased complexity in the international system. Absent a grand unifying strategy, there is a need to build coherence over time.
The second inference is that in order to modulate varying degrees of supply and demand, multilateral approaches through Intergovernmental Organizations adhering to concepts such as Security Sector Reform offer a more viable and sustainable structure than bilateral partnerships do.
The third inference is that to build coherence over time and amongst multiple audiences, foreign and domestic operational art must focus on narrative substantiation in the execution of security cooperation missions and tasks.
The fourth inference is that increased complexity will generate increased emergence in the international system. This will include significant challenges to the established system from state and non-state actors. Security cooperation, in its vital contribution to strong security cultures based upon substantive narratives and multilateralism, is a crucial component in the operation of a resilient system. It helps manages inherent change and thereby protects the unprecedented gains made by the liberal world order from shocks and other destabilizing feedback. Upstream capacity building is not only cost effective in preventing subsequent costly interventions but also in shaping theaters by diminishing and controlling potential adversaries' operational options.
When accurately situated therefore, PfP remains a worthwhile ongoing case study of how to execute an effective security cooperation program that successfully integrates ends, ways and means. Amongst a seeming litany of partnering failure during the Global War on Terror, it serves as a ready source of historical good practice that can be adopted for contemporary best fit approaches that still seek novelty in responding to constant emergence in the international system. This deduction serves as an appropriate inflexion point to consider how future research may further contribute to understanding the challenges of applying operational art in executing security cooperation missions. The work of Antulio J. Echevarria II raises important concerns about the state of operational art in the western military mindset.
Further specific inquiry into the application of operational art as the conduct of strategies will prove fruitful in bolstering the doctrinal depth of operational art. In the same way that Eisenhower's famous dictum that plans are worthless but planning is everything, reminds of the tension in detailed military planning, Echevarria's contention that strategies are worthless but strategizing is everything should serve as a spur to action in understanding how to manage multiple strategies as part of operational art. 
118
Ultimately, security cooperation is a means amongst many, but one that is central to the western network of alliances and partnerships that guarantees the security of the international system. With the increase in complexity in the international system that has resulted in the inevitable emergence of significant near term threats and medium term risks, the creation and maintenance of strong security cultures offers a strong hedge against uncertainty and an effective means to promote the universal norms that have delivered and continue to deliver unprecedented human development.
15  
15  
A copy of the statement is at Appendix 1. An addendum is scheduled for release in Spring
2 "Army Warfighting Challenges (AWfC)", Army Capabilities Integration Center, last modified June 29, 2015, accessed July 18, 2015, http://www.arcic.army.mil/Initiatives/armywarfighting-challenges.aspx.3 Doctrine Note 15/01 Integrated Action (Warminster, Directorate Land Warfare, 2015).4 "Defense Security Cooperation Agency Vision 2020", Defense Security Cooperation
Ministry of Defence, International Defence Engagement Strategy (London, gov.uk,  2013), last modified February 7, 2013, accessed July 21, 2015, https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/73171/defence_en gagement_strategy.pdf.
See Appendix 1.
Mark Sedra, Security Sector Reform 101: Understanding the Concept, Charting Trends and Identifying Challenges (The Centre for International Governance Innovation, April 2010), last modified April 2010, accessed August 17, 2015, https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/SSR%20101%20Final%20(April%2027).pdf .
Nicole Ball, Evaluation of the Conflict Prevention Pools: The Security Sector Reform Strategy, (Bradford University, Channel Research Ltd, PARC & Associated Consultants for Department for International Development 1 April 2004), accessed August 17, 2015, https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/67927/ev647ssr.pd f, 48.
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-90 (JDP 3-90) Civil Military Co-Operation (London, gov.uk, 2012), 1-8.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication 3-07 (ADRP 3-07) Stability (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 3-4.
Peter Lattman, "The Origins of Justice Stewart"s "I Know It When I See It"", The Wall
Thomas G Mahnken, "Small States Have Options Too: Competitive Strategies against Aggressors", Commentary (War on the Rocks, January 27, 2016), last modified January 27, 2016, accessed January 27, 2016, http://warontherocks.com/2016/01/small-states-have-options-toocompetitive-strategies-against-aggressors/.
See for example US Presidential Policy Directive 23, Security Sector Assistance Factsheet, page 2, published 5 April 2013 and the UK National Security Strategy, National Security Tasks 3, 4 and 8, page 33, published October 2010.
Antulio J Echevarria II, "Reconsidering War"s Logic and Grammar", Infinity Journal 1, no. 2 Spring (2011): 4-7.
Joint Publication 3-0 (JP 3-0) Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, August 11, 2011), V-5.
Antulio J.Echevarria II, "American Operational Art 1917
-2008", in
General Sir Nicholas Carter KCB CBE DSO ADC, "The Future of the British Army: How the Army Must Change to Serve Britain in a Volatile World", Chatham House, last modified February 17, 2015, accessed July 17, 2015, http://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20150217QBritishA
Ibid., 35.  It cannot also pass unremarked the serendipity of a Polish born American General of Georgian descent being the progenitor of a process that contributed so much to securing a Europe whole and free. The apotheosis of the American dream resolving a recurring European nightmare? One suspects that VV Putin might contest this narrative.
Gerald B Solomon, The NATO Enlargement Debate, 1990-1997 Vol. 174: The  Blessings of Liberty (Westport (Connecticut): Greenwood Press, 1998), 26.   
See Appendices 2, 3 & 4 respectively for the PfP Framework, Invitation and Signatory list documents.
Partnership for Peace: Invitation Document (Brussels: North Atlantic Treaty Organization, January 11, 1994), see Appendix 3.
Partnership for Peace: Framework Document (Brussels: North Atlantic Treaty Organization, January 11, 1994), see Appendix 4.
The Helsinki Final Act, initially signed by 35 countries in 1975 and by a further 22 countries since, stipulates wide ranging normative principles governing relations between Euro-Atlantic countries that inter alia guarantee territorial integrity and sovereignty.
56 Partnership for Peace: Invitation Document.
Partnership for Peace: Framework Document.
Partnership for Peace: Invitation Document.
Jorge Benitez, "Is NATO's new Fulda gap in Poland?,", November 24, 2015, accessed December 13, 2015, http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/natosource/is-nato-s-new-fulda-gap-inpoland.
The GAO has produced twenty-three reports on various aspects of US-NATO relations between 1990-2015. Eleven that pertain directly to this study are detailed in the bibliography.
Figures extracted from "A Citizen"s Guide to U.S. Security and Defense Assistance", Security Assistance Monitor, last modified August 25, 2015, accessed September 1, 2015, http://www.securityassistance.org/data/country/military/Warsaw%20Initiative/2006/2010/is_all/G lobal
"HMT Public Expenditure Statistical Analyses (PESA)" (HM Treasury, 2009), last modified 2009, accessed December 12, 2015, https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/238595/7630.pdf, 74.
Email correspondence between author and MOD and NAO officials September -December 2015.
"Who Is at Fault in Ukraine?", Brain Trust (Foreign Affairs, November 9, 2014), last modified November 9, 2014, accessed December 13, 2015, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russia-fsu/2014-11-09/who-fault-ukraine.
Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-3-1, Army Operating Concept 2016-2028" (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2010), 25 and "Army 2020: Transforming the British Army for the Future" (Ministry of Defence, July 5, 2012), last modified July 5, 2012, accessed January 18, 2016, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/army-2020-transforming-thebritish-army-for-the-future.
87 UK MOD Defence Engagement activities are partially funded from the tridepartmental (FCO, DFID, MOD) Conflict Pool.
Ibid, 48. See also The Army Vision: Strategic Advantage in a Complex World (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015) British Army Doctrine Note 15/01 Integrated Action(Warminster, Directorate Land Warfare, 2015).
Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 90.
President George H.W. Bush, "A Europe Whole and Free",
May 31, 1989
See appendix 1.
Lukas Milevski, "Revisiting J.C. Wylie"s Dichotomy of Strategy: The Effects of Sequential and Cumulative Patterns of Operations", Journal of Strategic Studies 35, no. 2 (April 2012): 223-242, 223.
Antulio J. Echevarria II, "Op-Ed: Is Strategy Really a Lost Art?", Strategic Studies Institute, last modified September 13, 2013, accessed October 1, 2015, http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/index.cfm/articles/Is-Strategy-Really-A-Lost-Art/2013/09/13.
from the 
NATO Partnership for Peace Program
US Regionally Aligned Force and UK Adaptable Force Security Cooperation
Peace Program
US Regionally Aligned Force and UK Adaptable Force Security Cooperation
Maj John A. Jeffcoat
This dilemma leads to the fifth and sixth structured questions of this case study. They test the hypothesis that it is possible to use the example of PfP to draw inferences for the application of operational art in resolving the dilemmas inherent in contemporary American and British security cooperation initiatives. The answers to these questions find the hypothesis partially supported. There are applicable lessons for contemporary operational art when understood in the appropriate context. However, the environmental frame and consequent operational environments are relatively more complex today, although not necessarily more consequential, than the problems presented by the collapse of communism in Europe from 1989 onwards. Consequently, contemporary practitioners should not seek to directly replicate PfP or assume, sua sponte, that because security cooperation worked then that it will necessarily work now. Nevertheless, the success of PfP can form part of contemporary narrative substantiation in legitimizing efforts to build partner capacity and ensure regional stability.
The fifth structured question determines the applicable differences and similarities between PfP and current security cooperation initiatives. It considers them in terms of strategic context and specific approaches taken integrate ends, ways and means. Applicability is broadly determined with reference to operational art and the purpose of this study as outlined in the introduction and literature review. Specifically, applicability is judged in line with the methodological approach of yielding actionable variables. It finds similar systemic and operational approaches but comparison of the post-cold war environment with today reveals differing conceptions of security and degrees of freedom that define the operating environment for both the American and British armies. These differences reflect the increased complexity of the environmental frame.
terrorism present in the Philippine archipelago is deafening in this respect. A strong shared security culture between the US and the Philippines and the judicious use of discrete military activities has repeatedly dampened down any amplifying feedback that may have disrupted the security system in the South Western Pacific.
By way of summary, this case study consisted of three parts designed to test the thesis that PfP is a proven instance of the means of security cooperation contributing to the ends of regional security modulated by the ways of Security Sector Reform. The evidence of this successful integration of ends, ways and means provides inferences from which modern day planners can infer to plan and execute contemporary security cooperation initiatives.
The first part of the case study found substantial evidence that PfP is a proven instance of successful security cooperation that achieved its objectives and generated sustained high levels of perceived value for money. The second part found the hypothesis that there is a mismatch in the integration of current ends, ways and means in American and British security cooperation initiatives was only partially supported. There are high levels of integration ongoing, particularly in the transformation both armies have undertaken, but it is too soon to make conclusive judgements as to their efficacy regarding security cooperation. The third part of the case study tested the contention that PfP provides inferences for contemporary operational art. Again, the analysis of available evidence produced mixed results. There are direct inferences to be made with PfP built upon as a point of reference, but the diverse nature of the differing problem frames tempers the findings. The relatively structured problem of NATO partnering in the nineties does not map across to the increased complexity present in the contemporary operating environment. These findings will be synthesized in the concluding section.