# ID: 5e476630b62e4491b4aa8d34db8d5a7d
# Title: Strategy and the use of airpower on the eastern front: Lessons for the airpower strategist
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
The Eastern Front is likely the least appreciated and least understood component of the Second World War. This is especially unfortunate since it contains some of the richest lessons about strategy and the application of airpower while faced with an imminent and existential threat. This study investigates several of these lessons and concludes that, despite the significant impact allied efforts had on the Western Front, their efforts were ultimately of secondary importance compared to the costly and more grueling efforts of the Soviet Union in defeating Germany. Furthermore, despite the fact that Soviet airpower diverged from patterns preferred by US strategic airpower thinkers, the Soviet air force (VVS) developed into an enormously successful and competent air arm which warrants further study, investigation, and consideration. The VVS utilized airpower very differently than did the United States, and yet its ability to reestablish air superiority and decisively contribute to national victory was truly impressive. While allied strategic bombing efforts increased friction, reduced German freedom of action, and reduced available German resources, it was ultimately unable to produce the decisive results they had hoped. Instead, the fortuitous combination of the Red Army, VVS direct and indirect support and deep interdiction operations, time, distance, and the unforgiving Soviet winter produced the most tangible strategic effect: the destruction of 6.5 million German soldiers on the Eastern Front.
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of many people who assisted me in getting to the place I am today. First are the leaders who inspire me to work hard and think critically. Their example has been a powerful influence in my development. The faculty at Air Command and Staff College had a dramatic impact in my appreciation for what airpower did and did not accomplish in the past and what it may be able to achieve in the future. The SAASS faculty has continued the challenge by building on that foundation. They are a very impressive collection of scholars, thinkers, and leaders. The devotion they exhibit to their students and to their craft is nothing short of spectacular.
Dr. Muller has the patience of Job. His gracious nature, wise guidance, and encouraging demeanor have resulted in sustained levels of motivation, both for my efforts and for those of my classmates. He is a world-class scholar and renowned expert on German airpower. Without his help, I would still be wallowing on page one.
My Family continues to bless me beyond every expectation or imagination. Their steadfast patience while enduring many evenings and weekends without me has made these efforts possible. I know I'm a better student of airpower for pursuing this endeavor, and I pray that I have also grown as a husband and father.
Psalm 111:10
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge; fools despise wisdom and instruction.
Proverbs 1:7 arguing that the air forces of the Western Allies applied the -correct‖ form of airpower through strategic bombardment, while other nations chose less effective paths. At the risk of bringing discredit upon the theories of past heroic eras and heroic men, Spaatz's claim is doubtful.
A brief look at Spaatz's article reveals that the American mindset and analysis of Second World War airpower strategy, performance, and circumstances is incomplete. Students of air strategy must seek to advance the field via a thorough understanding of the nature and circumstances of past conflicts, and of past adversaries and allies.
Effective American strategists, like strategists from any nation, must always endeavor to understand accurately the situation they face.
There are many factors which might have drastically altered the outcome of the Second World War. Had the Axis powers been able to undertake conventional strategic bombing campaigns, this would not by itself likely have changed the outcome. More fundamental issues such as grand strategy, economics, culture, and industrial capacity were much more powerful determiners of the course of the Second World War.
Spaatz's motivation to write what he did is difficult to separate from the historical context of attempting to create an independent United States Air Force. It is difficult to imagine his taking a different approach in his article. The political and military culture of his day seemed to require proof that would gain entrance to the temple of independence-the special key called -decisiveness.‖ His closing paragraph is also very telling: -Another war, however distant in the future, would probably be decided by some form of air power before the surface forces were able to make contact with the enemy in major battles. This is the supreme military lesson of our period of history.‖
2
The point of this study is to provide insight into a perspective missing from the tool kit of many US airmen. It examines what occurred on the Eastern Front during the Second World War and how vital those events were to eventual Allied victory. Airpower is part of that story-but the airpower lessons of that theater are significantly different from those gleaned in Western Europe. The lessons of airpower on the Eastern
Front should be very familiar to students of airpower who desire to most effectively contribute to joint campaigns in the future. Discussion of land battle includes rich examples of modern and ancient, western and eastern, approaches to warfare. Why should airpower not also draw from a diversity of experiences? Why should Eastern Front airpower lessons remain undiscovered? Is it possible that USAF thinkers tend to ignore the Eastern Front airpower experience simply because it seems to emphasize direct support for ground forces?
The first chapter will provide background, both cultural and military, which influenced the development of national, economic, land, and airpower in both the Soviet Union and Germany. The second chapter will refine the situation for both nations as the German invasion of the USSR, Operation Barbarossa, drew near. The third chapter attempts to capture salient airpower lessons from this campaign. It is critical for airmen to appreciate the possibility that one of the lessons of this monumental campaign is that strategic airpower had little to do with its outcome. The fourth chapter will attempt the near-impossible: to distill the vast experiences of the Eastern Front into strategic lessons for airmen. Finally a conclusion will summarize the findings of this study and provide some useful recommendations for the airmen of today.
Chapter 1
You may not be interested in war, but war is very interested in you.
Of the many contextual factors that influenced the development of warfare, and air warfare in particular, on the Eastern Front in World War II, four stand out as especially relevant. These factors are: ideology and the military; the conduct and nature of the First World War and Treaty of Versailles; Russo-German diplomatic agreements after the First World
War; and the nature of Stalin and Hitler's military policies. These factors are important because German and Soviet strategy, operational concepts, types of airpower, and combat performance on the Eastern Front were each critically shaped by these background factors. The first of these factors is communist ideology.
If nothing else positive can ever be said of Adolf Hitler and Joseph
Stalin, they at least demonstrated a consistent devotion to their stated aims. With great difficulty, one contemplates the extent of the evil and barbaric cruelty these regimes inflicted upon innocent people. Over the course of two world wars, German and Soviet forces wrought enormous death, destruction, and brutality upon one another. Yet, in light of the savage history of animosity between Germany and the Soviet Union, it is ironic that one of the great influences upon Soviet identity flow from the ideas of a German: Karl Marx.
Karl Marx's ideology challenged the abuses he believed endemic to capitalism. Just as most myths contain some element of truth, the attraction of Marxism-Leninism was based upon valid criticism and concerns about social and economic conditions. Marx warned of capitalism leading to imperialism, greed, economic injustice, and international tension. These concerns affected the broader European community at the close of the nineteenth century. Elements of several of his ideas have been sufficient to influence one of the great movements of history. Marx's ideas were unquestionably utopian. According to international relations theorist Edward Carr, they were, -…the product not of analysis, but of aspiration.‖ 1 During the century and a quarter since Marx's death, the serious flaws 2 of his ideas have been aptly
demonstrated, yet the appeal endures today.
Early revolutionary and communist leaders sought amelioration of economic injustice through adherence to Marx's ideology. It is interesting that these early revolutionaries remained strongly committed despite the fact that they readily anticipated a future wartime enemy consisting of an -economically superior capitalist coalition.‖ 3 These communists did not sufficiently consider the possibility that capitalism might produce economic strength sufficient to mitigate shortcomings of the capitalistic system. Some even suggest that Hitler's plans to dominate were inspired and enabled by capitalism. 
4
The utopian movement was strengthened by a variety of influences to include US President Woodrow Wilson's idealist belief in a -League of Nations,‖ wide-spread millenarianism, advocacy of international police forces, and various forms of collective security. The utopian ideal may not naturally agree with the military mind. Samuel Huntington identified Marxism as fundamentally contrary to his definition of the military mind because of the communist belief that man is basically good and rational.
The Marxist believes institutions corrupt man. 
5
This disparity between desire and reality was also present in the revolutionary military created in the USSR after the Bolshevik revolution in 1917. Friedrich Engels believed that, -the emancipation of the proletariat…will have its own special expression in military affairs and will create its own special and new military method.‖ 6 These revolutionary ideas were powerful, but more would be needed if Russian
Revolutionaries desired to create an effective Red Army out of the old Tsarist Army. As author and analyst in the Soviet Army Studies Office at U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Jacob W. Kipp, clearly states, -…revolutionary élan was no substitute for a proper understanding of military science or the effective application of military art.‖ 7 Converting revolutionary ideal into viable military policy, doctrine, and security was clearly going to present an enormous challenge. It is 
5
6
War: Operational Art, 1904
-1940, 123. 7
impossible to fully understand the state of the Soviet land and air forces in 1941 without consideration of this tension.
A second irony is that the same Bolsheviks who undermined military and civil authorities in order to seize power in 1917 now needed to maintain strong military forces to ensure their survival. 
8
Brest-Litovsk pact which ended hostilities between the USSR and Imperial Germany. During this period, invasions by western nations also posed an external threat. British and American soldiers landed at Murmansk and Archangel'sk, while French and British forces invaded Odessa, Crimea, and the Caucasus region. Additionally, Japanese and American forces spread westward from Vladivostok on the Russian Pacific coast. The fledgling communist movement was rightly concerned for its survival, and had to fight several early struggles and learn some valuable lessons.
Some of the lessons discovered during the Russian Civil War,   1918-1920, were more obvious than others. Lenin and Trotsky grasped the importance of mobility in the vast Russian spaces, and used railroads to carry out large scale troop movements to different fronts on a number of occasions throughout the war. 
9
The Russian military leadership learned additional important military lessons during this period. They grasped the importance of effective logistic capabilities when conducting military operations in vast areas defended by relatively few troops, a situation that demanded mobility and improved command and control. 
10
11
[That] produced a generation of officers who believed passionately in the value of mobility and maneuver and soon embraced mechanized forces as the weapon of choice.‖ 
12
13
The flexibility to conduct warfare under either mindset would both bless and curse the Soviet military in future conflicts. Again, the broad outlines of the 1941-1945 clash were beginning to emerge.
One of the most successful Soviet commanders of the Russian Civil War, and perhaps Soviet Russia's greatest military theorist, was M.N.
Tukhachevskii. Tukhachevskii, along with theorist V.K. Triandafillov, concluded that modern armies were too resilient to be defeated by one cataclysmic battle. A series of smaller offensives would be required that would allow for rapid exploitation into the enemy's rear echelons.
Additionally, victory in war was shown to require sustained economic and political mobilization, as well as military efforts. 
14
Deep Battle's impact on an opposing force's moral strength could be significant. Attacking enemy concentrations in such as way as to create a shallow envelopment (just behind their front line) was believed to induce stress upon enemy soldiers fighting near the front lines.
Likewise, deep strikes would have less immediate impact upon enemy front-line soldiers, but would likely cause stress and confusion in the minds of enemy commanders. 21 Some theorists believed that careful planning of maneuver can achieve a battlefield effect disproportionate to the strength of the operation. Clearly, airpower theorists did not possess a monopoly on the concept of achieving strategic or morale effects upon the enemy leadership.
Tukhachevskii's contributions were important in two main ways.
He laid a doctrinal and technical foundation for Soviet air, mechanized, and airborne forces, establishing large mobile ground forces and their logistical requirements. In one of Tukhachevskii's lectures, he stated, -The side which is not poised to destroy enemy air bases, to disrupt his railway system, to mobilize and concentrate strong airborne forces, and to act swiftly with mechanized formations-all in all to adopt this style of striking the enemy-will not be able to achieve the requisite strategic concentration and will lose the principal theatres of operations. The nation which, in this year of 1934, neglects to embark on a radical strengthening of its airpower will suddenly and unexpectedly find itself in 
20
25
Tukhachevskii's appreciation for strategic attack was based upon its impact on fielded forces and their logistic and mobility requirements.
As a committed Marxist, Tukhachevskii was keenly aware of the relationship between economic production and a nation's war effort.
Despite this, his recommendations for the use of airpower did not favor industrial web theories such as those associated with the US Air Corps Tactical School. In an era where many airpower enthusiasts were convinced of the efficacy of strategic bombing, Tukhachevskii's views make for an interesting contrast.
Tukhachevskii's preference for attacking fielded forces and their immediate logistical requirements invites comparison to political scientist Robert Pape's description of the coercive airpower strategy known as   -116. Aviation is used to attack those targets which cannot be destroyed by the fire of infantry, artillery, and other branches.
To achieve optimum combat effectiveness, aviation must attack in great numbers of aircraft and its effects must be consolidated in time and against targets which are of the greatest tactical importance.
As a rule the troop commander gives the mission to the combat pilots for the duration of the entire operation, stating to what extent the operational capability must be used.
Depending on the situation, tasks for specific sorties can then be allocated while the battle is in progress.
The success of cooperation between air forces and ground forces must be secured by reliable technical communications, by establishing personal liaisons between the troop commander and the air force commanders.
The choice and preparation of landing strips and airfields, using ground force personnel an (Ad materiel, is a daily task of commanders and their staffs at all levels.
117. Combat aircraft have the following tasks: a. they prevent the approach of enemy troops to the battlefield and destroy them in the rear area troop assembly or army area; b. they serve in direct support of friendly troops by attacking the enemy in various phases of the combat operation; c. they disrupt enemy command and liaison by destroying headquarters, transmitting centers, and wires of telephone and radio network;
d. they attack landing operations from the air or water (rivers) by destroying them at their initial positions, en route, during debarkation and action on friendly territory; e. they disrupt the functioning of rear services, prevent railroad shipments, destroy roads for motor vehicle transport, destroy supplies stored in depots, at railroad stations, etc.; f. they destroy enemy aviation at its airfields, destroy depots and air bases; g. they participate in the defense against approaching large enemy bomber formation.
118. Fighter aircraft are primarily dedicated to the destruction of all types of enemy aircraft in the air and on the ground.
Their tasks are the following: a. they destroy enemy aircraft in the air and on their bases; b. they protect friendly troops and immovable objects against air attacks; c. they destroy observation and barrage balloons; d. they provide cover for the assembly area of flying units, escort the flying units of the combat team as far as their range permit, and accompany them again once they have fulfilled their combat mission; e. if required, they provide photo reconnaissance and air support for the artillery.
In exceptional cases fighter aircraft can be used as follows: a. to attack ground troops at rest or on the move; b. to accomplish reconnaissance tasks for the benefit of ground commanders as well as air commanders.
119. Light bombers are used against the following types of targets: a. troop concentrations; b. command posts of the ground forces and message centers; c. supply depots d. road and rail transports e. enemy aviation on its air bases.
In addition, light bombers can be used for the following tasks: countermeasures against an aerial landing operation and participation in friendly air landing operations. 
The First World War was a defining moment for every nation involved. Memory of the carnage which ensued for very little movement upon the battlefield communicated a great deal to civilian and military strategists alike. Many falsely believed that it would be the end of war.
Others, more pragmatically, were determined to find a better means of waging it. Airpower theorists were motivated by the desire to prevent any recurrence of such a tragedy in any future war. 41
The emergence of a -security dilemma,‖ in which defensive measures were perceived as demonstrating aggressive intent, in the years after 1895 helped trigger the First World War. 
42
43
44
During the Second World War these tactics would eventually be finely
honed. Yet no amount of tactical prowess can compensate for a lack of strategic preparedness.
The internal combustion engine brought about dramatically increased ground mobility, and also made airpower possible. The introduction of primitive tanks was a promising development, although initially their performance was better suited to the conditions of trench warfare. 
52
The Treaty of Versailles imposed upon Germany conditions which would eventually influence its national identity and grand strategy. In the interwar period, Germany was expected to pay reparations and was limited to a lightly armed force of merely 100,000 soldiers. The German Navy and Air Force were -virtually eliminated.‖ 54 Imposing these restrictions is an appropriate response to aggression; however the Germans did not uniformly believe that the war was a battlefield defeat.
Some attributed their defeat to the myth that German politicians and traitors on the home front had betrayed the German military. Even the conditions of the Armistice involved trickery, some believed. 
55
53
54
55
Germans less willing to accept their new position and therefore to decrease France's long-run security. 
56
Belgium. Furthermore, Poland ended up with German territory and sizeable strength due to the Treaty of Versailles.
57
Germany and the Soviet Union were natural geopolitical rivals.  Stalin destroyed the leadership and middle-management of his military precisely when tension was growing and war loomed on the horizon. Young officers in both ground and air arms who survived the purge were presented the opportunity to lead organizations well beyond their experience level. In one account, a major arrived at his new unit to discover that the -commander, political commissar, chief of staff, and all but one primary staff officer of the division had been arrested, leaving him as division commander, a position that called for at least three ranks higher and ten more years of experience than he possessed.‖
64
Leadership and military experience were not the only victims of this tragedy.
In the 1930's a number of Soviet air force leaders were interested in the ideas of Douhet. There was special interest placed in heavy bombers, and the idea that heavy aircraft could achieve strategic significance through independent missions was widely discussed.
According to a 1954 RAND study, -most of the adherents of this view fell in the Great Purge of 
1937-1938.‖ 65
Fortunately for Stalin and the Allies, despite attempts to destroy Tukhachevskii's ideas, enough was preserved and sufficient officers who had been influenced by his theories survived the purge that they were eventually implemented. 
66
Franco's insurgents, who were supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist
Italy, The Soviets discovered that they had communication problems with the Spanish, their tanks were insufficiently armored, and their armor outpaced the infantry which allowed dismounted enemy troops to defeat the Soviet tanks without interference from Soviet troops. According to performance was disappointing and required several more years to be corrected.
The second Soviet opportunity resulted from a 1938-1939 border dispute with Japan. The local Soviet commander was a brilliant disciple of Tukhachevskii's named G.K. Zhukov. Zhukov was able to amass 57,000 men, 498 tanks, and 385 armored cars without being detected by the Japanese. He was able to encircle and defeat the Japanese forces.
The victory cost the Soviets 7,974 killed and 15,251 wounded as compared to the Japanese 61,000 killed, wounded, or captured. 
68
Although the Soviets were compelled to conduct significant operations on their eastern border at various times, they were spared from the likelihood of a Japanese attack on their eastern border during the Second World War.
The Soviets also conducted a bungled invasion of Finland on 30
November 1939. This invasion was ill-planned and a tremendous embarrassment to Stalin. 
69
It sounded a clear warning to Stalin of the true state of his military forces, while simultaneously demonstrating to Hitler that the present state of military preparedness of the Soviet Union was extremely poor. It also demonstrated to both Stalin and Hitler that Europe was reluctant to get involved.
On 17 September, the Soviets also crossed into Poland. As meager as this effort was, the required logistics taxed the Soviets. Motorized units had to resort to fuel siphoning in order to keep moving. Polish resistance forces were also a difficult problem for Soviet leaders. As a foreshadowing of the cruelty and atrocities to come, Soviet forces massacred 14,500 Polish military officers and civilians at Katyn. 
70
They had annexed the Baltic States, parts of Moldova, and Romanian objectives near German oil interests. Stalin's response to some of his military failures was to return to the technique of scapegoating. In fact, to a large degree, it was Stalin's earlier purges of his military that had left his forces in the dilapidated shape they were in.
Thus, on the eve of the Second World War, the Red Army was in utter disarray. It was confused both tactically and operationally, had few leaders capable of dealing with the challenges which lay ahead, and did not have the agrarian, industrial or economic strength its potential suggested. Furthermore, Stalin's leadership instilled institutional barriers to success which would ultimately contribute to an extremely dire situation for the Soviet Union.
Chapter 2
The German Army in fighting Russia is like an elephant attacking a host of ants. The elephant will kill thousands, perhaps millions, of ants, but in the end their numbers will overcome him, and he will be eaten to the bone.
The campaign fought between Germany and the Soviet Union was much more significant to the outcome of World War II and subsequent world events than many US airmen understand. To some, the Second
World War was about D-Day, the Combined Bomber Offensive, island hopping, naval battles, and atomic weapons. This perspective is much too narrow and reflects ignorance on many levels. Significant lessons concerning the development of strategy, the importance of logistics, and This discussion will include a consideration of terrain, population demographics, the German army and airpower orders of battle, the Soviet army and airpower orders of battle, and finally it will communicate several considerations related to military aircraft production capacity and its relationship to the strategy and operational art applied in this campaign.
The sheer size, diversity, and climatic extremes of the geography of European Russia warrant significant attention, as they powerfully influenced not only surface actions, but aerial activity as well. Both
German and Soviet forces experienced the combined effect of terrain and climate, but it did not have an identical effect on each belligerent. For 
Source: West Point Atlas for the Second World War, plate 19.
The Pripet marshes (see Figure 
1
3
Seasonal climate change was another significant factor. The Russian winter months were especially brutal. Temperatures south of Leningrad would routinely be -40 degrees Fahrenheit, and in a mild winter might be as warm as -20 degrees Fahrenheit. 
4
5
6
German tactics favored quick and agile infantry movements which were supported by artillery and Luftwaffe operations. Due to winter conditions, they could no longer reap the benefit of rapid gains after artillery preparation of their objective. Deep snow alone could effectively immobilize infantry units. In the winter 1941 attack on Tikhvin, the Germans suffered more casualties due to cold than to enemy action. 
7
The fact that Hitler disregarded careful study and awareness of these factors when considering the timing and wisdom of an invasion is well known. What is less appreciated is the impact that the weather had on aviation. Low ceilings and poor visibility affected both nations.
Training and experience in how to conduct ground support at low altitudes and at shallow attack angles was helpful to any side that mastered it. Those skills would be helpful in conditions of low cloud ceilings which was common in this theater.
Weather impacts were not limited to the conduct of air operations.
Of equal importance is the negative impact that the cold had on German aircraft servicing, maintenance, and expeditionary operations with long logistical and supply chains. During cold weather months, Soviet supporting maintenance functions were often conducted in suitable facilities. They were less affected by the predominant weather conditions. The Luftwaffe, which often found itself operating out of damaged or -bare‖ bases, was often unable to conduct operations at peak capacity due to the vulnerability of its equipment to the cold temperatures, or in some cases the clothing shortfalls that affected maintenance personnel.
Preparedness to conduct operations in diverse environments remains a critical requirement. An example is that long range aircraft are especially influenced by climactic changes because a sortie can originate in the warmth of the desert, and land in a very cold climate.
Within a short period a single aircraft can be exposed to opposite extremes, as can necessary support equipment under the contemporary expeditionary mindset. Climatic equipment and process testing is just as important today.
This conflict represented a significant existential threat to the Soviet people, given the clearly stated aims of German grand strategy.
By extension, in the event of German military failure, the German people would likely face an existential threat from an understandably vengeful Soviet Union. An understanding of population size and distribution is necessary in order to appreciate underlying factors that influence the ability to achieve grand strategic objectives.
At the beginning of 1941, the Soviet population (including areas of Soviet control such as the Baltic States and eastern Poland) was greater than 199 million. In contrast, Germany's population (excluding Germanoccupied Poland and Slovakia) was 100 million. 
8
On the eve of Operation Barbarossa, the German army had amassed a fighting force which dwarfs contemporary standards of warfare. At their disposal were 152 divisions, which included nineteen panzer (armor) and fifteen motorized infantry division. There were 3,350 tanks, 7,200 artillery pieces, and 2,770 aircraft. There were also fourteen Finnish divisions and fourteen Romanian brigades which supported German efforts. These forces were under the control of the German Army High Command (Oberkommando des Heeres, or OKH) and were subdivided into Army Group North, Center, and South. There was also an Army of Norway which was also called the Far North Army Group. 
10
15
The final objective of the operation is to erect a barrier against Asiatic Russia on the general line Volga-Archangel. The last surviving industrial areas of Russia in the Urals can then, if necessary, be eliminated by the air force.
It will be the Luftwaffe's duty to paralyze and eliminate the effectiveness of the Russian Air Force as far as possible. It will also support the main operations of the army, i.e. those of Army Group Centre and of the vital flank of Army Group South. Russian railways and bridges will either be destroyed or captured.
In order that we may concentrate all our strength against the enemy air force and for the immediate support of land operations, the Russian armaments industry will not be attacked during the main operations. Such attacks will be made only after the conclusion of mobile warfare, and they will be concentrated first on the Urals area. 
18
20
After the Spanish Civil War, there was some evidence in German reports that advocated avoiding the terror bombing of civilians. Luftwaffe officers were more aware of the challenges inherent in navigating to and attacking targets. According to one German military authority on the Spanish Civil War, Colonel Rudolf von Xylander, -bombing from the air failed to demoralize civilian populations.‖
21
The German main effort was with Army Group Center which was Fliegerkorps V and IV. In all, the German army fielded 3,800,000 men. 
23
Although efforts to bombard and eventually invade Britain had come to a disappointing close, the abandonment of the goal of occupying Britain did little to dampen German optimism. The German strategic mindset was conditioned toward continental wars. They prepared for and expected to achieve the rapid and dramatic envelopment and annihilation of enemy forces. Hitler's interest was in conducting a campaign primarily designed to destroy the Red Army, not capture specific geographic features. In fact, Hitler stated, -Moscow [is] of no great importance.‖ 24 This certainty of guidance would wane and eventually result in much confusion among German planners. Not all German leaders were as confident. Heinz Guderian's near prophetic words before the war bespeak a clear and contrarian voice: Russia possesses the strongest army in the world, numerically and in terms of the modernity of its weapons and equipment. The Russians have the world's largest air force as well, and they are striving to bring their navy up to the same level. The transport system is still inadequate, but they are working hard in that direction also. Russia has ample raw materials, and a mighty armaments industry has been set up in the depths of that vast empire. The time has passed when the Russians had no instinct for technology; we will have to reckon on the Russians being able to master and build their own machines, and with the fact that such a transformation in the Russians' fundamental mentality confronts us with the Eastern Question in a form more serious than ever before in history. 
25
German intelligence analysis accurately noted the poor state of Soviet military preparedness. Soviet military embarrassments in Poland and Finland were well known to German officials. Likewise, Stalin's purges ensured that members of the Soviet political and military leadership were either woefully inexperienced or blindly devoted to Stalin. Demonstrating leadership talent or genius was not necessarily a requirement for high command. Finally, assumptions about weak Soviet technology were woven together to portray Soviet industry in unfavorable terms. Despite these trends, the German assessment was actually correct in many ways, at least in the short term. The enormous tactical and operational successes that awaited the German advance testify that that German intelligence correctly apprehended the significant Soviet vulnerabilities.
Unfortunately for Germany, these assessments of Soviet vulnerability were combined with German preoccupation with Slavic biological inferiority. Not only were the Germans honed and ready for action, they were intellectually incapable of seriously considering a scenario other than rapid victory over their Soviet foes. Expert intelligence preparation does not end at appreciating initial strengths and weaknesses of the adversary. Rather, it starts here and transcends these qualities and endeavors to transition from mere apprehension to true comprehension of the enemy.
Contrary to postwar arguments which disparage Hitler's military judgment for considering a campaign to the east, it should be noted that Hitler actually understood very well that near the eve of Operation BARBAROSSA, Soviet military forces were probably at their weakest. In fact, Hitler knew that seizing the initiative and defeating the Soviet military would gain for Germany enormous quantities of war materials, slave labor, food, supplies, and significantly, a reprieve from the danger of an eventual attack from the east by a stronger, more dangerous Soviet army. Hitler was likely correct in believing that his chances for success were optimized by preventing the Soviets from beginning a conflict on the Eastern Front at the time of Stalin's choosing, especially if it was when Hitler least expected it. Luftwaffe assets were gradually and clandestinely moved at night from their positions on the Western front to positions of advantage to Germany's east. In fact, the last major London night raid, May 10, 1941, was partly a disguise for redeployment of German bombers to the east. 
26
29
Although Hitler underrated Soviet character and fighting spirit, many German officers did not. One German officer's assessment was that -The Russian soldier…loves a fight and scorns death.‖
30
The only means to gain that objective is combat. Combat results in: a. The destruction of the enemy's animate forces and materiel; b. The impairment of his morale and ability to resist.
Any battle-offensive as well as defensive-has the goal of defeating the enemy. But only a resolute attack in the main direction of effort, which leads to irresistible pursuit, results in total destruction of enemy forces and materiel. A constant urge to fight the enemy with the goal of defeating him, must be the basis of the training and conduct of any leader and soldier of the Red Army. The enemy must be attacked in a resolute and courageous manner wherever he is found, without specific orders being given to that effect. 
31
Tear his throat with your teeth. Do not die without leaving behind you a German corpse.‖ 32 The peril of misperceiving the reason and nature of a conflict or the nature of one's enemy is one of Clausewitz's key warnings.
Operation Barbarossa when he warned that, -No one starts a war -or rather, no one in his senses ought to do so -without first being clear in his mind what he intends to achieve by that war and how he intends to conduct it.‖ 
33
Warfare, at least since the American Civil War, had clearly been a function of the combined performance of the battlefield and national industry. 
36
37
32
Russian-German Conflict, 1941
-1945, 43. 33
34
35
36
37
Despite possessing one of the world's most capable militaries, Hitler would eventually discover he was not conducting the kind of war he expected. Contrary to Clausewitz's warning, Hitler's decisions brought about the dilemma of risk: Fight immediately with a qualitative advantage, or delay at the risk of losing relative strength? Strategy rarely results in success when applied to a situation other than which it was designed. In this case, German weaknesses were exposed in the crucible of a protracted campaign in the East. However, Soviets weakness was apparent prior to the conflict; instead, it was Soviet strength that was revealed by the test of combat.
It is commonly assumed that the German application of Blitzkrieg was the epitome of operational art. Their tactical capability was directed and shaped, through sound operational art, to meet the ends of their military and grand strategy objectives. Unfortunately for Germany, significant mistakes were made at the strategic level which resulted ultimately in failure.
Blitzkrieg's success in the opening period of the war in both France and Poland was stunning. It reflected German ability to conduct coordinated maneuver, identify and concentrate at appropriate points of weakness, penetrate deep into rear areas, and achieve positional advantage to further follow-on success in support of military and grand strategic objectives. German officers were satisfied with the result of their tactics and did a good job hot-washing their results. There was little likelihood of deep self-criticism at levels above the operational, however.
German Army Chief of the General Staff, Colonel-General Franz Halder, famously included in his diary, -I am not exaggerating when I say that the campaign against Russia was won within two weeks.‖ 38 However, there is also evidence that German military leadership failed to pursue interaction with Hitler, or was denied honest interaction concerning the relationship between military operations, strategy, and tactics. Their roles became that of managers of the conflict with little influence and connection in how they might enhance their ability to achieve the desired end state. Thus, controversy exists as to how serious the Wehrmacht was about operational art. Hitler was on some level gifted and insightful, but not truly the strategist he needed to be in order to safely reject the counsel of others.
Furthermore, if Naveh is correct, the German military was not focused on operational art as the connective tissue between grand strategy and tactics. The German military excelled at tactics and, through Blitzkrieg, had perfected the high are of tactics. The military did not really master operational art, and was therefore unable to attempt to connect its good tactics to strategy. Thus, Germany's status prior to Operation Barbarossa was that of a modern state possessing tremendous tactical and operational capability, but there was too little military influence upon military and grand strategy. They recently demonstrated enormous combat capability by achieving swift victories to the west and east. They were grossly lacking in strategic preparedness, manpower, level of industrial and economic output, and appreciation for the national strength of the Soviet 42 Basil Henry Liddell Hart, The German Generals Talk (New York, NY: William Morrow, 1948), 44. 
43
Union. Their tactical excellence was not representative of the presence of robust conceptual connective tissue between tactics and strategy.
Therefore, there was insufficient dialogue between military and political leadership concerning how good tactics would ultimately support strategy.
The Soviet Union was incapable of successfully disguising its weaknesses. Awareness of Soviet weakness was widely understood even outside Germany. Even prominent Allied strategists also expected that a German attack upon the Soviet Union would likely result in complete Soviet defeat in very short order.
44
45
46
Eruptions of conflict between the Soviets and their Japanese neighbors necessitated that the Soviets respect the military threat to their east. The Soviets stationed troops in the eastern regions as a deterrent. As a strategic consequence, Japan avoided causing Moscow further disruptions of great significance.
Nevertheless, Hitler was not the only actor concerned with the consequences of a two-front war. Thus Soviet strength consisted of reserves of troops and supplies which, at least from the perspective of proximity to German forces, were held very deep in reserve. Later in the Russo-German conflict, this would become more important once it became clear in Soviet thinking that Japan could no longer threaten them, and it became possible to move Soviet forces stationed in the eastern Soviet Union into battle against Germany. Soviet natural resources and land mass were not their only seemingly inexhaustible resource: so was the resolve of the Soviet people.
Alan Clark describes the -mixture of horror and admiration‖ that descended upon German officers upon realizing the extent of suffering that Soviet soldiers were capable of enduring in silence. -They do not cry out, they do not groan, the do not curse. Undoubtedly there is something mysterious, something inscrutable, about their stern, stubborn silence.‖ 
47
48
The theory of morale bombing was that bomber aircraft could inflict sufficient influence upon the mind of civilian leaders to induce a change of policy. As a theoretical point, this may be valid. However, sufficient evidence exists that societies typically endure more suffering than anticipated. Ultimately, the invading force can make no certain claims about when morale bombing will work. This is especially true when it involves a very resolute culture, such as the Soviet Union.
Not everyone was convinced of the reliability and predictability of directly influencing enemy morale as a coercive tool. A 1948 Air University report stated, -From the beginning, aerial warfare has been a war against men's minds as well as against their persons and their possessions. Up to 1939, the mind of man, though at times benumbed and uncertain, was not defeated by aerial bombardment.‖ 49 Attempts at this type of coercion did not result in compelling support. This same report makes a similar point about the relative character of individual cultures by pointing out, -What [civilian morale bombing] did to the morale of the individual and to the national morale differed from country to country and from war to war.‖ 50 Thus, military and national investment to produce enormous civilian destruction is a tenuous investment, at best. Many theorists assume that morale bombing or the imposition of suffering on an enemy's population would bring about collapse or civil revolt and unrest. Sociologist Ted Robert Gurr describes the concept of -Relative deprivation (RD) … [which] denote[s] the tension that develops from a discrepancy between the -ought‖ and the -is‖ of collective value satisfaction.‖ 51 Nazi society was susceptible to Gurr's -J-Curve hypothesis‖ which implies that revolutions are most likely when a prolonged period of positive development is followed by sharp decline. 
52
49
50
52
taking place on their own lands. Since the German military had enormously high expectations for the blessings that lay in their future due to their obedience to Hitler, they had a higher degree of RD and were thus, more likely to rebel or at least resist Hitler. Therefore, it is not surprising that Hitler faced numerous coup attempts.
The Soviet Air Force had some long range aviation and bombing capability, but morale bombing was not a high emphasis area. They understood that societies could endure tremendous levels of deprivation without giving up. They had lived under challenging conditions due to Stalin's leadership and were unlikely to think that other cultures would be easily affected by morale bombing. Instead, Soviet aviation decisions favored medium range bombers and tactical aviation. Although they did not directly target enemy morale, they did attempt to enhance tenacity and Soviet morale.
Red Army troops, prepared to defend their motherland to the death, were dispersed in depth such that only 2.7 million were at the front. 
53
Once the fighting began, the Soviet layout of its army was arranged by -Fronts,‖ roughly equivalent to German Army Groups. 
54
55
In peacetime, the Soviets were organized into military districts: Leningrad, Baltic, Western, and Kiev. These military districts were going to be converted to -fronts‖ once a conflict began. The Chief of the General Staff (Stavka) was General G. K. Zhukov, the third chief in eight months. These military districts were converted to the following Fronts: Northern Front Armies: 7 th , 14 th , 23d Corps: 1 st and 10 th Northwestern Army: 8 th , 11 th , 27 th Corps: 3d and 12 th Mechanized, 5 th Airborne Western Front Army: 3d, 4 th , 10 th , 13 th Corps: 6 th , 11 th , 13 th , 14 th , 17 th , 20 
th
Stalin clearly expected to receive strategic warning through diplomatic channels and would not entertain discussion of the possibility of a surprise German attack, even when the evidence strongly supported the possibility. Thus VVS assets were positioned well within range of a German sneak attack.
to the idea of a -light screen‖ of occupation in the newly acquired Western lands to dissuade Germany from proceeding any further. 
56
Hardesty points out that Soviet air strength figures are difficult to determine with certainty, but a reasonable estimate is that the VVS had 8,000 to 10,000 aircraft. 
58
59
60
61
62
Both the VVS and Luftwaffe were afforded the opportunity to improve their capabilities as a result of difficulties experienced in combat during the Spanish Civil War. Both sides benefited from the opportunity to develop better engineering, techniques, and procedures. These benefits were realized in operations, maintenance, equipment and aircraft procurement decisions. Thus, both Soviet and German equipment enjoyed a dress rehearsal which allowed deep impressions to form about the efficacy of their current tactics and skills.
Soviet equipment was obsolete in many cases. Two very notable ground equipment exceptions were the successful Katyusha rocket launcher and the T-34 tank which had significant fire power, strong mobility, and sloping armor to deflect enemy rounds. 
63
64
The Soviet and German aircraft production figures 
75
80
On the eve of the German campaign against the Soviet Union, the German military represented the world's most capable fighting force for the conduct of rapid maneuver warfare, envelopment, and annihilation, but it possessed a level of resources far beneath the level of its ambition.
The grand and military strategy therefore faced grave risk of failure. The only way they could win was to stand ready with a massive combined arms force ready for a battle that would be violent, decisive, and quick.
In contrast, the Soviet military was none of these things. It struggled under Stalin's self-imposed challenges as well as growing pains common to many emerging great powers. Blessed with natural resources and a protected productive capacity, the Soviet forces had some advantage of the natural strength of the defensive as well as battle upon familiar terrain and climate. However, their key strength was their ability to trade both distance and human blood for the much needed time Stalin required to save the Soviet nation. It must be understood that this conflict was the hinge upon which the Second World War would be decided.
Chapter 3
The art of air combat is clearly a German privilege. Slavs would never be able to master it.
--Adolf Hitler
The campaign between Germany and the Soviet Union had enormous significance at the grand strategic, military strategic and operational levels of war, for both ground and air forces. In order to comprehend the airpower lessons emerging from this theater, a brief synopsis of the overall campaign is required in order to establish the necessary context. The Eastern Front was a unique theater, and the forms of airpower applied by both adversaries were peculiar to that theater. In particular, the Eastern Front suggests a different definition of -independent‖ airpower than existed on, for example, the Western Front.
Finally, the remainder of the chapter will consider some of the major airpower roles and missions-air superiority, air-ground integration, and interdiction-that seem to offer especially valuable insights.
The Russo-German war lasted from 22 June 1941 to 9 May 1945. 
The Eastern Front was of enormous significance to the outcome of Furthermore, the eastern war featured several fundamental points of advance, culmination, and decision. Viewing the entire campaign as simply a matter of German casualties masks the fact that German success was so overwhelming in the opening months of the war. It is likely that the bulk of the German losses occurred closer to the end of the war, when the German Army was at its weakest and in disarray.
These analytical pitfalls are common to statistics and could apply to any of the theaters to some degree.
Allied action in the Pacific, North Africa, and Western Europe did significant damage to the Nazi war machine, but fell far short of inflicting the casualties upon German forces that the Red Army produced. Table 
2
Source: Chris McNab, The Third Reich 1933-1945, 135.
The Eastern Front is known as the -Great Patriotic War‖ for very 2,000,000 3,000,000 4,000,000 5,000,000 6,000,000 7,000,000
Stalin's empire was won with reservoirs of Soviet blood. The cost of the war dwarfed the sacrifices of any other fighting powers. By the time the last salvo had been delivered in Manchuria, Soviet forces alone had casualties of over 29 million: 6.2 million killed, over 15 million wounded, 4.4 million captured or missing, 3-4 million incapacitated by illness or frostbite. Of the 34.5 million men and women mobilized an incredible 84 per cent were killed, wounded or captured. Total military deaths from all causes are given as 8.6 million…total Soviet war dead may have been as high as 25 million, one quarter higher than the official figure 
of
2
1
3
6
In this theater, initial German successes were exponentially greater than even the previous achievements in Poland and France. 7 Serious criticism of German combat performance is hard to find, but there is consensus among many historians that German forces should have more effectively closed off their envelopments with increased speed and surety in order to reduce the numbers of escaping Soviet soldiers.
It is also significant that in addition to the size of the casualty lists, the campaign also included some of the cruelest Nazi atrocities. Neither side was innocent of cruelty, but Nazi (and especially SS) behavior was particularly loathsome, and news of it was communicated swiftly through Soviet forces. This resulted in enhancing Soviet motivation to fight to the death, since SS (and German army) mistreatment likely awaited those who were captured. This period clearly set the tone in Soviet minds. Not only were they fighting a German enemy with expressed unlimited aims, but their foe backed-up the fact that they meant business with unnecessary cruelty. Historian Alan Clark wondered if the Germans, -…realized they were sowing the wind? The first reaping, more terrible than anything they had experienced, was less than twelve months away.‖
8
The breathtaking German success had a terrible human cost.
Table 
3 contains
12
The 1944 Field Regulations of the Red Army included techniques for conducting artillery and air offensives to provide continuous support to ground forces. 
13
This phrase applies most appropriately to the peacetime functions of organizing, training, and equipping forces for eventual assignment to a war zone. The wartime applicability fades rapidly. For example, neither the German or Soviet armies were independent: they existed to satisfy the military needs of their respective societies and were beholden to their political leadership. Hitler directed, in minute detail, the actions of his army. Thus their ground forces were not even independent, nor would they ever be. It was Hitler who decided if or when the drive toward Leningrad or Moscow would begin, even over the misgivings of his professional military. He also decided when German forces were permitted to attempt to break out of hopeless Soviet encirclements.
Moreover, both armies operated in a combined arms fashion with air and
(to a lesser extent) naval forces.
Hitler's Directive 21, which called for the planning of Operation Barbarossa, directed that the Luftwaffe's first objective was to eliminate the Soviet Air Force and prevent it from impeding the German advance, and the second task was to support the German army. Despite Luftwaffe -independence,‖ this directive forbade German air attacks on Soviet armament industry until these critical tasks were discharged. 
15
Therefore, one might anticipate that the Luftwaffe would invest in a longrange bomber capability and the VVS might emphasize the development of a direct ground support force. However, this prediction does not seem to be borne out by events, as both air forces emphasized tactical support of army forces. Furthermore, by 1935, the Soviets had the largest bomber force in the world. 
16
In 1941, one of the biggest shortcomings of the VVS was its inability to mass and apply concentrated force when necessary. This problem was solved through organizational restructuring into Air Armies.
Insightful VVS leaders such as A.A. Novikov, a man who narrowly missed being eliminated in the purge, eventually established a responsive command structure in response to the failures of the initial period of Barbarossa. The resulting organization achieved marvelous improvements in VVS capability. Of special note was the vast growth in the air force's ability to concentrate airpower when required. This improvement did not require independence, only clarity in seeing the problem and directly addressing it. Novikov applied good, innovative leadership and a combined arms perspective to this challenge. Yet it was not accomplished in a single leap forward; it took a period of trial and error.
In March of 1942, the Stavka disbanded the Aviation of the High Command (DBA) and replaced it with a new organization, Long-Range Aviation (ADD) which fell under the Stavka's operational control. This new organization consolidated transport and long-range medium and heavy bombers under one command. The DBA only controlled a portion of the bomber aircraft, while the rest were divided up among the army units they supported. This organizational change was intended to enhance Soviet ability to engage strategic and rear area targets. This new organization grew to consist of 50 air regiments, with a total of 1,500 aircraft. Clearly, the VVS was in the process of trying to determine the optimal approach to airpower organization, command relationships, roles, and most appropriate application. The resulting structural transition was initially not very productive for Soviet aviation because the demands of the struggle for air superiority and the emphasis on tactical aviation took priority.
17
There were three main contributors to the eventual VVS improvement in concentration. The first was a significant change in command. Stalin, as noted above, had placed General A.A. Novikov as the new VVS Commander. His vision was to further consolidate aviation units assigned to the fronts and the armies into larger organizations.
These new, larger organizations were called -air armies.‖ With larger organizations under a single commander, concentration became much easier to achieve. These organizational changes, combined with enormous increases in annual aircraft production, brought about a significant improvement in VVS performance. In 1942, Soviet aircraft production was 
25,436, and in 1944, production had climbed to 40,241. 18
Reserve air units, capable of swift deployment to a battlefield hot spot, further enhanced VVS capability to achieve mass when required. In some cases, reserves represented between 48 and 63 percent of the VVS total frontline strength.
Commissar) Soviet Army Commander General Georgi Zhukov in order to, -develop effective interservice liaison and cooperation and improve the strength and state of readiness of his air armies.‖ 19 Not surprisingly, the personal relationship between Novikov and Zhukov was very important.
Both leaders were no-nonsense and efficient. As George Kenney did with Douglas MacArthur and Elwood Quesada did with Omar Bradley, Novikov earned the admiration and trust of his demanding commander.
Initially, Novikov's larger Air Army construct was unwieldy and did not result in sufficient flexibility. He massaged his concept until finally finding the winning combination. Each Front was ultimately equipped with its own air force, which could concentrate as required on that front.
He ensured the creation of thirteen reserve air corps by the end of 1942. 20 Under Novikov's leadership, the VVS maintained their prioritization of fighters over other forms of airpower. Novikov's innovative organizational construct of the Air Army allowed robust support for frontal aviation and brought about an increase in centralized 
18
19
21
Novikov and his pilots studied combat results for potential lessons. 
22
Under Novikov's leadership, the VVS demonstrated willingness to conduct significant self-evaluation. They borrowed successful techniques from the Germans such as more flexible formations. He also employed decoy airfields and disguise of his air units' buildup in order to provide some protection from German air attack. 
23
28
29
30
31
The Commander in Chief of the Luftwaffe, Hermann Goering, was second in command to Hitler, AND the air force he led was officially
independent. Yet, direct and indirect support of the ground forces remained the Luftwaffe's emphasis. For example, below are several guidelines listed in a 1 August 1939 document from the 3d (Tactical)
Department of the Luftwaffe general staff and signed by General der Flieger Hans Jeschonnek, the chief of the general staff:
32
1. In the conduct of air warfare, one must distinguish between independent air actions and actions carried out in direct support of the army. 2. All successful air attacks have a direct or indirect effect upon the combat operations of the army. 3. Independent air operations have a direct effect in that they bring about a gradually increasing restriction of the enemy's freedom of action in all important military and economic sectors. These actions require a certain amount of time to have an effect on the ground forces. 4. Moreover, it may be necessary in certain ground situations for the Luftwaffe to exert an immediate and direct effect on the conduct of the ground war. These situations arise if the army is engaged in potentially decisive or especially important battle operations. 5. The versatility that accompanies independent air warfare makes the air force capable of performing tasks that require well-considered force allocation among various combat actions.
The request of the army for direct support can therefore only be complied with if there is a need for bringing about a decisive or immediate result.
Germany's most significant prewar airpower theorist, Major Hans-Detlef Herhudt von Rohden, believed that the US, unlike Germany, was well suited to conduct strategic operations due to its size and location. 
33
In a 1946 essay, Gen Spaatz noted that a German weakness was they were land-minded and that, -In planning their aggression they did not allot their air force an independent mission of strategic offensive.
Consequently they failed to meet their one historic opportunity to win decisively and quickly in 1940.‖ 
34
He knew the Luftwaffe was independent. There is a touch of irony to say that American security interests support establishment of an independent USAF, possibly to avoid being too -land-minded‖ even though the Luftwaffe's -independence‖ did little to prevent them from traveling the same road. Yet, the distinction between organizational independence was clearly very distinct from the commitment to conduct missions independent of direct army support.
Organizational independence may provide some advantage during peacetime procurement of new equipment and training, especially in an adversarial domestic environment. It conceivably offers some insulation from the parochial concerns of the parent service. However, in the final analysis, even this scenario must accept the fact that civilian leadership, which is not always sufficiently air-minded, has the final say. Goering's influence upon the Luftwaffe was also directly connected to his relative level of power and prestige within the German government. It should be conceded that organizational independence offers an avenue for a louder voice in the debate over the allocation of scarce resources. When Goering's prestige was high, his Luftwaffe benefitted; when his star waned, so did his air force's position at court.
The connection between independence and strategic bombing leads to discussions regarding the effectiveness of strategic airpower. Strategic bombing in World War II was not independently decisive. A more plausible conclusion was that long-range bombing had a strategic influence by reducing the enemy's freedom of action. It did this through destruction or diversion of resources. Strategic bombing did not collapse enemy morale or industrial capability. For example, the threat of British and American strategic airpower required Hitler to respond by diverting resources to air defense (flak and fighter) units to Germany. 
35
In the case of the Luftwaffe and VVS, despite the differences in institutional independence, the Soviet and German air forces became very similar by the middle of the war. Initially the VVS was grossly unprepared for the coming struggle. However, the VVS grew and adapted into a remarkably flexible and effective air arm. Both air services served nations that emphasized power projection through terrestrial means. It did not make much sense for either Germany or the USSR to pursue long-range strategic bombing to the same degree as the USAAF or RAF.
Britain and the US found themselves having no immediate means of attacking Germany other than through long-range aviation. US theorists saw the distances involved and naturally emphasized the hoped-for impact of long-range bombing. Again, these differences are all contextual and do not really drive to the heart of proving that the Luftwaffe was better than that VVS simply due to the fact that it was independent.
Perhaps the single greatest lesson modern airmen can take away from the Eastern Front is to incorporate broader working definitions of airpower effectiveness and its relationship to organizational independence.
The Luftwaffe's success in achieving air superiority and providing both direct and indirect support to the German ground advance through the application of multiple Luftwaffe capabilities is a sterling example of the decisive contribution that an air force can make to an overall campaign plan-a classic -denial‖ strategy. The Luftwaffe prepared for its attack through significant photoreconnaissance efforts. By April of 1941, these missions provided a list of targets within 200 miles of the German lines. 
36
The opening air attack conducted by the Luftwaffe was so successful that it defies comparison with any previous operation. 
37
Command reported 4,017 Soviet aircraft were lost at the cost of 150 German aircraft. Soviet losses were at 6850 by 12 July
42
43
These results did not mean that Soviet airpower was incapable of fighting back. On 7-8 August 1941, 13 Soviet DB-3 bombers attempted a strategic bombing raid on Berlin. The raid succeeded in the sense that it did not result in the loss of any Soviet aircraft. Unfortunately, it caused only slight damage in Berlin. Like, the Doolittle raid, the strategic effect may be greater than the sum of its craters. However, in this case, there doesn't seem to be much effect at all. 
44
53
54
Soviet leaders demonstrated adroit understanding of airpower by recognizing that if they deployed their superior numbers in geographically separated areas, the Luftwaffe would likely be forced to divide its available forces to match the VVS. The VVS was able take advantage of the situation and maintain its superiority while stretching the Luftwaffe across a broad front. Thus, gaining air superiority was a combined effort of superior aircraft production, visionary leadership, improved tactics, and increased confidence.
Both VVS and Luftwaffe were schooled in air-ground cooperation, whether as -Deep Battle‖ or -Blitzkrieg.‖ In the opening months, the diminished once Soviet forces began their series of offensives to drive the German troops back. 
59
[VVS] bombers, the complexity of this type of operation, and considerable underestimation by some air commanders of the effectiveness of strikes against airfields.‖
60
In the typical Soviet lexicon, -independent‖ means that the effort need not coordinate directly with ground units. Thus deep interdiction and strikes against economic targets beyond the front are deemed -independent.‖ It has little to do with organizational structure.
Independent air operations were conducted to destroy German economic and political centers, but they were not effective. During the conflict, only 3.9% of VVS sorties were aimed at -enemy economic centers.‖
61
Thus the concept of the Soviet -air offensive‖ was eventually born.
It consisted of two phases: preparation and support. Preparation could occur in a preliminary or direct form. In either case, the point would be to crush enemy defenses in the direction of the planned Soviet attack.
Preliminary preparation would occur for one to three days before an Between 1941 and 1943, the weight of VVS efforts against enemy airfields was considerably higher in an attempt to diminish the Luftwaffe's asymmetric advantage. However, the VVS' initial lack of competence and experience prevented significant profit from these efforts and had the impact of reducing Soviet confidence in large counter-air efforts. A better investment appeared to be in direct support. They were also confident that the most decisive way to shut down an enemy airfield was to capture it. 
66
The Soviet Army progressed with relative rapidity in 1944-1945   during which they applied 90-95% of their frontal aviation toward these air offensives. Major break-through zones at L'vov-Sandomir, Vistula-Oder, and Berlin were all examples where 1,500-2,500 Soviet aircraft were concentrated in order to exploit expected advantage. 
67
The initial German ground and air assault upon the Soviets was made possible by their logistical and support efforts. Initially, these efforts were robust. However, as the war lingered on, cold weather, unreliable roads and travel efforts made continued maintenance and fuel efforts difficult to sustain. The VVS, on the other hand was falling back upon more permanent, better supplied locations for spare parts, repair facilities, and their aircraft, tools, procedures, and personnel were accustomed to the frigid cold of the winter campaigns.
According to two historians, -The Luftwaffe met this challenge by   
German prewar assessment of Soviet capability was a mixture of valid and invalid conclusions. Hitler was concerned that the Soviets would eventually grow in strength and therefore needed to be quickly and decisively defeated, because the Soviets might conduct a surprise attack at the least opportune moment for Germany.
In this campaign, not only did Hitler woefully miscalculate the enormity of what he was undertaking, he also failed to consider that the Red Army and VVS would gradually learn from and adapt successful German techniques, while also benefitting from German negative lessons. In maintaining logical consistency, this is understandable because Hitler could not entertain the idea that this war was going to last for more than a few months. In his mind, it certainly could not have lasted long enough for an enemy-especially a subhuman one--to change and improve to the degree that Stalin's forces eventually did.
The Wehrmacht was expert at maneuver and operational art. The to President Roosevelt as the greatest war criminal of all time! Thus, with this last published order, Hitler's failure to take his enemy seriously is still evident in the fear in his words:
Soldiers of the German Eastern front!
For the last time our deadly enemies the Jewish Bolsheviks have launched their massive forces to the attack. Their aim is to reduce Germany to ruins and to exterminate our people. Many of you soldiers in the East already know the fate which threatens, above all, German women, girls, and children. While the old men and children will be murdered, the women and girls will be reduced to barrack-room whores. The remainder will be marched off to Siberia….this time the Bolshevik will meet the ancient fate of Asia-he must and shall bleed to death before the capital of the German Reich….At this moment, when Fate has removed from the earth the greatest war criminal of all time [a reference to recently deceased President Franklin Roosevelt], the turning-point of this war will be decided. 
76
If we treat potential enemies with respect, we then prepare for all contingencies. The first identifiable area of required preparation and 
76 Trevor-Roper, ed., Blitzkrieg to Defeat: Hitler's War Directives, 1939
-1945, 212-13.
Because the diplomatic approach to maintaining a peaceful Eastern
Front was rejected at the start, Hitler's likely one chance to focus his efforts on a successful single Front slipped from his grasp.
Which is Truly Strategic: Supporting or "Strategic" Airpower?
The word -strategic‖ is multi-faceted. As an adjective, it implies an application of effort which lacks an immediate payoff, but assumes a more favorable payoff when that time comes. Attacking an oil refinery may not cause surrender today, but, as the theory goes, it might increase -fog and friction‖ within the enemy's combat capability, reduce their effectiveness, and eventually lead to enemy failure.
In this sense, -strategic‖ reflects a commitment to an idea. It implies a hope that the best contribution to an effort may not pay off with empirically verifiable data in the short term, even though it makes an enormous contribution to victory. On the Eastern Front, traditional strategic airpower was not applied to any great degree. However, the direct support and indirect support of both nations' air services were the most strategic use of airpower appropriate to their circumstances.
For example, the VVS directly contributed to the advance of the Red Army, the interdiction of German forces approaching the battlefield, and the destruction of Luftwaffe fighters. The Red Army's advance believe they should remove all the leaves of the tree in order to kill the tree, a time consuming task.
The wisest and most elegant solution may be to strike the tree at its trunk. The effort expended to chip away at the trunk directly weakens the tree, reduces the flow of nutrients, and decreases overall tree health. Obtaining positive results from the investment of effort is often more certain.
An argument may be made that identifying which tree to chop down is not easy. Getting this correct is similar to the guesswork associated with deciding which area of the root system should be attacked. This may be true in the case of coercing an adversary whose actions do not require the use of a fielded force. In the case of combat on the Eastern Front, the correct tree was the tree doing the shooting.
Thus, once sufficient air superiority has been achieved, the Eastern Front was an example of how the direct and indirect support of ground component was likely the most appropriate use of airpower.
British and American bombing efforts exposed Germany to the threat of the attrition of its capability in its rear area. It also reduced aircraft were overwhelmingly defensive fighters, as bomber production was wound down-and with it the Luftwaffe's offensive ambitions.
However, prior to D-Day, there were few options for projecting power against German-occupied Europe. Use of heavy bombers, with escorts, represented the only option available for much of the war.
German fighter aircraft and pilots were attrited, as were the other resources applied to the German air defense effort.
Thus, the air battle on the Eastern Front of the Second World War suggests significant lessons about the application of airpower, concentration of airpower, and the impact of organizational improvement. The lessons are significant and should be studied.
Unfortunately, history has not been on the side of open-minded evaluation. For example, Ben Lambeth states, -by making strategic bombing synonymous with airpower, strategic bombing theory effectively excluded some of the most potentially decisive aspects of airpower from its own scale of effectiveness….In the process, those who sought to prove that strategic bombardment alone was a war-winning capability did a grave disservice to the interests of broader air power concepts.‖ 78 78 Benjamin S. Lambeth, "Bounding The Air Power Debate," in Strategic Review (United States Strategic Institute, 1997; reprint, RAND), 47.
No independent operations of aviation can play such a role as operations conducted in the interest of the ground forces Anonymous Soviet colonel
The Eastern Front of the Second World War was THE decisive campaign of the war in Europe. The magnitude, ferocity, and lethality of fighting there defy the imagination. This is especially true in the American imagination which, understandably, gravitates toward American influence and effort in defeating Germany. Furthermore, the role of airpower in this story is even more interesting. What airpower did for Stalin's fight against a very dangerous, existential threat was to directly reduce German ability to produce combat effects upon the Red Army. For far too long, airmen have only given this topic cursory attention.
American airmen understand very little about the Eastern Front as a whole and treat the use of airpower in this theater as either a sideshow or an aberration. Rather than taking the German and Soviet application of airpower as worthy of serious study, it is dismissed or seen as flawed because it did not follow the preferred approach of American airmen in either this period or the decades that followed. Somehow, American airmen persist in the counterfactual argument that Soviet or German application of strategic bombing would have been a significantly more effective means of waging their air war in the east. Based on the demonstrated usefulness of tactical airpower in this theater, it seems very unlikely that dramatic changes in (particularly Soviet) approaches to airpower would have resulted in great improvements in lethality. Thus, the Eastern Front remains full of lessons and examples of the consequences of good, bad, wise, and careless assumptions, strategy, confidence, economics, industrial power, terrain, weather, and airpower.
The tapestry of experiences from the First World War, revolutions in government, the relative value of the individual and the whole of society, impact of the personal and philosophical idiosyncrasies of leadership personalities all greatly influence the type of national war making capability available to Germany and the Soviet Union. It is ironic that the airpower preference of many of the Soviet theorists and military thinkers of the interwar years saw the role of airpower in similar terms to how they're seen today, and yet the absence of strategic bombing or some 5-ring-esque decapitation approach renders this air theater as almost a footnote in history.
The Eastern Front should be taught in Professional Military Education (PME) as a learning laboratory of the dangers of ill-considered strategy, lack of military and national defense preparedness, the hazards of not seeing the threat that sits right before your eyes, and how under conditions of extreme danger, society can sometimes absorb much greater amounts of deprivation than is originally imagined.
Furthermore, the Eastern Front is an example of the use of airpower in a situation where crossing great distances was unnecessary in order to find and contact the enemy. For the USAAF and the RAF, there was little contact possible except to conduct long-range bombing of German cities, industries, and assets. These raids slowly attrited German fighter aircraft and, likely of equal importance, German fighter pilots. As allied ground units came into contact with German forces on their march towards the Reich, the importance of the use of airpower to conduct strategic bombing decreased as the necessity to conduct interdiction, indirect support, and direct support of ground operations correspondingly increased.
Just as efforts of American tactical airmen, like General Pete Quesada, were insufficiently appreciated once their active contribution was complete, so too have the efforts of men like Novikov and the VVS
In April 1946, less than one year after the end of the Second World War, General Carl Spaatz published an article in Foreign Affairs entitled -Strategic Air Power: Fulfillment of a Concept.‖ He began this article with a curious and counterfactual statement. He stated, -World War II might have ended differently had our enemies understood and made correct use of Strategic Air Power.‖ 1 Many commentators have followed suit,
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii, 47.  21 Basil Henry Liddell Hart, Strategy (New York, NY: Meridian, 1991)
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii, 47.  21 Basil Henry Liddell Hart, Strategy (New York, NY: Meridian, 1991)
8  
8  
Organization of the Soviet Air Force
Organization of the Soviet Air Force
72  
72  
Source:
Source:
77  
77  
General Carl Spaatz, "Strategic Air Power: Fulfillment of a Concept," Foreign Affairs,April 1946, 385.   
Spaatz, "Strategic Air Power: Fulfillment of a Concept,"
David M. Glantz and Jonathan M. House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1995), 5.
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 5.   
Kipp, "Military Reform and the Red Army, 1918-1941," 123.   
Harrison, The Russian Way of War: Operational Art, 1904-1940, 118.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 6.   
Harrison, The Russian Way of War: Operational Art, 1904-1940, 104.   
Harrison, The Russian Way of War: Operational Art, 1904-1940, 127.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 7.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 8.   
Kipp, "Military Reform and the Red Army, 1918-1941," 128.   
Harrison, The Russian Way of War: Operational Art,  
1904-1940, 2.  19  Richard E.Simpkin and John Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal  Tukhachevskii (Washington: Brassey's Defence, 1987), 34.   
Robert A. Pape, Bombing to Win: Air Power and Coercion in War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996), 19.
Pape, Bombing to Win: Air Power and Coercion in War, 57.   
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii, 86.   
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii, 165.   
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii, 51.   
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii, 163.   
Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 1, Air Force BasicDoctrine, 17 November 2003,  iv.   
Simpkin and Erickson, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii,[199][200][201][202] 
USSR, "Provisional Field Regulations For the Red Army (PU 36)," 34-36.
Kipp, "Military Reform and the Red Army, 1918-1941," 144.   
Kipp, "Military Reform and the Red Army, 1918-1941," 146.   
Waltz, Theory of International Politics, 167.   
Michael Howard, War in European History (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2009), 116.
Horne, The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916, 36.   
Howard, War in European History, 116.   
Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics, 67.   
Posen, The Sources of Military Doctrine: France, Britain, and Germany Between the  World Wars, 182.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 16.   
Kipp, "Military Reform and the Red Army, 1918-1941," 150.   
Kipp, "Military Reform and the Red Army, 1918-1941," 124.   
Richard Overy, Russia's War (New York: Penguin Putnam, 1998), 28.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 16.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 12.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 14.   
Overy, Russia's War, 56.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 18.   
Department of the Army Pamphlet No
20-231, Combat in Russian Forests and  Swamps (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1951), 1.
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-231, Combat in Russian Forests and Swamps (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1951), 1.
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-231, Combat in Russian Forests and Swamps (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1951), 3. Pripet Marshes
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-291, Effects of Climate on Combat in European Russia (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1952), 3.
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-291, Effects of Climate on Combat in European Russia (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1952), 18.
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-291, Effects of Climate on Combat in European Russia (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1952), 18.
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-291, Effects of Climate on Combat in European Russia (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1952), 12.
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 31.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 37.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 32.   
Andrew Brookes, Air War Over Russia (Hersham, Surrey: Ian Allan, 2003), 37.
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 67.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 32.   
Alan Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941
-1945
H.R. Trevor-Roper, ed., Blitzkrieg to Defeat: Hitler's War Directives,  
1939
-1945
Williamson Murray, Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe, 1933
-1945
Hilton Proctor Goss, Civilian Morale Under Aerial Bombardment (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University, 1948), 253.
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 53.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 11.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 53.   
Heinz Guderian, Achtung-Panzer! (London: Arms and Armour, 1992), 153.
Great Britain Air Ministry, The Rise and Fall of the German Air Force, 1933
-1945
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 43.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 59.   
Heinz Guderian, Panzer Leader (New York, NY: Dutton, 1952), 190.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 43.   
USSR, "Provisional Field Regulations For the Red Army (PU 36)," 1937 in FBIS [Foreign Broadcast Information Service] Report: USSR Report Military Affairs, JPRS-UMA-86-031, 12 June 1986, 2.
Brookes, Air War Over Russia, 16.   
David M.Glantz, Colossus Reborn:  The Red Army atWar, 1941-1943 (Lawrence, KS:   University Press of Kansas, 2005), 6.
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 631.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 146.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 147.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 135.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 631.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 34.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 37.   
Dupuy and
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 17.   
Kenneth R. Whiting, Soviet Air Power (Maxwell AFB, AL: Air University Press, 1985), 12.
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 37.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 17.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 41.   
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 194.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 37.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 39.   
During World War II, the US Army Air Forces was nominally part of the Army, but functioned independently for all practical purposes.
Wagner, ed., The Soviet Air Force in World War II, 398.   
Overy, Russia's War, 195.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 20.   
Brookes, Air War Over Russia, 12.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 57.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 331.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 51.   
Department of the Army Pamphlet No 20-261a, The German Campaign inRussia-- Planning and Operations (1940-1942)  (Washington: Dept. of the Army, 1955), 45.
 7  Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 124.
Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 1941-1945, 144.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 123.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 108.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 178.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 180.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 181.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 274.   
Murray, Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe, 1933-1945, 79.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 47.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 44.   
Sterrett, Soviet Air Force Theory, 1918-1945, 103.   
Sterrett, Soviet Air Force Theory, 1918-1945, 111.   
Hayward, Stopped at Stalingrad: the Luftwaffe and Hitler's Defeat in the East, 1942- 1943, 225.  
 24  Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise ofSoviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 218.   
Brookes, Air War Over Russia, 150.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 230.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 230.   
Garthoff, Soviet Attitudes Toward Modern Air Power,[2][3] 
Garthoff, Soviet Attitudes Toward Modern Air Power, 3.   
Garthoff, Soviet Attitudes Toward Modern Air Power, 7.   
Garthoff, Soviet Attitudes Toward Modern Air Power, 7.   
James S.Corum and Richard Muller, The Luftwaffe's Way of War: German Air Force  Doctrine, 1911
-1945
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 12.   
General Carl Spaatz, "Strategic Air Power: Fulfillment of a Concept," Foreign AffairsApril 1946, 395.   
Edward B. Westermann, Flak: German Anti-Aircraft Defenses, 1914
-1945
Martin van Creveld, Steven L. Canby, and Kenneth S. Brower, Air Power and Maneuver Warfare (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press, 1994), 67.
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 12.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 11.   
Murray, Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe, 1933-1945, 81.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 12.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 12.   
van Creveld, Canby, and Brower, Air Power and Maneuver Warfare, 69.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 60.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 26.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 28.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 231.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 31.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 235.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 55.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 58.   
Clausewitz, On War, 358.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 60.   
Robin D. S. Higham and Jacob W.Kipp, Soviet Aviation and Air Power (Boulder, CO:  Westview Press, 1978), 96.   
Sterrett, Soviet Air Force Theory, 1918-1945, 91.   
Vasili i Danilovich Sokolovskii, Soviet Military Strategy, RAND (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice Hall, 1963), 260.   
Sokolovskii, Soviet Military Strategy, 260.   
Sokolovskii, Soviet Military Strategy, 261.   
Sokolovskii, Soviet Military Strategy, 260.   
Sokolovskii, Soviet Military Strategy, 260.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 61.   
Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 61.   
Muller, The German Air War in Russia, 91.   
Sterrett, Soviet Air Force Theory, 1918-1945, 116.   
Sterrett, Soviet Air Force Theory, 1918-1945, 120.   
Hardesty, Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power, 1941-1945, 222.   
Corum and
training.73  Even top German aces who encountered the newly aggressive Soviet fighter regiments in the Kuban and at Kursk were astonished by their tactical proficiency and the quality of their aircraft. The -turkey shoot‖ days of summer 1941 were over, and the Luftwaffe was ultimately defeated by a first rate air force adversary-one of many cautionary tales from the campaign.73  Greenwood and Hardesty, "Soviet Air Forces in World War II," 50.
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 307.   
Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler, 292.   
Lieutenant 
Colonel David Williamson
United States Air Force Academy
US and Republic of Korea Army
Colonel Williamson
Air Command
Staff College
School of Advanced Air and Power Studies. Upon completion of the School of Advanced Air and Space Studies, Lieutenant Colonel Williamson
readiness of signals in the troops of the VVS in peacetime will lead to the paralysis of command in wartime.‖ 
56
Over the course of the campaign between Germany and the Soviets, the main effort of the VVS was directed at supporting ground force operations and destroying enemy troops and equipment on the battlefield. More than 46% of the total VVS sorties were utilized conducting these tasks. 
57
Sokolovskii claims that the second most important strategic problem facing the Soviet Air Force was air superiority. VVS air superiority efforts utilized 35% of available sorties. 
58
The Nazi war machine was extremely effective on the eve of Operation Barbarossa. Hitler's Center of Gravity (COG) was undoubtedly German military power, and there is no doubt that the biggest factor in diminishing that power was the struggle on the Eastern Front.
To be fair, the Eastern Front represents a challenge of greater significance than just conflict with the Red Army and Air Force.
Congratulating a boxer for defeating an opponent who had just completed running a marathon is roughly analogous to claiming the Red Army was the only hero of the Second World War. In addition to fighting the Red Army, German forces battled distance, cold, and enormous lines of communication. The German decision to attack Russia was not based on solid analysis of Soviet power, economics, or a sufficient appreciation of political reality. Odds against German victory were daunting, and yet incredibly, they almost achieved victory-due in no small measure to their use of airpower. The German war machine was certainly extremely capable and effective. Had German forces been able to achieve victory on the Eastern Front, leave a holding force in place, and then concentrate on occupying the remainder of Europe and North Africa, the costs necessary to achieve allied victory with non-nuclear warfare would have been much greater.
Yet this did not come to pass. At the end of the war, German ground force dead, wounded, and missing on the Eastern Front were approximately 6.5 million. In contrast, Germans losses against the Western Allies in fighting from Normandy to Berlin totaled 527,890 men.
Due to the variety of sources reflecting official German and Soviet histories, it is difficult to make a precise casualty comparison. Between September 1939 and 30 April 1945, the Germans suffered 7,956,000 even more significant in wars of unlimited aims. Hitler's stated plan was to raze Soviet cities and turn ethnic Slavs into a slave class. It should not have surprised Hitler that he faced more than a moderate amount of resistance.
There are interesting parallels between 1941 Soviet Union and contemporary China. In the short term, China lacks the equipment, employment, and training quality available to typical non-Chinese forces.
However, Chinese ability to apply economic power, industrial production, raw materials, an enormous population, and the ability to strategically withdraw deep into China makes conventional warfare against China a very daunting scenario.
Hitler despised the Slavic people. He viewed them as sub-human and incapable of offering sustained resistance to his war plans. This conviction was so strong and unquestioned that alternative conclusions became impossible to consider. This contributed to shortsighted economic, logistic, and environmental planning. German industrial production remained in low gear; there seemed to be no need to increase production of required war materiel. In Hitler's mind there was no possible way that the war would last more than a few months; that German personnel would require winter gear; or that industrial production, supply, and logistics would require the amount of attention it ultimately required. In particular, the Germans failed to appreciate the lethal combination of vast Soviet productive capacity and their ability to develop and field superior second generation aircraft designs such as the Il-2 -Sturmovik.‖.
On 15 April 1945, as Stalin's forces drew near to Berlin, Hitler released his Order 74. Given the fact that German defeat was quickly approaching, it makes sense that Hitler's communication would be intended to sustain German resistance. Hitler directed last-minute defensive plans, warnings, and concerns that Germans advocating toward Berlin was the ultimate strategic move. Furthermore, the VVS was able to produce a long-term advantage by destroying Luftwaffe aircraft while simultaneously strengthening the Red Army's position, its flanks, and destroying approaching or retreating German ground forces in the short term.
In this campaign, air superiority continued to remain the first, and most important, goal for the air component. Achieving supremacy in the air was a lofty goal and never really achieved, even in the aftermath of the Luftwaffe's deadly assaults in the first few weeks of the campaign.
Even after the tide turned, the Luftwaffe was able to seize local air superiority on occasion. The Eastern Front examples imply that local superiority may be the best outcome of an air effort. True, permanent air supremacy is a bridge too far-but it is often unnecessary. Additionally, killing enemy aircraft with the pilots still in them has increased risk (they'll defend themselves prior to perishing) but has an enormous payoff in human capital and training investment. Finally, unlike US and British efforts to fly long-range sorties into German territory in order to destroy airborne German fighters, the VVS needed only to take off on tactical missions in order to meet and destroy German aircraft.
Once air superiority has been reasonably achieved, an enemy's military capability is like a large tree which must be cut down to clear a field. There are several ways to destroy the tree, some effective and some not. Strategic Bombing zealots prefer to destroy the tree by attempting find a very important root and cutting it and depriving the tree of what it needs for life. Unfortunately, available tools prevent accurate application of a cutting instrument against that all-important root. Even worse, intelligence efforts are incapable of reliably determining the location and nature of the perfect root to cut. It cannot reliably be determined before the fact. Others, believing themselves as -outside-the-box‖ thinkers, been disregarded. Perhaps their contribution reflects an approach that, at some basic level, conflicts with preferred approach to airpower.
Even renowned historians such as Richard Overy are not immune from sounding overly dismissive. For example, his classic book The Air War, 1939-1945 allots a mere ten percent of its pages to the Eastern Front. He devotes much more space to the enormous USAAF and RAF investment in heavy strategic bombing, yet is unable to produce completely convincing evidence that it resulted in greater reduction in enemy combat capability, as compared to those air forces which favored tactical applications.
The Eastern Front Air War is a further example of the importance of achieving air superiority. In this case, localized air superiority was often the best, achievable goal due to the enormous size of the theater. Also, air superiority is something that must not be taken for granted.
The fact that it is earned today may still mean it will require a fight to maintain it tomorrow. World War III does not seem visible on anyone's horizon. For that we should be glad. However, just as theories abounded about the impossibility of warfare in an economically interdependent pre-WWI world, the unexpected might happen today. American confidence that warfare with a competent near-peer competitor is unlikely should be suspect. American perspectives often fail to appreciate the threat posed by a nation with nearly unlimited manpower, rugged real estate to withdraw into, an ability to place the needs of the many above the needs of the individual, governmental authority to make draconian changes to the economy or industry (such as physically moving the major factories), strong industrial and factory systems, access to natural resources, and reasonably good technology. Of course, China 2010 is not the Soviet Union 1941-but why ignore the parallels? Thus, there is a great deal to learn from the Eastern Front. It reminds of the value of sound strategy. It alerts us to possible uses of airpower and how its application with a tactical emphasis sometimes has the greatest strategic effect because, in the case of combat with an existential threat, the destruction of fielded forces is often the most reliable method of defeating the adversary.