# ID: 5f2dd9c45fab441098b267dbe55d6472
# Title: Balancing the Scales: Doctrine, Conventional Forces, and Winning in a Complex World
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In order to win in the complex operating environment of the twenty first century, the conventional forces of the United States Army must seek balance in their ability to fight both traditional and irregular wars. The Army's focus on the core competencies of combined arms maneuver and wide area security, its current training methodology, and demonstrated scalability have postured the Army to achieve relative advantage without having to specialize in one form of warfare.
The search for a comprehensive doctrine for the United States Army took a tremendous leap forward in 2011 with the adoption of Unified Land Operations as the Army's central operating tenant. Within the framework of unified land operations, the Army identified two core competencies that reflect the current complex operating environment. Both combined arms maneuver and wide area security provides the necessary doctrinal, training, and operational foundation enabling the Army to succeed across the range of military operations. The Army has demonstrated the validity of this model during recent combat operations in Iraq and deployments to Eastern Europe. As the Army continues to recover from over a decade of combat and stability operations, the Army and political leaders must not succumb to the temptation of focusing on one aspect of warfare over another. To win in the current operating environment, balance in doctrine and force structure is required.
With recent congressional discussions about growing the Army and the need to reemphasize combined arms maneuver in response to perceived threats, senior leaders may find the urge to disregard wide area security and the lessons of the last sixteen years difficult to ignore. Despite the looming threat of Russian resurgence and Chinese parity, the US Army must maintain a balanced approach to warfighting that includes both combined arms maneuver and wide area security. While special operations forces focus on the irregular aspects of warfare the conventional forces cannot afford to ignore wide area security in favor of the Cold War paradigm. The complexity of the modern operating environment necessitates a balanced force that is able to compliment other elements of military power such as special operations while retaining the ability to slide up or down the range of military operations, as contingencies require. Fortunately, the solution to this challenge already exists within the Army's concept of Unified Land Operations. In fact, the Army has successfully utilized this model for the past five years, and with continued refinement, it can continue to maintain dominance without sacrificing capability in any style of conflict.
My time at Command and Staff College has been both rewarding and enlightening leading me to become, what I hope, is a better professional military officer. Part of the enriching experience has been the discussions surrounding the nature of war, doctrine, and how militaries adapt to their experiences on the battlefield and to technological improvements. A significant portion of this paper is the result of required readings and the dialog between students and faculty during small group sessions. These enriching and, at times, enervating discussions have shown me how little I actually know about the nature of war and the development of doctrine that seeks to provide a framework for how the military thinks it should conduct operations.
As the United States military finds itself in the calm between proverbial storms, the struggle to make sense of the recent past and the way forward leads to a certain amount of, what I consider, professional angst. The desire to forego counterinsurgency and stability operations in the face of an increased potential for traditional warfare has potentially set the conditions for a dangerous backslide as seen in the post-Vietnam War era. Unlike the 1970s and 1980s, the environment the US Army operates in today contains a multitude of state and non-state actors that pose multiple, distinct challenges to the United States all across the range of military operations. This is opposed to the monolithic adversary that posed a single threat manifested in differing ways but driven by the same general ideology. Unlike in decades past, the Army has learned from its experiences and developed a doctrine that accounts for the complex world it operates in today. Like any doctrine, Unified Land Operations is not perfect and requires continual refinement, but to forsake it completely for the sake of expediency or past predilection is to condemn the organization to repeat the mistakes of the past.
I would like to thank the students of my conference group and, in particular, my military and civilian faculty advisors. Without your knowledge and forbearance, my eyes would remain closed to my everlasting detriment. Finally, I wish to thank my wife and son for their continued love, support, and tolerance.
With headlines full of dire warnings about Russia's military resurgence and subsequent adventurism, the continuing war against ISIL in Iraq, the ongoing conflict in Syria, and debates surrounding the United States military's preparedness, it is not difficult understand the challenging landscape confronting the uniformed service chiefs. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Any discussion involving the current operating environment is bound to involve a multitude of terms that have specific meaning, but taken in a broad context generally describe similar phenomena. For instance, unconventional warfare, asymmetric warfare, guerrilla warfare, and other such terms serve to describe violent, political conflicts that lack the linear characteristics commonly attributed to conventional war, such as uniforms and front lines. In an effort to minimize confusion and to simplify the concepts of warfighting, joint doctrine utilizes distinct terms to denote two styles of war. While useful for clarification, the division of war into separate categories is problematic in a theoretical sense as it creates an artificial divide between what is fundamentally a human activity simply carried out through divers means. 8 This delineation, when allowed to meander along its logical path reinforces the idea that the two styles of war require a force, or forces focused on a particular method. 
9
Joint Publication 1, the document that establishes joint doctrine for the United States armed forces, defines the term traditional [conventional] warfare as being "characterized as a violent struggle for domination between nation-states or coalitions and alliances of nationstates." 
10
11
12
The distinction fits neatly into the US military's desire to classify war in broad categories, thereby creating an image in which the styles of war are matched with a particular force, either conventional or special operations. This categorization, while convenient and simple, contributes to the mindset that the different styles of warfare are indicative of separate natures requiring a division of labor that does not necessarily account for the transition zone between the styles of war. 
13
Within the current operating environment (OE), the United States faces a host of security challenges that require the use every component of national power. The rapid growth of technology and social media contribute to an OE that is difficult to navigate, even in the best of times. The Army's recognition of this environment has helped to shape the operating concepts that reinforce the idea of balance in an effort to face traditional and irregular threats, now and in the immediate future.
According to the Army's Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), the current operating environment is composed of "Diverse enemies [that] will employ traditional, unconventional, and hybrid strategies to threaten U.S. security and vital interests. Threats may emanate from nation states or nonstate actors such as transnational terrorists, insurgents, and criminal organizations." 14 This short statement describes in general terms many of the actors and threats the United States faces daily and will continue to face for the foreseeable future. In addition to the broad definition provided above, the Army's operating concept goes on to describe five characteristics that fundamentally shape the OE: increased velocity and momentum of human interaction and events, potential for overmatch, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, spread of advanced cyberspace and counter-space capabilities, and demographics and operations among populations, in cities, and in complex terrain. 
15
Before the fall of communism, the Soviet Union served as the primary threat facing the United States and Europe. This singular threat led to the creation of a force trained and equipped to wage a traditional war in Central Europe. This OE enabled the US Army to establish the doctrine and force structure its conventional forces required in order to focus on traditional warfare against a similarly equipped and trained adversary. The US Army's emphasis on traditional war changed to irregular warfare after the 2003 invasion of Iraq, however recent developments are spurring a shift back toward traditional war. As the United States continues to view the Russian Federation and China's conventional militaries with rising concern, traditional warfighting has again become a pillar of defense strategy. 
16
Since the mid-1990s, the United States has remained primarily concerned about the threat of irregular or asymmetric warfare. The fall of the Soviet Union and subsequent stagnation of the Russian Federation's military forces led the US to largely discount the threat of traditional war and emphasize regional conflicts. 17 This outlook continued throughout the 1990s and into the 21 st century until September 11, 2001. Since then, the United States has continued to conduct military operations of varying scale, particularly in the Middle East. The two largest engagements, Iraq and Afghanistan involved substantial use of both conventional and special operations forces working together along the ROMO. Despite some significant challenges and setbacks, conventional forces were able to evolve from their Cold War, traditional mindset to the conduct of counterinsurgency (COIN) in a relatively short time frame.
The shift led to a focus on counterinsurgency to the detriment of traditional warfighting skills.
The Army recognized this trend as early as 2007 and has continued to emphasize traditional warfighting skills despite continued commitments to Iraq and Afghanistan. The present challenge is preventing the emphasis on traditional war from monopolizing training time and dollars and potentially damaging the Army's ability to execute tasks related to irregular warfare. 
18
Both Russia and China have embarked on modernization programs aimed at closing the military gap between the US and themselves. 
19
20
22
23
24
25
26
27
Recent changes in the way the Russian Federation and China utilize military power has ushered in a new round of debate over the United States response to the rising threat of traditional war and the simultaneous threat of irregular conflicts of varied intensity and duration.
Fortunately, recent doctrinal updates provide the solution to dealing with these disparate threats.
Army leaders have identified flexibility and balance as the keys to success in today's world institutionalizing the two concepts through its doctrine of combined arms maneuver (CAM) and wide area security (WAS). 
28
In 2011, the United States Army began a comprehensive restructuring of its doctrine in order to consolidate lessons learned over the course of a decade of war and to bring "clarity to doctrine." 
29
30
According to the framework of ULO, the Army seeks to "gain and maintain a position of relative advantage," 31 across the range of military operations executed as part of two core competencies: combined arms maneuver and wide area security. The Army defines combined arms maneuver as the "application of combat power in unified action to defeat enemy ground forces." 
32
Doctrine defines wide area security as "the application of combat power in unified action to protect populations, forces, infrastructure and activities." 
33
34
35
36
37
The above-mentioned argument notwithstanding, it remains clear that conventional forces primarily exist to engage in traditional warfare as demonstrated by their organization and capabilities. This fact in no way obviates the need to train in other aspects of war, so balance in training and resourcing is required at all levels of command. Training for combined arms maneuver is a complex task that involves preparation to face both regular and irregular forces in complex terrain, with access to sophisticated weapons and technology. 
38
With the doctrinal foundations for warfighting laid down, the challenge for leaders seeking to train a flexible force is to determine the right balance of combined arms maneuver and wide area security. Through its Mission Essential Task List and Combat Training Center rotations, the Army has established a training methodology that enables commanders to identify the correct balance of CAM/WAS necessary to carry out an assigned mission and the ability to test a unit's preparedness in a tough and realistic training exercise.
Mission Essential Task List (METL). The METL is a list identifying the primary tasks a particular type of unit (i.e. field artillery, infantry) trains to demonstrate proficiency in. 
39
40
The doctrinal foundation and training methodology of the Army's conventional forces is instrumental in the creation and maintenance of powerful units able to dominate across the range of military operations. Beyond the traditional role of sustained land combat, conventional forces have the ability to contribute to the irregular conflicts in which the military increasingly finds itself operating. 
41
42
One oft-forgotten capability of conventional forces in irregular warfare is the ability to task-organize into groups designed for a specific mission or purpose. These groups range in size from a military police squad conducting law enforcement training to battalions of artillery supporting a host nation offensive. This scalability, a fundamental by-product of the Army's doctrine and training constructs, is crucial for conventional support to special operations and force projection as demonstrated in both Iraq and Eastern Europe.
In the current OE, the belief that special operations (SO) and conventional forces represent the balance between irregular and traditional war remains firmly entrenched. SO, with their focus on discrete activity, minimal footprint, and language training are the first choice for operations that fall below the level of traditional war on the scale of violence. 
43
44
As part of the ongoing conflict in Iraq, the US military has combined SO and conventional forces in order to aid Iraqi forces in the battle for their country. 
45
46
The example of conventional-SO integration and support in Iraq demonstrates how conventional forces can contribute to operations in irregular warfare despite the absence of distinct combined arms maneuver or wide area security tasks. In particular, current operations in Iraq and Syria demonstrate the ability of conventional and SO forces to work together in the transition zone that exists between irregular and traditional war. Furthermore, all around the globe, the United States military engages with allies and partners in operations ranging from humanitarian missions to counter terrorism operations. 
47
48
The US Army's most recent deployment to Poland and other areas of Eastern Europe is a perfect example of why a scalable force, proficient across both core competencies, has value at present and in the future.
Beginning in April 2014, the US committed military forces to Poland and other Eastern European nations as part of Operation Atlantic Resolve. 
49
Operation Atlantic Resolve's first priority is as "a demonstration of continued U.S. commitment to collective security through a series of actions designed to reassure NATO allies and partners of America's dedication to enduring peace and stability in the region in light of the Russian intervention in Ukraine." 
50
Beyond deterring the Russian Federation, the forces deployed in support of Operation Atlantic Resolve are currently conducting over 38 exercises in conjunction with allied militaries from all over Europe. 
51
The OE in which the US Army operates remains marked by its complexity and the possibility of conflicts that extend across the range of military operations. In the future, the United States will have to answer calls for assistance and training from friendly nations, nebulous gray zone conflicts, low-level insurgencies, and the threat of traditional war in Europe and the Korean peninsula. The United States Army's ability to respond to these challenges by providing flexible and balanced options to policy makers will be the cornerstone of its future existence.
One of the core challenges to the Army's ability to provide the required flexibility and balanced force is fiscal austerity. The 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review makes it clear that the United States has transitioned from a wartime footing to one of watchful stability. 
52
As the military looks at the growing threat of Russian military power, thoughts are inevitably turning toward the Army's comfort zone, where the organization feels it excels, and that is traditional war. It is true that the Army has lost some of its proficiency in regards to linear, large-scale conflicts. Fifteen years of focus on wide area security and stability have eroded the organization's competency at maneuver and combined arms tactics. "Today, a major in the Army knows nothing but fighting terrorists and guerrillas, because he came into the Army after 9/11. But as we get into the higher-end threats, our skills have atrophied over 15 years," the Army's Chief of Staff, GEN Milley stated in a recent article. 
53
As the Army continues to recover from the longest war in its history, it must avoid the temptation to subscribe wholly to the past and continue to make informed decisions about the future.
At the conclusion of its 2006 war in Lebanon, the Israeli government initiated a commission seeking answers to Israel's admittedly sub-par performance against Hezbollah.
Released in 2008, the Winograd Commission's final report listed a number of flaws in Israel's preparation and execution during the conflict. 
54
55
Fortuitously, the answer to the question of how to balance the Army in order to meet the varied threats of the current operating environment already exists. As the Army began the post-Iraq recovery process, it developed the concept of Unified Land Operations and the subordinate core competencies of combined arms maneuver and wide area security to meet future challenges. The concept of CAM/WAS allows for the creation of a flexible force that is better prepared to face challenges wherever, and under whatever guise they may appear.
Reinforced by realistic training at the nation's combat training centers and the experiences gained through global deployments, the conventional forces of the United States have the ability to effectively contribute to national defense without committing to an approach that weights one style of war over another. It is a fundamental obligation of the Army to be prepared for a conflict of any nature, and in order to avoid fighting a war it is ill prepared for, the Army must prepare for every kind.
BCT: brigade combat team CAM: combined arms maneuver COIN: counterinsurgency CTC: Combat Training Center FID: foreign internal defense 13 Philip Kapusta, "The Gray Zone", Special Warfare, October -December 2015, 18; Thomas R. Mockaitis, "The COIN Conundrum." In each of these articles, the author's declare for specialization that seems to draw a distinct line between the nature of war and the nature of the forces used to fight war. Like the range of military operations, the conventional and special operations forces of the US military are part of the same whole: they represent the applicability of violence on a sliding scale. Planning Guidance does not, by any stretch of the imagination disregard the idea of counterinsurgency. The issue is the burning threats of today, will cause us to forget about other potential threats eventually leaving us vulnerable to exploitation by an observant adversary. The Israelis suffered from this before the 2006 war in Lebanon. 
17
37
40
41
42
help in the battle for Mosul," The Washington Post, October 17, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2016/10/17/how-u-s-and-western
-Headquarters Department of the Army. Army Strategic Planning Guidance 2014. Washington . The U.S. Army Operating Concept: Win in a Complex World