# ID: 5f62a853bbd0403da62586e68003d2a0
# Title: Military Thought and Doctrine in Europe and the United States: Patterns of Interaction in the Twentieth Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
I would like to thank my two thesis advisors, Professor Donald Abenheim and Dr. Carolyn Halladay. Thank you for patiently guiding and mentoring me through this challenging process and for providing me the opportunity to research the subjects I have been interested in for some time. The pandemic limited our contact, and I wish circumstances had allowed us to meet more in person. I will always be grateful for your support and trust along this journey. As Clausewitz wrote: "While history may yield no formula, it does provide an exercise in judgment here as everywhere else" and educates and prepares the soldier's mind to face the forces of war in their complexity. Having completed this work, I wish to thank the U.S. Marine Corps, the Naval Postgraduate School, my family, my friends, and my teachers for this chance to reflect on questions of central importance to my service as an officer in the U.S. Marine Corps.
I would also like to thank those who have been closest to me for the past year. To my wife, Ashley-thank you for your love, understanding, and support. Thank you for being present and available for Max and for helping him understand why I was off "in the library with books" and working on this thesis. Thank you, also, for embracing the arrival of all sorts of old books, faded and out-of-print military manuals, U.S. Army trade journals, and all manner of "Clausewitzian" things. Thank you for listening to my thoughts about this project and for lifting my spirits during the tough times during this most unusual year, which also brought us the newest and littlest member of our family. I know I will treasure our time in Monterey, and I look forward to future adventures in Germany and beyond that we will share with Max and baby Bowen. 
Since the 18th century, the profession of the soldier has grown in ambition and impact in government and society amid a constant preparation for war as well as, especially in the recent past, a constant assessment of what the past and present bode for the future.
One can call this process military thought, and as such, those who engage in this effort should be especially aware of the historical, political, and cultural context of ideas about "how to fight" and the higher purposes of war and military organization. In the 21st century, this process is not as well studied as in former times, while, at the same time, there is more military thought being exercised than perhaps ever before. From the origins of more or less modern military thought and education in the 18th century-and present-U.S. military planners have looked to Europe to think about how to fight. 
1
A number of scholars have taken a critical approach towards the legacy of military history centered in historical narratives that laud German Wehrmacht tactical and operational acumen and European colonial warfighting and have categorized these accompanying narratives as mythic and also as legend. 
2
How has European military history, military thought and combat doctrine, and military myth shaped U.S. military thought and combat doctrine?
This thesis considers European military history, that is, more or less the sum of strategic thought and operational practices since the 18th century to consist of the record of, as Michael Howard writes, those "complicated and disagreeable realities" that illuminate "what really happened." 3 Moreover, the general method of the thesis seeks to align with that put forth by Peter Paret: that the study of war should examine both the fighting itself and also the political, social, and cultural factors that "surround and penetrate war," such as the motives and action behind the battle, that hold "the key for a full understanding of the fighting." 
4
4 Peter Paret, Understanding War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), 1. See also Michael  Howard, War in European History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), xi for how the extraction of the study of war from "the environment in which it was fought-social, cultural, political, economic-was to ignore dimensions essential to its understanding." century, has developed into a global intellectual industry within which the U.S. military contributes an outsized role. In this enterprise one finds the intersection of war and politics, strategy, operations, tactics, as well as technology and battle, and the intersection and relevancy of military philosophy with consideration of "modern war." Brian Linn observes as such in The Echo of Battle (2002) and perceives that U.S. military thought consists of a plethora of different considerations:
Even before GWOT, the defense community was in the midst of a vibrant debate over whether the nature of war itself had changed. Advocates offered the prospect of a glittering future…Others defended the relevance of military philosophers such as Henri Jomini and Carl von Clausewitz…The debate, like the defense community, overflowed with buzzwordsasymmetric conflict, fourth generation warfare, shock and awe, full spectrum dominance -many of which quickly became passe. And with some significant exceptions, much of this debate confined itself to hypothetical threats, to the relative merits of weapon systems, and to new tactical organizations.
5
War in Europe has drawn the attention of U.S. military theorists and authors of doctrine that have in turn sought to interpret and extract theories and practice about the nature of war and how to prepare for war in its constant variety. U.S. Army officers sought strategic inspiration within the theorems of Jomini and the historical example of Napoleon in the early 19th century.
6
7
8
10
11
11 Gian Gentile, in Wrong Turn: America's Deadly Embrace of Counter-Insurgency, contends that the release of FM 3-24 partially represented an attempt to shape public discourse surrounding the Iraq and Afghanistan wars towards the view that the wars could be fought successfully in a less destructive manner than past wars. See pages 1-12 and 24-25 for supporting details on the association of doctrine development, public discourse, and association of American intellectuals with FM 3-24.
2001, U.S. defense intellectuals have oriented toward information operations and warfare as an emerging realm of inquiry 12 in light of recent Russian malign activity within Europe and have developed and published Joint Publication 3-13, Information Operations, in addition to multiple service-level reference publications. 
13
14
13 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Information Operations, JP 3-13 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff,  2012), https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp3_13.pdf.
14 See Smelser and Davies II, The Myth of the Eastern Front, 2 for the core thesis that the German officer corps successfully transferred a racialized and reductionistic view of Wehrmacht mobile and defensive operations on the Eastern Front via the after-action and "lessons learned" synthesis efforts resident within the Halder Group, and 131-132 for specific notes on how S.L.A. Marshall and Liddell Hart praised Erich von Manstein's Lost Victories. Also, recent sources that detail the Herculean industrial, economic, social, political, and strategic-tactical-operational effort behind the Soviet counterattack and advance in 1943-1945 reveals that the Russians were the very opposite of the racialized brutes depicted in the postwar light by German officers. Richard Overy's Russia's War (New York: Penguin Books, 1997) depicts the social, industrial, economic, and military foundation of Russian victory on the Eastern Front. depicts the large-scale industrial evacuation of the Soviet industrial base (170-171), Soviet small-unit innovation and toughness (175-176, in Stalingrad), and the Soviet rearmament and tactical-operationalstrategic doctrine improvement effort that supported victory at Kursk (186-203, for the conditions that enabled victory in Kursk). discourse. 
15
16
As Michael Howard has said, with regard to such "disagreeable facts" 18 :
It is in fact the function of the historian proper to discover and record what those complicated and disagreeable realities are. He has to find out, as Leopold von Ranke, the father of modern historiography, put it, 'what really happened'. And this must inevitably involve a critical examination of the 'myth', assessing and discarding its patriotic basis and probing deeply into the things it leaves unsaid…Inevitably the honest historian discovers, and must expose, things which are not compatible with the national myth; but to allow him to do so is necessary, not simply to confirm to the values which the war was fought to defend, but to preserve military efficiency for the future. 
19
18 Michael Howard, "The Use and Abuse of Military History," 27.
19 Howard, "The Use and Abuse of Military History," 27. Gian Gentile also cites this article in Wrong Turn: America's Deadly Embrace of Counter-Insurgency, 141.  Historical analogy lends credibility towards any dialogue the considers how to fight. 20 However, Hannibal encircled and annihilated the Romans at Cannae only once. 
21
22
23
22 Gordon A. Craig, "Delbrück: The Military Historian," in Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), 326 for how Delbrück applied his own historical method aimed at sorting out truth and history from legend to the military record of the past; 327 for how he served as a vocal critic of the military thinking and strategic approach within the First World War German state; 336-337 for how Delbrück reconstructed the history of ancient battles such as Marathon and Cannae in order to understand what really happened there.
23 Hew Strachan, European Armies and the Conduct of War, (London: Routledge, 2004), 130-132 for Strachan's thesis that Field Marshal Alfred von Schlieffen failed to distinguish between the tactical implications and requirements of fighting and winning a battle of annihilation and the operational-strategic implications, for instance, of violating Belgian neutrality.
Military thinkers have thought about how to fight and have translated their thoughts into various principles aligned with the "Principles of War" theme since the 18th century if not earlier, and European military thought influenced and inspired U.S. military thought. 
24
The reductionistic-extractive approach identifies Clausewitz as the "Madhi of Mass". 
25
26
27
29
Clausewitz and his intellectual development. 30
31
28 Van Creveld, The Transformation of War, 225.   29 Van Creveld, 197 for Van Creveld's list of belligerents and 20-21 for his description of the low intensity conflict (LIC). 30 Peter Paret, Clausewitz and the State (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 3 rd edition 2007), 3-5 for Paret's approach towards the political climate of Clausewitz's time; 32 for how the changing character of 19 th century warfare, to include the mass mobilization behind the revolutionary French armies, influenced Clausewitz; 34-35 on how Clausewitz's participation in combat in the French revolutionary wars of 1793-1794 influenced him; 36-37 for details on how "A bourgeoisie that was growing ambitious and self-assertive demanded training for its sons that was secular and realistic, and that would breach some of the restrictive, aristocratic walls encapsulating German society. Pietism, with its rejection of external, formal standards of thought and conduct for the sake of achieving a rich inner development, was one major source of the new education." 31 Paret, Clausewitz and the State, 71 for notes on how Scharnhorst, the Prussian reformer, 351 for Clausewitz's approach towards other thinkers he considered too doctrinaire and prescriptive; 371 for Clausewitz's thoughts on the integration of consideration of emotional forces into theory and the unattainability of a "positive" military doctrine that can truly "lay down valid rules for the conduct of war."
. "exonerate" armed forces from the stigma of failure, to the detriment of consideration of the forces of "anger, hatred, and primordial violence," which also appear in On War. 32 U.S. military thought has historically applauded the German tactical and operational record. Historians have appreciated the story of the First World War-era evolution and adaptation of German small-unit squad level tactics. 
33
34
33 Gudmundsson, Stormtroop Tactics, 171-173 on the decentralization of firepower and maneuver capabilities towards the German squad and devolution of command responsibility to lieutenants and noncommissioned officers; 176 on the integration of pioneer/combat engineer type formations into German tactical innovation efforts; 177 on the failure of German "operational art" and the consequent forcing function on the development of "stormtroop tactics" as the solution to stalemate. Stormtroop Tactics was sold physically at The Marine Shop, the merchandise shop associated with the Marine Corps Association, when I was stationed in Quantico in 2013-2016.   34 William H. McRaven, Spec Ops: Case Studies in Special Operations Warfare, (New York: Presidio  Press, 1995,) 8 for the establishment of the "six principles of special operations" against which various small-unit actions are evaluated, to include Operation "Oak," the glider-borne German mission to rescue Benito Mussolini from captivity in 1943; 60-69 for analysis on the German seizure of Eban Emael in 1940; 188 for McRaven's assessment of Operation "Oak." of historical synthesis and analysis aimed at promoting U.S. excellence within the tactical and operational levels of war. 35 U.S. military thought also praised the historical record of the German General Staff and posited that the organization possessed a "genius for war" and that the "more effective military institutions" represented within the German armed forces generated "combat superiority". 36 U.S. military planners looked to the combat record of the Wehrmacht as demonstrated on the Eastern Front in order to frame thought on land war against the Soviet Union solicited the thoughts of German officers, who willingly expounded on the importance of the "mobile defense". 
37
1974-1975. 38
39
the Halder Group. 40
41
43
The thesis incorporates aspects of the method employed by Peter Paret in Clausewitz and the State (1976), the leading biography of the Prussian theorist of war, which also explains how to best make sense of Clausewitzian theory. Specifically, Paret weaves political, intellectual, historical, and psychological context together throughout his appreciation of Clausewitz's life and thoughts on war and the nature of the state. 
44
43 Karl-Heinz Freiser, The Blitzkrieg Legend, (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2005), 351. 44 Paret, Clausewitz and the State; see 32 for notes on how the French Revolution brought new strategic and tactical considerations to the European battlefield; 34-35 on Paret's consideration of how a youthful Clausewitz responded to mobilization and war psychologically; 37 and 45 for the emergence of mass movements such as Pietism and the interest in modernization within Prussian society; 45-46 on the intellectual climate within Prussia and also within Clausewitz's regiment; 71-77 for the impact that the Prussian reformer Gerhard von Scharnhorst had on Clausewitz in addition to Paret's consideration of the psychological forces at work after the death of Clausewitz's father; 119 for Clausewitz's response to de Jomini's military thought as published during his time; 366 for perspective on dialectical relationships within On War; 373 and the importance Clausewitz attached to emotional and non-rational forces when considering war; 374 on Clausewitz's integration of psychological consideration of personality types into his own writing; and 438-440 for additional material on Clausewitz's conception of the "state" and the impact it had on his own work.
The thesis will incorporate the following sources and materials: the doctrinal publications themselves, secondary historical sources utilized to inform the drafting process, and sources such as professional military journals that reflect U.S. military discourse revolving around primary and secondary European military history sources.
This thesis consists of four chapters. The second chapter considers the inclusion of On War within U.S. military thought and how American appreciation of Clausewitz and On War has diverged into two intellectual approaches. The first approach constructs a de facto Clausewitz myth and treats On War as a "how to fight manual." The second approach employs the analytical framework employed by Peter Paret within Clausewitz and the State and expounds on the nature of the work as meditation on the interplay between themes not typically considered within the defense-intellectual scholarship field in order to delineate between the history that informs consideration of Clausewitz, and the myths associated with consideration of his work.
The third chapter focuses on U.S. appreciation of German fighting prowess after the Second World War. This chapter also considers histories such as Gross's The Myth and Reality of German Warfare critical of the performance of the German Wehrmacht and General Staff during the Second World War. This chapter illuminates the pitfalls of an unqualified appreciation of German tactical-operational achievements in the Second World War in light of critical history highlighting German operational-strategic planning deficiencies, Germany's racialized policy towards conquered territories, and German postwar mythmaking. The third chapter then considers integration of the German fighting approach into U.S. military thought as published within U.S. armed service trade journals, capstone U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Army doctrinal publications, and the broader realm of academic inquiry into the history of German arms in modern Europe.
45
The search for the influence of ideas in military institutions is fraught with peril, since the evidence is often ephemeral or misleading. Since the 18th century, European military thought has often operated in profound ways in the U.S. military. Seen from the perspective of the year 2021, then, the case of Carl von Clausewitz, the great Prussian theorist of war, is no exception. In this question of Clausewitz and his influence, two approaches of method and thought can be said to operate in the U.S. with regard to the Prussian and his thought: the reductionistic-extractive approach and the historic-contextual approach. The figures of the reductionistic-extractive approach have often wrongly and tendentiously isolated and transplanted a small number of key terms and phrases from On War into U.S. doctrine, military educational curricula, and the analysis of past U.S. military failure in since the Vietnam War. 
46
1914-1945. 47
48
56
57
Bülow, Clausewitz charged, had constructed an argument that was problematic for several reasons: the argument was too closely connected to the pace of technological change and inclined to shift as weapon ranges and capabilities shifts; analysis was too closely linked to geography and weapon math and did not consider the physical and psychological effects of fighting; and, finally, did not consider the full range of factors related to war such as soldier morale and commander psychology. 
59
60
Clausewitz returned to the battlefield in 1806 as Prussia entered the war against Napoleon. Clausewitz and Prince August led a Prussian grenadier battalion at the Battle of Auerstädt, north of Jena. 
62
63
He then travelled to Königsberg, the temporary home of the Prussian government, in 1808 and swiftly joined Scharnhorst and the circle of reformers that sought to modernize Prussian military institutions and solve the problems that had generated defeat at Jena and Auerstadt. 64 Specifically, Scharnhorst and Clausewitz supported ending the noble monopoly on officer commissions, reforming the rigid Prussian disciplinary and drill system, and encouraging initiative amongst all ranks in the Prussian military. 
65
Scharnhorst appointed Clausewitz to the Prussian general staff and faculty at the new Prussian kriegschule, and Clausewitz also became the military tutor to the Prussian crown prince in 1810. 
66
67
68
Friedrich Schiller and embraced contemplation of what was infinite, mystical, and rooted in an earlier time. 
69
70
71
72
73
France defeated Austria at Wagram in 1809 after a brief war and, in 1811, subsequently compelled Prussia to open borders and territory for French forces staging for the attack into Russia. 
74
75
76
77
78
79
Clausewitz served as the chief of staff of Prussian Rhineland forces for several years, resumed his study of military history and theory in 1816, and proceeded to assume 74 Paret, 195.   75 Paret, "Clausewitz," 195.   76 Paret, 195.   77 Paret, 195.   78 Paret, 195.   79 Paret, 195.   80 Paret, 195.  leadership of the Berlin Prussian war college in 1818. He began writing On War in 1819 and completed the first six chapters and drafts of the final two planned chapters by 1827.
Clausewitz stopped writing On War in 1827 when he concluded that he had not properly explained and incorporated two key thoughts about war that he had been pondering for some time, and therefore needed to revise the On War manuscript which he believed to be "as a rather formless mass that must be thoroughly reworked once more." 81 Specifically, Clausewitz wrote the following regarding the need for revision:
War can be of two kinds, in the sense that either the objective is to overthrow the enemy -to render him politically helpless or militarily impotent, thus forcing him to sign whatever peace we please; or merely to occupy some of his frontier districts so that we can annex them or use them for bargaining at the peace negotiations. Transitions from one type to the other will of course recur in my treatment; but the fact that the aims of the two types are quite different must be clear at all times, and their points of irreconcilability brought out.
This distinction between the two kinds of war is an actual fact. But no less practical is the importance of another point that must be made absolutely clear, namely that war is nothing but the continuation of policy with other means. If this is firmly kept in mind throughout, it will greatly facilitate the study of the subject and the whole will be easier to analyze. 
82
83
Clausewitz assumed the post of chief of staff of the mobilized Prussian army. 
84
83 Paret, 197.   84 Paret, 197.  1831 from the cholera epidemic which began in Russia and then spread to Poland and Western Europe. 
85
86
87
problems among a readership today that cannot understand this method of thought as applied to military affairs and the nature of war. The first dialectical relationship is the relationship and interplay between the concepts of the theoretical ideal of war-"absolute war"-that, in an abstract sense as present in a plan on paper, involves the total destruction of the enemy, and war as it actually occurs in the real world. 
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
94 Clausewitz, 225.   95 Clausewitz, 233-234 for the three elements of the "total concept of a victory;" 236 for the various objectives associated with offensive and defensive engagements; 240-241 for the three elements that comprise the "moment of decision" after which the battlefield situation is irretrievable for the losing side; 253 for the psychological effect of defeat and victory within opposing forces; 258 for five points related to the destruction of the enemy's forces, the primacy of large-scale engagements as leading to major success, and fighting as the means to destroy the enemy; 263-265 for notes on how to strategically exploit victory, to include employment of the pursuit; and 273-275 for notes on the utility and planning of night attacks, such as the famous Battle of Hochkirch, fought during the Seven Years War. 96 Paret, "Clausewitz," 198. Also, On War, Book VI, "Defense," does include a chapter on "The People in Arms." See 479 for Clausewitz's observation that "war by means of popular uprisings is a phenomenon of the nineteenth century" and how "conventional barriers have been swept away" that previously contained the "elemental violence of war" as reflected in popular war; 480 for 5 conditions under which popular uprisings are effective; 481 for the recommendation that uprisings should be "nebulous and elusive;" 482 for the recommendation for regular force commanders to support uprisings with small detachments of regular troops; 482 also for the recommendation that irregular units avoid engaging in protracted defensive battles; and 483 for Clausewitz's thoughts on the outline of a guerilla-type campaign involving retreat of regular forces into remote areas, insurrection against the occupier, and eventual counterattack. See also Book VI, Chapter Thirty, 516-517 for digression on how history, in the end, does not provide firm grounds for true "principles, rules, or methods," and is best employed within an "exercise for judgment." theoretical "absolute" war and war as it truly occurs, as well as the political nature of war and how politics and strategy interact with each other. 
97
No one starts a war -or rather, no one in his senses ought to do so -without first being clear in his mind what he intends to achieve by that war and how he intends to conduct it. The former is its political purpose; the latter is its operational objective. 
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
A dominant line of analysis in the period from 1919 until the recent past, especially within the English-speaking world, has been to use Clausewitz as a tool in a selective and often in a wholly faulty way to generalize about the changing face of war, and, more or often than not, to find fault in a variety of locales as pertain to state, armies, battle, and war itself. This school of thought, such as it is, often uses Clausewitz as a mirror to illustrate the author's assumptions about war and theory, as well as doctrine in a manner that duplicates many of the errors about such theory that Clausewitz so rightly criticized in his own time. One can say that within the reductionistic-extractive school encompasses the work and commentary of the First World War and inter-war British journalists and strategic theorists J.F.C. Fuller and Basil Liddell Hart. These two men, veterans of war on the western front, and figures in the interwar attempt to make sense of the phenomenon of total war in all its confusion, have had outsized impact in the U.S. on professional military education and the formation of doctrine until the present. When the Cold War ended a generation ago and war in many forms reasserted itself especially in the Middle East in the years from 1990 until 2003, the legacy of these two British officers and publicists was revived, even as tens of thousands of U.S. officers also read or misread Clausewitz.   This school underwent a renaissance of a sort in the 1990s as the Israeli Martin Van Creveld and the British John Keegan penned responses to Clausewitzian thought that channeled many of the sentiments of the two British soldiers of the World War and also of a British state and society that had been overwhelmed by war twice in a generation.
Their respective arguments converge on several main points that often have little to do with the text of Clausewitz. Their body of work asserts that Clausewitzian theory and practice as found in German war since the 18th century is either directly or indirectly to blame for the expansion of war into total war. In an ahistorical manner, the critics contend that Clausewitzian theory overemphasizes the role of the European nation-state in the direction and organization of violence and armed force; and that Clausewitz improperly rationalizes war, which is essentially irrational and originates within and is sometimes bounded by the innate desire for combat internal to all human culture and society. responsible for the transmission of the "offensive principles of Napoleon" to the military landscape of the First and Second World Wars. 
110
111
With the end of the Cold War and the rise of weapons of high accuracy and the instability that quickly showed itself in the Persian Gulf and former Yugoslavia, war reappeared despite the promise of an end of history. Military organization in the U.S.
especially had grown greatly in size, and its professional military education establishment had reached a point in which it was a kind of perpetual motion machine eager for new ideas and new doctrine. One was told to make sense of the end of the Cold War and this reappearance of war-a reappearance that was not a reappearance at all when one considers the small war or lesser wars in the years 1945-1989. Simple answers were in demand, and two figures in particular were ready and able to provide these too facile readings of theory and war. These men were Martin Van Creveld and John Keegan, and they analyze Clausewitz via tendentious and polemical critiques that cannot stand careful inquiry. 111 Fuller, 62.   112 Fuller, 68-71.  For instance, the Israeli's Van Creveld's The Transformation of War (1991)   contended that guerilla war, terrorism, and the progressive decay of state-centric "Westphalian" political institutions has rendered the so-called "Clausewitzian Universe" increasingly irrelevant. 
113
114
113 Van Creveld, The Transformation of War, 41 for the thesis that Clausewitzian philosophy is rooted in a post-Peace of Westphalia state-centric world order, 20-22 for the introduction of the "low intensity conflict" paradigm, 58 for the contention that the "Clausewitzian Universe" is outdated as a conceptual framework, and 192 for the prognostication that low intensity conflict may well "destroy the state." 114 John Keegan, A History of Warfare (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993), 3 for the initial critique of Clausewitz's approach towards war and policy; 21 for the causal linkages between Clausewitzian philosophy and industrialized warfare, 22 for the thesis that Clausewitz served as the "ideological father" of the First World War and that the mass suffering of that conflict "may be Clausewitz's enduring legacy." See also Hew Strachan, The First World War (New York: Penguin Books, 2013), 61 and 169 for how Rathenau organized the First World War German industrial war effort; and Strachan, European Armies and the Conduct of War, 130-132 for notes on the Schlieffen Plan, and 148-149 for how General Erich Lundendorff, as quartermaster-general within the General Staff, supported unsustainable offensive action during the second half of the First World War.
When whole communities go to war-whole peoples, and especially civilized peoples-the reason always lies in some political situation, and the occasion is always due to some political object. War, therefore, is an act of policy. Were it a complete, untrammeled, absolute manifestation of violence (as the pure concept would require), war would of its own independent will usurp the place of policy the moment had brought it into being; it would then drive policy out of office and rule by the laws of its own nature…In reality war, as has been shown, is not like that. Its violence is not of the kind that explodes in a single discharge, but is the effect of forces that do not always develop in exactly the same manner or same degree. 
115
116
117
118
119
118 Van Creveld, 49, for the contention that the Clausewitzian Universe "rests on the assumption that war is made predominately by states or, to be exact, by governments."
119 Van Creveld, 33 for the introduction of the "Clausewitzian Universe" construct; 35-42 for the extraction and development of the "trinitarian war" concept from On War and connection to the Clausewitzian Universe thesis; 20-21 for the association of "low intensity conflict" with non-trinitarian trend lines; 22 for commentary on the failure of counterinsurgency strategies as applied to guerilla war, 48-49 for notes on various attempts by modern states to wage trinitarian war in the Clausewitzian model, and 73 for how the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the West Bank serves as an example of non-trinitarian warfare.
Hart's thesis that the work is a sort of "Prussian Marseillaise which inflamed the body and intoxicated the mind" and served as a "clarion call for action" and battlefield brutality. 
120
121
122
To sum up: Clausewitzian war as the continuation of policy only goes so far in explaining the historical facts. A very important form of conflict, namely war for existence [sic], fits into the framework with difficulty if at all; a war of this kind defies the laws of gravity, so to speak, causing cost-benefit calculations to be stood on their head. When this happens, strategic rationalist, far from assisting the attainment of victory, can be a prerequisite for defeat. 
123
124
125
126
127
possible "restoration of the medieval situation." 
128
129
Van Creveld bases his argument on one primary thesis which crafts a straw-man version of perhaps the most important part of On War: the discussion of the trinity in Book I, in order to avoid the troublesome portions of On War which disprove the thesis that the "Clausewitzian Universe" exists as an increasingly irrelevant extension of the European world as it stood in 1648. The first main argument is that the emergence of combatants and battle that does not align with that seen during the era of both industrialized war in the middle of the 20th century and during the preceding century indicates that the essence of war itself has changed. Van Creveld mistakes the shift in the means of battle for a change in the nature of war itself, and indeed ignores the critical portion of On War that counters this point.
Clausewitz does not explain war itself in terms of the means of battle or particular tactics employed by combatants. War, as Clausewitz explains within Book I of On War, consists of the dynamic interplay and influence between primordial violence and anger, battlefield chance and uncertainty amidst friction, and the realm of politics and policy. This complex interaction generates and modulates how war manifests in the real world, and also how close it approximates the "total war" as conceived in theory by Clausewitz. Van Creveld, it seems, prefers to interpret the Clausewitzian trinity as the "second trinity" consisting of the people, army, and government, to the deliberate exclusion of the true heart of Clausewitz's complex argument. The Transformation of War is perhaps best read as a cautionary tale of how one specific nation's military experience marked by victory along lines generally recognized as conventional transformed after contact with the popular energy and passion induced during such events as the occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and 1982 Lebanon invasion. One has also to say that the book in the year 2021 has itself become an artifact of another era, i.e., the end of the Cold War and the pivotal period between 1990 and 2001. This epoch was characterized by a military realignment amid a revival of war and a search for new roles and missions that made this work appealing to stake holders in theory, doctrine and order of battle who had to assert their continuing worth amid budget cutbacks and the perpetual confusion about the changing character of war in detail versus its essence.
The instructor in Sandhurst, the British figure John Keegan issued a polemical warning to those who delve into Clausewitzian philosophy and On War:
In the practice of war making, it is to the principles of Clausewitz that the statesman and the supreme commander still turn; in the truthful description of war, however, the eye-witness and the historian must flee from Clausewitz's methods, despite the fact that Clausewitz himself was both an eye-witness and a historian of war who must have seen and could have written of a great deal that found no place in his theories. 
130
131 Keegan, 3.   132 Keegan, 12.  obedience, single-minded courage, self-sacrifice" and "honor". 
133
134
135
136
137
136 Keegan, 23.   137 Keegan, 28. See also 26 for how the Easter Islanders "taught themselves the full logic of Clausewitzian warfare by bloody experience" and attempted "Clausewitzian warfare's crowning act, the decisive battle." See 27 for how Clausewitzian warfare proved to be a "recipe for destruction" of European culture, just as it did for the Easter Islanders.
efficiency" that eventually disintegrated the Zulu nation. 
138
139
140
Clausewitz did seem to perceive politics as an autonomous activity, the meeting-place of rational forms and emotional forces, in which reason and feeling are determinants but in which culture -that great cargo of shared beliefs, values, associations, myths, taboos, imperatives, customs, traditions, manners, and ways of thought, speech and artistic expression which ballast every society -plays no determining role. 
141
139 Keegan, 32.   140 Keegan, 46. See also 42-43 for the culturally-sited origins of the samurai drive to manage warfare within Japan; 43-44 for social-cultural foundations of the restriction on import, construction, and use of firearms and gunpowder weapons within Japan during samurai rule, and 45 for why restrictions on gunpowder aligned with cultural mores regarding the superiority of the samurai sword manual of arms and warrior code.
141 Keegan, 46.   142 Keegan, 392. See also 387-388 for Keegan's citation of the history of development of war in Asia as evidence for the thesis that the Chinese way of battle was marked by moderation in the interest of reserving "cultural forms, rather than serve imperatives of foreign conquest or internal revolution."
In a manner that says more about how certain British military figures over generalize from a record that may bear on the issue or not, Keegan's argument crafts a Clausewitzian straw-man similar to that found in The Transformation of War. His core analytical construct of "culture" identified above-"that great cargo of shared beliefs, values, associations, myths, taboos, imperatives, customs, traditions, manners, and ways of though, speech, and artistic expression which ballast every society"-is so broad that it defies systematic refutation and Clausewitz surely is aware of these forces in his theory and well embraces him despite the Sandhurst instructor's statement to the contrary.
Keegan's thesis is rooted in several other propositions which extract and distort a few parts of Clausewitz's thought, and On War in particular. Keegan casts Prussian military culture at the time of Clausewitz in a mold that is ahistorical and betrays Keegan's own failing as a scholar of war in Europe, as Paret's Clausewitz and the State's account of the inner Prussian reform movement indicates. 
143
144
144 Keegan, 5, 23.   145 Clausewitz, On War, 89.  at various points in history. 
146
The U.S. military went in the period from 1900 to 1960 from being a minor force in world affairs to a dominant one, a process that proceeded with great speed but also a procedure that did not have a single unifying theory of war in the sense of German idealism.
Itself a fairly new phenomenon, U.S. strategic thought, after the end of the Second World War, struggled to comprehend and respond to several phenomena well embodied in Clausewitz's thought. The first was the apparent world conflict of ideology in the grey zone of two political systems in struggle on a global scale. Added to this fact was the prospect of atomic and thermonuclear war and the attendant involvement of extreme violence, 146 Clausewitz, 593 for the observation that, with regard to the historical survey detailed in 586-593, that "We wanted to show how every age had its own kind of war, its own limiting conditions, and its own peculiar preconceptions. Each period, therefore, would have held to its own theory of war, even if the urge had always and universally existed to work things out on scientific principles." chance, will, and annihilation of armies and societies. 
147
148 Fred Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1983), 269-270 for details on the initial brief of SIOP-62 to Secretary of Defense McNamara. SIOP-62 entailed the detonation of 3,423 nuclear warheads totaling 7,847 megatons of destructive power and the estimated death of 285 million people within Russia and China. SIOP-62 made little distinction between states within the "Sino-Soviet bloc," and covered targets in China, for instance, because they were in the path of U.S. strategic bomber routes into Russia. See also , for the observation that the mode of attack within SIOP-62 is best described as a "spasm" that made no attempt to tailor the nuclear offensive to the specific nation within the Sino-Soviet bloc actually involved in the crisis at hand. and the personnel, aircraft, submarines, and missiles needed to destroy them. 
149
The second challenge to U.S. strategic logic was the growing frequency of anticolonial and irregular or small warfare in Southeast Asia, Latin America, and Africa. U.S.
strategy shifted from solely focusing on nuclear war and nuclear deterrence to the challenge of waging counterinsurgency campaigns amongst the people and against political cadres dedicated to mobilizing popular support, violently seizing state power, and annihilating the legacy political order. 150 President Kennedy's "Flexible Response" strategy marked an attempt to channel some of the colonial warfare practices of the French and the British in order to meet and defeat war akin to that waged by the Algerian FLN against the French colonial administration, and, most prominently, the Viet Cong in South Vietnam.  1986), 817 for the definition of "revolutionary war" as "the seizure of political power by the use of armed force," 839 for Maoist theory about revolutionary war involving the mobilization of mass political support amongst the people, and the importance of "protracted struggle" and leveraging geographical space and time against initially superior state forces; 841 for Mao's belief in the importance of revolutionary base areas; 845 for the fall of the Chinese Nationalist regime in 1949 and triumph of Mao's Chinese Communists; 847-849 for the growth of Ho Chi Minh's Vietnamese communist movement and eventual victory in French Indochina in 1954; 852-853 for French perspectives on revolutionary warfare; 854 for British revolutionary warfare practices in Malaya; and 854-855 for an overview of failed U.S. attempts to respond to revolutionary war in Vietnam via civilian agency air projects and conventional and special forces operations.
151 Linn, The Echo of Battle, 152, and 180-185 for the institutional reaction of the U.S. Army to internal voices raising concern over preparedness to fight in a low-intensity war similar to that which had occurred in Algeria and French Indochina. See also Porch Vietnam, the Soviet Union, and China. 159 Some of his observations orient on the conflation of tactical success and operations as on display in counterinsurgency doctrine at the time, and his approach is fairly critical of counterinsurgency doctrine. 
160
161
Today, U.S. military students typically encounter Clausewitzian thought via the various professional military education (PME) programs which introduce concepts such as 159 Summers, 128-130.   160 Summers, 73 and 77 for how U.S. counterinsurgency doctrine assumed dogmatic status within the U.S. defense establishment, partially via the association with in-vogue academic-social science theories; 78 for how counterinsurgency doctrine obscured the "true nature" of military force. 161 Summers, 5-7.  the "center of gravity" (COG) 
162
requirements" aligned to accomplish that mission, and the "critical vulnerabilities" associated with those requirements. 
164
165
166
165 See Coram, Boyd: The Fighter Pilot Who Changed the Art of War, 376-379 for the initial presentation of "Patterns of Conflict" to U.S. Marine students in Quantico in 1980; 381 on the integration of Boyd's briefings with Michael Wyly's focus on German-inspired tactics; and 391 for the association of Boyd with the genesis of the precursor to MCDP-1 Warfighting: Fleet Marine Force Manual-1, Warfighting. Also, see MCDP-1 Warfighting, 102, footnote 18 for reference to Boyd's observe-orientdecide-act (OODA) decision making model and how rapid cycling of the model facilitates tempo and advantage in combat.
166 Coram, Boyd, 330-334 for notes on Boyd's thoughts on Clausewitzian philosophy, see also Hammond, The Mind of War, 129-130 for notes on Boyd's reduction of Clausewitzian thought to "decisive battle" and "attrition"; see also 153 for notes on the evolution of the maneuver and attrition lens of analysis.
destroying any adversary center of gravity would terminate in pitting strength against strength. 167 "Patterns of Conflict" also contested the perceived linear and rational approach towards warfare and state policy within On War. 
168
170
167 Ian Brown, A New Conception of War: John Boyd, the U. S. Marines, and Maneuver Warfare (Quantico, Marine Corps University Press, 2018), https://www.usmcu.edu/Portals/218/ANewConceptionOfWar.pdf?ver=2018-11-08-094859-167, 222-223 for Boyd's argument that, per Clausewitzian logic, the center of gravity is "where mass concentrates most densely, then you go after that, then you've got strength against strength. That's where the mass is concentrated most densely…his whole concept of center of gravity…he's wrong." See also 216 for slide notes from the "Patterns of Conflict" brief that contend that "Clausewitz did not see that many noncooperative, or conflicting, centers of gravity paralyze an adversary by denying him the opportunity to operate in a directed fashion…hence they impede vigorous activity and magnify friction." 168 Brown, 209.   169 Brown, 211.   170 Brown, 216.
American engagement with European military thought as reflected in the interest in German wartime operations, tactics, and campaign histories has generally unfolded in the context of the historical relationship between American and European militaries.
American interest in war in Europe has typically confined itself to interest in the conduct of war-tactics, operational history, and "how to fight" curricula-and not inquiry into or appreciation of the political, social, cultural, and economic roots of war. U.S. interest in the history of war in Europe also intersects with the ebb and flow of American involvement in the security affairs of the continent. Specifically, the imperative to fight wars in Europe has prompted an urgent search for answers about how to best fight on the continent. The historical record indicates that Americans are most interested in reducing the story of war in Europe to those key points seemingly best related to the perceived strategic, operational, and tactical challenges at hand.
The story of how U.S. military planners and historians interacted with the legacy of German arms and total war in Europe in the wake of the Second World War illustrates this point. Deteriorating relations between the U.S. and Soviet Union prompted U.S.
military planners to draft a series of emergency war plans that progressed to require that U.S. ground forces in Europe be prepared wage defensive battle against numerically superior Soviet conventional forces whilst the U.S. Strategic Air Command carried out an atomic bombing campaign. U.S. Army planners, therefore, were inclined to seek solutions to the land defense problem from Wehrmacht officers cooperating with U.S. Army historians. The select lessons transmitted from these captured officers, who had their own agenda within the context of postwar Germany, helped shift the U.S. Army to orient on "mobile defense" as the solution to the land defense problem in Europe.
The reality of German warfare diverges substantially from the myth. Gerhard Gross argues as such in The Myth and Reality of German Warfare and contends that the historical record indicates that the Second World War German operational approach towards warfare aligned with the historical approach of past German operational planners: namely, that German planners sought to solve strategic problems via rapid offensive action that, in the end, was unsustainable. Mark Mazower's Hitler's Empire illuminates the murderous impact of racialized National Socialist policies in Central Europe and highlights the savage and ultimately self-defeating nature of German activity as manifested in operationalized plunder, ersatz diplomacy, and unprecedented atrocity. Additional scholars also examine the history of the Soviet war effort, and thoroughly undermine the "Myth of the Eastern
Front" belief that the Soviets overcame the Wehrmacht via mass and materiel alone.
The European roots of U.S. military thought precede the formation of the modern American republic. In the period prior to 1781, European officers mentored and instructed the revolutionary Continental Army during in the mode of the armies of the dynastic and absolutist powers that reigned in continental Europe during the American Revolution. 
171
172
Academy in the early 1800s. 
173
174
172 Abenheim and Halladay, 101.   173 Abenheim and Halladay, 102.   174 Abenheim and Halladay, 102-103. See also Linn, The Echo of Battle, 12-13 for the involvement of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the "intellectual and technical elite," in the Fortification Board which formed in the wake of the War of 1812, which oriented on continental defense via scientific-technical principles best grasped by a military elite.
war of 1846-1848 confirmed existent biases towards technical training and the imperative that citizen-soldiers be led by the West Point-produced elite. 175 U.S. officers once again looked to war in Europe during the Crimean War in the 1850s, and a team of U.S. Army officers travelled to Crimea in order to study the conflict. 176 U.S. Army engineers cited the reduction of fortified defenses under artillery fire and the seizure of Russian-held Sevastopol as evidence to support the thesis that the U.S. Congress should fully fund an ambitious coastal fortification system. 
177
178
179
German line collapsed in the wake of the Stalingrad debacle and ensuing Red Army operational and strategic offensive in the years 
1943-1945. 215
The Year 1953: The German Generals Review U.S Army FM 100-5
It is this defensive experience at the tactical and operational level that most interested U.S. Army planners in the context of the imperative to defend Europe in 1949 from something other than an offshore air and maritime strategy with no continental commitment. Once NATO was founded, this imperative of forward defense grew steadily more urgent. The capstone U.S. Army field tactical manual, FM 100-5, mandated that U.S.
Army units retain fortified defensive positions capable of mutually supporting each other "at all costs" and be prepared to focus artillery fire on a "main line of resistance". 
216
218
236
237
238
239
250
252
253 FM 100-5 (1982)
"AirLand Battle" as a warfighting concept. Academic scholarship and U.S. military professional discourse also oriented on German wartime history in the 1970s and 1980s.
Academics profiled the historical German General Staff as possessing a "genius for war," and cited the developmental history of the First World War German stosstrupp as the record of an ideal type of organization which decentralized leadership and capability to the lowest tactical level in order to overcome the severe operational restrictions on maneuver which existed on the Western Front. Other scholars looked to the Second World War German raids in 1940 Eban Emael and in support of the Mussolini rescue in 1943 and concluded that the Germans had, indeed, mastered military tactics. This approach, collectively, orients almost exclusively on the military record of German arms as manifested in battles won and narrowly lost, idealized staff planning structures, and "lessons learned" as applicable towards U.S. military effectiveness in battle at the tactical and operational level. The German generals participated in a war game exercise along with several other senior U.S. Army commanders, and the scenario involved the U.S. Army V Corps Third Armored Division and the defense of West Germany. 
258
259
The Germans intended to allow Soviet forces to advance past the forward defensive lines and then attack, which was in keeping with how they had traded space for time on the Eastern Front. 
260
261
262
263
264 DePuy, 12.
Creveld states: "The German Army was a superb fighting organization. In point of morale, elan, unit cohesion, and resilience, it probably had no equal among twentieth century armies." 
269
270
274
275
276
277
278
282
283
284
285
286
observes that Russian engineers and soldiers developed capable tanks, aircraft, and heavy artillery on their own. 
293
294
Mazower's Hitler's Empire lends moral context to any effort made towards understanding the impact of German arms in Europe during the Second World War. Mazower observes that Hitler's racial philosophy established, animated, and guided the German strategy that reduced both occupied states and allies as de facto vassals who served to satisfy German economic need and desire for lebensraum. 
295
296
297
298
Despite the cult of "American exceptionalism" and the record of the U.S. as the world's military hegemon since 2003, this thesis has examined the idea: "How has European military history, military thought, and military myth shaped U.S. military thought?" The answer has surveyed the course of U.S. defense strategy as it has related to Europe, and specifically how it has engaged with the record of German military history, thought, and myth as channeled via the writings, interpretations, and misinterpretations of Carl von Clausewitz and the historical record of the Wehrmacht in the mirror of U.S. military doctrine in the 20th century. This thesis seeks to make clear that military thought and doctrine are manifestly an international process of challenge and response. The workings of this dialectical system recommend themselves to such a young person as this author who embark on a career in this undertaking and who, as a rule, need professional preparation to do so. This work is offered with this thought in mind.
To be sure, the influence of the world of ideas on the world in which we live is a difficult thing to identify, explain, and isolate. Paret observes the following with regard to the study of Clausewitz and his influence in which the prescriptive dogma is counterposted to its analytical and dialectically focused opposite, all ensnarled in the cult of "lessons learned":
The influence of a theorist whose intentions in his major work are not prescriptive is perhaps especially difficult to determine. It is not surprising that the search for Clausewitz's influence, which began in the second half of the nineteenth century, has been confused and inconclusive. That one or two sentences from On War have entered common usage, or that some of its arguments have been misinterpreted to support the military fashions of the day, scarcely proves that his ideas have had a genuine impact. On the contrary, if we examine the conduct of war since Clausewitz wrote, we will find little evidence that scholars and governments have made use of his theories. Wars have repeatedly demonstrated the relevance of Clausewitz's theories, but nothing has proved more elusive to discover than the application of "lessons" learned from On War. 
299
These generals transmitted a perspective on the Russian foe that was inherently paradoxical-the individual Russian soldier as essentially subhuman and easily disoriented by the unexpected, the Russian higher command and industrial base clearly capable of conducting large-scale and dynamic operations with highly capable tanks and artilleryand well received by U.S. officers eager to learn how to fight the Soviets. One can appreciate the problems associated with any military thought and doctrine that is founded on the conception of an enemy that cannot innovate and adapt; indeed, this generalization, in the end, did not really apply to the Soviets on the strategic level. U.S. Bundeswehr for both inspiration on how to best counter Soviet conventional superiority and how to best align with West German strategy that prioritized keeping land warfare as close to the East-West border as possible. TRADOC adopted the "active defense" approach within FM 100-5 in 1976. Real combat never tested this "active defense"; however, the doctrine generated to meet the requirements of European war afforded little perspective on forms of battle and war not immediately tied to the expected clash on NATO's Central Front. Critical voices in the U.S. Army charged that, as it stood, the doctrine neglected the more intangible and moral elements of war that were much on military minds in the uproar of the 1970s, was excessively prescriptive, and rendered forces ill-equipped to manage a Soviet enemy that might ration reserve maneuver elements and avoid positioning the majority of forces within the planned defensive engagement areas as the Israelis had learned to their dismay in October 1973 when they were nearly defeated, as opposed to the operational success won in June 1967. Second, U.S. military thought as represented in service doctrine, professional military education curricula material, and reflection on U.S. strategic problems has transferred decontextualized concepts from On War, such as the "center of gravity", into military doctrine and defense-intellectual discourse. The scholar Beyerchen acknowledges the appeal of such approaches: "Practicing soldiers may warm to the idea of focusing one's efforts on the most critical concentration of the enemy's fighting forces in order to strike the most telling blow." 300 This echoes the Jominian precept to "operate a combined effort with a strong mass upon a single point," 301 and illustrates how the reductionistic and extractive approach toward Clausewitz may lead the reader to draw ill-informed conclusions regarding such concepts as the "center of gravity." However, as Beyerchen proceeds to argue, Clausewitz qualifies his approach toward the center of gravity with a number of additional circumstances under which the center of gravity might be a city, or "community of interest" amongst wartime partners, or perhaps even popular sentiment or the personality of a leader. 
302
303
Finally, can we penetrate far into his writings without knowing something about the author and his world? The bare structure of his theories stands on its own, but how much is obscured or becomes meaningless when he is read as though he were a late-20th-century defense analyst who chooses to think and express himself in a peculiar manner. In turn, any interpretation of his political and military actions, to say nothing of his personal development, is pointless unless Clausewitz's writings are brought to bear on his life. 
304
In this case, a fine example is the 1991 work by Martin Van Creveld. Van  Nonetheless, this school of thought has woven logical fallacy into the body of Clausewitzian studies in the English-speaking world for reasons of cultural or national bias as well as a school of "lessons learned" and a picking and choosing from the past that may or may not constitute a work of history that can stand scrutiny. This cult of damning Prussian military thought as being somehow an extension of Hitler's world (a topic also examined here) avoids considering the full scope of what Clausewitz wrote on politics, strategy, the observed nature of combat, psychology, and organized violence. Once more, the British experience of total war and German arms in 1914-1918 and 1940-1945 in the case of such men as Liddell Hart and Keegan's connection of the horrors of industrialized total war to Clausewitzian strategy assumes nearly ad hominem proportions as an argument, and disregards the possibility that a Clausewitzian lens of analysis, as applied to the First World War by such fine scholars as Michael Howard and Hew Strachan, might indeed reveal important truths regarding the complex interplay of the nature of war, the mobilization of popular passion and anger, the stalemate on the Western Front, the inherent strength of the defense, and the impact of ill-considered policy on war. Van Creveld's approach selectively extracts portions of Clausewitz's initial argument about the nature of war, policy, and the "first trinity" and essentially builds a straw-man version of the Prussian's thought that casts the "Clausewitzian Universe" as a post-1648 environment bounded by the false dictum that war serves policy and is unconnected with the actual politics of the society in question.
The Transformation of War avoids substantive discussion of the true trinity of violence and anger, chance, and politics; doubtlessly because to do so would undermine the thesis that Clausewitzian thought is inapplicable to the world of 1991. Also, the author is guilty of suggesting that the Israeli and Middle East experience of war since, say, 1948 onwards, is the dominant experience of war at all times and place. All the same, the 1991 book appeared exactly at the right moment and right place to find a huge following in the U.S. that as of 1991 became the dominant power in the Middle East and, at the same time, ensnarled for a generation in the warfare native to the place. Just as the German ally in the Cold War shaped U.S. perceptions of war, strategy, operations and so forth, the school of Van  Marine Corps released Field Manual 3-24, Counterinsurgency, in 2006. 306 FM 3-24 identified, or perhaps not, the celebrated actions of former times adapted to the 21st century needed to wage successful counterinsurgency: "stability operations", provision of "civil security" and "civil control," the provision of essential services to the populace, support to economic and infrastructure development, and offensive and defensive operations considered more typical to how militaries train, deploy, and fight. 
307
Brian McAllister Linn, The Echo of Battle: The American Way of War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 1-2.
Weigley,  The American Way of War, 82-83 for the influence of Jomini's military thought within military thought at the U.S. Military Academy in the 19th century; 87-88 for U.S. Army officer and West Point instructor Dennis Mahan's interest in Napoleonic strategy and warfare as displayed in 19th century U.S. military thought.
Weigley,  
82; see also Linn, The Echo ofBattle, 23.   
Battle Leadership, for instance, is viewable for purchase at The Marine Shop, affiliated with the Marine Corps Association, at https://www.marineshop.net/battle-leadership-pb-0940328410. Likewise, Storm of Steel is available at https://www.marineshop.net/storm-of-steel-pb-0142437905.
See Summers, On Strategy,[5][6] for the integration of aspects of the Clausewitzian trinity into analysis of U.S. failure in Vietnam.
J.F.C. Fuller, The Conduct of War (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1961), 60. See also, regarding Basil Liddell Hart's polemical comment that Clausewitz was the "Madhi of Mass" within John Shy, "Jomini," in Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 196), 181.
Van Creveld, The Transformation of War, 41.   
Paret, "Clausewitz," in Makers of Modern Strategy: From  Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, edited by Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), 188.
Paret, 188.   
Paret, "Clausewitz," 204.   
Clausewitz,[589][590] 
Clausewitz, 607.    
Clausewitz,[607][608] 
See Paul Fussell's The GreatWar and Modern Memory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 12-13 for the enormous losses sustained by the British Army on the first day of the Battle of the Somme in July 1916; 21-23 for consideration of how literary style transformed from the pre-war era to the postwar, and inarguably modern, era; 315-316 for notes on Basil Liddell Hart's experience at the Battle of the Somme, where his 800-man battalion sustained over 700 casualties in a single day; and 317 for the deterioration of the British economy and gold reserve during the war.
John Shy, "Jomini," in Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 196), 181.
Van Creveld, 64  for how On War is grounded in the "rationalistic" intellectual climate of the early 19th century; 65 for the citation of Liddell Hart's "Prussian Marseillaise" commentary.
Van Creveld,[127][128][129] for notes on the medieval arrangement of war-making power; 131 for notes on the era of chivalry and moderating impact that the chivalric code, independent of the state, had on the conduct of warfare; 136 for additional notes on the historical right that religious authorities possessed to declare war, and 139 for holy war as an example of historical warfare that departs from the Clausewitzian trinitarian construct.
Van Creveld, 136.    
Van Creveld, 148.    
Van Creveld, 145.   
Van Creveld, 205 and 207  for notes on the predicted end of substantial state-level investment in military technology research, development, and fielding; 207 on the likely expansion of the private security industry; 210 on the likely increase in use of small and inexpensive military "gadgets" on the battlefield; 216 for the argument on the possible return of medieval-style political arrangements.
Van Creveld, 220. Also see 221 for the observation that warfare is the goal and end waged by men in itself in a world where "women like those men who are prepared to fight on their behalf" and 226 for the repetition of the thesis that the world is trending towards a "pre 1648" state of affairs.
Linn, 193, 201.    
Linn,[194][195] 
Kevin Soutor, "To  Stem the Red Tide: The German Report Series and Its Effect on American DefenseDoctrine, 1948-1954," The Journal of Military History 57, no. 4 (1993): 658, https://doi.org/10.2307/2944098.
Soutor, 659.    
Soutor, 659.    
Smelser and Davies II, The Myth of the Eastern Front, 56.
Soutor, "To Stem the Red Tide," 663 and 674.
See Souter, 675 for notes on U.S. Army professional discourse regarding the German Report Series, which was published from 1950 to 1954.
Department of the Army, Russian Combat Methods in World War II. DA PAM 20-230 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, November 1950), https://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p4013coll9/id/636, 7 for digression on how the Russian soldier is a "semi-Asiatic" incapable of independent thought and exhibits the "courage of the herd"; 11 for how Russian material resources and population advantage worked against the Germans, also see 11 for how Soviet commanders devalued human life; 14 for the role of the commissar in Russian operations; 24 for how Russian battle techniques indicated a general "disdain" for the value of human life; 30 for how Russia was best considered as an operational environment "about a century" behind that of Europe; 76-78 for how the Russian soldier was an inherently superior forest fighter; 103-104 for how the Russians utilized partisan operations behind the lines; and 114 for how "death zones" in vicinity of German-controlled railways were appropriate means to manage rear area security requirements.
Department of the Army, Small Unit Actions during the German Campaign in Russia, DA PAM 20-269 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, July 1953), https://history.army.mil/html/books/104/104-22-1/index.html, 6 for how the Russian soldier was a "master" of infiltration; 15 for how the Russian soldier struggled to manage unexpected situations; 31-36 for notes on how effective the Russian soldier was in the cold environment; 37 on the lack of lower-level initiative within Russian combat formations; 74 for how unorthodox Russian tank tactics confused the Germans on the Eastern Front; 76 for the critical role of Lend-Lease aid on Russian tank construction; 190 for the positive influence of German and Austrian defectors within Russian units; and 236 for more notes on the "innate" Russian characteristics which made them excellent forest fighters.
Department of the Army, German Defense Tactics Against Russian Breakthroughs, DA PAM 20-233, redesignated as CMH Pub 104-14-1 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, October 1951 as DA PAM 20-233, facsimile edition redesignated as CMH Pub released in 1984), https://history.army.mil/html/books/104/104-14-1/cmhPub_104-14-1.pdf, 3 for the value of the frontal counterattack as applied against a Soviet breakthrough or penetration; 9 for the value of attacking the flank of a penetrating assault force and the risks therein; 13 for the applicability of flank attacks towards largescale defensive operations; 15 for the value of a "spoiling attack" aimed to swiftly assault and interfere with enemy offensive preparations; 20-21 for details on the employment of "defensive pincer" countermeasures consisting of dual attacks on both flanks of Soviet breakthroughs; 27 for the importance of maintaining mobile reserves capable of shifting between successive prepared defensive positions; 34-35 for the employment of strong point and fortress-type defensive positions as "emergency measures"; 57-58 for notes on the conduct of delaying and blocking actions with the support of reserves; 64 on the usefulness of delaying the enemy offense via successive positions; 71 on the combination of various defensive tactics during the Russian campaign, and 80 on the final note that "skillful defense tactics and supreme personal sacrifices were instrumental in producing local, temporary relief."
216 Department of the Army, Field Service Regulations, FM 100-5 (Headquarters, Department of the Army: Washington, DC, August 1949), https://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p4013coll9/id/979, 120 for the dictum that "defensive doctrine contemplates the selection and organization of a battle position which is to be held at all costs,"; 127-128 for the requirement that main battle positions consist of fortified "tactical localities" capable of mutual support; 128 for the identification of the "main line of resistance" as, essentially, a fire support control measure enabling direction of field artillery and other supporting
arms.217 Souter, "To Stem the Red Tide," 677.
Franz Halder et al., Analysis of U.S. Field Service Regulations, MS #P-133 (Historical Division,  Headquarters, United States Army Europe, 1953), https://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p4013coll11/id/1255/, 7 for reflection on desirable officer character traits; 8 for the admonition that "inaction and neglect of opportunities" merits more "severe censure" than flawed judgment associated with action; 9 for the cautionary note that "cut and dried" planning stifles initiative in battle; 9 for the critique of FM100-5 (1949)  as excessively focused on the value of the offensive; 10 for the critique that FM 100-5 (1949) perceives defense as an inherently passive form of fighting, in contrast to the Clausewitzian maxim that defense is stronger; 12 for the critique that FM 100-5 (1949) exhibits a weakness for "pattern type planning" that is ill-suited for the battlefield; 12 for the critique that FM 100-5 (1949) retains the "outworn concept" of outpost-system defense that is "regulated in every detail" and has been rendered obsolete by motorized forces, radios, and aircraft; 13 for the criticism that FM 100-5 (1949) lends insufficient attention to the need to shift "main effort" focus as a "means for flexible conduct of operations"; 14 for the recommendation to include a separate chapter on "delaying action" as a defensive measure within subsequent versions of FM 100-5; 37 and 39 for the observation that FM 100-5 does not consider armor employment; 64 for the thesis that FM 100-5 (1949) improperly characterizes the defense as an "expedient to be resorted to in time of need"; 73-74 for recommended modifications to the "Main Battle Position" section in FM100-5 (1949).
Souter, "To Stem the Red Tide," 679.
Department of the Army, Field Service Regulations (1954), 120.
William DePuy, Generals Balck and Mellenthin on Tactics: Implications for NATO Military Doctrine, BDM/W-81-077-TR(Maclean, VA: The BDM Corporation, 1980), https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a097704.pdf., 1.
DePuy, 8 for General Hermann Balck's biography, 9 for the biography of General Major A. D. F. W. Von Mellenthin.
McRaven, 169.    
McRaven,[181][182] for notes on the mission planning and final brief that Skorzeny provided to the raid force; 188 for McRaven's conclusion and assessment of the mission.
Handschuh, "Otto Skorzeny and the Real Conduct of Unternehmen Eich and Unternehmen Panzerfaust," 27; 28 for analysis conduct by the author on mission photographs that reveal divergence from the Skorzeny narrative and the historical record; 29 for the exaggerated role of Skorzeny and the influence of Nazi propaganda on the mission narrative; 30-33 for notes on the support role of Skorzeny.
 for Central Intelligence Agency reporting on Skorzeny that indicated he was a sub-par leader; 18 for the author's assessment that Skorzeny was not trained as an operational or tactical troop leader.
Handschuh, 27.   
Gross, 304.   
Mazower, 227  on the organizational and practical differences between the Nazi civil service and the Party gauleiters and the extension of Hitler's decrees within the wartime administrative system; 251 on the Nazi avoidance of formally annexing Poland to the Third Reich upon conquest; and 253-255 for the erosion of prewar legal norms and their displacement by Nazi decree.
Mazower,[233][234][235] for notes on the SS assumption of police roles in various occupied territories as well as the absorption and co-option of parts of the German intelligentsia into the SS; 455-456 for the formation of the Waffen-SS.
Mazower,[369][370][371][372][373][374][375][376] for the progression within Nazi planning towards the Final Solution; 379 for notes on the establishment of the first dedicated extermination camps within Poland; 377 for Mazower's account of the Wannsee Conference; 384 for how the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich and the subsequent "Operation Reinhard" accelerated the genocide; and 390 for data on the decline of the Central European Jewish population in the wake of the initiation of the Final Solution. See also
Paret, "Clausewitz," 211.   
Alan Beyerchen, "Clausewitz, Nonlinearity, and the Unpredictability of War," International  Security 17, no. 3 (1992), 84, https://doi.org/10.2307/2539130.
See, for example, Martin Van Creveld, "To Wreck a Military," Small Wars Journal, January 28, 2013, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/to-wreck-a-military. See also Martin van Creveld, "The Great Illusion: Women in theMilitary," Millennium 29, no. 2 (2000): 429-42. https://doi.org/10.1177/03058298000290021101.
the American domestic front. 
181
The U.S. presence in Europe at the end of the Second World War initially retracted and demobilized in a rapid fashion similar to that seen during 1918-1923. This aligned with the global demobilization of the vast American defense establishment as in times past.
The U.S. Army, worldwide, numbered 5,984,114 soldiers in June 1945 and swiftly demobilized to 683,837 soldiers as of June 1947. 
183
184
185
208
206 See Tom Bower, Blind Eye to Murder: Britain, America and the Purging of Nazi Germany (London: Granada Publishing, 1983), 118-119 for initial reporting on the Malmedy massacre as it occurred during the Ardennes offensive in December 1944 and 412 for notes on domestic German political opposition to the execution of Peiper and implications on the discussion revolving around West German rearmament; see also Smelser and Davies II, The Myth of the Eastern Front, 55-56 for the transition of general U.S. domestic popular and professional military opinion towards either general indifference or support to the German officer corps in the wake of the Nuremberg trials and 168-169 for notes on the Malmedy massacre and the complicity and trial of Joachim Peiper.
207 Smelser and Davies II, 65-66, 70-71.   208 Jay Lockenour, Soldiers as Citizens: Former Wehrmacht Officers in the Federal Republic of Germany, 1945-1955 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2001) 31 and 34-37 for notes on the formation and goals of early veteran's organizations in postwar Germany, 25 and 27 for details on the antimilitary sentiment present within postwar Germany, 50 for details on the goal to restore the honor of the German soldier that was resident in one such organization, the Verband Deutscher Soldaten (VDS), and 181 for a summary of the impact of the Allied occupation on the career, livelihood, and value system of Wehrmacht officers in postwar Germany.
Small Unit Actions during the German Campaign in Russia, and DA PAM 20-233, German Defense Tactics against Russian Breakthroughs, transmitted the German version of the Eastern Front to a receptive audience within the U.S. military, who subsequently discussed the content of these pamphlets within professional journals and the military educational establishment. 
212
213
242
243
242 FM 100-5 (1976), 5-3 for the requirement for defensive commanders to be "willing to take risks on the flanks" and "concentrate at the critical times and places"; 5-7 to 5-8 for the goal to keep combat as far forward along the FEBA as possible; 5-10 for the role of the "covering force" forward of the main battle area; and 5-13 for the requirement to "maintain coherence along the FEBA" and for defenders to "destroy many targets in a short period of time." Also, see 5-14 for guidance on the tactical employment of tanks and ATGM teams in the counterattack. 243 FM 100-5 (1976), 5-5 to 5-6 for guidance on the helicopter-borne insertion of anti-tank guided missile teams and their subsequent emplacement in advantageous terrain; 5-7 for the requirement for company grade officers to ensure all weapons are properly sited and that fighting vehicles are "covered and concealed, or at least be hull down" and that "they must fire first." 
Carlisle, Pennsylvania. 244 Critics, however, argued that FM 100-5 (1976)
245
246
247
The record of the Wehrmacht has also attracted scholarly attention within academia.
Some observers cast the record of modern German arms as evidence to support the thesis that the Wehrmacht was an ideal type of military organization, and suggest that the German General Staff exhibited a "genius for war" as manifested in "combat superiority" and favorable casualty ratios, initiative at all levels of command, and the institutionalization of 281 Gross, The Myth and Reality of German Warfare, 303-306.  