# ID: 5f82453373b444f7bf80f2b0b0b53743
# Title: Effects of decentralized execution on the German Army during the Marne Campaign of 1914
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The German Army developed the concept of decentralized execution known as Auftragstaktik between the Wars of Unification and World War I. This concept evolved within the German Army command culture that included the culture of attack and the importance of the general staff officer. Auftragstaktik enabled the German Army to more effectively react to the rapidly changing conditions of the modern battlefield. This increased effectiveness would be achieved through the use of mission-type orders that provided subordinates with the purpose and intent of the mission. It required the subordinate to determine the best way to execute the mission and entrusted him to make decisions within disciplined initiative due to changing situations on the battlefield. With these concepts in place, the army developed plans in the event of war to enable a quick, decisive victory over France in the west before turning to the east to fight Russia. As the war began, the German Army enacted its war plan. In executing the Marne Campaign, the German Army failed to effectively conduct decentralized execution due to key leader appointment, span of control issues, lack of clarity in purpose of orders, communications technology, lack of situational understanding, and the culture of attack.
or the preferred term German army prefers Fuhren mit Auftrag, or "leading with mission" focused on allowing the subordinates maximum flexibility to determine how to execute their assigned missions and adjust to changing situations quickly. 
1
During and after the German Wars of Unification, the German Army developed and implemented the concept of decentralized execution. The German Army referred to this concept as Auftragstaktik. Auftragstaktik focused on using mission type orders to convey the intent of the mission and enabling subordinates to determine how best to accomplish their missions and adjust their courses of action to changing situations.
2
3
The German Army did not develop Auftragstaktik in a vacuum. It developed within the German Army command culture over time. Jörg Muth defined command culture as: how an officer considers himself to be in command, i.e., does he command as a visible person close to the action or rather through orders by his staff from his command post. It also means the way an officer tackles the turmoil and chaos of battle and war-whether he tries to make sense of it by doctrine or rather utilizes the pandemonium to make bold moves. 
4
Muth's definition only dealt with the placement of the commanders and their comfort with uncertainty. In this document the term "command culture" refers to the institutional environment within which a commander operates and the accepted norms wherein the commander makes decisions.
The German command culture of Auftragstaktik allowed subordinate commanders significant leeway in which to execute their missions. It also required the subordinate unit to constantly evaluate whether or not he needed to change his mission, possibly in defiance of orders, to accomplish the goals of his higher headquarters. If situations changed, commanders had the ability to change their own mission. When properly executed, units were able to respond incredibly quickly to changes in the situation.
However, a drawback lurked within the culture. With leaders at every level able to change their own mission based off the situation, how could commanders gain unity of effort? Unless all of his or her forces reacted in the same way to the changed situation, negative rather than positive results may occur. Possible negative outcomes could include desynchronization of the operation, loss of massing effects, and confusion of friendly element locations increasing the chance of fratricide.
The German army solved many of these concerns through its command culture.
The command culture of the German army extended far beyond the idea of flexibility in operations. The decentralization of execution existed in an environment of aggressive offense with minimal guidance from superior elements within an organization that put a large emphasis on the role of the General Staff officer. For hundreds of years, the German army culture encouraged leaders to aggressively attack the enemy. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
7
11
12
First, the decision by Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL), the German Army Supreme Headquarters, to place 1st Army under the command of 2nd Army's commander, General von Bülow, resulted in Bülow commanding the right wing of the German attack on France. Bülow elected to remain in command of 2nd Army while 1st Army was under his control. 
13
15
The results of the analysis can help to determine both the feasibility and the 
The concept of Auftragstaktik did not develop within a vacuum. Instead, it grew from within the command culture of the Prussian and German Armies which itself developed over many years. Although the German Army educationally draws back to the establishment of the Kriegsakademie by Gneisenau and Scharnhorst, culturally, however, the link goes further back.
Prussian and German officers of the 1800s and 1900s drew their cultural inspiration from as far back to Friedrich Wilhelm I, Great Elector of Brandenburg-Prussia from 1640 to 1688. 
16
As it is understood today, Prussian militarism developed dramatically from the time of Frederick the Great who ruled Prussia in the latter half of the 1700s until the beginning of World War I. Isabel Hull described militarism as "the penetration of military values into society."
17
18
After the Prussia's defeat by Napoleon at Jena and Auerstedt in 1806, the army underwent extensive reforms to combat the French. General Gerhard von Scharnhorst, who had risen through the ranks of the Prussian Army, believed military acumen could be increased not only through experience but also through academic study. 
19
20
21
The evolution of the public view of the military and the composition of the officer corps drove some key aspects of the German Army culture. Holding a reserve commission became a status symbol for German officials and men aspiring to hold positions within the government from the time of the reforms until the initiation of World War I. The Junker class however, still preferred to serve in the regular army. Active duty 20 Citino, 129. officers and reserve officers typically followed very different career paths. In contrast to the reserve officer, the active duty officer made the military his main focus. He paid little to no attention to the political world. For example, the Crown Prince of Prussia asked Moltke if he was aware of the political situation as the army approached Paris in the Franco-Prussian War. Moltke replied, "No, I have only to concern myself with military matters." 
22
Germany's place in Central Europe drove development of the German Army in important ways as well. Until the 1890s, Germany neglected building a massive navy in favor of expanding the army. Germany could use a powerful navy to protect colonies from Britain, but it needed a powerful army for simple existence. 
23
These factors led to the development of a framework into which Auftragstakik fit.
The Prussian, and later the German, Army favored aggressive attack immediately upon contact with the enemy. This idea linked back with attacks as far back as those carried out by Friedrich Wilhelm of Brandenburg-Prussia. This concept of aggressive attack aimed at a swift, decisive victory. The Kriegsakademie, as discussed above, developed the officers to enable the maneuver of these forces. The large army required a new kind of command and the German Army developed leadership at the operational level.
Auftragstaktik developed to enable a large force to move quickly and attack decisively, in line with both the cultural and academic heritage of the German Army.
First, the Prussian way, as described by Robert Citino, regarded finding the enemy and attacking him when and where he was found, even if the enemy outnumbered him. For example, at the Battle of Langensalza, in 1866, General von Flies made contact with the Austrian forces and attacked them immediately, even though he was badly outnumbered. The units adjacent to the flanks of Flies then reacted and assisted in the attack, resulting in a Prussian victory. 
24
25
26
25 Görlitz,
76. 26 Citino,
204.
To enable the attack in lieu of the defense, Prussia, and later Germany, required a large army and a way to command it. In 1869, Moltke issued "Instructions for Large Unit Commanders" which provided generals with the first handbook regarding the operational level of warfare. He also began running wargames and staff rides that were carefully analyzed. 
28
To enable the maneuver of the large forces, Prussia developed a specially trained group of officers to coordinate the deployment of the Army and execution of the war.
Scharnhorst, as discussed, in the reforms after the defeats at Jena and Auerstedt, led the development of the required officer and established the General Staff. He stated, "An Army without a well-organized General Staff is like a country without a government." 
29
27
28 Citino, 150. 
29
30
The German General Staff was a new kind of organization shaped by knowledge. As the Prussian Army became dependent upon railroads, the task of size space, and time coordination created a new kind of officer. The general staff officer became one who gave consistent, dependable, technical performance: he was interchangeable. His goals were functional reliability and high work capacity. The German General Staff ethos derived from its technical core, the railroads. 
31
32
33
31
32
33
34
36
37
38
39
40
37
38 Citino, 150. 
39
40
After the wars of unification, the German Army sought to codify the best command style within the framework of the German Army culture previously described.
Influential leaders within the German Army attempted to examine and describe the best practices discovered during the war. Two main methodologies gained popularity, Normaltaktik and Auftragstaktik. Both theories saw the need to change from massed formation that lead to large numbers of casualties.
Captain Albrecht von Bogulslawski and Major Wilhelm von Scherff developed and advocated the concept of Normaltaktik. 
44
45
46
47
In these short orders, the commander ensured his intent and the assigned tasks to his subordinates were clear. As the modern battlefield expanded, the operational commander could not control all the subordinate units himself. The commander, operating within the construct of Auftragstaktik, determined that the clear communication of his intent and the assigning of tasks to his subordinates were the best way to control 
46 Ibid.,
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
48
49
48 Echevarria,
41. 49
50
51
52
53
52
53
Even with subordinates able to make decisions on their own, higher headquarters still needed to provide guidance. The command and control issues of large armies with the technology of the time worried Schlieffen. The commanders of each side could no longer see the entire battlefield, or even a significant portion of it. Instead, commanders would need to rely on the reporting of subordinate commanders to gain situational awareness. The commander would also need to issue orders through radio or telegraph transmissions. 
54
55
56
Reconnaissance requires gaining and maintaining contact with the enemy without 54 Citino, 207. 
55 Ibid.,
192. 56
The doctrine of the Germany Army clearly demonstrated significant aspects of the command culture. The 1908 tactics manual for the Germany Army leading up to World War I, written by Lieutenant General (then Colonel) Wilhelm Balck reflected the preference for attack, mission-type orders, and the challenges of reconnaissance. Balck began the chapter on the attack by stating, The defense may repulse the enemy, but only the attack can annihilate him. The decision as to whether the force is to attack or stand on the defense depends upon the tactical situation and the will of the commander, and not upon numerical superiority, of which one is not aware, as a rule, until after the battle. Determined attacks, again and again repeated, in spite of all failures, are the surest means of gaining victory and of preventing the enemy from becoming aware of his superiority. Only pressing reasons (marked hostile superiority, necessity for awaiting approaching reinforcements, or the failure of an attack), and never favorable terrain conditions, should determine a commander to stand on the defensive. In defense, the eventual assumption of the offense is kept constantly in view. A commander who voluntarily stands on the defensive for the purpose of letting the opponent attack, and then attacks him in turn, reaps only the disadvantages and never the advantages of both the offensive and defensive. 
57
The above passage clearly demonstrates the preference for attack in all but the worst conditions.
In regards to orders, the manual reinforces the concept of Auftragstaktik. Within the chapter on orders, the manual reads, Since leaders change during the course of the combat, the order must ensure cooperation of the component parts of the force by thoroughly explaining the purpose of the fight. The troops have a right to know what the commander expects of them. . . . The commander must demand that no subordinate 'hide' behind an order and that, on the contrary, he act on his own initiative when an order is not received or the situation changes. 
58
Rather than simply allowing a subordinate to make a decision, the doctrine demanded the subordinate do so.
Last, the manual highlights the challenges in infantry reconnaissance saying, "The primary objective in local reconnaissance is to protect a force from surprise." 
59
60
58
Recently, the existence of the Schlieffen Plan became the subject of controversy.
Historian Terence Zuber posited that the Schlieffen plan never existed. 
61
Theses modifications then led to the changes in Germany's execution of the Marne Campaign in August and September 1914 and ultimately Germany's loss in World War I.
Since the appearance of his theory, however, the German archives located in the former East Germany, thought destroyed in a British air raid in 1945, were found at least partially intact. Since the discovery of these archives, the work of historians such as 61 Terence Zuber, Inventing the Schlieffen Plan (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Terence Zuber, The Real German War Plan, 1904-1914 (Stroud: History  Press, 2011). As the world progressed toward the 20th Century and became more and more modern, the leaders of the German Army saw the increased danger in war. In a speech to the Reichstag on 14 May 1890, Moltke predicted the danger of modern war: Gentlemen, if war, which has now for more than ten years been hanging like a sword of Damocles over our heads -if war breaks out, one cannot foresee how long it will last or how it will end. It is the Great Powers of Europe which, armed as they never were before, are now entering the arena against each other. There is not one of these that can be so completely overcome in one, or even in two campaigns that it will be forced to declare itself vanquished or to conclude an onerous peace; not one that will be unable to rise again, even if only after a year, to renew the struggle. Gentlemen, it may be a Seven Years' War, it may be a Thirty Years' War; and woe be to him who sets Europe in flames, who first casts the match into the powder-barrel. 
64
66
67
68
67
68
One of the deployment plans of 1879 included a defense against France in the west and an attack on Russia in the east in coordination with Austria-Hungary. The plan called for six corps of Italian Soldiers to help secure the western border of Germany. 
69
The Next in 1904-1905, Russia fought and lost a costly war against Japan. After this war, Germany saw a considerably weakened Russia that needed to recover and rebuild from its losses in personnel, equipment. German military leaders paid attention to the 
69
77
Schlieffen's memorandum of December 1905 fits within the German command culture in many important ways. First, it aims for a decisive battle to achieve victory as quickly as possible. Second, the plan calls for an attack. Schlieffen drew up this plan within the geo-political situation of the time, but did not concern itself with the reason for the beginning of hostilities. Therefore, regardless of why war began, the German army planned to attack. Third, the plan contained reconnaissance and logistical issues. While the plan contains many instances of contingencies for execution if the French army took certain actions, the memorandum never identifies how the German Army could effectively use reconnaissance to determine any of the French actions. Martin van Creveld's analysis of the plan showed logistical difficulties of the campaign. 
78
79
77
78
79
88
85
86 Citino, 218. 
87
88
Last, the German army built new corps to provided the required personnel for the attack. As stated above, eight corps contained within Schlieffen's memorandum of December 1905 did not exist. Moltke attempted to make up for this deficiency. However, at the outbreak of war, the German army still found itself five corps short of the number called for in the original plan.
The Deployment Plan of 1914/15, the plan Germany executed at the outset of the war, called for seven German armies arrayed along Germany's borders with Belgium, Luxembourg, and France. Two armies, Sixth and Seventh, would defend the German border with France. The center, consisting of Fourth and Fifth Armies, provided the pivot of the attack. The right wing, made up of First, Second, and Third Armies, provided the attack through Belgium to encircle the French and British, if they joined the war on the side of France, armies to complete the annihilation (see figure 
1
89
90
Additionally, even at the army level leaders made multiple decisions every day.
Rather than attempt to cover all of the decisions army commanders made, this chapter will focus on a few pivotal decisions, the reasons for the decisions, and the effects of the 
91 Herwig,
17.
The first decision this thesis will analyze is the determination to place 1st Army under the command of 2nd Army. The order from OHL came after the campaign began, and the armies' headquarters had to adjust to the new command structure during execution. The idea of military organizations adjusting their command structure during execution was not unusual, but the order and the following decision by General von General Alexander von Kluck, the 1st Army commander could not understand the reason for the order stating, No reasons were given for thus unexpectedly placing the flank armies under one commander. The commander of the First Army considered that the measure would limit his powers of command, and that it might apparently have been avoided if timely directions had been sent to both armies. 
93
94
As stated by Kluck, Bülow had the advantage of being centrally located in the right wing. Rather than agreeing that 2nd Army's position in the center of the right wing provided the best location to command from, Kluck argued, It could have been foreseen that the Second Army supported as it was on both flanks, would probably be confronted more especially with tactical problems, whereas the First Army would be faced by a situation pre-eminently strategical in its aspects. 
95
As for Bülow, he only briefly mentions the change in command structure in his memoirs. He states, "For this advance north of the Meuse, the 1st and 2nd Armies and Cavalry Corps No. 2, were placed under my command" in accordance with OHL's order. 
96
94
95
96
97
The third possible reason relates closely to the second. OHL could not feasibly control the actions of seven independent armies. By placing one of the army commanders in overall command of the right wing, OHL could drastically reduce its span of control.
Rather than needing three separate orders for the right wing, OHL could instead issue one order. Bülow could then give the separate orders to 1st and 3rd Armies and reduce the amount of time coordinating through OHL. 
97
The last possible reason for OHL's decision to place Bülow in charge could be his standing as a General Staff officer. Kluck, unlike most of the other army commanders had not served as a General Staff officer. OHL may have felt more comfortable with a General Staff officer in command, being a known quanitity.
Upon receiving the order placing 1st and 3rd Armies under his command, Bülow decided to remain the commander of 2nd Army. Thus, he attempted to command his own army and also coordinate the actions of the other two armies rather than becoming an "army group"
98
This decision could lead Bülow to become too involved in 1st Army's operations. Also, he could become focused on his army and issue orders to 1st Army that were unattainable. First, Bülow began issuing orders directly to corps within 1st Army. For example, on 24 August, Bülow ordered, "The IX. Corps will advance immediately west of Maubeuge to outflank the enemy's left wing; the III. Corps will move in echelon behing the IX. Corps and confirm its movements."
99
As for unattainable orders for 1st Army, Bülow ordered them to advance further than possible on 20 August, likely due to his lack of knowledge on 1st Armies situation. Army. Bülow went as far as declaring "total victory" against the French 5th Army. Kluck also declared 1st Army had "swept all enemy forces from the field." 
101
Instead, the Germans desired the encirclement of the entire French army, as well as the BEF if they intervened.
Kluck earlier had wanted to continue southwest to find the flank of French and make contact with BEF. He saw his primary concern to be the finding of the Entente forces' left flank and enveloping it. Kluck tried to continue further southwest on 22
August, but Bülow overruled him. Bülow's 2nd Army could not maintain contact with both 1st Army on its right and 3rd Army on its left if 1st Army continued to stretch the lines further and further.
On the evening of 28 August, Kluck's headquarters received directions from OHL which stated in part, "The strong resistance which is expected to be met on the Aisne and later on the Marne may necessitate a wheel inwards of the Armies from a south-westerly As a result of Kluck's decision to move east of Paris, he maintained contact with both friendly and enemy elements. Bülow and Hausen could stop stretching their lines to maintain contact with 1st Army. Kluck knew the enemy in front of his army was British and the flank of the Entente forces. The day after his order to change direction he stated, "The forces in front of the First Army, now known to be British, had retired . . . and the western flank of the French presumably through Soissons in a southerly direction." 
104
He saw no indication that enemy forces were extending their lines further west or moving forces to strike his flank.
Logistically, he did not simplify the situation, but Kluck managed to prevent making logistics significantly more difficult. In his memoirs, Kluck discusses the logistics of the operation saying, As a result of accumulated experience, helped by imagination, it gradually became clear to all that the constant preparedness of the Army and the maintenance of its strength depended to a very great extent on the efficiency and reliability of its trains and supply columns." 
105
Kluck exposed his flank to Paris. However, when Kluck made the decision, Joffre
had not yet formed 6th Army nor did he have any way of knowing 6th Army could be forming. Kluck instead focused on finding the flank of the French and British forces that existed. Kluck had no way to know that Joffre would form 6th Army in Paris and attack Thus the rearward echeloning of the 1st German Army for the security of the right Army flank ordered by [OHL] had resulted in a forward movement. In addition to this, the left flank corps of the 1st Army, instead of a southerly, was given a strictly southeast direction, insuch a manner, that the left flank corps (the 9th), placed itself completely in front of the [2nd Army] right flank corps (the 7th).
This was very annoying to the the 2nd German Army , as due to this, the 2nd Army was also crowded in another direction which it considered to not be correct. 
111
Bülow went on to discuss the effects of the overlap. The overlap between the left flank of 1st Army and the right flank of 2nd Army slowed his movement to prevent the two corps becoming entangled (see figure 
3
112
Ferte,
Milon,
and Crouy.' 116
4
As in any operation, the headquarters needed an accurate understanding of the situation. With OHL located in Luxembourg and the transmission times lagging up to 20 hours, it had a delayed picture at best. Both the order on 2 September directing 1st Army to echelon behind 2nd Army while 1st Army was a day's march ahead and the 4 September order telling both 1st and 2nd Armies to continue oriented west demonstrate OHL's lack of situational understanding. Bülow himself stated that OHL needed to deconflict that actions of 1st and 2nd Army.
Additionally, rather than coordinate the actions of 1st and 2nd Armies, OHL stood silent in many cases. Auftragstaktik allowed the subordinate to make decisions based off of the situation, but the headquarters still needed to provide some guidance.
Next, the culture of the attack showed in the forming of the gap between 1st and 2nd Army. Kluck favored attacking southeast rather than transition to flank security. His army was in contact with the enemy and he continued to try to attack the enemy's flank.
Bülow lamented 1st Army's turn southeast but stated, "1st Army also ordered for September 5, the further advance of all its corps. The enemy was to be attacked wherever found."
117
118
Just after noon on 8 September, Hentsch departed OHL to visit the armies of the right wing, including 5th through 1st Armies. At 5th, 4th, and 3rd Armies, he found no need for concern. In fact, he added to a report from 3rd Army to OHL "Situation and outlook is absolutely favorable to the Third Army."
119
120
121
The next day, Hentsch arrived at 1st Army's headquarters. He met with Kuhl, the chief of staff, and explained the situation. Protocol withinin the German army maintained that a general staff officer from OHL report to the General Staff of the field army, not the commander. In fact, he reported to each army's General Staff before meeting with the commander. Kuhl and Hentsch knew each other well due to Hentsch working for Kuhl in How could this happen? How could a staff lieutenant colonel order the withdrawal of multiple field armies and, in effect, the entire campaign? First, Hentsch represented more than a simple messenger from OHL. He had the ability and authority to evaluate the situation, make a decision, and implement that decision without needing to call back to OHL. Although Kuhl may have argued his opinion, Hentsch won out.
At first sight, OHL's decision to send an officer directly to field armies to instruct them what to do did not look like decentralized execution. However, Moltke authorized Hentsch, or at least Hentsch felt as though he had been, to make and implement decisions. He could evaluate the situation, determine what best to do, and implement that course of action. He made what he knew was a momentous decision and implemented it immediately. The empowerment of subordinates to make the proper decision, including staff officers, fit directly within the command culture of the German army.
Less important than Moltke's intention with Hentsch was the reactions the armies had to Hentsch. Whether or not Hentsch really had been authorized to make the decision, he felt Moltke had directed him to do just that. Not only did the armies follow the decisions of Hentsch, but they did so without so much as calling OHL on the radio or sending a representative back to OHL to argue the point. Even though 1st Army may not have had the time to do such a thing, 2nd Army did. Hentsch stayed the night at 2nd Army's headquarters and could have sent a car or even an airplane back to OHL. Also within the command culture, Hentsch's status as a General Staff officer would earn him some instant credibility. Each of the armies could reasonably know who Hentsch was before his arrival, but he clearly operated within the General Staff system.
As stated earlier, Hentsch reported first to the armies' chiefs of staff before possibly talking to the commander. His discussions about the possibility of retreat took place with both Bülow and Lauenstein present in 2nd Army headquarters and with Kuhl alone at 1st
Army. An officer not on the General Staff could not have influenced the situation in the ways Hentsch did.
Given the long developed Deployment Plan of 1914/15, the German army executed the Marne Campaign within its command culture with decentralized execution included in that culture. The culture of the attack, use of initiative by subordinates, mission type orders and the particular nature of the German General Staff all shaped the Marne Campaign.
First, the culture of attack could be seen in 1st Army's reaction to the threat from its right flank. Instead of moving away from Paris and linking in with 2nd Army's right flank, Kluck instead attacked toward the French 6th Army. He could have prevented the gap on the Marne, but doing so would have kept him from an attempt to attack and defeat the French 6th Army.
Next, the German army executed using initiative as evidenced by the actions of Kluck and Hentsch. Kluck made the decision to turn the entire German right wing to the east of Paris rather than continuing around to the west. He understood the enemy forces to be most important and adjusted 1st Army's direction in accordance with that understanding. Hentsch took the understanding he had of his instructions and carried them out as he saw fit. When he found a situation that confronted him with a hard decision, he made the decision instead of calling back for guidance from OHL. However, earlier in the campaign, OHL placed 1st Army under the command of 2nd Army. Bülow interfered with Kluck's initiative by directing the movement of individual corps under Kluck's command. This order limited Kluck's option and hampered his ability to react to unforeseen possibilities.
All through the operation, the German army used mission type orders. Rather than give long instructions, units used short direct orders to tell their subordinates what to do.
The orders did not direct how to do the dictated task. At times the German army failed, however, at creating a clear understanding across its field armies in those orders. For example, Kluck and Bülow saw the order of 4 September in different ways. Their reactions caused confusion amongst their formations. Mission type orders required shared understanding and this order caused the opposite.
Last, the emphasis of the General Staff officer could scarcely have been clearer.
One General Staff lieutenant colonel travelled to five different armies in two days and made a pivotal decision. He made that decision after conferring with fellow General Staff officers rather than primarily with commanders. The armies followed the instructions given by that General Staff officer rather than push him aside. Hentsch's decision ended the German attack of the Marne Campaign, but preserved the German right wing to continue fighting later. In addition to his doubts and failure to provide guidance, Moltke's physical location also likely contributed to the failure of the campaign. In contrast to Joffre, who moved around the battlefield constantly in order to maintain awareness, Moltke stayed in the headquarters in Germany and later Luxembourg. By staying away from the lines, Moltke lost awareness of the current conditions along the front and thus, in turn, restricted any awarenes of the situation to only the reports from the armies. 
126
Besides Moltke, the selection of key personnel caused friction between commanders and general staff officers within the armies. The appointment of officers to positions other than the Chief of General Staff stayed within the purview of the Military Cabinet. This power extended to the placement of general staff officers within the armies.
The Chief of the General Staff would also make his recommendations to the Kaiser, however, and the Kaiser made the final decisions. 
127
128
The next factor which may have prevented successful execution of the Marne Campaign relates to span of control. At the initiation of World War I, OHL directly commanded eight separate field armies, seven in the west and one in the east. The large number of separate formations spread over hundreds of kilometers would make adequate control over these formations extremely difficult, even with today's communication equipment.
OHL may have realized the difficulty of synchronizing so many subordinate elements. As analyzed in the execution of the campaign, OHL placed 1st Army under the command of the 2nd Army commander, Bülow, from 17 to 28 August. This decision enabled a more unified command structure for the right wing of the attack, even though Bülow used that command relationship to micromanage the corps of 1st Army. Had OHL recognized the span of control issues during the planning phase, it could have instituted separate army group commanders of the the right wing, the center armies, and the left wing. This decision would have prevented the need for the OHL to maintain awareness of the seven separate armies along the western front while still commanding the army in the east fighting the Russians. As evidence of the need to reduce the span of control on the Western Front, OHL created the echelon of army group no later than 15 August 1915 under Crown Prince Wilhelm. 
129
The proper execution of decentralized execution through Auftragstaktik required that all subordinate elements understand their purpose within the assigned missions. If an order provided a clear purpose, the subordinate leader could adjust to changing situations while still contributing to the overall purpose. Without a clear purpose, the orders hinder the ability of subordinate leaders to make the best decisions in accordance with the intent. OHL's order on 5 September provided a great example of an order that lacked clarity of purpose for the subordinate elements. Kluck viewed the most important portion of the order to be the push of the British and French forces southeast, away from Paris.
Bülow, however, found the assignment of 1st Army as flank security of the right wing to be the most important portion of the same order. An army that relied on subordinates understanding their purposes needed to ensure in its orders exactly what the purposes were at the time. Orders that lack clear, unmistakeable guidance can cause confusion and desynchronize operations more than no order at all.
As with any method of command, communication plays a vital role. The subordinate requires guidance from the higher headquarters and the higher headquarters requires accurate reporting of the situation from the subordinate. The combination of the two helps to synchronize operations to best achieve the assigned mission. Clear understanding of purpose allows the subordinate to better react to changing situations.
Unclear purpose as well as enemy action only serve to make the mission even more chaotic. The technology at the time, particularly in the realm of communications, inhibited the ability of OHL to receive reports and issue orders in a timely manner.
First, the time required for an order to travel from sender to receiver inhibited communications. Due to the technological constraints of the time, each field army possessed only one radio set. All other communication to and from each army travelled through other methods including telegraph. The limited number of radio sets hampered effective passage of information considering each army contended with volume of traffic and range issues. By only having one radio set, armies had difficulty being able to relay to adjacent units and OHL all of the needed information and receiving updates from OHL. Kluck acknowledged this drawback saying in his memoirs, Constant touch could be maintained with the Second Army, both at the front and between the two headquarters; but with the Supreme Command [OHL] it was otherwise; through the breakdown of close communication, their orders to the rapidly moving First Army, which, during its wheel on the extreme flank of the Armies, had by far the greatest distance to cover, did not arrive till after the most important events had already begun. 
130
131
The next aspect of communication unrelated to technology, but the content of the messages sent using that technology. Decentralized execution requires a unit to relay to both its adjacent units and higher headquarters the situation in its area. By doing so, all elements maintain awareness. When reports did not accurately convey the situation, the understanding across the entire front broke down.
The armies at least partially inflated the success of their operations with 2nd Army declaring "total victory" over the French 5th Army and 1st Army declaring it had "swept all opposing forces from the field of battle" on 30 August and 31 August respectively. 
132
Due to the lack of an accurate understanding of the situation, OHL ordered the movement of two entire corps from the decisive right wing east toward Russia on 26 August. Based off of the reports OHL received, it seems to have have felt that the right wing neared inevitable victory while the Eastern Front urgently needed the troops.
Another example related to a breakdown of understanding again comes from the order of 5 September. OHL ordered 1st Army to echelon behind 2nd Army when 1st Army was located a full day of marching ahead of 2nd. The situation on the ground made execution of the order impractical at best.
In regards to lack of understanding, communications left the separate army commanders unaware of the situation with the other armies along the front. Kluck requested information from OHL on 3 September sending, "The First Army requests to be informed of the situation of the other Armies, whose reports of decisive victories have so far been frequently followed by appeals for support."
133
Later, on 6 September, Kluck received a report from OHL explaining the situation along the front "to the amazement of First Army Headquarters, who believed all the armies to be advancing victoriously."
134
The culture of attack also inhibited the execution of decentralized execution. For example, with a 50 km gap between 1st and 2nd Armies, Kluck attacked west toward Paris enlarging the gap even more rather than moving east to regain contact with Bülow and 2nd Army. Why would Kluck do such a thing? Possibly, Kluck relied on the concept of finding the enemy and attacking him wherever he was. He recorded his thoughts, saying, "Should the pursuit be stopped, he [the French and British] would be able to halt and regain freedom of maneuver, as well as an offensive spirit." 
135
Aufmarsch. The concept of a detailed deployment plan that enabled the German Army to quickly assemble, equip, and transport its forces to assigned positions for the beginning of military operations.
Auftragstaktik. The German Army command methodology by which the army could react better to changing battlefield conditions through the use of mission-type orders to create shared understanding and allow disciplined intitative.
Command Culture. The institutional environment within which a commander operates and the accepted norms wherein the commander makes decisions Decentralized Execution. Delegation of execution authority to subordinate commanders.
getrennter Heeresteile. The concept of keeping armies on different routes and only converging to execute the desired attack.
Kesselschlacht. Literally translated as "cauldron battle" where German Army forces aimed to completely surround enemies to then destroy them.
Umgehung. The concept of bypass or encirclement where German Army forces would encircle the enemy to destroy them.
Antulio J. Echevarria II, After Clausewitz (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2000),
38-42.3 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Washington, DC: U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2010, amended 15 August 2014), 66.
Jörg Muth, Command Culture (Denton, TX: University of North Texas Press, 2011), 8.
Robert Citino, The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 2005), 2.
Ibid., 159.   
Arden Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen and Prussian War Planning (Providence, RI:  Berg Publishers, 1993), 320.
Gerhard Ritter, The Schlieffen Plan: Critique of a Myth, trans. Andrew and Eva Wilson (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1979), 17.
Annika Mombauer, "German War Plans," in War Planning 1914, ed. Richard  F. Hamilton and Holger H. Herwig (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 55- 63.   
Citino, 151.    
Martin van Creveld, Supplying War (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Citino, 2.   
Isabel V. Hull, Absolute Destruction: Military Culture and Practices of War in Imperial Germany (Ithica, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005), 2.
Gerhard Ritter, The Sword and the Scepter The Problem of Militarism in Germany, Volume II: The European Powers and the Wilhelminian Empire, 1890-1914 (Miami: University of Miami Press,
1970), 95.19  Charles Edward White, The Enlightened Soldier: Scharnhorst and the'Militarische Gesellschaft' in Berlin, 1801-1805 (Ann Arbor: University Microfilms  International, 1987), 255.   
Hew Strachan, European Armies and the Conduct of War (Winchester, MA: George Allen and Unwin, 1983), 65.
Walter Görlitz, History of the German General Staff, 1657-1945, trans. Brian  Battershaw (New York: Preager, 1953), 92.    
Ritter, The Sword and the Scepter, 102.   
Ibid., 91.    
Ibid., 97.    
Ibid., 146.   
Echevarria,[33][34][35][36][37][38] 
Ibid.   
Wilhelm Balck, Tactics vol. 1: Introduction and Formal Tactics of Infantry,  trans. Walter Krueger (Fort Leavenworth: U.S. Cavalry Association, 1915), 329.   
Herwig,[327][328][329][330][331] 
Mombauer, 48.   
Mombauer, 65.   
Michael S. Neiberg, Fighting the Great War: A Global History (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005), 12.
Kluck,[21][22] 
German Army doctrine at the time did not contain the echelon of army group. By placing Bülow in command of the entire right wing, OHL effectively used the concept though.
Kluck, 52.   
Herwig, 195.   
Ibid., 88.    
Ibid., 85.   
Ibid., 92.    
Ibid., 94.   
Bülow, 22.    
Ibid., 23.   
Kluck, 105.   
Ibid., 107.
Ibid., 121.   
Bülow, 23.   
Ibid., 23.   
Herwig, 272.   
Max von Hausen, Memoirs of the Marne Campaign, trans. John B. Murphy, Unpublished, 256.
Herwig,[273][274] 
Bülow, 27.   
Frank Bucholz, Janet Robinson, and  Joe Robinson, The Great War Dawning: Germany and its Army at the Start of World War I (Vienna: Verlag Militaria, 2013), 116.
Herwig,[118][119] 
"Die deutschen Heeresgruppen Teil 1, Erster Weltkrieg" Das Bundesarchiv, last modified June 15, 2013, accessed November 17, 2014, https://www.bundesarchiv.de/ oeffentlichkeitsarbeit/bilder_dokumente/01077/index-4.html.de.
Correlli Barnett, The Swordbearers: Supreme Command in the First World  War (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1975), 67.
Herwig, 195.   
Kluck,[98][99] 
Ibid.,107.   
Ibid., 106.   
I would like to thank my committee, 
Dr. Scott Stephenson
LTC Mark Bailey
Mr. Bob Salvatorelli
Their mentoring has developed me more than they will ever know. I would also like to thank 
Dr Dean Nowowiejski
Art of War scholar peers
Dr. Nowowiejski
Dr Robert J Smith
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
smaller conflicts such as the Russo-Japanese War, leading up to World War I. The idea of the leadership being taken by surprise with developments of modern war is untrue. 
70
71
Staff the concept of the battle of annihilation. 
72
71 Mombauer,
52. 72
Schlieffen's memorandum of 1905 called for massing the German Army to the west and attacking through Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands to bypass France's prepared defenses. Schlieffen acknowledged the plan violated the neutrality of all three countries but deemed the violation as militarily necessary. Schlieffen stated, "An offensive which seeks to wheel round Verdun must not shrink from violating the neutrality of Belgium as well as of Luxembourg." 
73
74
75
76
First, the General Staff believed Russia would need at least 40 days to mobilize. Next, 
73
74
75
76
In relation to decentralized execution, Kluck felt that Bülow infringed upon his army's ability to accomplish the mission. As the above quotes show, Kluck viewed Bülow as a peer and not a superior. By taking units away from him at a moment's notice and not always in situations that warranted it, Kluck may have felt that Bülow meddled in the execution of his mission, which he felt was had strategic implications as compared to Bülow's tactical.
In addition, Auftragstaktik requires each commander to understand where his organization fits into the overall plan. Kluck clearly felt his army was the main effort with Bülow simply staying with his flank to form the continuous German line. Bülow, now in command of all three armies could easily see how he could be the main effort considering OHL put him in command. Without clarification from OHL on the purpose of each army, both army commanders could feel they were the main effort. This confusion is the exact reason units' roles in the overall plan were important. Kluck saw his units being pulled away, and Bülow felt he had every right to do so. 
100
102 Kluck, 76.  his flank. Instead, Kluck understood the importance of maintaining the overall tempo of the operation as it attempted to encircle the French and British Armies. To inform Kluck of any possible attack from the east, he ordered II Cavalry Corps, Marwitz's corps, on 1 September to "remain on the right flank of the Army, and recconitre towards the north and northeast fronts of Paris and along the right bank of the Oise." 
106
Due to the situation involving the location of the French and British armies along with the results of Kluck's earlier decision to turn south versus continue southwest, OHL sent the following order on the night of 2 September, "The intention is to drive the French in a south-easterly direction from Paris. The First Army will follow in echelon behind the Second Army and will be responsible for the flank protection of the Armies." 107 While this ordered seemed to make sense to OHL, the positions of 1st and 2nd
Armies complicated the matter. When Kluck and Bülow received the order, 1st Army found itself one day's march ahead of 2nd Army. Therefore, Kluck needed to decide which part of OHL's order was most important. He made his understanding clear in his memoirs by stating, "On the 3rd September the IX. and III. Corps were ordered to move in accordance with the instructions contained in the first sentence of the above-mentioned wireless order of the Supreme Command." 108 Based off his statement, Kluck felt the need to force the British and French southeat of Paris to be his main purpose. This purpose clearly matched his previous efforts to find the enemy's flank and envelop it. Kluck explained his reason for continuing forward as if [1st Army] halted for two days so as to get in echelon behind the Second Army, the enemy's Higher Command would regain the complete freedom of action of which it had been deprived. Should the First Army hold back, the great success for which the Supreme Command was confidently striving by 'forcing the enemy in a south-easterly direction' could no longer be hoped for. 
109
Reserve Corps, reinforced by a cavalry division from 2nd Cavalry Corps, 2nd Corps and a brigade of infantry expected to arrive from Brussels to perform flank security. 
110
Bülow, on the other hand, saw the second sentence of the order as the primary intent. He viewed Kluck's role as flank security as key. In his memoirs on the campaign he stated, 108 Ibid., 96.
109 Ibid., 97. 
110
the OHL Third Section (intelligence) just before the war. 
122
124
The order from Hentsch included the following:
All the armies are to be moved back. . . . The First Army must therefore also retire in the direction [northeast]." Kluck went on to note that Hentsch himself drew the new lines for the armies on the map at 1st Army's headquarters. Hentsch even went as far as "emphasiz[ing] the fact that these directions were to remain regardless of any other communications that might arrive and that he had full powers. 
125
122 
Herwig,
270. 123
124
Kluck,
137. 125
In conclusion, the concept of decentralized execution, itself developed due to the inevitability of changing situations in war, proved difficult to execute effectively on the modern battlefield. The German Army could have effectively executed the campaign in a decentralized fashion, but the pitfalls discussed above needed to be addressed during 136 Herwig, 310-311.  76   The German Army, the innovators of the concept of decentralized execution codified in Auftragstaktik, failed to effectively implement it. In fact decentralized execution added confusion and desynchronized the German attack. After more than 50 years of evolution, the areas discussed above proved too difficult. Only through reconciling the issues of key leader appointment, span of control, clarity of purpose in orders, communications technology, situational understanding, and a culture of attack could the German Army effectively execute decentralized execution through
Auftragstaktik.