# ID: 5fc916a9d9704ce381fd4e4fb57a3eb6
# Title: Indo-US Relations for a Symbiotic World Order
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
India and the US have had rather inconsistent relationship, in spite of being leading democracies in the world. Post 9/11 however, the relationship between India and the US has improved significantly but, irritants remain. The thesis looks at the possibility of cooperation between both the countries to build a world order that is symbiotic and beneficial to both. The research is extremely significant as India starts asserting itself on the world stage and the US faces the leadership challenge from other emerging powers of the world.
India and the US have had rather inconsistent relationship, in spite of being leading democracies in the world. Post 9/11 however, the relationship between India and the US has improved significantly but, irritants remain. The thesis looks at the possibility of cooperation between both the countries to build a world order that is symbiotic and beneficial to both. The research is extremely significant as India starts asserting itself on the world stage and the US faces the leadership challenge from other emerging powers of the world.
The thesis uses historical representation and trend analysis for researching the topic. This thesis will analyze the national interests of India and the US to understand the congruence and conflict of national interests. The thesis will also consider the past and present relationship of India and the US and their strategic behavior in international politics. Based on the results and contextualizing the evolving world order, the thesis will contemplate the options for cooperation and progression of relationship between India and the US. The thesis will conclude proposing the most beneficial option.
The thesis uses historical representation and trend analysis for researching the topic. This thesis will analyze the national interests of India and the US to understand the congruence and conflict of national interests. The thesis will also consider the past and present relationship of India and the US and their strategic behavior in international politics. Based on the results and contextualizing the evolving world order, the thesis will contemplate the options for cooperation and progression of relationship between India and the US. The thesis will conclude proposing the most beneficial option. iv ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I take this opportunity to convey my wholehearted gratitude to everyone who assisted, guided and motivated me to complete the thesis. This thesis is my first academic endeavor on a topic which is close to my heart and has tremendous strategic influence on my profession. India is also being termed as a lynchpin in the pivot to Asia-Pacific.
I thank my thesis committee for the invaluable time, effort and faith they invested in me. I revere, Dr Bjorge, who has been instrumental in motivating, guiding, refining and critically examining my thesis. I convey my gratitude to Dr Baab and LTCOL Pralat, who have provided their valuable guidance and constructive criticism. Dr Hernandez was instrumental in building confidence for defense of the thesis. This thesis would not have been complete without the efforts of Ms. Venita Krueger, who worked very patiently with me to help format my thesis. I sincerely convey my gratitude to Librarians at the CARL library, who went beyond their call to provide me research material for the thesis.
I also thank all the instructors and students SG 3A of providing me inputs for the thesis. My IMS friends and IMSD faculty also enriched me with their valuable opinion and insight. Lastly, I thank my wife and daughter, who were extremely patient and tolerant with me.         
After a decade of war, we are developing a new defense strategy -a central feature of which is a "rebalancing" towards the Asia-Pacific region. In particular, we will expand our military partnership and our presence in the arc extending from the Western Pacific and East Asia into the Indian Ocean region and South Asia. Defense cooperation with India is a linchpin in this strategy. India is one of the largest and most dynamic countries in the region and the world, with one of the most capable militaries. India also shares with the United States a strong commitment to a set of principles that help maintain international security and prosperity.
1
The aim of this thesis was to study the India-US relations through a prism of strategic confluence of national interest, with a backdrop of history, and present relations while presenting recommendations for the future. Indo-US relations have seen all possible contours of relationship. They have waxed and waned through the ages, affected by the geopolitical realities and priorities of both the nations. However, never before has the need been felt for both the nations to come together and forge a robust relationship in order to stabilize the world order, which will be beneficial to both the nations.
A strong Indo-US relationship would promote growth of India's leadership on a global stage and for the US it could well be game changer in the balance of power in Asia and Africa. Whereas India could provide the manpower, market and opportunities to the US multinational companies, the US could provide India with FDI (foreign direct investment) and technology to help India's sagging infrastructure and manufacturing structure. India could contribute to a balance of power in the Asia-Pacific region, preventing the hegemony of any particular nation, while at the same time US could aid the growth and development of India's defense capabilities. Both countries possess complimentary capabilities which closer relations could exploit and weaknesses that could be mitigated up, by working together.
Even though various think tanks both in the US and India recommend a strategic alliances between the countries, there are still a number of issues that are impeding the relationship's progress. These issues range from the clash of commercial interests to clashes on geopolitical priorities. In spite of all these differences, the commonality of values, culture, and the democratic ideals still binds the nations together.
The US has a number of pressing issues to handle, from the Ukraine crisis, the ISIS crisis, the exploding Ebola pandemic, climate change to preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to countries such as Iran and North Korea. It has to handle them against the backdrop of a struggling, but reviving economy, challenges to its leadership in Asia-Pacific region, a declining budget for its armed forces, declining NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) capabilities and the rise of the rest of the world.
It may not be true to assert that US power is declining, but, it would be prudent to observe that the rise of the rest of world has remarkably altered and is altering the global balance of power. Whereas at one time when the US could easily take unilateral action against an erring state, now it has to build up a "coalition of the willing." What is distinctly clear is the relative decline of traditional US allies, due to rise of other powers.
As globalization and interdependency forces nations to build new alliances and pacts, traditional alliances and pacts are under stress. If this trend continues then it can be predicted that the US may find it difficult in the times ahead to safeguard its national interests. Hence, pragmatically US has to seek partnership with other nations that could help her retain global leadership in the long term India is predicted to be a future global center of power for some time. However, India faces huge daunting tasks at home before becoming a great power. Home to more than 1.4 billion people, it has its own range of complex and interdependent problems.
Scarce capital, lack of energy resources, an unstable neighborhood, the threat of terrorism and the hegemonic ambitions of China are big challenges for India. India will have to overcome these challenges to develop the country from the present developing status to developed status. India, in spite of being the third largest economy by Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), is home to one third of world's poor. India desperately needs capital, technology and a stable balance of power in the Asian region.
In this context, whether or not India and the US could come together as strategic
partners is an open question. This thesis debates this issue, researching the facts and based on the facts and assumptions lays out a possible roadmap for the future. The thesis carries out research on the following questions to seek an outline for the roadmap.
Primary Question
Can India and the US form an alliance for a symbiotically beneficial world order? Secondary Questions 1. What are the national interests of a state?
2. What are the national interests of the US? 3 3. What are the national interests of India?
4. Where do the Indian and the US national interests coincide and collide?
5. How have the US -India relations evolved?
6. What is the likely future world order?
7. Why do the US and India need each other?
8. What are the options for cooperation between the US and India?
9. What are the broad steps for collaboration for India and the US?
Democracy forms the bedrock of an alliance between both the US and India.
Some theorize that democracies never collide and are generally accommodative of each other. It is a fact the world's most powerful democracy, the US and the world's largest democracy, India, almost came close to a conflict in 1971 during the Indo-Pak war.
However, it is argued that, the consequences of, attacking a democracy like India prevented the conflict. Based on the strategic guidance issued by the President of US, it is assumed that the US will endeavor to keep it leadership role and preeminence of power for a foreseeable future. The thesis also assumes that India, in its quest to find its rightful place on the world stage does not seek to upset the status of current world order. Her endeavors are aligned to persuading the world powers to accommodate India within the world order. It is assumed that the relations between the US and India will have some priorities and perceptions, but that in the long term the relationship will have more commonalities than differences. The relationship is assumed to be based on a very broad agenda rather than on narrow short-term tactical gains.
There are certain definitions which the readers should have grasp of in order to understand the thesis work. These definitions particularly relate to international relations theory.
City on a hill: Matthew 5:14-15, 14 "You are the light of the world. A town built on a hill cannot be hidden. Neither do people light a lamp and put it under a bowl. Instead they put it on its stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house. Based on this, Puritan John Winthrop's speech brought this tern to the American folklore, wherein Unites States of America is considered as a guiding light for the entire world. (American exceptionalism)
Coalition of the willing: The term coalition of the willing is a post-1990 political phrase used to describe collective participants in military interventions that fall outside of United Nations peacekeeping operations. It has existed in the political science/international relations literature at least since UN peacekeeping operations began to run into complications in 1993-94, and alternatives began to be considered.
Developed country: The term developed country is used to describe countries that have a high level of development according to some criteria. Philosophy. According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the term has two distinct definitions in modern English. It is defined either as a political doctrine that all people should be treated as equals and have the same political, economic, social, and civil rights or as a social philosophy advocating the removal of economic inequalities among people or the decentralization of power.
Jus ad Bellum: Jus (or ius) ad bellum is the title given to the branch of law that defines the legitimate reasons a state may engage in war and focuses on certain criteria that render a war just. The principal modern legal source of jus ad bellum derives from the Charter of the United Nations, which declares in Article 2: "All members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations"
Jus in Bello: Jus in Bello, by contrast, is the set of laws that come into effect once a war has begun. Its purpose is to regulate how wars are fought, without prejudice to the reasons of how or why they had begun.
Laissez-fair: the theory or system of government that upholds the autonomous character of the economic order, believing that government should intervene as little as possible in the direction of economic affairs. Numerous theories explain world order, the most popular are: balance of power, bipolarity, multi-polarity, and hegemony.
The thesis has a huge scope for research, studies, and interpretation. However, the paucity of time is a big limitation for the research. The resources involved in the form of books, official literature are exhaustive from the US perspective, however the Indian perspective is, especially the official one from the government, is restricted. Hence every possible use of literature available from the speeches of leaders is made of to cover the unavailability of official documents. The research has been conducted with utmost neutrality, keeping in mind the likely bias of the research by the researcher. Another limitation is the dynamism involved in the US-India relations, wherein the issues that hinder the growth of relationship are sorted out by both the countries dynamically, however, the issues covered in the thesis are up to date till September 2014. The US-India relationship often finds expression in strong rhetoric, but the ground realities do not match the rhetoric. Hence a deliberate attempt has been made to differentiate between rhetoric and reality on ground.
While evaluating the relations between India and US, the DIME 2 model has been used. The DIME model provides clarity on the national interest, convergence of national interest, and also conflict of national interests. The articulation of the factors within the DIME model reflects the material in the literature cited. The thesis also uses the ends, 
2
The thesis, as stated earlier has a very broad scope because of the complexities and number of stakeholders involved. It is not qualitatively possible for the thesis to cover the entire gamut of factors and actors affecting the relationship. In order to limit the scope of the thesis, and focus primarily on the viability of developing the US-India relationship, certain actors and factors received limited consideration.
Pakistan has been limited as a factor from study. The reason for doing so is, dehyphenation 4 of US policy on India and Pakistan and also the realization on the India's part about the need to overcome the regional barriers in order to become a world player.
3 Ends are the objectives pursued, means are the resources committed to achieve objectives, and ways are how those resources are organized and applied to achieve the desired objectives. D. Robert Worley, "Afghanistan: The Ends, Ways, and Means," The The World Post, October 22, 2012, accessed October 29, 2014, http://www.huffington post.com/d-robert-worley/afghanistan-ends-ways-means_b_1989257.html. 
4
The US-India relationship is often related to their relationship with China. China is an important factor in the calculus. However, the complexities involved in discussing the role of China from the both Indian and US viewpoints would enlarge the scope of the thesis considerably; hence China as a factor has been limited. The important issues involving China that affect both India and US have been covered to provide depth. The aim of the thesis is not to present a research which symbolizes a containment of China policy. The US-India relationship is much broader than that. It is strategic in nature.
Though China occupies a substantial part of it, there are numerous other areas of cooperation and coordination.
Indian relations with Russia and Iran have an impact on the relationship. However, both the US and India have evolved their relations to understand the necessity and pragmatism in Indian context. Hence, keeping in mind this understanding, these relations have been delimitated from the scope of this thesis.
The study of Indo-US relations is significant for the study of the Asia-Pacific region. Indo-US relations have the potential and high likelihood of changing the evolving dynamics of the Asia-Pacific region. For the members of the armed forces, of both the countries, this thesis provides a guide as to what is at stake for both the countries. It also provides a glimpse into the strategic behavior of both the counties. Members of both the armed forces can understand the logic behind the numerous exercises which both counties undertake annually. This understanding will forge deeper bonds and increase the interoperability, cultural awareness and keenness to understand each other's stated stand on various issues.
For the students of international relations this thesis provides an understanding of the necessity for productive strategic relations between both the countries. Apart from this, it also provides an insight into the deterrents that are hampering the growth. The thesis also fairly covers the emerging trends in the international order from the US and Indian perspective.
The thesis is also an evolutionary step for those who want to undertake further research on this topic. Further research can be conducted on the possible effects of the factors that have been delimited from this thesis.
The aim of the thesis is to determine whether it is possible for India and US to come together and forge a close strategic relationship. It delves into the national interest domain to research on the convergence and conflict of the national interests of both the countries. Further, the thesis also researches the current and likely future trends in the world order and their impact on India and the US. Finally it researches the options for growth of Indo-US relations, keeping in mind the ground realities and conflicts of interest.
The thesis researches the topic from a variety of sources to include the literature available in form of books, newspapers, the reports of the think tanks, previous research on this topic, and the official documents available. The next chapter deals with the review of the literature available on the topic. Introduction US-India relations have evolved with the passage of time. In spite of being leading democracies in the world, relations between the countries have been fraught with a number of difficulties. The world is becoming more multipolar and the dynamics of geopolitics are changing. The US is finding it increasingly difficult to get traditional allies to agree on what it considers challenge to world peace and prosperity. Accordingly, the US is trying to change its strategic behavior of being a hegemonic power to one which builds coalitions of the willing for specific causes. But even these coalition are under strain because of multiple factors which includes geopolitical constraints, economic problems, and convincing the citizens of various countries that the coalition objectives will benefit them.
India, which during Cold War followed the policy of non-alignment and Panchsheel, is finding itself out of step with the current international order. It potential to rise as a world leader has been mostly wishful thinking and rhetoric. Part of this problem has been that India was not able to reap the benefits of any alliance with world superpowers during the Cold War and later. Her idealistic foreign policy has not paid major dividends. As India faces the daunting tasks of reviving its economy, uplifting its poor population, deterring an increasingly assertive China, and facing a hostile extreme neighborhood , the foreign policy and strategic thinking of India require a new look.
This thesis, examines the potential for partnership between India and the US. It enquires whether or not, India and the US, can come together to forge a strategic alliance that overcomes the common challenges and helps establish a favorable world order beneficial to both of them. The research therefore focusses on the national interests, priorities, and strategic behavior of both the countries.
This chapter provides information about the literature on this topic that is available and the research that has been conducted. The chapter is organized on the basis of the primary and secondary questions that have been articulated in the Chapter 1:
Introduction of this thesis. The literature review briefly describes and critiques the literature that has been written by various authors on the primary and secondary questions. The literature review begins with the purpose of understanding national interest National Interest Paul Sanders in his article, The Five most Abused Foreign-Policy Clichés, articulates national interest as something that is mandatory for maintaining freedom of the nation and wellbeing of its citizen. Scott  In similar manner he cites Clausewitzian need for security and prosperity that forces the state to go to war. He notes that Morgenthau has had a deep impact on American foreign policy making. Morgenthau, he states, defines national interest in terms of power of the nation, i.e. national power. In this manner, Morgenthau defines national interest as those factors that increase the power of the nation.
Michael Roskin, breaks down national interest into various categories, based on importance, duration, specificity and compatibility. Based on importance he classifies it into two parts vital and secondary. On the duration factor, he breaks it down again into two parts permanent and secondary. On the basis of specificity, he classifies it as specific and general national interest and on compatibility basis, he says there are complimentary and conflicting national interest. 
Scott Burchill,
12
Analyses of this thesis.
A good source for understanding the US national interest, is examined in the National Security Strategy (NSS) that is promulgated by the President of United States. It is also important to understand the origins of US national interests. The NSS, gives a comprehensive insight on the American national interest. It portrays American view of the world and then elucidates the national interests of America. It speaks of the strength of the US, which is its economy, as a sponsor of US elements of national power. The NSS divides the national interest into four categories of security, prosperity, values and international order. Under these headings the NSS lists a number of more specific national interests. Another policy shift of the US is captured in Rebalancing the Balance:
Resourcing US Diplomatic Strategy in Asia." This policy has been called as the Asiapacific pivot. The Asia-pacific pivot would be analyzed in a later part of the thesis. The understanding of US national interest leads to a standard for analyzing the Indian national interest.
A major factor affecting US national interest is the idea of American exceptionalism. Chapter 4 of this thesis, provides details into the American exceptionalism. Seymour Martin 
Lipset,
13
14
1840
India's National Interests Indian national interests are not defined in any official document. The Indian national interest have to be derived from the literature that has been written on this topic.
It can also be deduced from the research of the think tanks and from the speeches and statement of the leaders of India. Based on the literature available, the national interests of India can be classified into four categories that are similar to the US national interests. They are security, economic prosperity, international order, and global issues.
Indian security interests are divided into two parts, internal and external security.
Kashmir militancy, as part of internal security as Aditi Malhotra notes in her article, "Punitive Deterrence through Covert Operations," in the CLAWS(Centre for Land and Air Warfare Studies), that this threat is due to the foreign support that is being provided by Pakistan through its Operation Topaz. Over a period, the insurgency has died down.
However, with the US withdrawal from Afghanistan, the situation might change. Apart from the Kashmir militancy, India has an insurgency in the North-East India and the Naxalite insurgency in the Red Corridor. 
15
Regarding the Naxalite problem, the previous Indian Prime Minister, Dr, Man Mohan Singh, termed it the biggest problem facing India.
The external security calculus of India mainly involves, Pakistan, China, Afghanistan, and South-East Asia. Christine 
Fair,
16
China, according to previous external affairs minister of India, Mr. Salman Khursheed, is as a strategic partner and competitor. The unresolved boundary problems, the race for resources and China's military bases in the Indian Ocean are seen as threats to India's dominance in the region. It security relations with Pakistan is also a headache for India. The MEA (ministry of external affairs) report on India's foreign relations, describes Afghanistan and Southeast Asia as an area of important interest. While Afghanistan is important because of the resources and its strategic location, Southeast Asia is important for India's look east policy. These security interest are analyzed in detail later in the thesis.
The World Bank, January 2013, report notes that India is home to one third of the world's poor. Kaushik Basu, the Chief Economist to the World Bank, in his interview to BBC, describes the problems faced by Indian economy. He analyses how the crumbling infrastructure and red tape affect India's economic growth, where it requires at least a trillion dollar investment in infrastructure. The OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) report, "India Sustaining High and Inclusive Growth," notes India also requires modern technology. With a burgeoning population India requires to ensure that at least a million jobs are generated every month says the U.N.'s Department of Economic and Social Affairs report of May 2014.
Raja Mohan, 18 in his report, "Crux of Asia," observes that India desires reforms in the international order, keeping in mind the geopolitical realities. He states that it is increasingly difficult for India to influence the world when it comes to its national interests, as most of the world bodies are dominated by the Western nations. India desires the membership of the UNSC (United Nations Security Council), reorganization of the WB (World Bank) and the IMF (International Monetary Fund) etc. However, the most important theme of this desire for reforms is, it accepts the present world order and primacy of US as a leader.
There are certain common global issues which fall within India's national interest as they directly affect the safety, security and prosperity of the citizens of the country.
With regards to terrorism, India's approach has evolved systematically, observe Radha Kumar and Anchal Malhotra, in their report, "Back to Reality: India's National Interest and Multilateralism." India has recognized that terrorism is not the bane of a particular country. It cannot be solved by a single nation alone, but instead requires cooperation at the international level. Apart from terrorism, India takes keen interest in addressing the issue of climate change, as it affects the country and the subcontinent in a big way. The increasing instances of pandemics in the world and their resultant chaos, loss to the life and economic damage is another major concern for India. India also works together with other nations of the world for a world free of nuclear weapons.
The above issues form the core national interests of India. At a general level the national interests of India and the US seem to be converging on almost all the issues. This Southwest Pacific Studies, School of International Studies at Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India. He was the Henry Alfred Kissinger Scholar in the John W. Kluge Center at the Library of Congress, Washington, DC during 2009-10. Source: Wikipedia.
will be analyzed later in the thesis. The next discussion is on literature about India-US relations in the past and present.
Past India-US Relations Amit Gupta in his research paper titled, "The US-India Relationship: Strategic Partnership or Complimentary Interests?" traces the history of Indo-US relations and the reasons behind the waxing and waning of the relationship status. He notes that when India changed orientation of its economic policies to the quasi-socialist economy, the US got suspicious of India's nonalignment. Though for most part the relations were normal, the 1971 war saw the US threatening India with its military capabilities in the Bay of Bengal. The testing of a nuclear device by India in 1974 further aggravated the situation.
After the 1991 economic crises in India, the Indian economy opened up and saw a huge foreign investment in India. This was also the time when the Cold War ended. As relations improved, India tested it nuclear weapons in 1998, which led to sanctions by the US and thus the relations again deteriorated. The situation changed after the George Bush administration came to power in the US, and especially after the 9/11 terrorist attack.
In India-US Nuclear Deal Prospects and Implications, the nuclear deal of 2006, removed all the mistrust that was created during the Cold War period between both nations. US preoccupation with a number of issues like the Ukraine, ISIS and the economy and Framework Agreement laid strong foundations leading to mutually beneficial defense cooperation activities through security dialogue, service-level exchanges, defense exercises and defense trade and technology collaboration. the India's priorities in addressing its economy and internal politics, brought a lull in the relationship. The recent visit of the Indian Prime Minister, Mr. Narendra Modi, to the US and his interaction with President Obama created high level of interest in the US and reinvigorated the relationship. However both countries need to understand the importance of the relationship is for defining the twenty first century. This understanding can only be achieved by studying the world trends.
Changing World Order and the Need for Cooperation Joshua Goldstein
21
22
There are a number of reports on this topic. Strategic Trends Program, Global Strategic Trends, published by the British government, documents the shifting economic center of gravity towards Asia. The report states that rapid economic development, rise of the middle class, and the resultant demand for the goods and services will lead to shifting of economic activity to Asia and more specifically to China and India. The report also analyzes the nature of defense spending amongst the countries in the world. In this regards it states that the US will remain the most technologically advanced military in the world, but the gap would be increasingly closed by China and India. They can emerge as strategic competitors to the US.
The Carnegie Endowment council report titled, "The World Order in 2050," describes significant inputs to changing world patterns. The battle for influence in the changing world order is a sum of all national powers. The report further states that as the world wealth shifts in relative terms to the East, the world will witness the emergence of a number of alliances and pacts to extend influence. In this context the likeminded nations with similar national interests will come together more easily than others to forge these alliances and pacts. This is what makes India and the US important to each other.
Both countries hold tremendous importance for each other, which is complimentary and symbiotic. This point is noted by Ashley Tellis
23
24
The previous chapter elaborated upon the literature that is available on the subject of India-US relations. This thesis examines the possibilities for the development of Indo-US strategic relations. The thesis covers the past and present and then presents options for the further growth of India-US relations. The primary research question for this thesis is, can India and the US form an alliance for a symbiotically beneficial world order? To answer this question the thesis has a number of secondary research questions which will aid in seeking an answer to the primary research question. The secondary research questions pertain to the understanding of national interest, the national interests of India and the US, the past and present relations between India and the US, the global trends and then options for the Indo-US relations. This chapter will layout the research methodology of the thesis. This chapter will first delineate the limitations of the research, then it will produce the choice of the research methodology and the reasons for choosing the said methodology. Then the chapter will further elucidate how the research was carried out, what the sources are, how they were acquired, and then conclude with the description of method of analysis.
The research that was conducted was limited by the time and financial resources that were available. Research on the topic that has been chosen would ideally involve interviews of the leaders who affect foreign relations. However, given time and resource constraints it was not possible to do that. Hence the researcher has availed the data that is already available, interpreted it and then analyzed it to answer the research question.
The research question is an open ended question, wherein the answer to it can be either positive or negative for India-US relations. Since the question is open ended and involves numerous factors, the research has been carried out qualitatively. The qualitative research focused on following 1. Obtaining a more realistic view of the Indo-US relations that cannot be understood or experienced in numerical data and statistical analysis. 
26
6. Providing a holistic view of the Indo-US relations. 30 7. Creating a descriptive capability based on primary and unstructured data. 
31
The thesis uses discourse analysis 32 for research. Discourse analysis is the key to understanding the past and present relations between both the countries. It will also make clear the often stated stances of both countries in international relations. Discourse analysis will use the data available from articles, books, research papers of think tanks, and the interview and speeches of the leaders of both the nations.
The thesis uses historical representations for research. 
33
29
30
31
32 Audie Klotz and Deepa Prakash, Qualitative Methods in International Relations: A Pluralist Guide (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 62. 
33
Process tracing is an important tool while researching
34
The thesis incorporates process tracing for research. This helps the research the world trends. Establishing world trends will help in analyzing the contours of the relations that are likely to be evolved. This analysis will be based on the historical evidence of the factors that led to a particular situation. As stated above, due to limitations of time and money the thesis is based primarily on The thesis will also use DIME and End, Ways, and Means model. The DIME model will be used to collate the national interests of both the nations. Once they are determined, they will be labelled under common terms for both the nations. The end, ways and means model will be used for analyzing the future of the India-US relation and presenting the options thereof.
The literature used for this research consists of books, articles and research papers by renowned authors who are considered authority in the India-US relations, the research papers of the renowned think tanks. The literature also includes the major newspapers of both the nations and abroad. The interview and speeches of leaders and bureaucrats are also included as part of the research data. Apart from this the data, the factsheets of the MEA in India and the State Department of US have been used to corroborate the data. This literature has been derived both as a hard copy from the library or directly from the websites and can be considered as authentic.
The credibility of the data so provided has been verified by cross comparison with the other sources. The evidence cited by the authors have been sampled to prove the authenticity and credibility of the citations. Distortion of data and thus its interpretation has been avoided. Data has been updated by the author and the citation for such updates has been made. The author has strived to maintain the authenticity, credibility, and meaningfulness of the data. I am guided by one overwhelming conviction and passion: This century must be an American Century. In an American Century, America has the strongest economy and the strongest military in the world. In an American Century, America leads the free world and the free world leads the entire world.
-Mitt Romney in his foreign-policy speech, Citadel, 2011
Nations often justify their international relation on the basis of national interest. It is the national interest of the nation that forces it to stand, fight wars, seek diplomacy and do all that is possible to secure the present and future of the nation. The thesis through this chapter, envisages to analyze the term national interest. Looking for its definition and its usage in past, it will also seek answers to the determinants of national interest. If national interest is an established theory, then for certain there will a process to put this theory into practice. The thesis will also look into the nature of national interest in regards to its perpetuity. Further the thesis will look for validity and coherence of the theory.
The Obligation to Understand National Interest George Orwell In his compelling essay "Politics and the English Language,"
analyzes how thoughts corrupt language and further draws the analogy that bad writing can corrupt thoughts. 
35
36
There are heated debates on stands taken by various world powers based on their own national interest. However, many a times, the analysis brings out the fact that the world crisis situations do not receive the same coherent attention, in spite of the stated national interest. We can take, for example, Chinese policy on the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014, wherein it rationalized the Russian absorption of Crimea on the premise that it represented desire of Crimean people. However, Chinese policy towards Xinjiang, Tibet or Inner Mongolia, or Taiwan does not contain the same perspective. 
37
The definition of national interest as per Miriam Webster's dictionary is "the interest of a nation as a whole held to be an independent entity separate from the interests of subordinate areas or groups and also of other nations or supranational groups." 38 Paul Saunders in one of his article relates national interest as something that is mandatory for maintaining freedom of the nation and wellbeing of its citizens. 
39
Burchill,
38
39
40
The history of national interest, shows that there were various proponents of national interest in both Eastern and Western powers. 
41
42
40
41
43 Jayantanuja Bandyopadhyaya, A General Theory of Foreign Policy (New Delhi, India: Allied Publishers, 2004), 30. interest, i.e. to say a nation uses its powers to achieve happiness. 
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
52
53
54
55
52
53
54
55
National interest is generally broken down into three functions, which are security, economy and ideology. 
56
The security interest includes the safety, security and sovereignty of the nation and its citizens. Where necessary, it also includes the safety of its military bases, its allies and even maintaining knowledge of the security threats to the nation. 
57
58
Ideological interests may incorporate the spread of democracy or communism, human rights, legal rights etc. 
59
As per Scott Burchill in his book titled National Interest in International Relations Theory, there are at least five major schools of thought which have differing opinions on national interest. These five are classified as the Realist approach, the Marxist approach, the Liberal approach, the English school approach and the 56 Close Up, "National Interest and the Tools of Foreign Policy," accessed July 12, 2014, https://www.closeup.org/lib/National%20Interest%20Foreign%20Policy% 20Lesson%20Planvfinal.pdf. 
57
58
59
60
The realist approach believes in the world as it is, rather than what we would like it to be. 
61
62
The Marxist or Critical approach has a very radical view of national interest. As per this theory the national interests of the state are defined by the elites of the state, since they are powerful and govern the state. 
63
64
65
66
60
61
62
63
64
65
67
The English school approach states that the narrow and myopic view of the realist approach makes states look after their own self-interest, which in the modern world is not viable. 
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
68
Of these multiple approaches to the concept national interest, the realist school has had great influence in the recent years. This is in large part due to influence of Hans Morgenthau. When Morgenthau migrated to USA from Germany he brought tin a storm of new ideas in political sciences. 
76
77
78
79
Morgenthau used power as the determining criteria for national interest, i.e. to say, all those policies which would increase power were in the national interest and all those which dispersed power did not serve the national interest. He also advised that the 
75
76
77
Morgenthau cautions against a "policy of bluff" 81 i.e. declaring certain interest as vital and then not backing up that position with military power. Citing the example of US policy towards Japanese expansion in China, he stated that US condemned the expansion but did not back it up with military power. Hence, Japan took it as a bluff and did not view China as a vital interest for the US. 
82
Michael G Roskin in his book, National Interest: From Abstraction to Strategy, covers various types of national interest. He classifies national interests on the basis of importance, duration, specificity and compatibility. For the most part, his analysis is based on Morgenthau's realist approach.
Based on importance there are two types of national interest, vital and secondary.
Vital national interest are those which form the basis for sustaining the life and security of the state. Not taking care of those would lead to the downfall of the nation. They are easy to identify and can sometime extend to foreign states in case those foreign states by their actions are likely to affect the sovereignty and integrity of home state. Secondary national interest are those which do not affect the sovereignty of the state and are generally harder to define. They are generally away from home states and pose no 81 Ibid. 
82
83
84
85
86
83
84
85
86
interest would be cooperation in Bosnia and conflicting interest would be Russian support for the Serbs. 
87
Major question for this thesis is whether the national interest of India and the US are complimentary or conflicting. Based on the answer to that question this thesis will recommend further courses of action for the Indo-US relations.
The US is the sole superpower in the world today. 
88
89
87
90
91
No single nation has contributed so immensely, to development of other nations, as has the US. 
92
93
95
96
97
The Americans view themselves as a country which is qualitatively different from other countries. 
98
99
101
103
98
99
100
101
102
103 Herbert Hoover, American Individualism (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page and Co., 1922), 9. In this book the author differentiates the American individualism from that of others as "that while we build our society upon the attainment of the individual. We shall safeguard to every individual an equality of opportunity to take that position in the community to which his intelligence, character, ability and ambitions entitle him; that we keep the social free from the frozen strata of classes; that we shall stimulate effort of each individual to achievement; that through an enlarging sense of responsibility and understanding we shall assist him to this attainment; while he in turn must stand up to the enemy wheel of competition." different from other nations where the community translates to nationality. A person can become un-American only if he does not subscribe to the American values. 
104
105
106
Though the concept of American exceptionalism was not to bring an air of superiority over others, eventually this concept was used viewed in such a context. These concepts in American exceptionalism have left an impression on determinants of the national values and its corresponding effect on the national interest.
Apart from the NSS, a commission on America's national interest in 2000, 107 defined the national interest into four parts, vital interest, extremely important interest, important interest and secondary interest. This committee report is more objective in nature wherein it specifies each interest. However, on the basis of comparison the thesis finds that the NSS is more comprehensive and covers the ground realities of today's strategic environment. Hence, the thesis takes into account the NSS as the primary document for investigating the US national interest, comparing it to the Indian national interest and its further evaluation and recommending a course of action for both countries to work together American View of the World
The National Security Strategy 2010 (NSS), states that after the end of Cold War, democracies increased in scale and size, as the world economy has expanded. 
108
Wars over ideology have taken a back seat and now wars over identity, religion and ethnic lines have increased. Environmental damage has increased, food security and dangers to public health have increased; proliferation of nuclear weapons has taken place.
The September 11, 2011 has demonstrated the rise and reach of terrorist organizations like al-Qaida and its affiliates. The global economy has increased the competition for American people and businesses. 
109
The National Security Strategy 2010 (NSS) 110 recognizes that the strategic polices of the government have been shaped in accordance with the developments of the world to benefit American interests. This document gives examples of the industrial revolution when the US transformed its economy and role in the world, and also describes the rise of fascism and communism and the response of the US to it. The NSS, points out the effective American leadership for the world and the promotion of a just and sustainable world order. Then it lays down the strategies through which the government plans to establish the world America seeks.
The strength of America has been its robust economy which has sponsored the elements of national power, to include military, diplomatic and development efforts. 
111
111 White House, National Security Strategy, 14. 
112
113
114
115
113
114
115 Ibid.
for emergencies, 119 empowering communities to counter radicalization, 120 improving resilience through increased public-private partnerships 121 and then engaging with the communities and citizens. 
122
123
Reversing the spread of nuclear and biological weapons and securing nuclear material is also an important part of ensuring security of United States. In this context the US wants to pursue the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. The Strategic Arms 119 Ibid., 18. 120 Ibid. 
121
122 Ibid. 
123
Reduction Treaty (START) agreement with Russia, 124 compliance with the Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) were steps in this direction. The NSS (2010) also speaks of deterring Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons and persuading North Korea to abandon their nuclear weapon program. In the same breath the US is ready to support peaceful nuclear energy initiatives in coordination with international regulatory bodies. 
125
126
127
128
129
130
Economic prosperity depends upon numerous factors, which have to be addressed concurrently. The US needs to improve education system, invest in science, technology, engineering and math education; increase international education and exchange and pursue comprehensive immigration reform. It has to reduce dependence on fossil fuels.
For enhancing science and technology it will have to invest in research and development; expand international partnership; employ technology to protect the nation; and leverage and grow space capabilities. 131 128 Ibid., 27. 
129
130
131
The economic growth has to be balanced and sustainable. To achieve this, the US has to promote inclusive growth and prevent the recurrence of economic imbalances and financial excesses. The debt crisis has provided important lesson for the economy. The repeat of a crisis like that has to be avoided. More saving and more export are necessary. Domestic demand abroad needs to be increased. Opening of foreign markets to the US products and services will stimulate the growth of the economy. Building cooperation with international partners like those in the G20 to increase global growth and deter threats to the international financial systems is mandatory. 
132
133
134
This is the third part of the US national interest. NSS (2010) lays out the significance that the US attaches to human values. It elaborates that values such as freedom of speech, freedom to choose leadership, to assemble without fear, dignity, tolerance and equality among all the people are universal. 
135
Because of poverty, in many parts of the world people lack dignity and the opportunity to do well. The US national interest recognizes the fact that long term security and prosperity of the US depends upon support to these universal values. 
136
135
136
137
The fourth national interest as laid out in the NSS (2010) is the international order. The US desires to have an international order that is advanced by the US leadership. It wants the international order to be just and sustainable. The primary purpose of this international order is to advance the security and prosperity of the American people. NSS (2010) notes that certain problems have no boundaries, e.g. terrorism, climate change etc. which require international cooperation. The international order includes international institutions. 
139
However, in recent years these institutions have been facing pressures due to emerging threats and the growth of new power centers in the world. 
140
139 
White House,
National Security Strategy,
40. 140
The US has a multipronged strategy for building alliances. The US categorizes the world into three parts on the basis of establishing the relations. The first part is the traditional allies 141 in the form of NATO and the European allies, long standing Asian allies and the North American allies. The US intends to develop those relationship further, enhance the interaction, build on security relationships, ensure prosperity, security, stability, promote human rights and advance democracy.
The second category is the 21st century centers of influence. 142 This category includes three countries namely, India, China and Russia. The US understands the global realities and sees these nations asserting themselves on the global stage. It sees building bilateral relationships with these countries as an important way ahead to engage them.
The nature of these relationships is to develop shared interests to promote security and stability. However, in stark contrast to the relationship with India, US relationships with China and Russia does not appear to be very cordial, because they are acting against the American interests in Asia and Europe. 
143
144
142
45. 143
[45]
[46]
47.
The international order that the US seeks is targeted at international issues of mutual concerns with other countries. The important areas of cooperation are laid out in NSS ( 
2010
147
148
The national interests that have been identified through study and analysis of the NSS ( 
2010
India occupies a highly strategic location in the eastern hemisphere, especially so for the US interest. India projects approximately 1750 KMs of landmass in the Indian Ocean, bringing Strait of Hormuz to Strait of Malacca into its sphere of influence. As a consequence of it, India is able to dominate the trade routes passing through the Indian Ocean utilizing its blue water navy. 
149
150
151
152
Unlike, the US, India does not have an established National Security Strategy, which lays down the national interests and how it intends to protect them. The literature presented here as India's national interests has been obtained through the published books, articles and research material. Based on the research conducted on this topic, the general categorization of the national interests of India can be done into the following parts:
1. Security interest.
2. Economic prosperity.
4. Global issues.
The Security of the Indian homeland and that of its interests abroad is a major concern for India. India shares a border with China, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar and Sri Lanka and to an extent with Maldives. All the neighbors except for China and Bhutan, witness numerous challenges to their stability. The level of development, poverty and extremism is a cause of concern for India. However it is not only the neighbors that affect Indian security, there are internal factors also.
The internal security scenario of India is a major cause of concern. The terrorism in J&K (Jammu and Kashmir), the insurgency in Northeast India and the Naxalite problem in the heartland are specific problems facing India. The militancy in the state of J&K started in the decade of eighties. It was a very well planned out and executed plan of the Pakistani state machinery under Operation Topaz
153
154
The continued state support of Pakistan to the terrorist groups and the harboring of terrorist sanctuaries is an existential threat to the security of J&K and India as a whole.
The insurgency in northeast India is a home grown problem. It is due to poor development and neglect of the northeastern states by the central government. The drawing of the border or the reorganization of the states was not done taking into consideration the linguistic and cultural affinity of the citizens. Furthermore the northeast Indian citizens are distinctly different when it comes to their ethnicity. 
155
The Naxalite problem is again a manifestation of poor governance, ignorance of the needs of the people and the deep rooted corruptions in the state machinery. 
156
157
The external security scenario is not good for India. All of India's neighbors, except China, are undergoing internal stability problems. Their stability and their relations with India affect the security of India.
India and Pakistan have been involved in long standing border dispute since independence. The Kashmir dispute lies at the heart of the Indo-Pak problem. Both the countries have fought four conventional wars. Pakistan claims that India is a threat to its sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
158
159
Settling the Kashmir issue, keeping Pakistan from using state sponsored terror, stabilizing the situation in Pakistan and ensuring its nuclear weapons do not fall into the wrong hands are some major challenges for Indian polity.
Relations between India and China are constantly tense because of the boundary disputes. The Chinese have been found supporting the northeast militancy with material help. 
160
161
162
In the long term however, India seems to be heading towards an inevitable contest with china for influence in the region and world. The need for resources for the growth of the economy and sustaining it will further create problems between both countries. The clash of national interests in the South China Sea is another case in example. The massive dumping of Chinese goods in India and the heavily tilted balance of trade in China's favor add to the complexities of the relationship. Indian security experts are also wary of China's strategic encirclement of India. Furthermore, India's desire for a permanent Security Council seat in the UN finds opposition in China. China is a big factor in India's security calculus. Accordingly the new (2014) government under PM Modi, is maneuvering to constructively engage China and at the same time limit its influence.
India's ties with Afghanistan have a long history. As Mr. Raghav Sharma, observes in Handbook of India's international Relations, Indian interests in Afghanistan are three fold. 
163
The Indian look-east policy was put in place in 1991. 
164
sectors 168 is needed. The major areas of concern are transportations, ports, electricity generation and smart cities to sustain the burgeoning urban population.
It requires modern technology 169 to transform the agriculture sector of the economy apart from developing irrigation facilities. India also has to make huge investments in the improvement of human capital, solving governance bottlenecks and labor reforms. 
170
171
India desires bringing reforms to the international order, keeping geopolitical realities in mind. 
172
173
174
175
176
177
There are a number of global issues which affect the national interest of India.
Analogous to the US, India intends to tackle these transnational issues with the world 173 Ibid. 
174
175 "Pluralism or Fragmentation? India and the Changing International Order," January 1, 2010, accessed August 21, 2014, http://www.foresightproject.net/downloads/ Pluralism_or_fragmentation_India_a_the_changing_int.order_E.Jurado_P.Shankar.pdf. economy of India and the world. Control of such pandemics can save thousands of life and avert major humanitarian crises. To address this issue there is a need for international cooperation in the fields of research, development of vaccines and medicines and control of the outbreak. Indian national interests certainly incorporate all the efforts to tackle these pandemics. 
185
186
187
Apart from the above mentioned aspects of India's national interest, India, in coordination with the US and other democracies promotes democracy around the world. 
188
189
The Indians are bastards anyway, they are the most aggressive goddamn people around. 
190
191
Relations have, however, taken turn for the better in recent years. This section will deal with relations between these two democracies since India's independence. To understand the relations between these two countries, it is necessary to understand the foreign policy of India, immediately after independence. The Indian foreign policy drew its inspirations from the Indian freedom struggle. Mahatma Gandhi was a big influence when it came to the foreign policy after independence. During India's independence struggle the Indian National Congress, led by Mahatma Gandhi, practiced nonviolence to overthrow the colonial British.
The past relationship between India and the US has seen its high and lows. The two democracies even came very close to a conventional war during 1971. The recent turn to friendliness is a sign of a growing relationship between both countries. India gained independence in 1947 when the Cold War was emerging. Postindependence India adopted a non-aligned position, joining the soviet nor the American led camp. It established a quasi-socialist economy, which raised suspicions in the US. 
192
193
In 1971, the relationship again deteriorated during the Indo-Pak War when the US pressured India by dispatching the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise to the Bay of Bengal. This led to India signing a peace and friendship treaty with the Soviet Union. Relations turned worse when India tested its nuclear device in 1974 and the US imposed sanctions on India.
When USSR the invaded Afghanistan in 1979, the US used Pakistan as a tool in a proxy war to contain the USSR. This brought the US closer to Pakistan and created suspicion on the Indian side. The relation turned better in 1984 after Mr. Rajiv Gandhi became the prime minister of India and pursued engagement with the US.
In 1991, India faced a severe economic crisis and the then Indian Prime Minister, Mr. Narsimha Rao, opened up the economy. This event saw the both India and the US come together and expand trade and defense relationships. The Clinton administration sought to improve relations with India further. The nuclear tests of 1998, however, led to further sanctions on India by the US. The Kargil War in 1999, saw the US playing a major role in averting a nuclear war, when President Clinton pressured the prime minister 
193
of Pakistan and the Pakistan army, which was readying nuclear warheads, to back down and withdraw its troops from the Kargil region. 
194
195
After the attack on the Indian parliament in December 2001, India mobilized its forces on the border. It, however, did not pursue military action after the US pressure on President Musharraf to halt cross border terrorism.
The signing of the Indo-US nuclear deal in March 2006, is a major highlight in the relationship. This transformational event greatly enhanced the Indo-US relations, wiping out all the mistrust that had been created during the Cold War period. 
196
197
India and the US have a ministerial level strategic dialogue, which is an annual event and is chaired by the Indian External Affairs Minister and the US Secretary Of State. There are five areas of cooperation that the strategic dialogue focuses upon. These areas are strategic cooperation; energy and climate change, education and development; economy, trade and agriculture; science and technology and health and innovation. The first dialogue was held in Washington DC in June 2010 and the latest fifth dialogue was held in July 2014.
The Indian Embassy in United States and the US Embassy in India provide adequate depth to the areas of strategic cooperation between India and the United States.
Indo US strategic operations addresses nonproliferation, counter terrorism and military cooperation. 
198
199
India and the US regularly consult each other regarding East Asia, Central Asia and West Asia. They also have strategic consultations on Latin America, Africa and the Indian Ocean region. India and the US also have trilateral security cooperation with Japan as a third partner and then Quadrilateral cooperation with Australian and Japan as partners.
This area of cooperation has tremendous potential and both the countries have neglected it for quite some time. The total trade between India and the US in 1990 was mere $5.6 billion and in the year 2013 it stood at $ 63.7 billion, which is an impressive 1037.5 percent growth. 
203
The Indian exports stood at $41.8 billion while those of US stood at $15.26 billion.
Both countries have initiated several mechanism for improving in bilateral trade.
Both the countries are also negotiating a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT). Apart from this the private sector of both nations have a forum for trade and investment in form of India-US CEO's Forum which was constituted in 2009. A Private Sector Advisory Group (PSAG) has been created, using experts in international trade, to provide guidance for improvement of trade and commerce. 
202
The economic dialogue also includes trade defense measures, small and medium enterprises and capacity building on intellectual property rights. A MoU (memorandum of understanding) on agricultural cooperation and food security was signed in 2009. In the arena of mutual investment, the US is the sixth largest investor in India. From 2000 till 2014, US has invested 11.92 billion in India, whereas India has invested more than $17 billion in the US, mainly in R&D (research and development), spurring innovation in US.
The US -India energy dialogue was launched in 2005, to promote trade and investment in the energy sector. This dialogue has five working groups, which concern oil and gas, power and energy efficiency, new technologies and renewable energy and civil nuclear cooperation. 
204
205
210
211
212
213
Geopolitically, America is an island off the shores of the large landmass of Eurasia, whose resources and population far exceed those of the United States. The domination by a single power of either of Eurasia's two principal spheres -Europe or Asia -remains a good definition of strategic danger for America, Cold War or no Cold War. For such a grouping would have the capacity to outstrip America economically, and, in the end, militarily. 
215
216
217
endeavor to explain the principle of world order are balance of power, bi-polarity, multipolarity and hegemony.
218
219
220
221
The multi-polarity is similar to the bi-polarity in which the numerous actors are involved due to interdependence, interconnections and cooperative interaction. 222 "It is often characterized by pro-democratic arguments based on economic coordination, international law and international cooperation." 223 Multi-polarity theory is based on the existence of multiple powerful nations at the same time. The multi-polarity draws its strength form alliances and federations which the powers establish and since its aim is to counter balance the power and influence of each other, multi-polarity is a dynamic in nature. 
220
221
222
223
224
225
The US is the largest economy in the world followed by China and India. The present and the future state of the world economies is as depicted in figure 
4
227
4
4
The Clausewitzian proverb, "War is merely a continuation of Politics," 
229
5
Military capabilities are resource centric and require economic backing. It is a sum of numerous factors that combine into two categories, which is quality and quantity.
While quality incorporates the technological superiority, command and control systems, the quantity includes numerical values of the personnel and systems a nation's military possess. As a shift in the economy occurs, defense spending would be generally moves with it. Figure 
5
230
231
232
As the center of gravity of economic activity moves towards Asia, the world will see numerous changes in alliances. The erstwhile Western powers like Europe and Russia will seek and create new alliances. They will aim to match the capacity of the new world powers and maintain influence, Europe and other Western powers would reach out to the emerging powers. 
234
International institutions will have to recognize these changing geopolitical realities and change accordingly to accommodate these rising powers or they will collapse. 
235
233
234
235
236 Ibid. growth. As China starts asserting itself on the global stage, it is likely that the US and China will get engaged in rivalry on a world stage. The global swing states,
237
238
India's importance to US India provides immense opportunities to US. If the opportunities are seized and exploited then it would work in betterment for both the nations. If the opportunities are not realized, seized and exploited, India could end up in the opposing camp. Following are the major opportunities that can be offered by India.
1. India could prove as an important partner in the US quest for preventing proliferation of WMD. This partnership assumes importance because of the Indian expertise in the nuclear, chemical and biological fields. In this field India's impeccable nonproliferation record deserves this merit.
2. US could find India as an important partner in preventing the spread of extremism and terrorism. The vast arc of instability starts from North Africa only to culminate on the western borders of India. With its diplomatic, economic, military and informational resources India can form a credible ally in the war against extremism.
3. The NATO allies of US are facing tough economic situation and as a result of this their armed forces are undergoing contraction. They are not able to maintain the mandated 2% expenditure of GDP on their militaries. India on the other hand is expanding its armed forces, which are already the world largest. The Indian armed forces could be future collaborators in the solving the world crisis in future under a credible legal and legitimate umbrella.
4. India's population presents huge opportunities to US. As India develops it would seek to develop its human resources. Already more than 100,000 Indian students are studying in the US. As more and more students study in US, the commonality of English, its pro-western and pro US population can be a major collaborators in developing technology and marketing it.
5. The Indian market itself provides a huge opportunity to the US commercial interest. The sheer population, scale of infrastructure development required and the high spending power of the burgeoning Indian middle class provides huge opportunities, which if US does not exploit, someone else will.
6. One of the major issues on which both countries would benefit is the climate change. India has a lot of stakes in preventing climate change. If there is lack of coordination and cooperation in the fields of non-conventional energy resources, the demand for the conventional resources is likely to skyrocket leading to huge greenhouse gas emissions. It serves as a challenge to US and also as opportunity to market its technology and expertise in this area.
7. When it comes to world order, India does not seek to alter the world order or its leadership. India aims at removing the discrepancies in the present world order. It wants the world realize the present geopolitical realities and behave in an unbiased manner. India and us share the same concern and have similar national interest in global governance. Hence collaborating with India on global governance will serve as a good choice. 8. India is the world's largest democracy and it has succeeded in spite of numerous challenges it faced, while its neighbors have struggled to do so.
India could serve as a glaring example to nations to believe in the idea of democracy and human rights. Together India and the US could work towards making the world more open to true democratic ideals. 9. India has a tremendous soft power. India diaspora world over has a peaceful, dynamic and positive image. The Indian movies industry already significantly carry the Indian value and culture abroad. India's image is of a peaceful nation with excellent relation with the Middle East, South East and East Asia, Africa and Latin America. These are the same regions where US has strategic interests. Together in a synchronized and synergistic manner both the nations could work toward common goals.
India's ambition to succeed economically and emerge as a strong nation can only be fruitful through support of the US. That may the reason for former Indian PM Mr. Atal Bihari Vajpayee terming US as a 'Natural Ally'. The following are certain important consideration for India when it seeks to understand the importance of US for itself. 1. To become an economic superpower India needs both money and technology.
US has no dearth of both. With US it could be win win situation for both the countries as India provide s market the US provides India with FDI and technology, expertise, management and marketing. 4. US can be provider of green technologies to India so as that India can have unhindered economic progress without damaging its natural environment.
Further US with its vast shale gas deposits can be a net exporter to India. With adequate security of its energy requirements, India has better options to react to world geopolitics.
5. With US and Indian interest converging on the issue of freedom of navigation in international waters, both the countries could help secure the major trade routes in the world. India can take care of the trade routes passing through Indian Ocean while US can exert influences in places like South China Sea. As seen from above, both the nations have a number of complimentary and symbiotic interests. From a long term view both the nations are likely to evolve their partnership realizing these complimentary and symbiotic factors.
The Future of Indo-US Relations Relations between India and America should not be seen within the limits of just Delhi and Washington. It's a much larger sphere. The good thing is that the mood of both Delhi and Washington is in harmony with this understanding. Both sides have played a role in this. 
239
Mr. Modi statement is significant because even when the relations between the two countries were not so good, relations between the people, the economic houses 240 and education systems were maintained. As quoted above the breadth and the depth of Indo-US relations is huge and hence, it should not be seen only in light of containing any particular country or block of countries, but rather, they should evolve from the idea of realizing common national interests, with a broad agenda of bringing in a mutually beneficial world order. This section will layout the options that are available for the future Indo-US relations. The options presented are based on the current geopolitical realities and constraints that both the nations face. Some of the key concerns that impede in developing a strategic relations lie in economic sphere, divergent US and Indian policies in Middle East (in context of Iran), India's engagement with Russia and US engagement with Pakistan, conflicting energy needs etc.
This option would aim to consolidate the gains that have been made during the past decades of cooperation between India and the US. The strategic pause intends to further expand cooperation between US and India on economic issues and put rest of the issues on backburner. The fundamental assumption behind this option is the geo-ecopolitical realties facing both the countries. There are a number of issues at the multilateral level, where perceptions of both the countries differ. An example of this is policy with regards to Iran. While US wants to isolate Iran in its quest to seek the nuclear bomb, India has other economic and geopolitical compulsions in not taking a similar stance. 
241
In this option both India and US relegate each other in foreign policy arena, 242 till the time both the countries are able to realize and come close to each other on almost all the issues. Both the governments however, have to ensure than the obstacles to trade and investment relations are removed. These relations and efforts are easily achievable and are not likely to face resistance. However, this policy will miss out on the areas of cooperation that present themselves as an opportunity in the evolving world, which can establish the cooperative processes. 
243
The issue based cooperation 244 entails cooperation between India and the US on the issues of common concern at the global stage. India and the US can cooperate on the issues where there is no conflict of interest and where the mechanism for cooperation have evolved substantially. The specific areas of cooperation are climate change, food security, non-proliferation of WMD, economy 245 etc. In this manner, both the countries would be able to bring together their strengths on the floor, for achieving common interests, thus paving way of synchronized unity of effort. It will also afford India, the lesser mortal, amongst the two, to develop itself in short and medium term to be prepared for greater role in the world. This is also a fact at least in short to medium term, the US and Indian priorities are not aligned. 
246
247
248
If both the countries realize this convergence of interest, there would be requirement of radical reforms to re-energize the partnership and build it up to the level of natural allies, thus tilting the balance of the power in the favor of alliance. It will not only help both the countries, but will also anchor the security and aspirations of the likeminded countries, with similar values and ideals. The US has to take lead in this sphere 
247
The preceding chapter presented an analysis of the Indo-US relations and factors affecting them, based on an examination of the key secondary sources listed in the literature review and the bibliography. This chapter presents conclusions based on the earlier chapter. It also provides a recommendation for future Indo-US relations for both the countries. It is based on certain facts that both nations are likely to face and proposes actions to exploit those facts to their benefit. In doing so they will be able to forge a strong, robust, enduring strategic relationship which is broad-based and involves all the elements of national power.
In chapter 4, a comparison of the national interests of both the nations was made.
Based on the comparison, the thesis finds the US national interests and the Indian national interests aligning themselves in the mid and long term on most of the issues. 
The thesis interprets that the natural ally option for Indo-US relations will benefit both in the long run. As the world trends indicate, the US and India are likely to face threats and encounter opportunities, which present a congruence of national interests. It will be extremely optimistic to be assured of a good relationship in future if the seeds of these bonds are not sowed at this juncture. For both the countries to become natural allies they must build trust, establish common procedures and processes of cooperation and establish mechanisms for conflict management. They must also evolve common communication strategies and understand each other's cultures apart from numerous other important aspects. This cannot be achieved in one try. It will take incremental improvements, hence, the process of realizing the potential and process of converting that potential to something more concrete should begin as early as possible.
Actions Recommended for the US to Improve Relations with India
The thesis recommends following approach for the US in defense of its national interests and maintaining leadership of the world. This approach is based on the research as stated earlier in the thesis. US: Benefits Derived US will be able to forge a strong relationship with India incorporating all the aspects of diplomacy, military and economics. US will also be able to engage India economically to such a level that both country's economic interests are integrated and bound by common interests. This would ensure synergistic economic cooperation at various world forums. Cooperation in defense sector and joint production and development of military equipment will present a large market in countries aligned to US interests. By increasing India's reliance on energy imports from US, the US-India can pragmatically amend its relations with states like Iran. In addition to this, India would serve as a large and sustained market for US energy exports. By helping India to elevate its stature in the world institutions like the UNSC, NSG etc.US will be able to get additional support for its policies. The biggest benefit would come in the form of maintaining a balance of power in Asia-Pacific, which will further stabilize the region.
Actions Recommended for India to Improve Relations with the US India must work hand in hand to realize the full potential of the partnership so as to ensure that both the nations are able to achieve their national interest in the multipolar world by establishing a mutually beneficial world order. i. US is likely to be the most important and reliable energy partner of India in the long term because of its shale gas discoveries and its technological prowess in the non-conventional energy technologies. j. The US defense industry can make an enormous contribution to self-reliance of India's armed forces by transferring of technology, joint development and co-production of defense equipment in India.
2. To ensure that Indo-US alliance is a reality India must: a. Realize the importance of the strategic cooperation with US and build consensus in India regarding the same. b. Engage US economically. Ensure that the necessary policy hurdles that limit the participation of the US multinationals in India are addressed. The government has to ensure that there is clarity on the labor reforms, Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) rules and taxation regime and provide institutions, meeting its energy needs, besides self-reliance of its defense industry. By forging strong economic bonds, India will be able to ensure that US interest are deep rooted in India, hence, India will be able to exert pressure on other nations and entities affecting India's security and prosperity. Technology with help from US arms industry, India would have self-reliance of its own arms industry and ensure that the arms manufactured are not sold to countries which can be detrimental to India's regional security calculus. Joint targeting of terrorists and intelligence sharing will help India mitigate the threats to homeland. Both the countries will be able to effectively counter proliferation of WMDs to include nuclear technology.
This thesis has carried out extensive research on the Indo-US relations. However, due to limitation of time and resources the thesis has not been able to study certain factors that are related to the subject. The thesis makes following recommendation for future research on this topic.
1. Examine how China influences the Indo-US relationship.
2. Future research can also be carried out to examine potentially disruptive alliances with other nation, i.e. US-Indonesia or India-Iran.
3. Another important aspect of research can be the division of responsibilities between the US and India in various geopolitical regions based on the national interests and dominance, so as to conserve the sources of national power and at the same time converge them when required.
8
Excerpts of the speech of Mr. Leon Panetta, in a public address at the Institute for Defense Studies and Analyses, New Delhi, June
Kautilya (also known as Chanakya, was an Indian statesman and philosopher, chief advisor and Prime Minister of the Indian Emperor Chandragupta, the first ruler of the Mauryan Empire. Kautilya belonged to the Brahmin caste (the priestly class), he was originally from Northern India and a professor of political science
Philosopher and theologian St. Thomas Aquinas was born circa 1225 in Roccasecca, Italy. Combining the theological principles of faith with the philosophical principles of reason, he ranked among the most influential thinkers of medieval Scholasticism.
Hans JoachimMorgenthau (February 17, 1904-July 19, 1980)  was one of the leading twentieth-century figures in the study of international politics. He made landmark contributions to international relations theory and the study of international law, and his Politics Among Nations, first published in 1948, went through five editions during his lifetime
The terms, Jus ad Bello and Jus ad Bellum, have been explained in definitions.
Dr Scott Burchill is Senior Lecturer in International Relations in the School of International and Political Studies at Deakin University.
Seymour Martin Lipset was an American political sociologist, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, and the Hazel Professor of Public Policy at George Mason University. His major work was in the fields of political sociology, trade union organization, social stratification, public opinion, and the sociology of intellectual life.
Alexis-Charles-Henri Clérel de Tocqueville was a French political thinker and historian who travelled the US extensively.
The red corridor is a region consisting of around 200 districts of eastern India from the states of Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and Maharashtra. The region experiences the naxalite activity on a large scale.
Dr. Fair is an assistant professor in the Peace and Security Studies Program, within Georgetown University's Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service. Previously, she has served as a senior political scientist with the RAND Corporation, a political officer to the United Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan in Kabul, and as a senior research associate in USIP's Center for Conflict Analysis and Prevention. She is also a senior fellow with the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.
Daniel Byman is a professor in the Security Studies Program in the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service with a concurrent appointment with the Georgetown Department of Government.
C. Raja Mohan is an Indian academic, journalist and foreign policy analyst. He is Distinguished Fellow at the Observer Research Foundation, New Delhi. He was previously Senior Fellow at the Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi, and prior to that, a professor at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore and Professor of Centre for South, Central, Southeast Asian and
The New Framework for the U.S.-India Defense Relationship was signed by Secretary Rumsfeld and Minister Mukherjee on June 28,
The 2005 New
On December 11, 2013, Devyani Khobragade, then the Deputy Consul General of the Consulate General of India in New York City, was charged by U.S. authorities with committing visa fraud and providing false statements in order to gain entry to the United States for Sangeeta Richard, a woman of Indian nationality, for employment as a domestic worker for Khobragade in New York. Khobragade was arrested the next day by U.S. federal law enforcement authorities, subjected to a body-cavity search commonly called a "strip search," presented to a judge and released the same day. Her arrest and treatment have received much media attention particularly in India, and have led to a major diplomatic standoff between India and the United States. Wikipedia, "Devyani Khobragade," January 11, 2014, accessed November 2, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Devyani_Khobragade.
Joshua Goldstein is a Professor Emeritus of International Relations, American University, Washington, DC; Research Scholar, University of Massachusetts and Nonresident Sadat Senior Fellow, CIDCM, University of Maryland.
Joshua Goldstein, International Relations, 6th ed. (New York: Longman,  2002), 43.
Tellis is a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace specializing in international security, defense, and Asian strategic issues.
Ambassador Teresita C. Schaffer is an expert on economic, political, security and risk management trends in India and Pakistan, as well as on the region that extends from Afghanistan through Bangladesh. She also serves as a senior adviser to McLarty Associates, a Washington-based international strategic advisory firm.
Mike Marra, "America-the Arsenal of Sovereignty," Global Security, accessed November 2, 2014, http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/2014/marra-gordon_arsenal-of-sovereignty.pdf.
University of Southern California, "Organizing your Social Sciences Research Paper," accessed October 3. 2014, http://libguides.usc.edu/content.php?pid= 83009&sid=615866.
Ibid.
Ibid.   
"A User's Guide to Political Science," January 31, 2011, accessed October 5, 2014, http://govthesis.site.wesleyan.edu/research/methods-and-analysis/analyzingqualitative-data/process-tracing/.
Paul Sanders, "The Five Most Abused Foreign-Policy Cliches," The National Interest, accessed May 28, 2014, http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/the-five-mostabused-foreign-policy-cliches-9978.
Michael Roskin, National Interest: From Abstraction to Strategy (Carlisle, PA:  Strategic Studies Institute, 1994), 1
Matt Sheehan, "Crimea Referendum Sparks Secession Debate in China," The Huffington Post, March 17, 2014, accessed May 30, 2014, http://www.huffington post.com/2014/03/17/crimea-referendum-china_n_4977901.html.
The term 'Happiness' is an over encompassing term to gain wealth, influence, territory, security etc.
Andrew Moravcsik, "Liberal Theories of International Relations: A Primer," accessed July 14, 2014, .http://www.princeton.edu/.
World Bank, "GDP (current US$)," accessed July 25, 2014, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD.
Alexander Hess, "Countries with the Most Immigrants," 247wallst.com, accessed July 25, 2014, http://247wallst.com/special-report/2013/09/25/countries-withthe-most-immigrants/3/.
  94  Mazlish, The Pradox of a Global USA, 25.
Andrew Goodpaster, Rita Hauser, and Robert Ellsworth, "America's National Interest-A Report from The Commission on America's National Interests," Executive Summary, 1.
Ibid., 31.    
Theda Skocpol, Social Policy in the United States: Future Possibilities in Historical Perspective (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995), 223.
Richard M. Gamble, In Search of the City on a Hill: The Making and Unmaking of an American Myth (London: Continuum, 2012), 17-18.
This report can be accessed at http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/files/ amernatinter.pdf.
White House, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: Government  Printing Office, 2010), 1, accessed July 26, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/ default/files/rss_viewer/national_security_strategy.pdf.
Ibid.   
White House, National Security Strategy, 24.    
Ibid., 25.    
Ibid., 26.   
Ibid., 30.    
David Karl, "The Greatest Challenge to U.S. National Security: A Weak Economy," The National Interest, 23 June 2014, accessed July 27, 2014, http://nationalinterest.org/feature/the-greatest-challenge-us-national-security-weakeconomy-10720.
  134  Ibid.
This report can be accessed at http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/files/ amernatinter.pdf.
Blue Water Navy: The Defense Security Service of the United States has defined the blue-water navy as, "a maritime force capable of sustained operation across the deep waters of open oceans. A blue-water navy allows a country to project power far from the home country and usually includes one or more aircraft carriers.
Sergei DeSilva-Ranasinghe, "Why the Indian Ocean Matters," The Diplomat, March 2, 2011, accessed August 13, 2014, http://thediplomat.com/2011/03/why-theindian-ocean-matters/.
  151  Central Intelligence Agency, "India," The World Factbook, June 22, 2014, accessed August 13, 2014, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-worldfactbook/geos/in.
html. 152 "Population of Non-Resident Indians (NRI): Country wise." May 1, 2012, accessed August 13, 2014, Http://Moia.Gov.In/Writereaddata/Pdf/NRISPIOS-Data(15-06-12)new.Pdf.
Arun Bajpayee, "Pakistan ISI and India," October 21, 2012, accessed November 2, 2014, http://www.dailyexcelsior.com/pakistan-isi-and-india. Operation TOPAZ, is a covert operation launched by the Pakistani intelligence agency, ISI, with the final Goal of breaking up India by thousand cuts.
Aditi Malhotra, "Punitive Deterrence through Covert Operations," April 10, 2010, accessed August 13, 2014, http://www.claws.in/356/punitive-deterrence-throughcovert-operations-aditi-malhotra.html.
155 Subir Bhaumik, July 10, 2007, accessed August 14, 2014, https://www.wiltonpark.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/india-insurgency-north-east.
pdf. 156 Gaurang Sahay, "Naxalism, Caste based Militias and Human Security: Lessons from Bihar," July 1, 2008, accessed August 19, 2014, http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/ mai/files/2012/07/gaurangsahay.pdf.
C. Christine Fair, Fighting to the End: The Pakistan Army's Way of War, vol. 1 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 155.
Daniel Byman, Deadly Connections: States That Sponsor Terrorism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 4.
"Northeast Insurgents Getting Arms from China: Govt," Times of India, March 13, 2013, accessed August 19, 2014, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Northeastinsurgents-getting-arms-from-China-Govt/articleshow/18940936.cms.
On April 15, 2013, a platoon-sized contingent of the Chinese PLA set up a camp in Raki Nula, 30 km south of Daulat Beg Oldi near the Aksai Chin-Ladakh Line of Actual Control (LAC). Chinese and Indian patrols in this disputed area are common, but both Chinese and Indian military forces have avoided establishing permanent bases and fortifications in the region. Indian forces responded to the Chinese presence by quickly establishing their own encampment 300 meters away. Negotiations between China and India lasted nearly three weeks, during which the Chinese position was reinforced and supported by trucks and helicopters. The dispute was resolved on 5 May, after which both sides withdrew. As part of the resolution, the Indian military agreed to dismantle some military structures 250 km to the south in the disputed Chumar sector that the Chinese perceived as threatening.
Nilanjana Bhowmick, "The Dalai Lama Steps Out in India, as China Seethes," Time,December 5, 2011, accessed October 28, 2014.   
David Scott and Raghav Sharma, Handbook of India's International Relations  (London: Routledge, 2011), 109.    
"India-foreign-relation-2012," August 8, 2014, accessed August 19, 2014,  http://www.mea.gov.in, 370.   
The World Bank, "India: Country Results Profile," January 1, 2013, accessed August 19, 2014, http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/ 0,,contentMDK:22888405~menuPK:141310~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSitePK:46 07,00.html.
Government of India, "Total Trade," Department of Commerce, August 12, 2014, accessed August 21, 2014, http://commerce.nic.in/eidb/default.asp.
As stated by Kaushik Basu, the chief economist of World Bank, in an interview to BBC. The details of the interview can be found on http://www.bbc. com/news/world-asia-india-25742983.
The Financial Express, Trade and Market, August 7, 2014, accessed August 21, 2014, http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/2014/08/07/49061.
Raja Menon, "India's Tough Road to the Security Council," The National Interest, April 4, 2014, accessed August 21, 2014, http://nationalinterest.org/ commentary/indias-tough-road-the-security-council-8305.
Rajiv Kumar and Santosh Kumar, In the National Interest: A Strategic Foreign Policy for India (Delhi: BS Books, 2010), 53.
"India on A Nuclear Weapon-Free World: From Conception to Reality," April 2, 2014, accessed August 22, 2014, http://www.idsa.in/keyspeeches/ InauguralAddressShriManmohanSingh.
Ibid.   
As stated by C Raja Mohan, Professor of South Asian Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore and Roland Rich, Executive Head, United Nations Democracy Fund in an interview with Jayshree Bajoria, Staff Writer, CFR.org, May 8, 2009.
Charu Sudan Kasturi, "Centre Mulls Iraq Rescue in Batches," Telegraphindia.com, June 22, 2014, accessed August 21, 2014, http://www.tele graphindia.com/1140622/jsp/nation/story_18538154.jsp#.U_awwKPCv8g.
Debashish Choudahary, "South Asia News, Business and Economy from India and Pakistan," Asia Times Online, June 23, 2005, accessed November 2, 2014, http://atimes.com/atimes/South_Asia/GF23Df04.html. Statement by Henry Kissinger, the then Security Advisor.
John Kerry, Secretary of State, "Remarks on the U.S.-India Strategic Partnership," U.S. Department of State, June 23, 2013, accessed November 2, 2014, http://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2013/06/211013.htm.
Amit Gupta, "The U.S.-India Relationship: Strategic Partnership or Complementary Interests?" February 1, 2005, accessed September 6, 2014, http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pdffiles/PUB596.pdf.
The U.S. role in getting Pakistan's troops to withdraw from Kargil is described in Bruce Riedel, "American Diplomacy and the 1999 Kargil Summit at Blair House," (Center for the Advanced Study of India, Policy Paper Series 2002), http://www.sas.upenn.edu/casi/reports/RiedelPaper051302.htm.
Carl Paddock, India-US Nuclear Deal Prospects and Implications (New Delhi: Epitome Books, 2009), 7.
Ibid., 22.   
The Devyani Khobragade incident, Iran sanctions have been some of the irritants.
Embassy of the United States, New Delhi, India, "Strategic Cooperation," accessed August 28, 2014, http://newdelhi.usembassy.gov/strategic-cooperation.html.
Financial Times, "India Becomes Biggest Foreign Buyer of US Weapons," February 24, 2014, accessed August 30, 2014, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ded3be9a-9c81-11e3-b535-00144feab7de.html#axzz3BtxLbVuo.
200 "India-US Relations,"
June 1, 2014, accessed August 30, 2014, http://www.mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/India-US_relations.pdf. 201 Ibid.
Embassy of India, "India -US Bilateral Trade," accessed August 30, 2014, https://www.indianembassy.org/pages.php?id=42.
"India-US Relations," June 1, 2014, accessed August 30, 2014, http://www.mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/India-US_relations.pdf.
Ibid.    
Ibid.   
"India-US Relations," June 1, 2014, accessed August 30, 2014, http://www.mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/India-US_relations.pdf.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Embassy of the United States, Offices and Departments, accessed September 3, 2014, http://newdelhi.usembassy.gov/cultural_affairs_section.html.
Henry Kissinger, Diplomacy (New York: Simon and Schuster, 199), 813.
J. Goldstein, International Relations, 6th ed. (New York: Longman, 2002), 43.    
"Oxford Dictionary, "World Order," accessed September 27, 2014, http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/us/definition/american_english/world-order.
Tyler S, Moselle, "The Concept of World Order," June 19, 2008, accessed September 25, 2014, http://www.hks.harvard.edu/cchrp/research/ConceptOf WorldOrder_Moselle.pdf.
Ibid.   
Ibid.
Ibid. As stated by N. Ferguson in his article in foreign policy (July/August 2004) titled A World without Power.
Helene Cooper, "Cost of Wars a Rising Issue as Obama Weighs Troop Levels," The New York Times, June 21, 2011, accessed September 13, 2014, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/news/obama-afghanistan-war.
Danny Quah, "The Global Economy's Shifting Centre of Gravity," Global Policy 2, no. 1 (January 1, 2011), accessed November 2, 2014, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1758-5899.2010.00066.x/pdf.
Christopher Bassford, "Clausewitz and His Works," March 18, 2013, accessed September 14, 2014, http://www.clausewitz.com/readings/Bassford/Cworks/Works.htm.
Ministry of Defense, "Strategic Trends Program, Global Strategic Trends-Out  to 2045," accessed November 2, 2014, https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ uploads/attachment_data/file/348164/20140821_DCDC_GST_5_Web_Secured.pdf.
Ibid.   
The Oxford Dictionary defines swing state as, "A US state where the two major political parties have similar levels of support among voters, viewed as important in determining the overall result of a presidential election." In the similar context the author has used this analogy with these four states.
Daniele Kliman and Richard Fontaine, "Global Swing States: Brazil, India, Indonesia, Turkey and the Future of International Order, November 27, 2012, accessed September 12, 2014, http://www.cnas.org/files/documents/publications/CNAS_Global SwingStates_KlimanFontaine.pdf.
CNN, "Transcripts," Fareed Zakaria, September 21, 2014, accessed November  3, 2014,  http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1409/21/fzgps.01.html. Indian PM Modi in an interview with Mr. Fareed Zakaria of CNN
Ashley J. Tellis and Teresita Schaffer, Challenges and Choices (Strategic Asia) (Seattle: National Bureau of Asian Research, 2008), 214-225.
Alok Bansal, "Iran: Its Strategic Importance," Strategic Analysis 36, no. 6 (November-December 2012): 848-858, accessed September 23, 2014, http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09700161.2012.728871?journalCode=rsan2 0#preview.
Tellis and Schaffer, Challenges and Choices (Strategic Asia),[214][215][216][217][218][219][220][221][222][223][224][225] 
Bouton, "The Future of the U.S.-India Partnershi."
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
President, Mr. Obama called Indo-US partnership as, "The Defining Partnership for the Twenty First Century." Another significant aspect of the relationship has been that in spite of the highs and lows of the relationship, business relationships and people to people contact have always remained positive.
As seen from the review of the literature, the Indo-US relations are poised to take off, if both nations decide in that direction. Both nations have commonality of national interests so there is a huge potential for cooperation. The cooperation between both countries is already envied, in the Eastern world. However, there is still a tremendous scope for growth.
The literature available on the Indo-US relations is extensive. This thesis combines the literature that is readily available and presents it to the reader in such a manner, that the readers would have a single point reference on this topic. At the end, the analysis of the literature will reveal possible paths for the growth in the Indo-US relations. It will be left to the readers to accept these various options or not.
Nations are guided only by their own interests and have no obligation to other countries which did not conform to those interests. 
25
The National Security Strategy (2010) states the national interests of the US as defined by the President Barrack Obama. 
116
1. Security: The security of the United States, its citizens, and U.S. allies and partners.
2. Prosperity: A strong, innovative, and growing U.S. economy in an open international economic system that promotes opportunity and prosperity.
3. Security: Respect for universal values at home and around the world; and 4. International Order: An international order advanced by U.S. leadership that promotes peace, security, and opportunity through stronger cooperation to meet global challenges.
Security is the first theme of the US national interest. The US acknowledges the threats to US citizens, the homeland and its interests abroad. While accepting it as a challenges, it prepares for meeting those challenges. 
117
The strategy to emulate this design is rooted in enhancing security at home, 118 preparing 116 
White House,
National Security Strategy,
17. 117
118
India is a home to around one third of the world's poor. 
165
166
Though there are adequate opportunities and skills available in India, in addition to its red tape culture, what hinders India's growth is its rusting infrastructure. 
167
India is one of the worst affected country from the scourge of terrorism and insurgency. The northeastern insurgency has been alive since independence, while the Kashmir dispute and Naxalism are also taking a toll. The cross border support to terrorism from Pakistan has also resulted in the terrorist attacks like the parliament attack and the Mumbai attack where even people from foreign countries were massacred etc.
After 9/11 even the world has realized the gravity of the situation and how terrorism affects world security.
India's approach to terrorism has evolved systematically. 
178
179
The effect of climate change is highly pronounced in Indian and South Asian context. 
180
181
183
184
The need to study the global trends in inevitable for decision making in the highest echelons of the government. Based on the trends, the policymakers are able to identify the gaps and holes in the policy, take corrective measures and then channelize the policy in order to bring changes in their stride to derive maximum possible benefit from them. If ignored, the changes shaping the world can become overwhelming in the later time period and might become difficult to respond to. Hence it is imperative to analyze the Indo-US relations keeping into perspective the present and prospective future geopolitical trends.
The US is considered to be a superpower because of its ability to project power into multiple parts of the world, at times at the same time. The superpower status comes from economic might, military capability, political influence and culture (soft power). 
226
226
f. Conduct anti-terrorism cooperation, pose a common alliance in fight against terrorism. Ensure high level of intelligence cooperation. g. Promote democracy and human rights in Asia and other regions affected by oppression, dictatorship and violation of human rights.
With US as an ally, India will be able to grow stronger regionally and globally.
India would receive US assistance in developing its economy, leadership at world
The relations between India and US are poised to take off. This can be seen from the bipartisan support from leaders of both the nations. However the rhetoric usually does not match the ground realities. It is time both the nations realize the inevitable strategic importance of each other. It the duty of both the nations to apprise the citizens about this importance, instill amongst the bureaucrats the necessity for continuation of policies, and building up of robust relations. It takes a long time to set up the process and systems to synergize competencies. It will also take long time to understand each other's cultures.
Bargains will have to be made on the issues which are contentious. One-upmanship will deteriorate the relations and will not be beneficial to anyone. Instead the alliance of the two largest democracies can result in a world which is stable, prosperous, peaceful, and a symbol of hope for countries which want to imbibe the democratic spirit. At the same time it will prove as a deterrent to those nations and non-state actors, who threaten world peace and stability, show a lack of respect for human rights and engage in criminal and inhuman activities.