# ID: 600b6c39b8c045b2a5b18df47002a0ae
# Title: Political Leadership of a Military at War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The United States maintains the largest, most powerful military in the world, but the nation has not always been successful in turning military capability into desired political outcomes. This paper examines some of the most successful militaries in history, and evaluates their processes for linking military objectives to political end states. It recommends a formula, based on historical precedent, to ensure that operational level objectives remain properly nested beneath theatrestrategic and national-strategic objectives, and then uses this formula to evaluate the outcome of the 1991 Gulf War. The results of this evaluation form a strong argument in support of active involvement of political leaders in military operations.
Paper Abstract
Political Leadership of a Military at War. The United States maintains the largest, most powerful military in the world, but the nation has not always been successful in turning military capability into desired political outcomes. This paper examines some of the most successful militaries in history, and evaluates their processes for linking military objectives to political end states. It recommends a formula, based on historical precedent, to ensure that operational level objectives remain properly nested beneath theatre-strategic and national-strategic objectives, and then uses this formula to evaluate the outcome of the 1991 Gulf War. The results of this evaluation form a strong argument in support of active involvement of political leaders in military operations.
Carl von Clausewitz is revered by the American military, yet his teachings on the subordination of military objectives to the political are often resented, and sometimes disregarded, by operational commanders. The dichotomy of venerating Clausewitzian ideas on war-fighting, but begrudging his theories of wartime civilian-military (civ-mil) relations, has been so common in American military history that it begs the question: What effect does the involvement of national political leaders in military operations have on military effectiveness?
In answering this question, history challenges the American military to examine other civ-mil structures, and appreciate their value in comparison with the American way of war. If the U.S. military is able to discard its inherent distaste of subjugation to political ends, and rationally appreciate the proven historical benefits of assertive political involvement in military operations, it will become a more effective fighting force. By combining strong, specific guidance from political leaders; consistent supervision of military actions and objectives at the operational level of war; and implementing policy education for all ranks of the armed forces the United States could create a three tiered defense in depth to ensure that its military objectives are properly nested with its strategic, and in-line with the nation's desired end state.
The political system of the United States was set up to be the first of its kind since the democracies of ancient Greece, but the enduring influence of Hellenic government has not extended to military control. Early American revolutionaries fought similarly to the Greeks, using a framework of citizen-soldiers and political generals; however, the U.S. system has evolved over time to mirror that of America's former imperial masters: the British. Today both England and the U.S. maintain a professional military separate from the government, and have sacrificed some attributes of the Greek politician-commander format. The greatest of these lost attributes is a crystal clear understanding by the operational commander of the national desired end state.
Thucydides' grand history of the Peloponnesian Wars provides detailed insight into all levels of war in ancient Greece, and portrays a radically different method for democracies to lead their militaries. At the national-strategic level, the Greek democracies openly debated the merits of their nation's war aims, and the strategies necessary to achieve them. When these Greek senates finished debating, a member of that same democratic body was chosen to lead the armed forces into battle. In both Athens and Sparta it was often the most active citizens, such as the Spartan King Archidamus or the Athenians Cleon and Nicias, that left these debates with orders to take command of the state's fielded forces. 
2
The merits of this system are exemplified in the battle for Pylos between Athens and Sparta. In the initial fight, several hundred Spartans became trapped on the adjacent island of Sphacteria. From this disadvantageous position, the Spartans were forced to send a delegation to Athens in order to sue for peace. Chinese Communists under Mao Tse-tung were all led politically and militarily by the same individuals. All three achieved astounding military successes, and each used diplomacy and kinetic force to support political ends. Of the three, Mao Tse-tung was the only leader who was able to leave the battlefield, and achieve as much success as a political leader as he had as a politician-general. "Chairman" Mao achieved these successes through political maneuver and assertive military oversight, a potent combination in any age of war.
Mao Tse-tung wrote that "War is politics and war itself is a political action", and therefore viewed his military commanders as part of a political force working towards a political goal. 
5
6
Mao's opposite, President Truman, had a very different national-strategic objective: The prevention of World War III. 
7
Throughout the conflict, General Peng continuously communicated his intentions to Beijing; MacArthur did not communicate with Washington nearly as well. As the Chinese prepared to enter the war, Peng informed Mao that his plan was to establish defensive positions above the 38th parallel in order to support guerrilla operations in the South. 
8
9
General Peng consistently focused on military constraints in the field (fatigue, food, clothing, and ammo), but Mao saw how every offensive would affect interaction at the negotiating table. On four separate occasions, Mao ordered changes to Peng's war plans. In one instance, after vigorous disagreement, Peng was forced to explain to his commanders that they were advancing on orders from the central leadership "because of political considerations." 
10
The intervention of the Chinese in Korea broke the fragile American chain of command.
MacArthur had been ordered not to enter North Korea if there were indications that the Chinese would intervene, but he did anyway. 
11
The dichotomy in political oversight between the two main belligerents was crucial to the outcome of the Korean War. Mao, in constant conversation with his commander, ensured that every military action was working towards the desired political end state, even if it meant certain sacrifices at the operational level. Truman, on the contrary, provided inadequate supervision, and let his famous military commander run the war. This lack of supervision continued until MacArthur's military decisions became so blatantly incongruous with political objectives that he had to be relieved of command.
It is impossible for a military leader to read the communications between Mao and Peng and not feel General Peng's frustration. Many might classify Mao's leadership as micromanagement, but they would be wrong. The amazing performance of the Chinese, in which they forced the recent victors of WWII out of North Korea and held a superpower to a stalemate, was due in large part to the coordination of military and political objectives. The Chinese had a harmony in civ-mil effort that the U.S. never achieved. Every Chinese soldier, every diplomat at cease-fire negotiations, and every Chinese General were all working under Mao's guidance towards the same ends. That cannot be said of the Americans.
The Chinese Soldiers' efforts in the Korean War, as well as in China's Communist Revolution, were united with Mao's not just because of his close military supervision, but also because each soldier was educated in what their government was trying to achieve. Communist nations have always believed in a level of political indoctrination that western countries generally find "undemocratic", but they shouldn't. If there is truly such a thing as a "Strategic
Corporal", then the U.S. would be wise to educate that corporal on strategic objectives.
No nation has politically educated its fighting forces, or achieved a more pronounced victory over the United States, than the Communist North Vietnamese-the two are not coincidental. The Vietnamese extended Mao's idea of war as "politics with bloodshed" into an all-encompassing theory of conflict known as "Dau Tranh." 
13
14
"I don't know what we're doing here" is a quote that has never been attributed to a Viet Minh Soldier, yet is so common as to be cliche when uttered by U.S. Soldiers fighting America's limited wars on foreign shores. to do what should be done. The two are often incongruous. Recently, there has been debate over the use of U.S. drone strikes against the Taliban on the Afghanistan/Pakistan border, and whether they are doing more harm then good. There is no one better positioned to make that decision than U.S Soldiers in the field. The Army's "Every Soldier a Sensor" concept instructs that Soldiers "actively observe for details for the commander's critical information requirement (CCIR)", but with the proper education they could do even more. 
17
This idea of a politically educated force, along with the lessons gleaned from the Greeks and Chinese on political guidance and supervision, offer operational advantages which could be capitalized on in modern warfare. The 1991 Gulf War is a case in point. It was one of the most dominant victories in military history, but left the U.S. President who orchestrated it unsatisfied with the results. 
18
When diplomacy failed in the early 1990's, Saddam Hussein's Iraq seized Kuwait, and stood poised to invade the other oil-producing Arab nations of the Middle East. It was imperative for the oil dependent economies of the world to prevent Saddam from gaining control of Saudi Arabia's petroleum resources, which would allow one unpredictable dictator an unacceptable level of influence over the global energy supply. Saudi Arabia's defense was therefore a clear imperative, but beyond that national-strategic objectives proved extremely difficult to solidify. The Bush Administration put forth an admirable effort in the composition of National Security Directive 54 (NSD 54), but this authorization for war and list of strategic objectives still ended up short of the mark.
NSD 54 is generally hailed as a prime example of political guidance to an operational commander. The directive provided national and theatre-strategic objectives, and allowed the military professionals to determine how to achieve them. 
19
20
21
This, in turn, required increased supervision of military objectives by political leaders, and eventually led to the unsatisfactory results of a brilliant military victory.
President Bush and his Secretary of Defense, Dick Cheney, were forced to intervene at the operational level of war on multiple occasions. The timeline to launch the ground war, the SCUD ballistic missile threat, and the cease-fire negotiations were all decision points that required significant political supervision. The civilian leadership's attempts to steer their operational commander's actions at these points met with varying degrees of success, but they were most successful when they were most assertive.
One of the first disconnects between Schwarzkopf's Central Command (CENTCOM) and the national leadership occurred when Russia attempted to broker a peace deal with Iraq. The Bush Administration saw the Russian effort as a threat; if it achieved its goal of preventing a ground war many of NSD 54's objectives could not be met. Schwarzkopf, on the other hand, saw the Russian proposal as an opportunity to avoid American casualties. The rift between military leaders and policy makers over the Russian proposal was only intensified when it garnered French and even limited Arab support. Schwarzkopf was pressured to accelerate the timeline and start the ground war before a peace negotiation could fracture the Coalition.
CENTCOM's commanders opposed this move for military reasons, and Schwarzkopf successfully sided with them against Bush's Administration. The ramifications of this "on-time" start ended up being inconsequential, because the Russians couldn't get their brokered deal through in time, but it could have been a tremendous error. If Saddam had been a more astute leader, or the French had garnered more Arab support for the Russian plan, Schwarzkopf's refusal to accelerate his ground attack could have resulted in a negotiated settlement prior to the ground war. This settlement would have left Iraq's center of gravity, the Republican Guard, largely intact, and prevented the achievement of a primary strategic objective. Considering the amount of U.S. treasure spent in the deployment of half a million troops to the other side of the world, this hypothetical end would have to be considered a tremendous failure. 
22
23
24
25
Political direction and supervision were not perfect during the build up and execution of the war, but they would likely have been sufficient if the U.S. had terminated the war better. At the cease-fire negotiations President Bush and his advisors failed in all three aspects of civilian leadership: guidance, supervision, and education. The decision to end hostilities was made in Washington based on the belief that the military objectives were assured and a concern that the continued destruction of a military in full retreat would have negative effects on world-opinion. 
27
CENTCOM and Washington had intense, rigorous, debate on the plan for the air war and on the plan for ground combat, but there was no plan for war termination. The cease-fire negotiations were conducted in a tent in Safwan, Iraq by General Schwarzkopf with no political representation and zero guidance. 
28
29
Unfortunately for the U.S., the territory was returned at no cost; a poor political use of combat success. 
30
31
It would have been quite different if the NCA had been as involved with CENTCOM's plans for war termination as it was with his plan's for war. The lack of guidance and supervision is hard to understand. Nevertheless, if Schwarzkopf's had benefited from a career which emphasized education in American foreign policy, he would likely have made better diplomatic decisions -even without civilian oversight. The Dau Tranh philosophy, which Schwarzkopf himself fought and lost to in Vietnam, educated its soldiers on the unity of the armed and political struggle. It inculcated every warfighter with the fundamental ideas of the political end state; the type of end state CENTCOM should have been focused on.
Promotion of democracy and self-determination have always been bedrock principles of the United States. A clear political education system for the military, one that burned this national philosophy into its war-fighters like the Communists burned Marxism into theirs, would have reaped rewards at Safwan. If Schwarzkopf had entered that tent as an indoctrinated student of American foreign policy -not educated in the vagaries of various presidential administrations, but a student of the nation's enduring democratic policy ideals -it is hard to believe he would have been focused on anything other than precipitating Saddam Hussein's downfall.
The rebuttal to robust political involvement at the operational level of war stems from the thesis that political limitations hinder the military's ability to achieve its military objectives.
This thesis is entirely correct. The most efficient, expedient method of achieving a military objective can only be determined by a military professional, and any interference with that professional's desired course of action will reduce the probability of the objective being achieved. In order to avoid this, goal oriented commanders have often attempted to shed political interference when it has been possible. As Supreme Allied Commander, Europe during operations in Kosovo, General Wesley Clark argued for this thesis when he stated that "Using military force effectively requires departure from the political dynamic and following the socalled "principles of war." 
32
The irreconcilable flaw with the very logical thesis purported above is that nations do not go to war to achieve military objectives; nations go to war to achieve political objectives. This fact may not be optimal for professional Soldiers, it certainly was not for General Clark, but it is the unfortunate reality. Political end states are hard to define, they can evolve, and often require coordination across all aspects of national power; in short, they are difficult. Military objectives are generally clear, concrete, and achievable solely through the application of combat power.
The tendency for operational commanders to concentrate on the latter at the expense of the former is, therefore, natural. However, by forcing the military to keep its objectives nested underneath political goals, even at the expense of freedom of action, civilian leaders ensure that combat power is not fruitlessly wasted. From the American Revolution to Vietnam, the U.S. has repeated first-hand experience fighting wars in which the victors lost more battles than they won, and the losers achieved their military objectives but failed to achieve their desired political end state. America's first General, George Washington, understood that achieving military objectives alone would not assure victory, it would be valuable for America's future commanders to remember the same.
Wars are won by the combined force of all aspects of national power. The military instrument may bear the plurality of the burden to impose a nations will, but it will still only be effective if its efforts are orchestrated with diplomacy, information, and economics. This orchestration is the responsibility of the military's political masters, and it has always been an extremely daunting task. Keeping military commanders in line with political will takes assertiveness, intelligence, and often greatness, but it is a challenge that modern governments can meet through the theories outlined in this essay. By providing comprehensive political guidance, intense and assertive political supervision of operational commanders in the field, and recurring political education, the U.S. government can ensure that objectives at the operational level of war remain properly nested under the national-strategic objectives.
The success or failure of the American government in executing this type of political oversight will likely be the key to America's future military success. Even with the rise of some "near-peer competitors", it is nearly indisputable that the U.S. will continue to have the largest, most capable military force in the world for the foreseeable future. The outstanding cadre of American commanders should have little difficulty utilizing this overwhelming force to achieve U.S. military objectives in all American conflicts for decades to come. Will these military successes lead to American victories? The answer to that question lies in the capabilities of future American governments to align their armed forces with political objectives. We shall see.
assuming command in Pylos, Cleon's forces were able to assault Sphacteria, break the Spartan lines, and pin the Spartans between two Athenian forces. Cleon had his operational objectives in his hand, the Spartan force was a single command away from being destroyed, and Pylos would be Athens for as long as the Athenians desired to keep forces there.
assuming command in Pylos, Cleon's forces were able to assault Sphacteria, break the Spartan lines, and pin the Spartans between two Athenian forces. Cleon had his operational objectives in his hand, the Spartan force was a single command away from being destroyed, and Pylos would be Athens for as long as the Athenians desired to keep forces there.
Even more importantly than influencing a Soldier's decision to violate a rule, and possibly hinder larger U.S efforts, political education could help to ensure that U.S. operational objectives remain properly nested. It is easy for a military to do what it is good at, much harder
NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release; Distribution is unlimited. Reference: DOD Directive 
5230.24 13
Naval War College
NWC
Department of the Navy