# ID: 607d779fae6a422093b38ce6e48bdd65
# Title: Russian Military Personnel Policy and Proficiency: Reforms and Trends, 1991-2021
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
Russia's transition to a professional military, paired with an increase in technical military education and training requirements, improved the capability and readiness of Russian forces.
Russia's military leaders expressed satisfaction with Russian military commanders' technical and leadership performance in Syria, with Gerasimov claiming in 2017 that Russia's performance in Syria upheld "the superiority of the Russian military school and science."
687 However, some Russian military scholars continued to warn that parts of the force might lack material and professional motivations to serve.
688 • Training initiatives introduced in 2005 and expanded after the 2008 New Look reforms, particularly among contract enlisted personnel, focused on improving training and proficiency standards.
According to senior Russian military leadership, this effort continued, in part to respond to the increasing complexity of delivered weapon systems and military equipment.
689 • Military prestige and popular support improved significantly prior to 2022.
As of 2021, the military represented the institution in Russia that had the greatest degree of trust and approval of the general public.
690 Furthermore, support for military service appeared to have increased.
691 • Hazing and other negative service conditions were also areas of focus for senior military leader attention, as noted previously, and had reportedly improved.
However, with the expansion of contract services, some hazing appeared to have spread there as well: In one 2020 poll, 55 percent of military respondents said they experienced some sort of hazing in the past six years.
692 • Peacetime draft evasion had been reduced dramatically, from 6,200 in 2013 to 1,600 in 2018.