# ID: 607d779fae6a422093b38ce6e48bdd65
# Title: Russian Military Personnel Policy and Proficiency: Reforms and Trends, 1991-2021
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help
• These initiatives also addressed but did not fully resolve several of the perennial problems that had previously hampered the Russian military's effectiveness. • Although overall proficiency might have improved, multiple factors suggest significant variance in individual proficiency across the Armed Forces. • Russia might not fully trust its military personnel, even as more of them increasingly serve under contract; prior to 2022, the Russian government was working hard to improve the loyalty of all its service members by promoting lessons of military history and patriotic values at all echelons. • Investments and initiatives between 2009 and 2022 increased the base level of professionalism and readiness within Russia's Armed Forces, although the 2022 invasion of Ukraine exposed persistent weaknesses within the system.
In sum, Russia's approach to personnel reform as part of a broader modernization scheme for the Armed Forces appears to have been proactive and deliberative in addressing long-standing challenges within the Armed Forces. However, as discussed in this report, Russia's performance during the 2022 invasion of Ukraine suggests that despite policy and demonstrated improvement in many areas, multiple problems remain. Russian military leaders might have overestimated proficiency levels, and the conflict itself could have long-term implications for the recruitment and retention of Russian military personnel, based on our findings from the pre-war period.     
Table 2.
Russian military reforms and a 2010-2020 State Armament Program, set into motion after the Russia-Georgia war in 2008, sought to enact far-reaching changes to the Russian military. These reforms, which Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu anticipated would contribute to "a new qualitative level" for the Russian military, included replacing or modernizing 70 percent of Russian military equipment by 2020, revitalizing Russia's defense industrial base, and bolstering the number of professional personnel in the Russian military. 1 By 2021, this investment and reforms initiated by these programs collectively yielded a significantly more capable and ready force available to Russian political leaders. 
2
3
Overall, Russian military modernization generally is understood to reflect changes in Russian strategic exigencies and evolving conceptions of the nature of modern war. At a strategic level, Russian analysts have highlighted the revision of global military ambition following the collapse of the Soviet Union in favor of a regional posture focused on territorial defense and the assertion of influence in "buffer" states between Russia and its potential adversaries. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
The significance of a strong and capable force is underscored in Russian military doctrine. While the technological investments continue to receive top priority, the 2014 Military Doctrine explicitly emphasizes personnel issues, with the objective of yielding "highly professional servicemen devoted to their Homeland." 20 Relevant ambitions of the Russian military, which will be explored in detail in subsequent chapters, reflect a desire "to raise the prestige of military service and to prepare citizens of the Russian Federation for such service in a comprehensive manner" and "to develop the mobilization base and to ensure the mobilization deployment of the Armed Forces, other troops and bodies, as well as to improve methods of recruiting and training of mobilization manpower reserves and mobilization manpower resources." 
21
With this report, we seek to fill a gap in open-source Western analysis of Russian military personnel and proficiency and complement existing work. Some recent analysis has considered policies and trends in Russia's approach to military personnel, primarily in the context of broader modernization efforts through the New Look reforms of 2008 to roughly 2012, to December 2021, where the scope our research ended. Reforms seeking to professionalize the Russian military have received some analytical attention, as have the cultural and social trends associated with Russian military. Russian military scholars have publicly released some of their analyses on these professionalization efforts. For example, one study from 2014, published by the Russian Ministry of Defense (MoD)'s Sociology Center, found that more than a quarter of Russian military personnel surveyed reported problems with their infantry equipment. 
22
23
Within the limited body of work on the subject, a 2019 RAND publication on the future of the Russian military includes the most thorough recent treatment of Russian personnel policy and trends. 
24
25
Other publications have offered views of personnel reforms within the broader consideration of Russian military modernization. Within this context, IISS analysis of Russian military modernization describes the evolution of the personnel system from the Soviet massmobilization model to the existing system of military units maintained at high readiness and staffed by contract-based military personnel. 
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
30 Keir Giles, Assessing Russia's Reorganized and Rearmed Military, Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Task Force White Paper, May 3, 2017. 
31
32
33
35
37
The study leading to this report was undertaken to fill a gap in Western analysis on Russian military manpower and proficiency and help improve understanding of recent trends. More specifically, we ask:
• How has the Russian military conceptualized and implemented reforms in the areas of recruitment, retention, and personnel proficiency from 1991-2021? • How has the Russian approach to military personnel changed since the initial post-Soviet period? • What were the notable trends in the areas of Russian military recruitment, retention, and proficiency between the 2000s and 2021?
Within each chapter, analysis of available open-source data and literature on Russian military recruitment, retention, and proficiency addresses these questions and provides new insights into recent trends and their potential significance.
To conduct this study, we assembled a research team that included deep regional, functional, and linguistic expertise. Team members drew from knowledge and professional backgrounds in military sociology, Russian military history, social psychology, military intelligence analysis, and national security policy to approach each chapter topic. Extensive Russian-language skills provided access to a variety of published and unpublished works from the Russian defense and academic spheres.
Broad examination of Russian-language sources, including military journals, local polling results, leadership statements, and unpublished academic works, offered direct insights into the information and considerations that Russian military leaders might be incorporating into their approach to recruitment, retention, and proficiency of military personnel. The research approach within each chapter relies on qualitative analysis of primary-and secondary-source documents and data, as well as secondary source review of analytical articles and book chapters. Englishlanguage sources of information offered complementary insights for each chapter and included previously published research, journal and news articles, and announcements from the Russian MoD. These sources also helped the search for Russian-language sources, including research published in Russian scholarly journals.
In recent decades, a growing number of scholars in Russia have published both quantitative and qualitative research on their country's military manpower and personnel system. Although some of this research has appeared in English-language peer-reviewed journals, 
38
40
Some pragmatic constraints limited the methodologies applied in this report. Partially because of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, team members were unable to travel to Russia for interviews, and thus relied exclusively on written works by Russian authors. 
41
42
Within the literature reviews conducted for each chapter, we assume that Russian research related to military recruitment, retention, or proficiency is a sign that some military leaders have an interest in this topic. Although a member of the Russian Armed Forces might support a particular line of research on their personnel, we cannot conclude who within the MoD has interest in particular research findings. Additionally, the research questions and approaches 
38
Work, Vol. 5, No. 2, 2010. 39
'nykh issledovaniy, Vol. 10, No. 2, June 2018b. 40
Another important caveat to consider within each chapter is that the quality of research cited in Russian sources might not always rise to the level of standards used by U.S. scholars. For example, surveys of Russian personnel did not always use well-designed survey instruments, representative samples, or sophisticated modeling, and some articles did not provide sufficient methodological details about their research designs. Where possible, we have identified the relevant methodological details of the Russian sources cited.
Geographically, Russian military scholars might not always have the resources to collect data within all military districts. Thus, research reviewed in this report might focus more on some districts (e.g., the Western military district) over others, not because one is a higher priority to Russian military leaders, but because of the ease and cost-effectiveness of data collection.
Finally, we exclusively reviewed open-source research, and there likely are personnel-related studies that the Russian military has not released to the public.
To shed light on how Russia has pursued the professionalization of its military personnel, we consider policies and trends in three core areas: recruitment, retention, and proficiency. Each chapter draws from Russian literature on these subjects to focus on select topics of likely interest to military leaders.
Chapter 2 offers an overview of the post-Cold War history of Russian military personnel policies, including the evolving challenges and aspirations that shaped modern policies. Chapter 3 identifies recent trends that are relevant to recruitment into the Russian military, including popular perceptions of the military and military service, the qualities that the Russian military appears to be seeking and finding in its conscripts, and contract recruitment efforts. Chapter 4 focuses on core issues associated with personnel retention in the Russian military. Chapter 5 addresses Russian efforts to improve the proficiency of its military personnel. The report's concluding chapter reviews core findings from the study and identifies ways in which recent trends have or have not addressed enduring challenges within the Russian military personnel system.
Chapter 2. Russian Military Personnel Problems and Reforms  Between 1991 and 2009   Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the newly renamed Russian Armed Forces were thrown into a period of disarray, austerity spending, and collapse of prestige domestically and globally. The personnel in the Russian military in the 1990s and most of the early 2000s experienced firsthand poor service conditions, low or unpaid wages, lack of social supports, and criminality within their units. However, throughout this period, the Russian military sought to improve and modify personnel policies to correct the course, even if their efforts were underfunded or imperfect. In this chapter, we will outline the manning and challenges faced during the tumultuous years from 1991 through 2009, until the restart of Russia's most recent military reform efforts, and will focus on issues relating to personnel proficiency, recruitment, and retention. We then will discuss the multiple attempts over this period to resolve these problems and discuss the policies created to resolve these problems.
Systemic Personnel Problems of the Russian Armed Forces: 1991-2009   The Russian military of the 1990s and early 2000s faced daunting constraints and problems. Structurally, the military was struggling to downsize and modernize after the collapse of the Soviet Union because of entrenched military-bureaucratic views and severe financial shortcomings within a larger Russian economy in freefall. This section will catalogue these problems across three areas: proficiency, recruitment, and retention. It should be noted that several of the cultural problems inherited by the Russian military in the 1990s were carryovers from the late Soviet period (for example, hazing and undermanning), but Soviet military policy is outside the scope of our study, and our analysis begins in 1991. We have identified several systemic problems and note whether and how they affect three broad buckets of challenges: proficiency, recruitment, and retention. Several problems have had effects in more than one category.
Historically, recruiting (or forcing service) was not a problem for the Soviet Union or the polities that preceded it because manpower was plentiful. As Alexei Arbatov describes, Commanders relied on high levels of manpower much more than on technology or mobility, and on the practice of fighting wars by overwhelming opponents with their huge numbers and by being able to absorb much greater losses than their opponents. . . . 
43
44
Similar to the recruiting challenges, morale problems, wage arrears, and poor service conditions dogged service members throughout the 1990s and early 2000s and led to a severe retention challenge during this period.
A significant proficiency problem with its attendant effects on readiness arose after the collapse of the Soviet Union when Russia inherited large force structure and the inability to effectively man this force. In 1991, Russia inherited a military with 2.8 million service members and hundreds of undermanned units. 
45
46
47
48
49
50
Another set of significant issues that created proficiency challenges were associated with training conditions and the lack of money for training. Military training efforts remained poor throughout the 1990s. The first major exercise of the newly constituted Russian military did not take place until December 1992, and service members were quickly losing the ability to conduct core functions of their roles (e.g., some pilots logged at most 20 flight hours per year, and even among this low number, crews within regiments also were divided into flying and nonflying crews). 52 Few service members trained together before being deployed to Chechnya. 53 By 1996, Dale Herspring explains, "Russia had gone through more than ten training cycles without conducting any serious training," creating "a whole generation of platoon and company commanders (except those who had served in Chechnya) [who] had no field experience." This issue persisted through the battalion, regiment, and division levels of the Ground Forces. 
54
55
56
Military morale and population support was low in the early years of the new Russian military, which discouraged many from pursuing the once-prestigious military career path, which led to recruitment challenges. Although the Armed Forces remained one of the most trusted institutions in the post-Soviet period at a time when most state institutions at the time had lost popular trust (in 1993), only 59 percent of the Russian population reported confidence in the Armed Forces because the image of the military as a profession and personal preparedness to serve waned. 58 Military service decreased in prestige as service members' pay became uncompetitive amid the Russian economic crisis of the 1990s and because the military faced systemic issues stemming from the poor treatment of both conscripts and officers. 59 Moreover, while the populace might have previously been willing or forced to make sacrifices for the national defense in a command economy, the democratization process of the 1990s led to other priorities and a greater focus on human rights. Pallin explains that, "in practice, society displayed its unwillingness to participate in developing the Armed Forces through draft evasion on a massive scale, and this became one of the main reasons for military reform." 60 Draft evasion is discussed in greater detail in a section that follows.
problem led to severe recruitment and retention issues for the Armed Forces. Conscripts faced dedovshchina (which roughly translates to "hazing"), which Julie Elkner defines as "the widespread systems of informal power hierarchies that operated in Soviet barracks, and the associated violence in which senior conscripts bullied and victimised new recruits" throughout their two years of service. 
61
63
65
67
In the 1990s and early 2000s, many families were desperate to keep their sons out of conscription, which contributed to the military's recruitment issues. In the context of an overall demographic decline that shrunk the pool from which to draw eligible men for service and an entrenched pro-conscription element within the military bureaucracy that wanted to punish evaders, pervasive draft evasion created a thorny set of issues in Russian society. Conscription was in need of immediate reform. 68 Some officers within the Armed Forces resisted overhauling the conscription system, claiming, for example, that the only fix to the hazing problem was harsher discipline. This disdain for the well-being of conscripts and minimal efforts by the MoD to assuage public concerns during the 1990s further contributed to draft evasion and lowerquality Armed Forces. 
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
The combination of poor physical and mental health of potential draftees and a complicated system of deferments and exemptions (estimates by the military suggested up to 90 percent of eligible draftees received legal deferments) meant that the Russian military expended precious resources on recruitment to meet annual conscription quotas. 
79
80
82
84
85
86
81 Demina, 2001.
Voenno-Promyshlennyi Kur'er, No. 24, June 23, 2010. 83
The Russian military faced a twin morale crisis as it navigated the 1990s and early 2000s; this crisis affected proficiency, recruitment, and retention. Several factors, such as the ambient confusion and chaos of the collapse of the Soviet Union and loss of social standing of the military within Russian society in the aftermath of the collapse, led to a military that was structurally in disarray and strategically adrift, and to the individual disillusionment or despair of military personnel about the future. Within the military, the poor operational performance in the Chechen campaigns, a chaotic piecemeal breakup and relocation of former Soviet military units from abroad, a halt to out-of-area military operations, and crumbling readiness were sources of shame that affected even the most senior echelon of the Russian military. The degree to which despair permeated the military during the 1990s cannot be overstated. Marshal Sergey Akhromeyev, the last Soviet Chief of the General Staff, shot himself in his office in August 1991 as the Soviet Union collapsed, with a note that allegedly read "everything I devoted my entire life to building is crumbling." 88 A decade later, in 2000, then-Defense Minister Igor Sergeev, when asked about the dire state of materiel and personnel readiness of this period by a young Sergei Shoigu (who would later become Defense Minister) allegedly pondered aloud, "What can I do? There is not enough money even to maintain the nuclear forces." 89 Among field-grade and junior officers, disillusionment with military service manifested in different ways. Austerity defense budgets meant that there were few funds left for training or operational deployment, which led to idle time spent on noncombat tasks, such as groundskeeping. This downtime lowered morale and introduced opportunities for hazing and other crime. In 2006, senior officials from the General Staff met with members of the Commission of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation to discuss social issues in the military; they met with Russian academics, economists, diplomats, human rights activists, and other NGOs. 
90
89 MoD, "Remarks by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation General of the Army S. K. Shoigu at the Russian Defense Ministry Board Session" ["Тезисы доклада Министра обороны Российской Федерации генерала армии С. К. Шойгу на расширенном заседании Коллегии Миногороны России"], webpage, 2020a. 90 Y. Gavrilov, "In the Army with the Parents" ["В армию с родителями"], Strazh Baltiki, No. 195, 2006. This Public Council was created by order of then-Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov.
start a family, and 30 percent of polled officers and warrant officers were living below the poverty line). 
91
93
The MoD faced dire financial straits, unable to pay service members and personnel for long periods in the 1990s and early 2000s. Moreover, pay lagged behind other opportunities in Russian society, including those forces under the control of other power ministries (such as Border Troops). 
94
Pay remained well below the level of civilian compensation; as Herspring explains, the pay of service members living in some areas of the Russian Federation "met only 25 to 30 percent of their subsistence needs." 95 One hundred and twenty thousand officers reportedly were homeless. Some Russian officers took second jobs to make ends meet, and other members of the Armed Forces often had to sell old uniforms and other materiel to provide for themselves and their families. 
96
97
98
99
During this period, criminality-and corruption-related issues were pervasive in the Russian military, affecting proficiency, recruitment, and retention. At the largest scale, there are estimates that, during the early 1990s, as much as 50 percent of the Russian defense budget disappeared in the pockets of criminal individuals. 101 Within the military ranks, the criminal crisis in this period could be attributed to such factors as low and unpaid wages and runaway inflation, in addition to an increase in social ills that manifested as a surge in alcoholism, drug use, and criminality among officers and enlisted soldiers. In 1999, 10 percent of all potential draftees had alcohol or drug abuse problems; 30 percent had poor health or psychological problems. 102 Ten years later, nearly 50 percent of Russian conscripts had some criminal record, according to the chairman of the military collegium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, who handles legal statistics and crime reports for the military. 
103
105
106
107
Desertion was another major retention issue during the 1990s through early 2000s, when conscripts abandoned their posts because of excessive bullying and unsafe or unhealthy service conditions. In keeping with Soviet practice, conscripts often served in areas very far away from their families, making it more difficult for them to desert. However, many still tried and often traveled great distances to return to their hometowns or simply disappeared for lengthy periods of time. For example, the General Staff published some statistics on this issue in 2002, when it noted that 2,270 servicemen had deserted their units that year. However, the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers, a Russian human rights organization devoted to improving service conditions for conscripts, believed that the number of desertions probably was closer to 10,000 annually. 
109
106 Ball, 2000, p. 125.
108 Turchenko, 2010.
109 Diederik Lohman, The Wrongs of Passage: Inhuman and Degrading Treatment of New Recruits in the Russian Armed Forces, Human Rights Watch, Vol. 16, No. 8(D), 2004a.  days, either by local military units, police, or families that returned them), and that units attempted to cover up desertions to save face from higher commands. 
110
2
Russia's inherited military was chronically undermanned, and force structure was poorly devised for challenges that the Russian military would face.
Poor and irregular training and broader economic issues created lack of funds for more.
Endemic problems led to a decrease in prestige and subsequent decline in popular support for military service.
Hazing and other service conditions Extremely poor service conditions-particularly hazing of conscripts and junior officersdecreased the incentive to join or stay in the military.
Draft evasion Because of service conditions, families were desperate to keep their male family members from serving.
Poor health conditions of eligible male Russian population made recruitment more difficult and costly.
Military disillusionment Deep-seated morale crisis within the military caused both recruitment and retention problems.
Wage issues Financial problems led to arrears and poor pay compared with other sectors.
Pervasive issues stemming from criminality and corruption throughout the ranks affected many parts of the military.
Poor service conditions led some service members to desert. 
Russian manning and proficiency reforms began long prior to the military's 2008 announcement of the New Look defense reforms. Our analysis of the period between 1991 and 2008 shows that Russian strategists attempted several times to address multiple personnel issues noted previously, and that several ideas being implemented as of this writing trace their origins to this period of experimentation and learning. Although Russian leadership pursued several methods of personnel reforms during this period, such efforts remained relatively low-priority on the agenda. As Russia military scholar Bettina Renz argues, "the fact that military reform was not a top priority does not mean that there was no awareness that reforms were a necessity, at least in principle." 
111
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, a major professionalization debate centered on conscripts. As Renz argues, "the consensus view [in the 1990s and early 2000s] was that the Russian military could never be fully modernized unless the large and mostly conscript-based army was abandoned in favor of smaller and more affordable professional units." 112 Geostrategic concerns, entrenched conservative views within the military bureaucracy, financial constraints, and a preeminent role of military capacity in Russia's understanding of its great power status all contributed to Russia's inability to move to an all-volunteer army during this period. 
113
111 Renz, 2018
, p. 54. 112 Renz, 2018
, p. 68. 113 Renz, 2018, pp. 68-69.
114
116
118
119
121
122
Specific units of Russia's Airborne Forces and permanently ready forces in other services were used as a trial magnet program for contact service from 2004 to 2007 (the formal name of this program was the Federal Target Program for the Transfer of Units and Formations of Permanent Readiness to the Contract Manning Principle). During this recruiting campaign, professional soldiers were promised better conditions with housing, pay, and realistic combat training: the opportunity to become a professional solider. However, the military still was unprepared to back up these promises because of inexperience and lack of supports. This initial three-year trial effort was not considered successful because only 20 percent of the initial wave of contract service personnel re-enlisted, and there were cases of contract terminations (resignations) halfway through the contract period. 
124
121 Pallin, 2009, p. 57.
No. 2, 2004. 124
Another mid-2000s attempt at military reform was made when former Chief of the General Staff Yury Baluyevsky attempted to reorganize military structures, creating the prototype for what would become the Operational Strategic Commands (OSK) of today. However, Baluyevsky's proposals added another superstructure to the top-heavy command and control chain while failing to address personnel issues in the lower ranks. In this plan, the Military District commanders and Naval Fleets retained their original chains of command, and the VDV was to be subordinate to the Ground Forces High Command. The effort quietly failed. 126 However, perhaps the biggest change under Baluyevsky's command was to reduce conscription service length from two years to one in a phased approach between 2006 and 2008. Although this shift ameliorated some of the issues associated with conscription, it also created new readiness-related problems for the Armed Forces: Less time in service meant less skilled conscripts and double the number of recruits needed to achieve manpower requirements each year. 127 During this time, the MoD made other attempts at gaining the trust of conscripts and families, but these attempts provided to be ineffective. They included providing postal addresses and phone numbers of commanders to parents, giving parents the right to visit units twice annually, and letting mothers and fathers accompany their children into the military commissariats during drafting. 128
The Russian military needed a structural, readiness, and personnel overhaul. The defense reform programs initiated in 2008 were approved to modernize the Russian military comprehensively by 2020. As the previous section suggests, the reforms announced in 2008 were not completely new; the seeds of Russia's personnel policy overhaul were sown in the tumultuous decades prior through trial and (many) errors.
In 2008, Russia fought a five-day war against the Republic of Georgia. In that campaign, multiple problems with combat performance emerged. The Russian military at the time, under the new leadership team of General Nikolay Makarov (who was Chief of the General Staff) and new Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov (who came from Russia's tax service), was given a public rationale for implementing a bold vision of reform and transformation. This goal-to 126 Ilya Kramnik, "Reform from Serdyukov-Makarov" ["Реформа Сердюкова-Макарова"], Natsional'naia oborona, No. 12, 2011. 
127 Renz, 2018
, p. 69. 128 Gavrilov, 2006.
In a departure from norms, the Russian military and military scientific community openly discussed successes and shortcomings in the aftermath of the 2008 August war. 
129
130
131
132
134
• improving the organization and staff structure of the armed services • transferring all Russian units to permanently ready status (i.e., being capable of deployment with a short period, typically 24-48 hours) • moving to a mixed manning system with far more contract servicemen than conscripts With an eye toward the wars of the 21st century, Makarov and General Staff leaders wanted to bridge the gap between well-developed military theory on what these future wars would entail and what the Russian military was built for and capable of in 2008. The goal was to transform the inherited post-Soviet military into a force that could meet these challenges through a comprehensive rearmament program and personnel policy overhaul. As Makarov noted in 2008, "it is time to stop preparing troops for the wars of the past; we must teach them to wage war against a strong, technically equipped enemy, taking into account everything new that appears in military theory." 
136
137
The uneven military performance during the Georgia conflict therefore can be considered the public rationale for beginning a comprehensive (and expensive) reform program that already had 
134
135
46, 2008
46, . 136 Litovkin, 2008. .
1. Reorganizing the structure of the Armed Forces by disbanding low-strength units, consolidating command chains, creating new unit structures, creating operational strategic commands instead of service-specific command chains, and transferring all remaining units to permanent readiness standards. 2. A massive procurement and modernization program that would lead to 70 percent new or modernized equipment by 2020. 3. Revising military training programs to improve individual proficiencies. 4. Reforming professional military education for officers and professional NCOs. 5. Improving social issues and "humanizing" military service by overhauling manning policies and benefits.
138
Our analysis next focuses on MoD policies to improve personnel proficiency, recruiting, and retention, which roughly correlate with lines of effort three, four, and five of the New Look reform efforts. In subsequent chapters of this report, we will assess the implementation and modification of these different policies up to 2021.
In this section, we discuss the Russian military's policy objectives as they pertain to proficiency, recruiting, and retention, as they were first laid out in 2008.
To seek to transform the Russian military into a force capable of fighting modern wars of the 21st century, the military leadership knew that they had to fundamentally overhaul individual proficiency within all services. To do that, they first had to radically restructure the force, reduce billets, and change command relationships. Military leadership at the time felt that fewer personnel and fewer understrength units on the books would allow more funds to flow to remaining personnel and units.
In 2008, only 13 percent of Russia's military units, on average, met the highest readiness standard of permanent readiness, which means a unit is manned at 85-100 percent and can deploy from home garrison with 24-48 hours' notice, according to Russian military leaders at the time. 
139
140
2
142
143
144
Top General," Reuters, December 16, 2008;
Mark Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army: 1992
-2016
, Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2017
. 141 Charap et al., 2021
, p. 88. 142 Vadim Soloviev, "Military Reform 2009
-2012
" ["Военная реформа 2009
-2012
No. 44, 2008. 143
145
148
149
The next focus of reform was overhauling the Russian training system to improve individual proficiency. Unit and service training and trends are outside the scope of this report, but there are several policies that the Russian military instituted to improve individual performance across the services. Conscripts were to begin an intense 90-day basic training program in their units with 
145 Soloviev, 2008.
146
153
154
155
156
155 Soloviev, 2008;
Kramnik, 2011.
157
158
As shown in In response, the MoD enacted a series of personnel policy changes. Many of these focused on improving the tangible benefits of military service, such as higher pay, better-quality housing, and enhanced opportunities for education and professional development, while also improving conditions by reducing hazing and allowing service on bases closer to soldiers' homes. Other changes were meant to improve perceptions of the military by promoting the intangible benefits of military service, such as pride in serving in the nation's most trusted institution and doing one's patriotic duty.
The following two chapters examine in more detail the specific recruitment (Chapter 3) and retention (Chapter 4) policies enacted under the reforms.
In its effort to attract and retain the personnel needed to create a more professionalized military, the Russian military introduced major changes in recruitment policies and practices. 
159
Four principal conclusions emerge from this analysis:
1. Faced with the need to create a more nimble and effective military force in the context of demographic pressures and legacy of post-Soviet socio-economic deprivation, Russia invested significant resources and effort in improving military recruitment. Although the reforms emphasized increasing the appeal of contract service, other reforms aimed to facilitate conscription and quality of conscripts. 2. In recent years, the principal motivation for youth to join the military was economic rather than patriotic. Recognizing that satisfying the former and fostering the latter is essential for recruitment, reforms included significant enhancements and updates to the pay and social benefit structures and wide-ranging military-patriotic efforts targeted toward pre-conscription-age youth. 3. There is some evidence that reform efforts paid off: As of 2021, at least 70 percent of the current military force and all key units and positions were staffed with contract personnel, and both conscripts and contract personnel were older and better-educated than at the onset of the reforms; fewer people dodged the draft under peacetime conditions; and Russian society overall has held the military in high regard and supported the mixedmodel military service. 4. Challenges remain, including rigid military culture and persistent hazing, insufficient socio-economic benefits of military service, unclear success of military-patriotic efforts, poor physical and mental health of pre-conscription youth, and the overall high price tag of making recruitment of high-quality military personnel sustainable.
What Kinds of Recruits Has the Russian Military Sought?
The Russian military has sought to create a mobile, combat-ready, largely professional force that is staffed with well-educated, physically fit, eager-to-learn individuals. 
160
161
162
164
165
166
What Kinds of Recruits Has the Russian Military Attracted?
In the years between 2013 and 2018, the characteristics of a typical conscript changed, including the average age and level of education. During this five-year period, the proportion of 18-year-old conscripts went down from 23 to around 15 percent, while the proportion of 161 Evgeniy Burdinsky, "Conscript: Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow" ["Призывник: вчера, сегодня, завтра"], Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, July 28, 2019. 
162
Burdinsky, 2019. 163
conscripts who were older than 20 years old increased from around 47 percent to 58 (see Figure 
3
170
172
174
175
Contract service members accounted for the majority of the Russian military as of December 2021. According to Deputy Minister of Defense Nikolay Pankov, the number of contract service members doubled between 2012 and 2020. 
177
181
184
Although proportionally more youth drafted for conscription are deemed fit for service when compared with the years prior, in 2021, Shoigu lamented that nearly 20 percent of young people remain ineligible because of poor health and 40 percent of conscripts demonstrate insufficient physical fitness, skills, and talents. 187 Academic research on the health of Russian adolescents of pre-conscription and conscription age also paints a grim picture. In the years between 2008 and 2018, there was a reported rise in a variety of diseases, predominantly within the musculoskeletal system (rose 124 percent), circulatory system (rose 80 percent), and endocrine system (rose 66 percent).
188
What drives young Russians to join the military? The Western institutional-occupational model, cited in Russian military literature and discussed in more detail in Chapter 4, frames these motivations through two categories: occupational benefits, defined by tangible rewards, including housing; compensation; prioritization for higher education; and benefits to the family, such as spousal opportunities and child care; and institutional benefits, defined by the intangible values and norms of service, including order and discipline, patriotism, and the prestige of serving in the Armed Forces. 
191
192
193
194
195
As described in Chapter 2, military recruitment suffered greatly following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Although historically Russians have held the military in high regard, the economic deprivation and instability in the post-Soviet years and the perceived failures of the Chechen wars hurt the military's image and the prestige of the military service. Military service became unappealing, and rates of draft evasion were high. 
197
199
200
201
202
203
No. 121, 2003. 199
Vol. 2, No. 5, 2015. 200
McDermott, Bertil Nygren, and
Carolina Vendil Pallin, eds., The Russian Armed Forces in Transition: Economic, Geopolitical and
Institutional Uncertainties, Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2012, p. 38. 201 Putin, 2012. 202
99, 2008
99, . 204 Putin, 2012. .
Improving Conditions for Conscript Service Several changes were made in an effort to improve conditions in the conscription-based military service and improve the image of conscription service. As one major step, the conscription term was shortened to one year. This move to a great extent mitigated the problem with deds-the second-year conscripts who often exercised their seniority through violence and hazing-and made the time commitment to military service more palatable for reluctant recruits. The overall conditions of conscript service improved: The nonmilitary chores (such as cooking), previously conducted by conscripts, have been outsourced to civilian contractors; conscripts are provided with adequate clothing and food; and the military barracks feature more comfortable living than in years prior and include better recreation facilities and gyms. 
205
206
209
205
206 However, smartphone use has been prohibited; this began with the draft in spring 2021. 
207
208
garrisons with favorable reputations. 210 Furthermore, these changes allowed conscripts to avoid mandatory on-base weekends with poor or no supervision, which is often when hazing would occur. 211
At the same time that the MoD made conditions more attractive for conscripts, it also shored up loopholes and inefficiencies in the drafting process to reduce evasion. This tightening of intake also was motivated by Russia's demographic troubles, which are likely to worsen until 2024 before they begin to rebound slightly: Russia has needed the draft process to be as efficient as possible. 
212
213
214
215
The Russian military also announced an overhaul to local military commissariats, known as voenkomaty, where physical and psychological assessments central to fitness-for-service decisions take place. 
216
217
218
219
220
The contract service received a major makeover as well. The Russian government created the Federal Target Program (FTP) to improve (1) recruiting and retention of contract service personnel and (2) service conditions for these personnel that would last from 2009 through 2015. 
221
222
223
Because housing historically has been one of the principal recruitment draws into the military service,
224
225
226
Raising pay for officers and contract service personnel was one of the key tasks of the New Look reform program to improve recruitment and also retention. 
227
228
The most important thing now is to make the military service attractive. To do this, it is necessary to provide a serviceman, especially an officer, so that he does not think about his daily bread but can serve peacefully. 
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
centers have been built specifically to address the needs of military families nearby. 
237
The efforts to recruit into military contract service intensified and became more systematic between 2012 and 2022. To attract more people by lowering the time commitment, the term of the first contract was reduced from three years to two. Initially, entering the contract required prior conscription service; gradually, the criteria of eligibility widened to include those without military experience if they have a vocational or university degree. In 2017, the opportunity to join the military by contract was expanded to high school graduates after they served three months under conscription. 
238
239
240
As of 2021, at least 84 screening centers had been established across the majority of regions to facilitate selection from the pool of potential recruits and popularize the contract military service through informational activities intended to persuade potential recruits. 
243
244
245
246
247
248
The Russian military also has established more opportunities for science-minded individuals to contribute to military service while furthering their expertise. The number of scientific companies (also called scientific squadrons in the military literature) 249 has grown from only four functional scientific companies with 160 people in service in 2013 to 17 such companies with 664 people in service in 2018. 
250
In recent years, partnerships have been developed with factories and vocational education colleges-arrangements through which vocational students go through military service, where they build on their education and then join factories to continue related work. Three hundred and sixty-two graduates of vocational schools participated in these partnerships between 2012 and 2018. Finally, at least four science-industry squadrons have been formed, where eligible employees from partner enterprises go to fulfil their service requirements to then go back to their pre-service jobs. The majority of such conscripts have university degrees in technical disciplines. Such partnerships give rise to collaborative projects, experiments, and new pilot programs. The conscripts receive new knowledge, which they later bring to the military-industrial enterprises in their region. 
252
250
251 Gavrilov, 2019b. 252
service following their conscription term and managed complex systems, such as the Iskander system, and strategic air defenses, such as the SA-20 and SA-21 systems. 
253
The Russian military also sought to attract individuals with notable performance in sports through the creation of dedicated sports squadrons. In 2021, there were five squadrons staffed with members or candidates for 29 of Russia's Olympic teams; the majority of these nearly 700 service members were enlisted and brought high-level athletic abilities and recognized sports accomplishments. 
254
255
258
Russian leaders have long recognized lagging patriotic motivation for military service as a critical gap that needed be filled to enhance both recruitment and retention. 
260
261
262
263
265
As of December 2021, every public school in Russia was mandated to implement a militarypatriotic curriculum. Per federal law, "On Military Duty and Service," all secondary-level and vocational students had to receive basic knowledge in the area of defense through basic safety and security classes. 266 Furthermore, in an apparent attempt to streamline efforts to enhance ideological and patriotic education within all schools, a new position was proposed and piloted in 2021: School advisors for upbringing, who, according to general understanding, will work to facilitate students' ideological and patriotic indoctrination within schools. 
267
The majority of military-patriotic activities thus far have occurred outside school walls, ushered by a variety of governmental institutions, near-governmental organizations, or NGOs. Probably the most long-standing among such organizations is the Volunteer Society for Cooperation with the Army, Aviation, and Navy (DOSAAF). Established in 1927 as a paramilitary sports organization, it survived the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and, after years of languishing, received new support from the government, regained its old name, 268 and was given an expanded mission to conduct pre-conscription military-patriotic education in 2009. At that time, DOSAAF became an official amalgamate of civil society and government with a mission to provide new, high-quality pre-conscription youth training, including military-patriotic education; applied military, aviation, and technical sports; and military specialties. 
269
270
As of December 2021, a relatively new initiative-said to be a pet project of Minister Shoigu-was ramping up across Russia: Avangard youth centers that deliver military-patriotic education and basic military training to youth. The mission of the Avangard centers is to "develop a team spirit; [a] sense of responsibility for oneself, one's family, and close ones; acquaint youth with state-of-the-art defense technologies; and improve their physical fitness." 
271
272
273
This relatively new movement-the All-Russia Young Army National Military Patriotic Social Movement Association (also called Yunarmia)-was established in 2016. 
274
275
Russia's efforts to facilitate sustainable recruitment of high-quality military personnel have been diverse and well funded. Still, challenges remain. 278 Despite notable improvements, the service and living conditions (as of December 2021) varied depending on the military division and the region of service, and many service members complained about the poor state of the military living facilities. 
279
280
282
Another notable obstacle to attracting and keeping high-quality personnel has been military culture: This continued to feature dehumanizing relationships along the command vertical, with limited accountability for mistreatment. Russian military culture has discouraged and even punished service member initiative. 
284
Relatedly, although the data on hazing along with other inner issues within military service are kept secret, 285 the accounts of dedovshchina seeped through in service members' private blogs on social media and in high-profile criminal cases. 
286
289
290
As Russia has transitioned from a primarily conscription-based military to one dependent on professional force, the societal context of military recruitment has become increasingly significant. Overall, trust in and approval of the military rose significantly in the decades following the post-Cold War period. Support for military service increased as well, although this occurred predominantly among older populations who were ineligible for service.
According to various polls, the military was, as of 2021, Russians' most trusted and approved institution, 291 including for Russian youth. 
292
3
287 Shlykov, 2011. Several retired colonels noted that they considered it a grave mistake to first reduce the draft period and flood the units with larger numbers of conscripts while simultaneously cutting the officer corps significantly and eliminating warrant officers, without having first created a professional NCO corps of enlisted sergeants to support these changing dynamics within the units. The Russian military attempted to do everything at the same time, which could have been a recipe for disaster. Still, the colonels' fears of chaos within units did not come true during this transitional period, possibly because of more-structured training days and better pay at multiple levels. 
288
293
3
294
The years immediately prior to 2022 saw an increase in positive assessment of military service conditions (see Figure 
3
3
297
3
3
299
3
Increases in support for military service appear to have been reflected in the lower number of people attempting to evade the draft under peacetime conditions. Within the five-year period from 2013 to 2018, the number of draft evaders reduced significantly, from and estimated 6,200 in 2013 to 1,600 in 2018 (see Figures 3.8 and 3.9). Most often, such reductions in draft evasion were attributed to the shortened conscription term, improved service conditions, and reductions in dedovshchina. (Although data were not yet available on the number of draft evaders during the April 2022 conscription drive, media accounts suggest that fear of compulsory military service in the Ukraine war might be causing many would-be conscripts to seek alternatives. 301 ) Both during peacetime and wartime, Russia's general population, and its youth specifically, are provided with minimal information about what is happening with the military. 
302
Opinions on whether Russian military should follow a contract-only or a mixed model of service appear to be more uniform across age groups. Consistently, Russians prefer some version of a mixed conscript-contract mode of service: The conscript-only approach is the least popular option. 
304
303
As of 2015, 306 70 percent of Russians expressed pride in contemporary Russia-a significant increase since 2006, when only 50 percent of Russians expressed the same sentiment. Similarly, as of 2019, over 70 percent of Russians considered themselves patriots, an increase from only 57 percent in 2006. 
307
308
309
311
314
306
As noted in previous chapters, Russian leaders have desired a nimble, efficient, professional military force, staffed with highly motivated, physically fit, well-educated military personnel. Many barriers stood in the way of achieving this ambitious goal because the state of the military, service conditions, and social upheaval of the post-Soviet years made military service a highly unappealing option. During the years between 2008 and 2022, the Russian military invested vast resources and efforts to seek to overcome these challenges, yielding some improvements in service conditions and benefits both for conscript and contract personnel, reductions in military hazing, new and expanded service opportunities for scientists and athletes, and the overall effort at humanization of military service. The resulting force was smaller and more nimble and better trained, educated, and regarded than it had been in the first two decades following the fall of the Soviet Union. By December 2021, contract military service members constituted at least 70 percent of the overall force, with presence in key battalions, units, and positions. Draft-dodging was reduced prior to the 2022 conflict in Ukraine, and while conscripts still might have lacked enthusiasm for service, increasing numbers appeared to view the conscription year as an accepted inevitability rather than a dreaded prospect. 
315
Despite these improvements, important caveats exist. Even prior to Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, people of conscription age (1) were significantly less likely to consider military service a necessity when compared with people in other age groups, (2) preferred to see a fully professional volunteer force, and (3) were less patriotic. The conflict in Ukraine has further exposed the extent to which Russian military culture continues to be rigid and, often, brutal, in addition to the potential hazards associated with combat duty. During peacetime, military pay still lags behind the benefits from better-paying civilian jobs. The health of Russian youth, both physical and psychological, continues to be rather poor, which is an important barrier in the context of demographic pressures. Although Russia's efforts to facilitate recruitment were notable, the challenges it has faced continue to be formidable.
The purpose of this chapter is to review key issues of retention in the Russian military in the period preceding 2022. It is divided into three parts. First, we use the institutional-occupational model (introduced in Chapter 3) to conceptualize retention in the contemporary Russian military. This model was first developed by military scholars in the United States in the 1970s and is cited frequently by Russian military scholars. Second, we review some of the key features of the Russian military that relate to retention, including terms of service, generic career progression, and where Russia might have specific retention objectives. Third, we review some of the Russian literature on military retention, focusing on select topics of interest to military leaders.
In general, we find that Russia sought to professionalize its force structure in recent years, and retention was a key feature of these efforts. Professional militaries spend resources to train and prepare their personnel. Thus, retaining them is key for Russia to receive a sufficient return on this investment. Using the institutional-occupational model discussed in Chapter 3, we find evidence that the Russian military was attentive to both institutional benefits (e.g., maintaining good order and discipline, promoting a sense of patriotism, and managing public perceptions) and occupational benefits (e.g., increasing compensation of contract personnel, improving the well-being of their families, and creating educational and professional development opportunities).
This chapter discusses four conclusions from this review:
1. The Russian military's retention-related concerns and priorities shifted over time, and uncertainty remained about its objectives, even prior to the 2022 invasion of Ukraine. 2. Prior to 2022's special military operation, the Russian military likely had been uninterested in retaining all of its conscripts, contract personnel, and officers under peacetime conditions. 3. The Russian military has used both tangible (e.g., housing, compensation, family wellbeing) and intangible (e.g., good order and discipline, patriotism) benefits to retain personnel.
316
As noted in Chapter 3, the Soviet military relied on a universal service model for its personnel system, which was a form of mass conscription. 
317
318
In this chapter, we focus on the retention part of Russia's efforts at military professionalization. We define retention as the "rate at which military personnel voluntarily choose to stay in the military after their obligated term of service has ended." 319 While the personnel systems of the U.S. and Russian military are markedly different, we found some evidence that Russian military scholars have looked to U.S. efforts at professionalization during its transition to an all-volunteer force between 1968 and 1974. 
320
We begin with three basic assumptions. First, the Russian military incurs costs in recruiting, training, and retaining these personnel (e.g., salaries, benefits, housing, leadership training). Second, we Russian military leaders have preferred to retain some, but not all, of these professional personnel based on evolving manning requirements at various ranks, specialties, and services. Third, the Russian military has had a finite amount of resources that it can dedicate to retaining these professionals. Under these assumptions, we review recent, publicly available research on the Russian manpower and personnel system. In the next section, we review our sample of Russian research that highlights what types of issues might have been salient to Russia's military leaders prior to the February 2022 invasion of Ukraine.
This section defines the meaning of retention in the Russian military, focusing on balancing the needs of optimizing a personnel structure with the costs of this optimization. As with any organization, Russian military leaders, under normal conditions, cannot and do not want to retain all their personnel and therefore will focus on strategies to retain some and not others. These priorities might change over time. This section continues with a discussion on the terms of service and general career progression within the Russian military. We then focus on key issues and objectives in the retention of three classes of Russian service members: conscripts, contracted enlisted personnel, and officers.
The fundamental goal of a retention strategy before the latest invasion of Ukraine is to balance the force and optimize the personnel structure to meet existing and future demands of the military in question. If too few people or too few in select fields are retained, military services could experience a shortage of technical experts and experienced leaders, decreased efficiency, and lower job satisfaction. If too many people remain in service, a force could need to limit promotion opportunities, involuntarily separate individuals, end up with a top-heavy force, 321 and struggle with increasing personnel-related costs. Overall, retention affects unit readiness, morale, training requirements, and recruitment, among other key elements of a military force. 
322
322 RAND Corporation, "Military Personnel Retention," webpage, undated.
323 Although the issue of personnel retention is widely discussed in Russian economic and business literature, we could not find a clear-cut definition of this concept in the Armed Forces context. Academic articles in this field tend to analyze it through the lenses of satisfaction and motivation to stay in the military, even when directly citing the Western models. For example, see Ekaterina Karlova, The Historical Experience of American Military Sociology" ["Исторический опыт американской военной социологии"], Sotsiologicheskiye issledovaniya, No. 4, 2014. However, military journals are more explicit in their discussions of the need to retain service members. These deliberations mostly are clustered around the early 2000s, when the problems with retaining the newly contracted recruits and young officers were especially striking. Some military journal articles directly use the term retain in the titles (e.g., Aleksandr Yevdokimov, "We Will Be Able to Recruit. But What About Retaining?" ["Набрать сможем. А удержать"], Armeiskii sbornik, September 30, 2004, p. 9; Maksim Sidorov, "How to Retain Young Officers in the Armed Forces?" ["Как удержать в армии молодых офицеров?]" Na boevom postu, No. 73, November 3, 2001; Ivan Kovtun, "Contract Military Service. Recruit-We Will Recruit. Can We Retain?" ["Служба по контракту. Набрать-наберем. Сможем ли удержать?"], Rossiiskoe voennoe obozrenie, Nos. 11-12, November  30, 2004), but do not provide any definition.
reasons) within a period of obligated service versus personnel that began or completed a contract to serve. And still others focus on retention at stages of a military career from initial training all the way through retirement. 
324
325
326
327
Acknowledging these challenges, we primarily focus on Russian military personnel that voluntarily committed to a new, fixed term of service within the MoD when their current obligated term of service ended. The following description of conventional career progressions highlights the most common decision points presented to Russian service members as of December 2021.
Using the definition of retention described previously, 328 distinctions in terms of service are important to understanding the Russian Armed Forces' retention objectives and performance. Since 2007, Russians drafted to be conscripts serve a one-year term, after which they move to the mobilization reserve, sign an enlistment contract, or attend a military school that would lead to an officer commission. Whether completing a 12-month conscription period or signing an enlistment contract without serving time as a conscript, a typical first enlistment contract obligates the individual to a two-or three-year period of service. 329 Newly enlisted service members have a three-month probationary period, during which the commander of their military training unit determines whether to discharge or retain individuals for continued service. 
330
The path toward becoming an officer might start at the end of a conscription term, following an enlistment contract, or directly from a civilian educational institution. If accepted to one of several military academies, these cadets complete a four-or five-year period of education and training. The academies place a large emphasis on tactics and military occupational specialty (MOS) proficiency; therefore, newly commissioned lieutenants go directly from their academy to take command of their first platoon. 332 A common first term of service for officers (and warrant officers) is five years. 
333
329
Bartles, 2016. 330
332
Bartles, 2016. 333
then return to the operational force to command a regimental-or brigade-sized unit. 
334
4
Similar to most hierarchical organizations, the Russian Armed Forces cannot have and does not want every individual progressing through full career paths depicted in Figure 
4
335
Typically, the majority of conscripts who complete their 12-month term of service join the mobilization reserve as intended and in support of the benefits described in the Chapter 2 conscript-contract discussion. Some of these individuals also will join the ranks of other government organizations, including agencies comprising Russia's larger security apparatus. Additionally, the Duma drafted a bill to allow qualified conscripts to fulfill their commitment in the Federal Security Service (FSB) during their conscription service to "replenish security agencies with young promising specialists." Similar programs are said to exist for the civil service emergency department, Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), and National Guard. 336 Furthermore, recent Russian laws have "given priority to individuals who have done military service in filling top civil service positions." 
337
4
338
339
As noted in the preceding chapter, while conscripts remained a large share of military personnel, Russia continued its modernization efforts toward increasing the percentage of professional or contract (kontraktniki) service members in the years leading up to the February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. Most combat units in the Ground Forces, for example, included professional soldiers as of 2020, 344 and in 2020, the MoD claimed that there were almost twice as many contract personnel as conscripts, 345 a claim that has been reiterated by other sources. Working from a total of 295,000 contract troops at the end of 2014, Moscow's prior goal was to have 500,000 service members on contract by 2021, 346 but that goal was later dropped. By March 2020, the last date that numbers were updated publicly, the MoD announced that it had reached 405,000 contract service personnel and updated its goal to reach 475,000 by 2027. 
347
349
The officer corps has seen drastic changes over recent decades. Tens of thousands of officers left the Russian military following the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the 2008 New Look reforms cut many more. These cuts shifted the officer rank composition across the Armed Forces from one of an egg shape to more of a pyramid: There were now significantly more lieutenants and the military lost about three quarters of all majors and two thirds of colonels. 
353
354
349
350 "Russian Federation-Army," World Armies, updated August 8, 2022.
351 "Russian Federation-Navy," World Navies, updated February 24, 2022.
352 "Russian Federation-Air Force," World Air Forces, updated June 20, 2022. In general, conscripts with only a year of service are given assignments with few training requirements, such as "drivers, cooks, laborers, or lowerlevel maintenance personnel," according to Russian military expert Charles Bartles. Charles K. Bartles, "Russian Armed Forces: Enlisted Professionals," Army University Press, 
March 11, 2019. 353
354
356
357
358
359
We found evidence that Russian military scholars have looked to the U.S military's experience for insights on how to transition to a force structure that increasingly relies on volunteer personnel (contract soldiers) over conscripts. Thus, it is helpful to briefly review how this transition proceeded in the United States.
When the United States transitioned to an all-volunteer force, a key concern for policymakers was how to recruit, train, and retain high-quality personnel. 
360
355
During the 1970s, policymakers and scholars in the United States began to focus on the motivations of service members to enlist and stay in the military as a career. One popular model from this work is the institutional-occupational model, which conceived of two sets of values that motivate the service of military personnel. 
362
363
364
Additionally, these benefits are emphasized in reports presented by the military leadership at the annual expanded meeting of the Collegium (the board) of the MoD of the Russian Federation. Table 
4
365
We define occupational benefits as tangible rewards that motivate service members. These include pay, housing, health coverage, and family benefits, and largely are defined by the marketplace. In civilian society, employers negotiate with employers for these tangible benefits. 
366
367
365
A
368
Housing is one type of occupational benefit for military service that directly affects the wellbeing of personnel and their families. Research on Western militaries has found consistent evidence that family well-being is a key variable for retention intentions of service members. 369 Thus, we assume that, under conditions similar to those that existed before the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, housing is an occupational benefit that will affect retention of contract personnel in the Russian military. To illustrate this assumption, one warrant officer in the Russian military with 14 years of experience said the following in an interview conducted sometime between 2006 and 2007:
I live with my parents and a brother in a three-room apartment with adjacent rooms. I am not on good terms with my relatives. In order to be placed on the waiting list for getting my own apartment from the military unit the total area of our apartment should be two square meters less. The total area includes rooms, the kitchen, the corridor, and the balcony. If I decide to marry we'll live on my balcony. If I choose to live in a hostel-it will be deterioration of living conditions. Thus I cannot get on the waiting list for another five years. It is a vicious circle. 
370
371
372
374
375
377
378
382
383
384
385
384
385
65.85 percent in 2018. 386
Self-reported levels of satisfaction with military housing have varied by military district. For example, surveys of contract members in the Western and Central Military Districts in 2015 and 2016 suggest that some personnel continue to struggle with housing. One survey of 511 contract service members in the Nizhny Novgorod oblast in the Western Military District, conducted between 2015 and 2016, reported that only 8.6 percent of respondents said that they live in "comfortable" housing. In another survey of 267 contract service members in the Saratov Oblast in the Central Military District, conducted in 2016 and 2017, found that only 32.2 percent reported living comfortably in military housing. 
387
388
389
386
390
A
Compensation in the form of a salary is another occupational benefit. Our review of recent research on the Russian Armed Forces identified several lines of research on military compensation. First, there has been a debate on the role of compensation in motivating contract personnel to enlist. Similar to in the United States during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, 392 some Russian scholars are debating the role of compensation to motivate Russian service members. These scholars have insisted that the higher values that the service entails are reflected even in the name: Russian service members received an allowance (dovol'stvie) and not a salary. Their primary motivation is nonmaterial (pride in serving their country, doing a job of "real men"). 393 However, the surveys of service members that will be further discussed indicate that, in reality, compensation (along with housing) typically is a top concern reported by service members. In the early 2000s, insufficient pay and inadequate housing were identified as the main reasons why young lieutenants decided to leave the military. Some considered that the compensation was not enough to compensate for their physical and mental load. 
394
395
396
398
399
400
404
405
406
404
406
407 Kalinin, 2019.
There is some evidence that problems surrounding housing and compensation in the Russian Armed Forces have been amplified for service members with dependents. According to one estimate, roughly 30 percent of contract service members get married in their first or second year of service, and by the end of the fifth year, this number reaches more than 90 percent. 
409
410
411
As the housing situation began to improve and compensation began to rise, attention shifted to family-related issues. Particularly concerning were child care and education for the children of military service members, as well as finding adequate employment for their spouses. Some service members live in closed military towns where the job opportunities for their spouses are extremely scarce. As the spouses could not find employment, in many cases, married officersespecially officers with children-experienced financial hardships. 412 Moreover, frequent relocation creates additional stress because spouses have to go through this process multiple times. The process also affects children, who are forced to change schools. 
413
415
419
• 40-hour workweek • free health care, health insurance and life insurance for the service member • 45 days of annual vacation with free travel with service members and families (including travel time up to 15 days; for example, by train) • military pays 80 percent of preschool or child care costs for one or two children, and 90 percent for the third child as a stipend in the service member's monthly wages 420 • retirement housing and the right to choose a place of retirement if space is available, with earliest pension age of 45 with a possible earnings of 5,500-7,000 rubles monthly (2008 rubles) 421 • 50 percent of pay for retirement pension • doubling of service time counted through service in austere or "hardship" locations • three-year contract completion bonus.
Another issue is the interconnectedness of the professional development of both service members and their families. The results of one survey, administered between 2016 and 2017 to 408 contract service members and sergeants, emphasized the interconnectedness of professional development of military personnel and their families. The authors of this research, Yuriy Bychenko and Taisiya Balandina, regard the ability of all members of military families to have a fulfilling career as a crucial factor of the professional development of the service members themselves. 422 It will both bring additional income-which is very important for most military families-and allow military personnel's families to realize their own potential. Therefore, according to Bychenko and Balandina, the Armed Forces have to go beyond bandage solutions, such as unemployment benefits or very formal job-searching support. The strategy to support military families should be multifaceted and include such elements as education and training, comprehensive support throughout one's career, building the skillset flexible enough in situations of frequent relocations, and encouraging self-employment. 
423
425
426
422
423
424
Politologiya, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2021. 426 Bychenko and
Egorov, 2021. 427
Military District found that only 2.4 percent of the respondents selected having a convenient work schedule as a dimension of the military service's attractiveness. A smaller percentage (0.5 percent) believed that there was less overwork in military service compared with other occupations. 
428
429
430
Designing and implementing a professional NCO education program was another key tenet of the 2008-era New Look reforms. In 2008, Russia announced that it would create a long-term training program for professional NCOs based on warrant officer education. This line of effort, despite being designed well conceptually, proved to be very difficult for the Russian military to sustain on a large scale and did not last long in practice.
While the previous sergeant training program was only five months long, the new effort was to create a two-year professional NCO course. This effort was greeted with enthusiasm, and allegedly 4,000 personnel applied for 800 slots at the Ryazan Higher Airborne School for junior commanders in 2009. 
431
433
434
435
436
437
439
440
We define institutional benefits as the intangible values and norms that transcend the selfinterest of individual service members. Put simply, these values are defined by higher-order goals that might include duty, honor, or service to one's country. 
441
We identified two themes related to good order and discipline: (1) hazing, bullying, and harassment and (2) military leadership. These themes relate to overall culture of serving within the military. While most of this research did not model using quantitative data on retention intentions of Russian service members, we posit that perceptions of good order and discipline affect perceptions of well-being by Russian personnel. These perceptions might affect personnel decisions to continue with military service.
As noted earlier, hazing, bullying, and harassment are widely studied problems within Russian military literature related to good order and discipline. 
442
Structural changes within the military, reduced one-year conscript terms, and more-frequent and strict control procedures (including regular physical examinations for conscripts) have decreased the number of incidents but not eliminated harassment entirely. 443 There were several media reports on incidents in recent years. Major incidents, such as mass shootings or suicides, 444 usually make the headlines and stay on the agenda for a longer period, encouraging public conversation about possible remedies. The media also talks about less widely known cases, and these reports are relatively infrequent.
Recent amendments to the legislation on foreign agents might make it increasingly difficult to attract public attention about the incidents. 
445
447
At the same time, in an extensive interview in September 2019, Shoigu emphasized that hazing in the Russian military had been eliminated completely. He admitted that some "criminal activities" were being committed within the Armed Forces, but their quantity was low compared with the average crime rate in civilian communities. 
448
449
A reduction in the amount of hazing is believed not only to improve the attractiveness of the military service for those considering whether to continue but also to reduce desertion rates. The desertion rates in the Russian Armed Forces were especially high during the 1990s and early 2000s. While we did not find publicly available data on trends in desertion rates over the years, several reports in Russian military journals and media describe the scale of the problem. For instance, in 1998, an official newspaper of the MoD, the Red Star, quoted the Chief Military Prosecutor's Office, which had said that 17,000 service members deserted the Russian military between 1992 and 1998. 
450
Between 2010 and 2013, desertion rates appear to have decreased, but they increased again in 2014. However, the overall number of reported cases was smaller than in previous years (29 cases in 2013 and 50 cases in 2014). The apparent rates of desertion and evasion of duties sharply rose in 2014. An article in Russian media outlet Kommersant said that this was caused by hazing and a desire to avoid involvement in the conflict in Ukraine. 
452
455
456
457
458
459
461
463
464
A sense of patriotism was at the center of the debate over the future development of Russia's Armed Forces since the 1990s. 
465
466
467
468
464
Society, Vol. 12, No. 3, Spring 1986. 466
467 Khramchikhin, 2017.
469
470
471
472
473
474
469
470
471 
Klimenko and Posukhova, 2018a. 472
475
Public perception of the military is another institutional factor that could influence the retention of Russian personnel. The esteem and regard of military service among Russian civilian society has, in theory, the capacity to reaffirm a sense of service to the country and overall identity as a service member. We know from research on the U.S. military that these perceptions affect recruitment and retention. 
476
477
478
479
481
482
In contrast, only 15.7 percent of personnel in Moscow reported that the military profession's value in society was a motivator for joining. When asked about what motivates these Moscow personnel today, only 4.3 percent reported that it was the value of military service in Russian society. Put simply, personnel in Rostov reported a higher likelihood of making a career in the Armed Forces, and their positive perceptions of the military profession remained relatively simple as they completed their contract. The authors conclude that personnel in Moscow tend to hold "pragmatic orientations in their work. A neutral prestige assessment of the military profession and higher satisfaction with the quality of their lives." 484 In comparison, Rostov personnel's "expectations for the privilege position of professional soldiers" were not met because of inadequate real socioeconomic support. 
485
We draw four conclusions from our review of the Russian military manpower literature. First, Russian military retention-related concerns and priorities appear to have shifted over time prior to December 2021, and uncertainty remains surrounding the specifics for some of these priorities. The Russian military has had limited resources to pursue efforts at both professionalizing and modernizing its force structure. Retention has been a key variable in pursuit of the former, especially for highly skilled personnel. Although institutional benefits might help develop a sense of purpose for Russian personnel, the perceived lack of occupational benefits (e.g., housing and compensation) appears to have been a persistent problem for some personnel within the Russian military.
Second, we conclude that the Russian military likely has been uninterested in retaining all of its conscripts, contract personnel, and officers under peacetime conditions. Given economic constraints, it is likely that the Russian Armed Forces would prioritize benefits for certain types of personnel that leadership would like to retain as these individuals' careers progress. For example, we found evidence of specialized compensation incentives based on one's occupation. If, previously, the main emphasis was made on retaining sergeants, young lieutenants, and newly recruited contract soldiers in general, 486 in recent years, the targeting has become more focused. In particular, pilots-including test pilots-and engineers have received enhanced monetary incentives. 
487
485 Klimenko and Posukhova, 2018b
. 486 Mukhin, 2019
. 487 Bocharova and Nikol'skiy, 2020;
Kulikov, 2021.
Fourth, we conclude that motivations for peacetime military service have likely varied by geographic region. For example, as also noted in Chapter 3, we found evidence that the selfreported motivations for why some Russian personnel joined-and why they were currently serving-varied for those located in Moscow versus other regions of the country. Those in Moscow held a more pragmatic view of their profession when compared with those in such places as Rostov, who might be more motivated by the institutional benefits of service. With that said, these perceived institutional benefits might not always cancel out the economic incentives-or lack thereof-for some Russian service members.
The MoD has viewed military proficiency as "the most important component of combat potential of the Armed Forces and an integral part of their combat effectiveness and combat readiness." 
488
This chapter considers efforts by the Russian military to enhance its proficiency standards prior to December 2021. We draw five conclusions from our literature review:
1. Russia has been moving toward a contract-based military as one way to respond to the effects of technological revolution in the military. 2. A more proficient Russian military will still be structurally and qualitatively different than the U.S. military. 3. Russia has employed a combination of education and training reforms, deployments, and combat experience to increase the level of proficiency in its contract and conscript personnel. 4. While overall proficiency might have improved since the immediate post-Soviet period, multiple factors suggest that there has been and will be significant variance in individual proficiency across the Armed Forces. 5. Russia might not fully trust its military personnel, even as more of them serve under contract, and it has been working hard to improve the loyalty of all its service members by promoting lessons of military history and patriotic values at all echelons.
The Russian MoD defines military proficiency as "high professional and specialty readiness of service members, military divisions and units (ships) to perform combat missions and responsibilities to carry out military duties." 489 Military proficiency consists of individual and collective actions and "is acquired during combat training and the entire process of military training and education." 490 Russia also considers moral incentives as a means to support and encourage military proficiency growth.
Russia's view of military proficiency at the individual level thus encompasses two dimensions, professional readiness and specialty readiness, where the latter is a component of the former. 
491
The quality of competence further highlights the specialty readiness component of military proficiency. The MoD defines military-professional competence (also for the militaryprofessional officer) as "military-professional knowledge necessary for confident accomplishment of military duties." 493 Specific military duty requirements determine the scope and content of this knowledge, as well as skills and abilities. In this chapter, we will explore whether Russia's contract-based military corps possesses relevant and sufficient skills to perform their jobs effectively under a variety of combat conditions and how they sustain these skills over time. Combat experience will also play a role in influencing these skills. Figure 
5
Russia has viewed military training and education as the primary means of raising individual competence by improving the knowledge, skills, and abilities of military personnel. For example, during military training exercises, the MoD combined committee working groups to evaluate the levels of knowledge, skills, and abilities to assess the level of individual proficiency and unit readiness during final inspections of military units. 
494
Skill-level qualification plays an important role in increasing individual military proficiency of the Armed Forces. 
496
Competence Discipline Leadership Organization Creativity Psychological qualities Physical qualities Specialty Knowledge, Skills, Abilities and was tied to financial incentives and promotion. 
497
499
500
501
Tests consist of two parts: theory and practice. The theoretical part tests the level of professional knowledge needed for discharging the duties of the military office, and the practical part checks the level of professional skills associated with an assigned specialty. Theoretical questions address readiness for combat, professional duties, and command duties, while practical tasks apply knowledge and skills during exercises and demonstrations of other military requirements, such as weapons handling and marksmanship, use and control of combat and specialty equipment, maintenance, physical fitness, situational awareness exercises, moral-psychological support, and working as a team under different conditions. Some units that have already applied this directive have tested their personnel in tactics, weapon handling and firing drills, and driving a combat vehicle. 502 Generals were automatically assigned the highest skilllevel qualification.
To encourage service members to attain higher skill-level qualifications and view this practice as a benefit to their careers, the MoD had reportedly planned to provide additional monthly financial compensation. Specialists with third class qualification would receive 5 percent more than their duty pay, while those with the master qualification would receive 30 percent more. 
503
The Kremlin has viewed the moral-psychological state of its military forces as an important component of Russia's combat potential. 504 A. Kuleba wrote that the "high morals of service members are the basis for successful accomplishment of combat training missions," while "psycho-emotional resilience of service members is an important factor in achieving their combat capability." 505 Furthermore, the service member's moral readiness and psychological ability to achieve assigned goals comprise a complex set of moral-psychological and professional-combat components. 
506
courage, and heroism, as well as professional competence as a specific moral quality. 509 Analytical reports from the Russian military establishment acknowledge that this combination cannot exist without considering the broad worldview and general personality of the service member.
In 2018, Russia amended its federal law, "On Conscription and Military Service," to include a requirement for all citizens who apply to serve under contract to undergo professional psychological evaluation. 510 Since that time, the evaluation has become an integral part of preparing citizens for military service and conscription. According to General Lieutenant Yevgeny Burdinskiy, director of the Main Organization and Mobilization Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, this change will contribute to "improving the quality of conscript personnel in the Armed Forces and ensur[ing] future growth of the system of professional psychological evaluation." 
511
512
The post-Cold War era brought chaos and uncertainty to Russia's military planning, which extended to military personnel at all levels. Past training requirements were either no longer appropriate or unattainable in light of limited available resources. Low staffing and financial support forced most units to focus on individual training and forego unit-level training. 514 In 1996, for example, units with reduced strength planned to conduct combat training eight days per month. While more than the four days per month were achieved prior to this period, it still fell short of the 16 days (or at least 12 days) per month requirement for Russian service members to maintain and improve their skills. Additionally, Russian junior officers constantly had military detail and only viewed the concept of "independent training" on a schedule, theoretically. As a result, leadership skills of many company and platoon commanders atrophied. At the beginning of the 21st century, the Russian Armed Forces were not faring any better. Russia's lack of an effective system of training and discipline for pre-draft youth resulted in an enlisted corps with weak military corporate values. 
515
516
517
With new combat training programs came the institution of new requirements for contract personnel across the Armed Forces, who were expected to conduct combat missions in any environment. 
519
520
521
522
523
When Shoigu became Minister of Defense in 2012, the Serdyukov reforms gave way to Shoigu's MoD Action Plan for 2013-2020, which detailed Russia's military planning priorities for building a contract-based force, among others. 
524
526
527
5
525
November 7, 2017b;
and MoD, 2020a. 526
527 MoD, "Testimony of the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation General of the Army Sergei Shoigu at the Russian Defense Ministry Board Session" ["Выступление Министра обороны Российской Федерации генерала армии С. К. Шойгу на расширенном заседании Коллегии Миногороны России"], webpage, December 22, 2016. (VDV), marine battalions, artillery reconnaissance, technical personnel, drivers, maintenance personnel in combat units, and operators of complex and expensive weapons and equipment. The Action Plan called for contract personnel to fill these units at 100 percent between 2013 and 2020. Figure 
5
528
5
5
• All personnel in combat roles are contract personnel.
• Push for contract-based crew corps to operate increasingly capable platforms.
• All submarines are operated by contract personnel.
• 90 percent of personnel on surface ships are contract personnel.
• Marines are almost completely staffed with contract personnel.
• Receive priority for contract personnel.
• 70 percent of personnel in VDV are contract personnel.
• Receive priority for conscripts.
Special Forces (Spetsnaz)
• Ongoing efforts to replace Spetsnaz personnel completely with contract personnel.
• Spetsnaz still has some conscripts.
• Spetsnaz receives priority for conscripts. SOURCE: Bowen, 2020b; "Russian Federation-Air Force," 2022; and "Russian Federation-Navy," 2022.
Filling designated military units and bases with majority (95-100 percent) contract personnel has allowed the Russian military to maintain higher combat readiness, according to the MoD. 
529
530
532
533
534
535
536
537
539
540
5
Russia's military training priorities for 2013-2020 focused on improving combat training for all service members. Table 
5
541 MoD, 2018a; and MoD, "Remarks by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation General of the Army S. K. Shoigu at the Russian Defense Ministry Board Session" ["Тезисы доклада Министра обороны Российской Федерации генерала армии С. К. Шойгу на расширенном заседании Коллегии Миногороны России"], Moscow, December 24, 2019f. 
It is difficult to estimate whether Russia is achieving its individual proficiency goals for every branch listed in Table 
5
542
5
543 Karsten Marrup and Kåre Dahl, "The Rise of Russian Air Power-A Qualitative Assessment of the Capability of the Russian Aerospace Forces," in Poulsen and Staun, eds., 2021; and Andrew S. Bowen, Russian Armed Forces:  Capabilities, version 3, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, IF11589, June 30, 2020a. 544 MoD, 2018e.
545 "Russian Federation-Air Force," 2022.
546 "Russian Federation-Navy," 2022. 
547
By late 2021, the VKS training fell short when compared with the Action Plan and Russia's near-peer adversaries. According to one estimate, recently graduated pilots averaged over 120 and 110 flying hours in 2018 and 2019, respectively-slightly below the Action Plan average requirements of 128 flying hours in 2018 and 132 flying hours in 2019 across combat, military transport, and army aviation units. 
548
As with other militaries, Russia's primarily has sought to improve individual proficiency through training and education. 552 Russian officials have touted Russia's recent experience in military conflicts as having increased the military proficiency of Russia's personnel. The following sections will discuss the training and education of Russia's conscripts, contract enlisted personnel, and officers, followed by a discussion of the impact that Russia's participation in recent military conflicts (e.g., Ukraine, Syria) has had on military proficiency.
Before examining specific training and education programs and recent combat experiences, it is helpful to outline typical pipelines of professional development and career progression within Russia's Armed Forces. Russian citizens, with or without military-related civilian training and education discussed in Chapter 3, enter service via three pipelines: (1) being conscripted; (2) under a contract as a professional enlisted soldier, sailor, or airman; or (3) as a junior officer following graduation from a military academy. Each pipeline includes distinct training requirements at various stages of the individual's career progression, and similar to other militaries, distinct opportunities to change pipelines also exist. For example, conscripts can sign 548 "Russian Federation-Air Force," 2022.
549 "Russian Federation-Air Force," 2022. 
550 Marrup and Dahl, 2021;
and Bowen, 2020a.
552 MoD, Military-Encyclopedic Dictionary, "Military Education (Military-Professional)" ["Военное образование (военно-профессиональное)"], webpage, undated-a.
a professional contract following their period of conscription and become a professional enlisted soldier, sailor, or airman. Furthermore, some enlisted service members under contract can become NCOs or warrant officers after completing required schooling. Finally, enlisted service members may attend a military academy to pursue an officer commission. As discussed in the preceding chapter and depicted in Figure 
4
Russia practices a conscription system, but this system differs greatly from the U.S. draft system, which many Americans remember from the Vietnam era. Russia uses military commissariats-local military administrative offices responsible for not only the semiannual conscription process, but also documentation of local human and economic resources for the state's use in the event of war. Within the conscription function, the commissariat determines the best use of the conscript. 554 While the proportion of Russian conscripts to contract enlisted personnel has decreased, and raising the proficiency of contract service members has become a priority, a significant number of active service members are still conscripts. 
555
556
558
560
Bartles. 562
Furthermore, units staffed primarily by conscripts and relying heavily on OJT continued to experience high turnover as annual conscription periods end and new conscripts join the unit. Thus, conscript-based units have continually remained at low levels of proficiency and readiness collectively as well. 
563
In December 2019, Shoigu reported that Russia's Armed Forces continued efforts to develop a professional military to respond to the increasing complexity of delivered weapon systems and military equipment. Simultaneously, the number of contract personnel ready to operate such systems increased. 
565
Shoigu. 566
Similar to conscripts, individuals signing enlistment contracts must fulfill rudimentary requirements (e.g., age, health, fitness, lack of criminal record) to enter the Armed Forces at the first enlisted rank, private or sailor. 567 Such individuals must pass minimal fitness standards in three categories: strength (pushups, sit ups, and pull ups [men only]), speed (60m sprint, 100m sprint, 10x10m shuttle run), and endurance (1km run, 3km run, and a cross-country ski event [men only]). Unlike conscripts, qualified recruits go directly to the first of what is a five-tier training system, as outlined in Figure 
4
568
565 MoD, 2019f.
566 "The Russian battalion tactical group (BTG) is a modular tactical organization created from a garrisoned Russian Army brigade to deploy combat power to conflict zones" (Nicolas J. Fiore, "Defeating the Russian Battalion Tactical Group," paper, Fort Benning, Ga., undated); "Shoigu Said That There Are 168 Battalion Tactical Groups in the Russian Army" ["Шойгу заявил, что в армии России насчитывается 168 батальонно-тактических групп"], TASS, August 10, 2021. 
567
568 Bartles, 2019.  from the Armed Forces. 
569
570
Overall, Russia has invested in several initiatives to increase the number of contract junior enlisted personnel and improve the formal and unit training of these personnel. These initiatives very likely have improved the quality and competence of junior enlisted ranks that previously included mostly conscripts who were limited to OJT. However, it is difficult to ascertain exactly how much more proficient the average individual at the lowest ranks is, relative to past periods. The characteristics of Russia's approach also might limit professional development beyond a basic level at this echelon. For example, one program, which was aimed at increasing the ratio of contract enlisted to conscripts, offers draftees reporting to their induction office an option to sign a two-year enlistment contract instead of serving a one-year conscription period. 571 There are some indications that this program (which was discussed in Chapter 4) along with other retention issues may result in high numbers of contract junior enlisted leaving service after their shortened contracts expire (normal contracts are at least three years). Although a private under this program receives formal initial and VUS training, that individual will serve only about a year and a half (or less) in their unit (two years minus their tier-one training period), generally less time than most U.S. junior enlisted spend in their first assignments.
Furthermore, during the previous conscription policy that included two years of service, conscripts spent nearly all their time with their assigned unit, although they did not receive formal initial training. Thus, some fully staffed contract units still might include individuals with little time in service and thus might experience relatively high turnover at the junior enlisted rank, partially limiting the potential to develop professional competence at this echelon. Individual competence is undoubtedly higher, but it is not clear just how much "better" the twoyear contract enlisted service members-who have short basic and VUS training before joining their unit-are, when compared with the two-year conscripts that preceded them.
Those enlisted service members that renew their contracts after their first terms of service would likely attend a second-tier training course dedicated to their branch of service and VUS; this would prepare them for squad leader, tank commander, crew leader, and other similar positions. The intent of this and more-advanced enlisted training programs is not to "develop 569 
Bartles, 2019. 570
571 Bartles, 2019.  well rounded leaders" but rather "develop technically proficient professionals." 572 Russia's junior NCOs do not expect to spend time out of their branch or specialty, so their career training pipeline focuses almost entirely on professional skills needed to learn, practice, or teach their specific profession. Thus, after serving in a unit for three to five years in a second-tier position, individuals will receive another three months of VUS-specific training and return to a unit as a deputy platoon leader, or, in some combat support platoons, as a platoon leader. After at least ten years of service, contract service members can attend three to five months of tier-four staff training to prepare to serve on regiment, brigade, and division staffs. After another five years in one of those positions, they may then receive another three to five months of tier-five training before serving at the Army Group level or on higher-echelon staffs. 573
As mentioned previously, the MoD has a different concept of the roles and responsibilities of mid-and senior-ranked NCOs. In the Russian Armed Forces, officers-and in some cases warrant officers-take on many of the disciplinary, leadership, and training roles that Western military NCOs usually play. 574 However, the Russian military has shown an increased interest in the professional development of its NCOs-sometimes referred to as officer assistants-in recent years. And those meeting qualification requirements for knowledge, skills, abilities, and education can attend a professional educational institution at a dedicated military installation or university. 
575
576
In the past, Russia experienced challenges with maintaining enough warrant officers, in part because such officers had to graduate from a four-or five-year military academy like other officers. In addition, after graduation, warrant officers had few opportunities for career advancement and received roughly the same pay in all positions. As a result, the Armed Forces always had a shortage of warrant officers, especially in the positions associated with complex technical work. 581 After abolishing warrant officer ranks as part of the 2008 reforms, the MoD has brought these ranks back into service and improved their training and education. 
582
583
Russian military officers serve different roles than many of their Western counterparts. In addition to their command and control role, they also act as the Armed Forces' "primary trainers, disciplinarians, and repositories for institutional knowledge." 584 Officers constitute the backbone of Russia's highly vertical command structure, and they exercise a great deal of authority over their subordinates. 
585
587
589
590
587
589
590
In the absence of substantial NCO leadership, Russian military units are generally smaller than U.S. ones and have smaller staffs to facilitate officer command and control. As a result, Russian maneuver officers have opportunities to lead troops, and some command tours can last up to six years. Russian officers are also promoted more quickly than their Western counterparts and "it is not uncommon to see a 32-year-old battalion commander." Within this tactical path, Russian officers generally do not serve in positions outside their branch, and they get ample time to hone the technical skills of their specialty. In this system, a brigade commander on the tactical path would have more years of command experience than their U.S. counterpart because of the ability to specialize in tactical leadership. 
593
594
The MoD formally defines military education as the process of training, increasing qualification of, and retraining military specialists, accompanied by an assessment of these specialists' achieved education level. 596 At the end of an individual's time in a military-academic institution, they typically receive a diploma or other form of documentation that serves as confirmation of a completed course of military education. The main purpose of professional military education is to ensure that Russia's military forces have a qualified military cadre. This goal applies to all levels of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, which emphasizes acquisition of specific knowledge in a teacher-controlled environment at the lower levels as well as at the highest military academy, the Military Academy of the General Staff of the Armed    In 2017, 60 percent of selectees had combat experience, and more than half had received high government awards.
Russia's professional military education (PME) program includes primary, secondary, higher education, postgraduate, and additional military training. Requirements for graduation are comparable with those in civilian education in the same specialty. 599 Table 
5
600
As part of their additional military training (described in Table 
5
601
Russia's military education system includes one additional element: military-political education. While independent of Russia's PME program, military-political education is one of 600 MoD, 2017b.
601 MoD, undated-n. the primary training topics for military personnel of the Armed Forces. 
602
603
604
607
Unlike professional, combat, and other official forms of training discussed elsewhere in this chapter, military-political training is a requirement for all contract, conscript, and civilian personnel of all ranks and positions, and no one receives an automatic passing grade without prior testing. To assess the effectiveness of VPP-the results of which are important enough to report to the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation-the GVU administers the training through a strict curriculum. The curriculum encompasses several subject areas: state and military building, military-political situation, the mission of the Armed Forces in repelling threats to national security, patriotic history, army and navy traditions, military education and psychology, moral norms and military ethics, laws of the Russian Federation, and international humanitarian legal norms. 608 Table 
5
613
614
During the 2014 Russian military intervention in eastern Ukraine, regular rotations of troops from multiple military districts ensured that individual units did not get burned out, and numerous individuals had opportunities to serve in or directly support operations in Ukraine. The 2014 annexation of Crimea by a "small number of highly trained and disciplined troops" was portrayed as an indicator of improved Russian capabilities. 617 However, early reports from fighting in eastern Ukraine indicated a noticeable variance in terms of the quality and competence of Russian service members there. 
618
By the end of 2020, an estimated 63,000-plus Russian service members had served in Syria. 
621
617 Russell, 2021. 618
619
621 "Russian Military Forces Dazzle After a Decade of Reform," 2020. exercises in Russia. 
622
623
624
625
On February 23, 2022, 190,000 Russian military troops and separatist forces invaded Ukraine on its eastern, northern, and southern borders and began their advance toward Ukraine's major cities, including its capital, Kyiv. 629 At the end of March 2022, a month into Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the Russian military found itself "bogged down in the face of Ukraine's fierce resistance" and began to retreat, presumably to reconstitute its Ground Forces for the "focus toward the Donbas" during the next stage of its "special military operation." 630 During this first month, Russia surprised Western observers of its ongoing military reforms with its poor performance. On the battlefield, Russian troops struggled to advance their wheeled and tracked vehicles through somewhat muddy Ukrainian terrain; remained clustered and out in the open when stopped; and seemed inadequate at employing armor, infantry, engineers, artillery, and mortars to achieve combined-arms effects, such as maintaining their vehicles and weapon systems and providing logistical support to their forward forces. 631 Russia's Air Force attempted but could not disable Ukraine's military airfields at the beginning of the war, and could not achieve air superiority. 632 Russia's Air Force stayed outside the range of Ukraine's air defenses to reduce aircraft losses. 633 Russian forces also underperformed jointly. Russia's Air Force "has been unimpressive" with providing close air support to its Ground Forces advancing inside Ukraine and has "generally been carrying out attacks that are disconnected from ground maneuvers." 634 Russia's Black Sea Fleet was able "to provide supporting fires and logistical support to its Ground Forces in the south," but it suffered a significant loss when its flagship battle cruiser, the Moskva, was sunk by Ukrainian forces. 
635
639
641
644
In 2017, Gerasimov had called for official analyses of Russia's recent combat operations at the operational and tactical levels, but combat experience had already affected training and education as well as performance standards for officers. 645 Future service members of the Armed Forces would heed the examples that Russian officers and enlisted service members set with their "professional handling of modern weapons, high level of tactical proficiency and stoic morals . . . which allowed them to accomplish complex and difficult combat tasks with a small force." 
646
647
Although most observers agree that Russia's combat experiences prior to 2022 represented a net positive on individual and unit proficiency, there is a limit to how beneficial these campaigns are, partially because of the characteristics of Russia's overly centralized system. Russian officials certainly learned from experiences in Chechnya and Georgia to drive improvements, but Russia still lacks an objective media and has a culture that discourages the reporting of bad news from the front lines. As a result, those empowered to direct improvements in training and education might not be provided with the most-accurate accounts of what is actually occurring in 
645
646 Gerasimov, 2017, p. 20
This chapter identified five core findings. First, Russia has taken steps to move toward a contract-based military to respond to the effects of technological revolution in the military. Russian strategists have concluded that "modern warfare requires agility and highly trained personnel to operate complex equipment and perform sophisticated tasks. Only trained professionals are suitable for this task." 650 Russia's professional training and education systems have been set up with the intent to (1) improve technical competence in military specialties; (2) prepare contract personnel to operate complex and advanced weapon systems and military equipment; (3) facilitate continuous learning; (4) take advantage of conscripts prone to scientific work with degrees in national-security-related fields; and (5) support scientific research, development, and application of new technologies to national security missions.
Second, a more proficient Russian military would still be structurally and qualitatively different than the U.S. military. Although Russia has made progress toward increased contract staffing and improved training, one must avoid the mirror image fallacy in comparisons to American analogues. Even if Russia ultimately realizes its ambitions for a robust, professional NCO corps, Russian NCOs are still more like enlisted professionals, having a narrow, technical focus on their specific specialty. 651 Russian officers still will be expected to perform many of the roles and responsibilities that Western NCOs fill, and the use of short-term conscripts in many service support roles will continue. Russia is also making efforts to learn the lessons from recent combat deployments, especially in Syria, to improve real-world decisionmaking and encourage creativity and initiative among officers in a clear departure from traditional Russian military culture. However, it is unlikely that a maneuver warfare mindset and proclivity for mission-type orders will permeate through all ranks of Russia's Armed Forces in the near future.
Third, Russia has shown a commitment to improving proficiency by employing a combination of education and training reforms, deployments, and recent combat experience to increase the level of proficiency in its contract and conscript personnel. Russia intends to raise the technical expertise of its service members through new military education and training requirements. However, it is only in combat that Russian military leaders can learn whether their efforts have the intended impact on the future of Russia's military. Russia's military leaders expressed great satisfaction with Russian military commanders' technical and leadership performance in Syria. The number of contract personnel across the Armed Forces has grown as 
649
650 Radin et al., 2019, p. 60
651
Fourth, while overall proficiency may have improved, multiple factors-including Russia's 2022 military performance in Ukraine-suggest that there is, and will be, significant variance in individual proficiency across the Armed Forces. Over the past 15 years, poor personnel management has resulted in both a large overabundance and deficits of personnel at different times. In the former case, a shortage of assigned officer positions for lieutenants limited their opportunities to develop, and in the latter case, the MoD had to reduce training requirements (e.g., programs at military academies went from five to four years in length) to get the officers to their operational units quicker. While staffing might be more stable today, the effects of earlier incoherence might still be present. The MoD has also had to balance limited funding and has, for example, prioritized equipping and training the VKS in recent years, thus increasing the VKS's proficiency while sacrificing other specialties. 
653
654
653 
Marrup and Dahl, 2021;
Bowen, 2020a
. 654 Golts, 2017a.
Between the mid-2000s and early 2020s, Russia took proactive steps to address longstanding challenges in its military in response to lessons learned from previous military engagements, assessments about the changing nature of warfare, and witnessing the effects of technological revolution in the military. These efforts included investments in tangible benefits, including housing, compensation, and family well-being, as well as efforts to improve intangible factors, such as patriotism and perceptions of the military, that make up benefits associated with military service.
Combined with a concerted effort to enhance personnel proficiency through investments in training and restructuring, these efforts yielded progress in mitigating many of the problems that have traditionally plagued the Russian military. However, despite this improvement, researchsome based on survey and administrative data-suggests there is still room for improvement, and Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine revealed substantial remaining gaps in the professionalism of Russian military personnel.
Drawing from Russian-language sources and analysis, we identified several major findings for this report.
Between 2008 and 2022, professionalization of the Russian military was a policy and budgetary priority for Russian defense leadership as a counterpart to modernization investments in weapons and equipment. Overall, the Russian military sought to take a forward-leaning and iterative approach to personnel changes to address significant challenges within the force. This approach was apparent in policy changes across the areas of recruiting, retention, and proficiency. These changes required significant budgetary investment: In constant 2014 dollars, Russia's personnel spending increased from $4 billion in 2000 to $30 billion in 2013. 
656
660
In pursuing personnel reforms, the Russian military appears to have drawn some lessons from previous experiences of the United States and other professional militaries. In addition to Russia's general thrust to develop a professional force-a process that the United States began in the late 1960s-Russia adopted a training cycle similar to that of the United States, increased nighttime training, and adapted its qualifications on the basis of its perceptions of Western combat.
In an effort to improve recruitment and retention, the Russian military invested in its ability to deliver tangible benefits associated with conscription and contract service. Survey data suggest that some dissatisfaction persisted during the pre-war period. Our review of Russian civilian and military surveys and analysis suggests that, as of December 2021, Russian motivations to join and remain in military service focused primarily on material benefits. In some Western works on military personnel recruitment and retention, these types of benefits have been described as occupational benefits, within a broader institutional-occupational model, also cited by some Russian analysts. Three primary areas of emphasis for the improvement of material benefits were housing, compensation, and family well-being.
Housing remained a top-tier personnel policy priority for the Russian military, according to senior leader speeches that were analyzed in this report. The Russian military sought to improve housing for contract service members by providing a new system that provides service members with a housing mortgage that accrues over years of service. This mortgage system, which provides tangible rewards and stability for contract service members, incentivizes recruitment and retention because the mortgage is fully paid after two decades of service. Considered to be a significant competitive advantage against other potential career choices, housing has featured prominently in Russian military recruitment materials, followed by salaries and patriotic themes. However, although these efforts somewhat improved traditionally negative perceptions of Russian military housing, they did not entirely, and regional surveys between 2016 and 2017 suggested that only 8 to 30 percent of contract personnel reported living comfortably in military housing. Housing continued to be a personnel policy priority for the Russian military: In December 2020, the MoD consolidated the allocation of residential premises for military personnel into a single entity. 
661
662
664
665
666
667
The Russian military undertook efforts to improve intangible factors, such as increasing prestige and reducing the stigma associated with military service, although these factors may play less significant roles in recruitment and retention than material factors, particularly with contract personnel. In 2019, Shoigu emphasized that effective Armed Forces require both tangible factors, such as the improvement of conditions for service members, and intangible components, such as patriotism as a core value. 670 Within the context of the IO model in Western literature, these can be considered institutional benefits. Although the balance between tangible and intangible motivations varied in surveys of Russian service members that we reviewed for our study, a pragmatic view of the profession tended to dominate, followed by motivations of institutional benefits of service.
In a significant area of intangible benefits, the broader public opinion of the military appeared to have risen substantially prior to 2022, and particularly following Russia's military campaigns in Ukraine (2014) and Syria. According to polls reviewed for our study, the military was Russians' most trusted and approved institution as of 2021. 671 This improvement did not go unnoticed by contract personnel, a majority of whom interviewed during surveys reviewed for our study (60 to 70 percent) reported increases in professional prestige between 2012 and 2017. However, this support does not universally translate into enthusiasm for military service. Although the percentage of Russians who believe that every "true man" should serve in the Armed Forces reached 61 percent in 2021, this view was significantly more popular among respondents aged 55 years and older (72 percent), and has far less support (36 percent) among Russians aged 18 to 24. 
672
669 Makarov, 2013, p. 73. 670
672 Levada Center, 2021a. youth, these efforts, according to one news report, cost the Russian government at least 73 billion rubles between 2015 and 2020. 673 Military-patriotic education appeared to seek to raise the prestige and desirability of military service, and the ubiquitous and compulsory nature of the programming means that nearly all Russian male youths have exposure to substantial militarypatriotic messaging, although the effects of this programming are unclear. The Russian military promotes lessons of military history and patriotic values across echelons as one dimension of military-political readiness (moral-political and psychological readiness), throughout an individual's period of service.
Endemic problems with corruption and hazing (dedovshchina) have traditionally diminished perceptions about the desirability of military service for the Russian public. Order and discipline were thus additional areas of policy focus for the Russian military leadership, and represented one major motivation for the reduction of the conscription term to a single year. Court cases and anecdotal evidence suggest that some level of hazing persisted prior to 2022. However, Shoigu claimed in 2019 that hazing in the Russian military had been eliminated completely, and while he acknowledged that some criminal activities were still being committed within the Armed Forces, he stated that the rate of crime was low compared with the average crime rate in civilian communities. 
674
675
674 "Sergei Shoigu Told How They Saved the Russian Army," 2019. 
675 Klimenko and Posukhova, 2018a. 676
New education and training programs instituted in 2005 began to address "professionalization of the military" as part of Russia's federal plan, "Transition to Recruiting Contract Service Members to Fill a Number of Formations and Military Units." 677 Combined with a new focus on hiring and retaining contact personnel, investments in professional training yielded some improvements in the system of combat training for ground and naval forces. 
678
680
Policy initiatives increased the proportion of contract service members in Russia's military. According to Deputy Minister of Defense Nikolay Pankov, the number of contract service members doubled between 2012 and 2020. By 2020, the majority of the Russian military force was comprised of contract service members, with contract personnel making up nearly 70 percent of the force. 682 journalistic investigation of hazing convictions recorded in the state system Justice, for example, uncovered more than 1,500 verdicts between 2016 and 2020 (Georgevich and Prokushev, 2020).  681 MoD, undated-u. 
682
The MoD had to balance limited funding and, for example, prioritized equipping and training the VKS in recent years. 
683
684
Although conscripts still played important roles in filling some less technical and service support roles, contract personnel fully staffed all junior commanding positions (sergeant and senior sergeant), combat units of special forces, Marines, battalion tactical groups, and operators of complex equipment. 685 Within regiments and brigades, contract soldiers staffed two battalions for each one staffed by conscripts, bolstering the readiness of tactical groups for immediate use in the formations and military units. 686
Overall, the Russian military took steps to address most of the perennial problems and challenges that had previously hampered its effectiveness, but not all issues were resolved. Chapter 2 of this report identifies ten perennial problems within the Russian military. We found that policy reform and investment in the areas of recruitment, retention, and proficiency addressed most of these areas. Table 
6
• The handling of manning and readiness challenges improved in the years prior to 2022.
Russia's transition to a professional military, paired with an increase in technical military education and training requirements, improved the capability and readiness of Russian forces. Russia's military leaders expressed satisfaction with Russian military commanders' technical and leadership performance in Syria, with Gerasimov claiming in 2017 that Russia's performance in Syria upheld "the superiority of the Russian military school and science." 687 However, some Russian military scholars continued to warn that parts of the force might lack material and professional motivations to serve. 688 • Training initiatives introduced in 2005 and expanded after the 2008 New Look reforms, particularly among contract enlisted personnel, focused on improving training and proficiency standards. According to senior Russian military leadership, this effort continued, in part to respond to the increasing complexity of delivered weapon systems and military equipment. 689 • Military prestige and popular support improved significantly prior to 2022. As of 2021, the military represented the institution in Russia that had the greatest degree of trust and approval of the general public. 690 Furthermore, support for military service appeared to have increased. 691 • Hazing and other negative service conditions were also areas of focus for senior military leader attention, as noted previously, and had reportedly improved. However, with the expansion of contract services, some hazing appeared to have spread there as well: In one 2020 poll, 55 percent of military respondents said they experienced some sort of hazing in the past six years. 692 • Peacetime draft evasion had been reduced dramatically, from 6,200 in 2013 to 1,600 in 2018.
• While a larger proportion of conscripted youth were deemed fit for service, nearly 20 percent of young people reportedly remained ineligible because of poor health, and 40 percent of conscripts demonstrated insufficient physical fitness, skills, and talents for military service, with psychological fitness remaining a major barrier to service among Russian youth. 693 • Military disillusionment was identified as an area of concern for the Russian military, particularly with a greater proportion serve under contract. The military had thus prioritized efforts to promote lessons of military history and patriotic values at all echelons, and incorporated the moral-political status of a unit in core evaluation criteria. • Wage issues persisted, as noted previously, but appear to have been an area of investment for the Russian military, resulting in more-competitive compensation and greater levels of satisfaction reported among service members. • Although public data on criminality and corruption in the Russian military are limited, MoD publications suggest that these continued to be issues prior to 2022, with drugrelated crimes and extortion decreasing in recent years but corruption increasing. 
694
Levada Center, 2021b.
For example one recent study of parents of adolescent boys in Russia, 68 percent responded that they would like for their son to serve in the military (VTsIOM, 2016). Arenina, 2020.   Bondarev, 2021.   Gavrilov, 2020a; and Svetlova, 2021b.   Klimenko and Posukhova, 2018a.   Gavrilov, 2020b.  10.3 percent in 2020. 697 However, there has been notably less public data available from the MoD on these issues in recent years. 
698
697 Svetlova, 2021a. 
698
699
700
A
the list approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; in military units (institutions, organizations, subdivisions) performing tasks to support space programs, according to the list approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; at special facilities (in military units, organizations, institutions and in certain positions), according to the lists approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; carrying out special work (performance of special tasks), according to the lists approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; performing military service in other special conditions of military service, according to the lists approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; carrying combat duty with a total duration of five or more days per month-30 percent, from three to five days per month-15 percent, less than three days per month-5 percent • 20 percent of military position salary for the service members in aviation military units (aviation rescue centers) performing military service in military positions, replaced by military personnel (ground aviation specialists who ensure the safety of aircraft and helicopter flights) according to the list of military positions approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; in the crews of standard combat (special) equipment on tracked and wheeled chassis, as well as in the instructors of training military units and subunits included in the crews of equipment on tracked and wheeled chassis and engaged in driving training on these combat (special) vehicles, in military positions, those working on recharging nuclear reactors of ships, and those handling nuclear fuel and radioactive waste, according to the list approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation. • Up to 20 percent of the military position salary for the service members doing military service in certain military positions that require foreign language skills, according to the list approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation; if one Western language is used-10 percent, if one Eastern or two or more foreign languages are used-20 percent; in military positions of leaders, commanders (chiefs) of military units and organizations of the Armed Forces and their structural units, as well as in leadership of units, according to the list approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation. • 10 percent of the military position salary for service members doing military service in Moscow and Moscow region and in Saint Petersburg and Saint Petersburg region.
For performing tasks directly related to risks to life and health in peacetime (monthly)
• Up to 100 percent of the military position salary for performing diving tasks depending on the depth, time spent underwater, and type of task. • Up to 60 percent of the military position salary for the period of direct participation in exercises, ship missions, the development of tasks of combat and combat training in the field, and tasks outside the permanent deployment of a military unit according to the list defined by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation (2 percent of the military position salary for each day of participation in these events). • Up to 50 percent of the military position salary for parachuting (landing with equipment), depending on the number of jumps, conditions, and performance; for working with explosives, such as detection, identification, seizure, disposal, destruction of explosive devices and explosive objects, the use of explosive materials and explosives, explosive devices and explosive
objects for the days on which they performed this work, for performing flights from ship deck or using a ground training system based on the flights and performance, and for being in flight crews to extinguish natural and human-made fires. • Up to 40 percent of the military position salary for working directly with persons providing assistance on a confidential basis. • Up to 30 percent of military position salary for military service in medical institutions (units) with harmful and/or dangerous working conditions in the positions of medical personnel, according to the lists approved by the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, and for military service related to the performance of research on cadaveric material, research using X-ray, high-frequency and ionizing radiation, toxic, poisonous, narcotic, potent, or aggressive substances. • Up to 20 percent of military position salary for serving in the regions of ecological crisis at the Baikonur complex and the city of Baikonur (Republic of Kazakhstan), carrying out diagnostics and treatment of HIV-infected, working with materials containing the human immunodeficiency virus, completing military service in anti-plague institutions or departments, laboratories of especially dangerous infections and sanitary-epidemiological units, for direct involvement in work on recharging nuclear reactors of ships and handling nuclear fuel and radioactive waste for each day of performance of this work.
Percentage allowance for the length of service in structural units for the protection of state secrets (for contract service members)
• If the length of service is between 1 and 5 years- Monthly bonus for military personnel with higher legal education and military positions in the legal profession (for contract service members)
• For positions in the central office of the MoD-50 percent • For positions in military command and control bodies, services and branches of the Armed Forces, military districts (fleets) command, regional command, combined arms-30 percent • For positions in the directorates of formations, military units, and organizations of the Armed Forces-15 percent Monthly bonus for high achievements in service (for contract service members)
• For working in institutions of higher and additional professional education on teaching and research positions and having a degree of the candidate of sciences-20 percent, doctors of science-40 percent • For holding military positions in research institutions that require advanced degree-for the candidates of sciences-15 percent, doctor of science-30 percent • For holding a teaching position in higher education institution and having an academic title and degree-for associate professors 40 percent, for heads of departments 50 percent, for professors 60 percent,
• For those involved in the performance of tasks in mountainous and high-mountainous terrain, trained under the program of mountain training instructors and occupying military positions in the mountain training and physical training and sports occupations-70 percent. • When awarded by the medals of the MoD (within one year from the date of the issuance of the medal): "For performance in combat"-30 percent, "For demining," "For military valor, 1st degree"-20 percent; "For military valor, 2nd degree"-10 percent • For the qualification level of physical fitness, receiving or maintaining sports categories in military-applied sports and the sports titles (honorary sports titles) in any sports: for the 2nd qualifying level of physical fitness-15 percent, for the 1st qualifying level of physical fitness-30 percent, for the highest qualifying level of physical fitness-70 percent, for completing or maintaining the first category in one of the military-applied sports-80 percent, for completing the category of a candidate for master of sports in one of the military-applied sports-90 percent • For having the sports titles "Master of Sports of Russia (USSR), international class," "Master of Sports of Russia (USSR)"-100 percent; honorary sports title "Honorary Master of Sports of Russia (USSR)"-100 percent Other monthly allowances • For serving on a permanent basis on the territory of the Republic of Dagestan, the Republic of Ingushetia, the Kabardino-Balkarian Republic, the Karachay-Cherkess Republic, the Republic of North Ossetia-Alania and the Chechen Republic; from the day of enlistment and until termination, for those arriving as a part of a military unit, from the day of arrival at the point of deployment, the service members receive a monthly supplement to their monetary allowance. • For serving within special forces and (or) the forces of the combined grouping-in the amount of two monthly salaries in accordance with the military position held. • Not included in the special forces and (or) the forces of the Joint Group-in the amount of one month's salary based on the military position . SOURCE: Reproduced in translation from MoD, undated-bb.
1. Summary of Systemic Issues, 1990s Through 2009 .................................................... Table 2.2. Russian Force Reductions by Service, 2008-2012 ...................................................... Table 3.1. Should Men Serve in the Army? ..................................................................................
268  
268  
291  
291  
298  
298  
301 Mary Ilyushina, "As Russia Drafts Young Men, Some Fear Ending Up on Ukraine's Front Line," Washington Post, April 1, 2022. SOURCE: Data from MoD Military General Prosecutor's Office, as reported in
301 Mary Ilyushina, "As Russia Drafts Young Men, Some Fear Ending Up on Ukraine's Front Line," Washington Post, April 1, 2022. SOURCE: Data from MoD Military General Prosecutor's Office, as reported in
304  
304  
312 Public Opinion Foundation, 2019; and Levada Center, 2014.  313 Public Opinion Foundation, 2019.  314  
312 Public Opinion Foundation, 2019; and Levada Center, 2014.  313 Public Opinion Foundation, 2019.  314  
356  
356  
367  
367  
378  
378  
387  
387  
402 Kulikov, 2021.    
409
583  
583  
608  
608  
Samuel Charap, Dara Massicot, Miranda Priebe, Alyssa Demus, Clint Reach, Mark Stalczynski, Eugeniu Han, and  Lynn E. Davis, Russian Grand Strategy: Rhetoric and Reality, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4238- A, 2021.  
Alexei G.Arbatov, "Military Reform in Russia: Dilemmas, Obstacles, and Prospects," International Security,  Vol. 22, No. 4, Spring 1998, p. 99.   
A. Yakovlev, "Soldier with Advanced Training" ["Солдат с высшей подготовкой"], Na strazheRodiny, No.  33, 2008.   
Nikolai Makarov, "Results of Construction of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation in 2009" ["Итоги строительства вооруженных сил российской федерации в 2009 году"], Rossiiskoe voennoe obozrenie, No. 1, 2010.
Radin et al., 2019b, Appendix D.   
Radin et al., 2019b, p. 57.    
Bruntalsky, 2010;
Kramnik, 2011.
In this chapter, we refer to military recruitment as the activity of attracting people to and selecting them for military training and employment, both on a contract basis (i.e., voluntary service) and through conscription.
Vladimir Putin, "Being  Strong: National Security Guarantee for Russia" ["Быть сильными: Гарантии национальной безопасности для России"], Rossiyskaya gazeta, February 20, 2012.
Aleksandr A. Sogiyaynen and Leonid P. Chicherin, "Health and Quality of Life of the Conscript-Age Citizens as the Basis for Optimizing Their Medical Care" ["Состояние здоровья и качества жизни граждан призывного
Andrei Voronin, "Looking Back on 2019: Worse Is Possible, Though Not Desirable" ["Итоги 2019: хуже можно, но, пожалуйста, не нужно!"], Soldatskiye materiSankt-Peterburga, December 31, 2019.   
Anna Konstantinova, "Speedy Call: Military Commissariats Send  Conscripts to the Army in One Day" ["Быстрый зов. Военкоматы отправляют призывников в армию за один день"], Mediazona, December 25, 2020.
Aleksandra Georgevich, "The Urgent Vacation" ["Каникулы срочного режима"], Novaya gazeta, June 28, 2021.
"Shoigu Compared Military  Commissariats to Closets in Need of Cleaning" ["Шойгу сравнил военкоматы с гардеробами и пообещал привести их в порядок"], Interfax, June 9, 2021.
Konstantin Raschepkin and Viktor Pyakov, "The Way to Professionals" ["Путь в профессионалы"], Na boevom postu,No. 69-70, 2008.   
Raschepkin and Pyakov, 2008.    
To accommodate these changes, personnel expenditures have risen multifold during the period of the reforms and accounted for the largest share of defense spending; see Gil Barndollar, "The Best or Worst of Both Worlds? Russia's Mixed Military Manpower System," blog post, Center for Strategic and International Studies, September 23, 2020.
Leonid Hairemdinov, "Social Guarantees That Inspire Long-Term Military  Service" ["Гарантии, вдохновляющие на длительный срок службы"], Krasnaya zvezda, No. 84, August 2, 2019.
Soloviev, 2008;
and Makarov, 2010.
If the service member leaves the service earlier, they will have to pay back the money that the government gave them toward housing (with few exceptions).
Makarov, 2010.
"Over One-Third of Russian Junior Officers, Contract Soldiers Below Poverty Line" ["Более трети российских младших офицеров, контрактников за чертой бедности"], Interfax,
December 12, 2008.
MoD, "Social Benefits Package of the Contract Service Member" ["Социальный пакет военнослужащегоконтрактника"], webpage, undated-y.
  231  For those who serve in some of the Northern regions, see MoD,
2019d. 232 MoD, "Social Benefits Package of the Contract Service Member," webpage,
undated-y.233 Radin et al.,  
2019b, p. 70.234 Radin et al., 2019a, p. 62, citing Nadja Douglas, "Civil-Military  Relations in Russia: Conscript vs. Contract Army, or How Ideas Prevail Against Functional Demands," Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Vol
. 24, No. 4, 2014.   235 "Russian Military Allows Replacement of Conscription with Contract Service" ["Военные Силы России позволяют заменять призыв контрактной службой"],
RT, February 26, 2016.  236 "For You, Contract Soldiers" ["Для вас, контрактники"], Boevaya Vakhta, No. 69, September 12, 2009.   
For example, Vladimir Sosnitsky, "Families of Servicemen of the Russian Unit in Gudauta Received a Kindergarten for the Garrison" ["Детский сад для гарнизона получили семьи военнослужащих российского
"Eight Thousand People Decided to Join the Contract Service During the 'Armiya' and 'ArMY' Forums" ["На 'Армия' и 'АрМИ' восемь тысяч людей решили пойти на контрактную службу"], RIA Novosti, August 31, 2021.
Yuriy Belousov, "To Attract to Contract Military Service" ["Привлечь на службу по контракту"], Krasnaya zvezda, No. 37, September 4, 2018.
MoD, "Fourth Control Agency of the Human Resources" ["Четвертое управление главного управления кадров"], webpage, undated-cc; "Eight Thousand People Decided to Join the Contract Service during the 'Armiya' and 'ArMY' Forums," 2021.    
Examples of such events here: Vesti Khabarovsk [Вести Хабаровск], "Special Report. Recruiting for Contract Military Service" ["Специальный репортаж. Агитация на контрактную службу в армию"], video, YouTube, October 3, 2014.
MoD, undated-cc.   
Yuriy Belousov, "Innovations in Army Recruitment" ["Инновации армейской агитации"], Krasnaya zvezda, No. 15,
February 12, 2021
Shoigu, 2021.   
"Ministry of Defense Summarizes the Outcomes of the Fall Draft" ["Министерство Обороны подвело итоги осеннего призыва"], RIA Novosti, December 31, 2020.
Viktor Schepilov, "New Recruits from the Capital Are Getting Physically Stronger" ["Столичный новобранец физически крепчает"], Voennye komissariaty Rossii, October 1, 2021; and
Burdinsky, 2019.
See Maksim Kalinin, "Satisfaction with the Housing and Monetary Benefits Among Military Service Members" ["Удовлетворение жильем и денежным довольствием военнослужащими"], Alleya nayki,Vol. 2, No. 29,  
Public Opinion Foundation, 2021.   
154.1 147.1 152 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Spring draft Fall draft
4 2.7 2.5 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Spring draft Fall draft
Svyatoslav Ivanov, "Do Russians Want to Serve?" ["Хотят ли русские служить?"], gazeta.ru, February 22, 2016.
We refer to tangible benefits as occupational benefits in this chapter. Furthermore, we refer to intangible benefits as institutional benefits.
David E. Rohall, V. Lee Hamilton, David R. Segal, and Mady W. Segal, "Downsizing the Russian Army: Quality of Life and Mental Health Consequences for Former Organizational Members, Survivors, and Spouses," Journal of Political and Military Sociology, Vol. 29, No. 1, Summer 2001.
Vasile Sminchise, "Military Retention. A Comparative Outlook," Journal of Defense ResourcesManagement,  Vol. 7., No. 1, July 2016.   
Giles, 2017.
Grau and Bartles, 2016.    
Barndollar, 2020.
We define retention as the "rate at which military personnel voluntarily choose to stay in the military after their obligated term of service has ended." For more details, seeKapp, 2021.   
Grau and Bartles, 2016.    
James V. Marrone, Predicting 36-Month Attrition in the U.S. Military: A Comparison Across Service Branches, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4258-OSD, 2020.
Ermolov and Karlova, 2018;
Nikolay Prokhorov, "Officer  Contract" ["Офицерский контракт"], VPK.Voenno-Promyshlennyi Kur'er, No.  26, July 11, 2007.   
Vladimir Mukhin, "Every Tenth Crime in the Armed Forces Is Battery" ["Каждое десятое преступление в армии-рукоприкладство"], Nezavisimaia gazeta, February 18, 2020.
"Сrime Is Not Getting Better" ["Криминогенная ситуация не улучшается"], Suvorovskii natisk, No. 147,
December 19, 1998.
MoD, Military-Encyclopedic Dictionary, "Military Proficiency" ["Мастерство воинское"], webpage, undatedb.
  489  MoD, Military-Encyclopedic Dictionary, undated-b.
Scientific Companies
V. Maksimenko, "Combat Training Given High Intensity" ["Боевой учебе -высокую интенсивность"], Strazh Baltiki, No. 21, June 4, 2021.
"Russia Plans to Increase the Number of Contract Personnel," 2021.
Moscow Mayor's Office, undated.   
The authors of this report are grateful to 
U.S. European Command
Russia Strategic Initiative
Mark Cozad
Bettina Renz
Daniel Ginsberg
This research was sponsored by 
U.S. European Command's Russia Strategic Initiative
International Security and Defense Policy Program of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD)
National Defense Research Institute (NDRI)
Office of the Secretary of Defense
Joint Staff
Unified Combatant Commands
Navy
Marine Corps
For more information on the 
RAND International Security and Defense Policy Program
Summary and initiatives from the 1990s through December 2021, prior to Russia's
Based on no less than three test questions; additional three questions to assess level of mastery of knowledge Answers to questions based on a four-level scale:
• Excellent-correct use of concepts and terms • Good-may include some inaccuracies and mistakes • Satisfactory-soft knowledge of the topic; basic understanding presented with difficulty • Unsatisfactory-requirements for satisfactory rating not reached Individual grade scale:
• Excellent-at least two answers received excellent rating • Good-over 90 percent of correct answers given; no less than two answers receive excellent or good rating; one satisfactory or 80-90 percent of answers are correct • Satisfactory-no less than two answers receive positive evaluation or 70-80 percent of answers are correct • Unsatisfactory-requirements for satisfactory rating not reached A grade is reduced by one point if the service member has a pending disciplinary action against them at the time of the VPP test.
• Excellent-average grade of at least 4.7
• Good-average grade of at least 3.7
• Satisfactory-average grade of at least 2.7
• Unsatisfactory-average grade less than 2.7 Operational units
• Excellent-leadership and at least 50 percent of tested subordinate units received excellent, the rest good or satisfactory • Good-leadership and at least 50 percent of tested subordinate units received excellent and good, the rest satisfactory • Satisfactory-leadership and at least 70 percent of tested subordinate units received positive evaluation   
609