# ID: 61cd2f64ac3d46feb6125ab527d676f2
# Title: Offsetting Tomorrow's Adversary in a Contested Environment: Defending Expeditionary Advance Bases in 2025 and Beyond
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Potential adversaries have studied the operational advantages of the U.S. joint force and as a result are developing A2/AD systems and capabilities intended to challenge the U.S. military's asymmetric advantage by denying freedom of access and maneuver in the global commons and across all warfighting domains. The advancement and proliferation of A2/AD capabilities enable adversaries to negate U.S. high value/capable assets by holding critical forward infrastructure at risk and imposes a cost imposition that could prove prohibitive. Sustained and integrated efforts across the joint force are required to ensure the continued U.S. and allied access to, and maneuver in the global commons. Well defended and mutually supportive Expeditionary Advanced Bases (EABs) will ensure operational freedom of action by keeping a foot in the door in contested environments. The integration of game-changing technology in force development paired with an innovative offset strategy will enhance the joint forces' ability to preserve vital national security interest in contested regions through the employment of well defended EABS supported by a joint force with resilience, capacity, and operational agility.
The rise of potential competitors and proliferating technology present an operational problem to the U.S. Joint Force, which has historically possessed an asymmetric advantage in freedom of access and maneuver through the global commons and has based its operational approaches on this advantage. The National Military Strategy states that the key state actors of Russia, Iran, North Korea and China pose serious concerns to national security interests. 
1
Operating in and maintaining access to contested environments will require the joint force to utilize maneuver from Expeditionary Advance Bases (EABs). 
2
The U.S. military's asymmetric advantage is built on a technology dependent force that possesses significant capability and efficiency at the risk of reduced quantity and resiliency.
Future force development must balance capacity with capability and be informed by an offset strategy that embraces emerging technology to properly counter adversarial anti-access / area denial capabilities in defense of EABs to provide sufficient capacity and resiliency to attain temporal supremacy in a given domain.
The joint force has found itself at a capability versus capacity mismatch due to the growing A2/AD capabilities of rising competitors and must develop an offset strategy that embraces a mix of technologies in defense of EABs. One of the causes of this quandary is that the (or our) joint force has been predominately focused on the defeat of extremist forces that threaten national interests for the last 15 years. Potential adversaries have used this distraction to develop and invest in capabilities that can deter, delay or prevent effective U.S. freedom of access and maneuver within the global commons and threaten the homeland. These threats span all five war-fighting domains (i.e., air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace) and are not unique to one adversary or region of the globe. The proliferation of ballistic missiles, precision strike technologies, unmanned systems, space and cyber capabilities, are of particular concern in defense of forward basing that is required to maintain U.S. military advantages and access to the global commons. 
3
1
While China is often used as the default example, there are significant similarities between the A2/AD strategies and capabilities of our adversaries: they all seek to impose costs on the joint force by using a layered approach that begins with offensive strikes over long ranges and culminates with defenses that increase in intensity with proximity to their homeland.
Operational concepts designed to offset adversarial A2/AD capabilities would be similar but have different execution timelines dependent on geographic location. 4 The difference between anti-access and area-denial (A2/AD) is sometimes confused and the terms are not interchangeable. As defined in the Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC) and used in this report, anti-access refers to those actions and capabilities, usually long-range, designed to prevent an opposing force from entering an operational area. Area denial refers to those actions and capabilities, usually of shorter range, designed not to keep an opposing force out, but to limit its freedom of action within the operational area. 
6
7
Although the "American Way of War" is still dominant in a conventional force on force conflict, rising peer competitors and adversaries are evolving the next paradigm of warfare designed to obviate U.S. global forward basing and expeditionary warfare model. U.S. combat platforms are remarkably capable, but are rendered brittle in a contested environment, by their limited quantity and infrastructure requirements that are highly vulnerable to enemy A2/AD systems. 
9
10
While an adversary's A2/AD capabilities may deny a particular domain, the U.S. must develop a force that operates simultaneously across multiple domains, leveraging strengths across the strategic environment and compensating for shortfalls in contested areas. Historically, U.S. doctrine has called for the "roll back" of threats within a contested environment. This view encourages a system versus system approach that imposes a significant cost imbalance on the joint force by playing into adversarial A2/AD strengths. This system vs. system approach highlights joint materiel shortfalls that are not fiscally attainable and calls for an offset strategy built on emerging technology that obviates the capacity mismatch. With longstanding allies, treaty obligations, national interests and trading partners situated within the growing arc of potential adversary A2/AD systems, it is imperative that future force development is informed by an offset strategy that embraces emerging technology to properly counter adversarial A2/AD capabilities in defense of advance bases.
Advancing A2/AD capabilities, and the rise of adversaries possessing them, require new forms of deterrence and concepts of operations in the form of an offset strategy that synergistically links them together. 
11
The foundation of an offset strategy to confront A2/AD operating challenges will call for operational approaches that integrate technologies in a complementary vice additive fashion thus compounding their effectiveness and operating with cross-domain synergy by efficiently acting on multiple lines of effort concurrently. This offset strategy will complicate adversarial problems by massing efforts simultaneously in every contested domain to overwhelm the adversary in a combination of efforts, which will enable the joint force to capitalize in a domain that permits the conduct of operations at a given location with sufficient duration to complete the mission. 
12
The challenges presented in defense of EABs are compounded by national defense budgetary constraints and calls for force development and operational concepts that combine the strengths and expertise of individual services to complement each other, thus ensuring the holistic power of the joint forces compensates any weakness of a singular service. 
13
"Joint synergy has been a strength of U.S. joint forces for decades. Whereas joint synergy focuses on the integration of Service capabilities, cross-domain synergy requires the integration across domains without regard for which Service provides the action or capability." 
14
The advancement and proliferation of A2/AD capabilities exploit the U.S. joint forces dependency on critical infrastructure and lack of capacity and resiliency, which calls for a balanced capabilities mix. The U.S. military is a highly capable joint force whose capability is based on costly, but highly technical platforms that are produced in low quantities due to their exorbitant cost. The U.S. joint force must maintain its ability to defeat the full spectrum of adversarial capabilities without introducing vulnerabilities. To operate decisively in an era calling for leaner budgets and force structure, against adversaries with near technical parity and greater capacity, the joint force must embrace operational agility in future force development, which manifests itself in a balanced capability mix. The term high-low mix describes the intent to procure a reduced number of high-cost/high capability platforms supplemented with an increased number of low-cost/reduced-capability platforms that in turn provide the capacity to balance high-end capability. 
15
16
Expeditionary Advanced Bases (EABs) are an enabling capability designed to operate within the area of adversarial A2/AD threats with a minimal need for fixed infrastructure and operating with the smallest physical and electro-magnetic (EM)footprint , required to accomplish the desired mission. EABs are temporary in nature and to the degree possible use passive defenses and rely upon mobility, mutual support, deception, and concealment to compound the adversary targeting problem (see figure 
2
19
EABs operating inside A2/AD arcs will apply significant pressure to an adversary's interior lines and degrade the benefits an adversarial A2/AD technology by changing the predictive targeting of fixed infrastructure to an uncertain and heavily ISR dependent hider finder completion. In this sense, EABs can affect a fundamental shift of the cost imposition onto the adversary by compounding the possible targeting requirements for a finite A2/AD arsenal.
Beyond complicating targeting, the EABs force in being requires an opponent to react and allocate resources to contend with an "inside force," essentially holding an enemy force at risk until legacy forces can mass to achieve decision and obviates a fait accompli strategy like that recently seen in the Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. 20 "This gives each Geographic Combatant Commander (GCC) the three-fold advantages of forward presence: the recurring dividends available from "soft power"; deterrence derived from credible and capable response; and the freedom of action created by expanded operational reach and tactical flexibility." 
21
The offensive capability of one platform at an EAB will free another platform to conduct like capabilities in an alternate location or domain (e.g. a UAS from an EAB can conduct local ISR freeing up another platform to conduct a like mission in another location). 2) Gained efficiencies in shared defenses and logistical support of mutually supportive EABs (see fig 10).
3) The ability to quickly aggregate forces to mass efforts at desired location and time.
EABs are threatened by increasingly complex A2/AD systems threats which make it challenging and costly to conduct and sustain air operations from them. 
22
Operational approaches, such as the Joint Concept for Access and Maneuver in the Global Commons (JAM-GC), seek to identify capability gaps, provide integrated counter-A2/AD solutions and inform future force development decisions. There are numerous emerging technologies that will directly contribute to the defense of EABs, reducing the risk incurred in their defense and effectively increasing their operational agility. The Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) has identified the emerging technologies of Hypersonics, Autonomy, and Directed Energy as possible "game changers" in the implementation of future offset strategies and each lends distinct capabilities in defense of EABs. 
23
The key point to take away is the need for procurement and integration of emerging technology as it becomes viable and relevant to maturing operational approaches, as highlighted in guiding documents like the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan (JSCP), the Air Force Future Operating Concept (AFFOC), and Expeditionary Forces 21 (EF21). This report will focus specifically on the "game changing" technologies of directed energy and autonomy, as well as developments in camouflage and passive detection that are at a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 5 or better and would directly contribute to the defense of EABs in the next 5-10 years.
"Exploiting directed-energy technology will provide the opportunity to fundamentally alter operational concepts and support requirements. As we seek flexibility in our weapons effects and the ability to operate in contested environments, directed energy weapons with deep magazines can alleviate the need for acquiring and transporting large stockpiles of munitions into the theater, while providing precise, responsive, and persistent effects." 24 Emerging nanotechnology has led to the development of advanced battery and capacitors that provides a power source that can charge and discharge rapidly with no decline in performance throughout its life cycle. 
25
The use of solid-state lasers in defense of EABs is possible with current technology that can defeat missile seekers, UAS sensors and defeat soft ground targets. While weather can limit laser effectiveness, the primary threats a laser would counter are affected by the same weather and should not deter further development and incorporation into force development but call for a diverse and layered defense. Increases in power output, tracking capabilities and beam manipulation have enabled the fielding of laser-based Ground Based Air Defense (GBAD) and counter Guided Rockets, Artillery, Mortars, and Missiles (G-RAMM) technologies that defeat kinetic threats. Expected advancements in technology will further the range and lethality of lasers in defense of EABs. In the next 5-7 years, technology will have integrated 100+ kW High Energy Laser that can defeat threats at moderate range and provide a temporal and spatial defense zone around EABs. In the next 10-15 years, 300+ kW high Energy Lasers that will defeat hard targets in flight and on the ground at stand-off ranges. 
26
27
While there are numerous future capabilities for laser technology in defense of EABs, two demonstrators stand as examples, the static Area Defense Anti-Munitions (ADAM) 28 system and the truck mounted GBAD Directed Energy On-the-Move 
29
3
High Power Microwave (HPM) technology is an adaptable and proven capability that can aid in defense of EABs through capabilities ranging from area denial to defeating UASs and other electronic systems by emitting highly focused microwave energy upon a target. HPM share similar benefits as laser in that as long as a power source is available they have an unlimited magazine. Additionally, HPM can produce non-kinetic effects that leave infrastructure untouched. Proven HPM technologies are currently fielded, and future advancements in capability will allow for greater effects at range, furthering HPM's ability to defend EABs. Two specific HPW systems that are of particular use in defense of EABs are the Active Denial System (ADS) and Counter-UAS (C-UAS) systems.
The ADS uses focused microwave energy that causes intense pain on targeted individuals at range without resulting in any temporary or permanent physical damage. The non-lethal millimeter wave penetrates the skin by just a few millimeters and heats the tissue causing a burning sensation. 
32
4
35
These systems are modular, expeditionary and require minimal manning making them a force multiplier (see figure 
5
Autonomy will enable the joint force exceptional operational agility within a contested environment, enable continuous operations through multiple domains by mitigating A2/AD capabilities and reducing the overall risk in defense of EABs operating under the veil of advanced A2/AD systems. 
39
40
41
6
On the ground, expeditionary sentries both static and roaming will be equipped with multi-spectral sensors that can see in all-weather, are networked with tunable ground search radar that can detect man-sized targets outside of 10 miles and wheeled or maritime threats at twice that distance. 
44
7
8
47
48
Future advancements in autonomy will ehance the defense of EABs by reducing manning requirements for physical security and Processing, Explotation and Dissemination (PED) personnel needed for defense of the EAB. Future systems will better react to their operational environment and perform context-specific tasks, greatly reducing the data-to-decision loop. 
49
To maintain the advantage in the hider finder competition, confuse the adversaries operational picture, and ensure the successful defense of EABs the joint force must minimize its physical footprint and overall signature across the Electro Magnetic Spectrum (EMS). The joint force is heavily reliant on the EMS to maintain its asymmetric advantage across multiple domains. To effectively operate in a contested environment, the joint force must develop and employ an offset strategy containing operational approaches adhering to a "low-to-no power EMS regime." These operational approaches would inform future force development and foster detection capabilities (see figures 9 and 10) 50 by using reflected ambient electromagnetic energy that come from emitters of opportunity to find enemy forces while avoiding detection by their active and passive sensors. By employing enhanced emissions control, Low Probability of Detection (LPD) such as laser/ambient light communications, and Low Probability of Intercept (LPI) such as low-power countermeasures to avoid detection, the joint force will maintain the advantage in the hider finder competition and minimize risk while operating inside enemy A2/AD threats. 
51
52
The operational concepts required and development of the future force needed to effectively offset A2/AD systems in defense of EABs will require forethought and a dedicated effort through all phases of the operational environment. 
56
Preparations taken during Phase 0 will have a direct and proportional contribution to the successful defense of EABs. The paradigms of operating in a contested environment, while arguably stale, or not novel concepts to the joint force. In his work "Advanced Operations in Micronesia," the then-Maj "Pete" Ellis outlined the requirement for the seizure and defense of advance bases during what is now labeled Phase 0 operations in the prelude to war in the Pacific. 
57
Rapid development in A2/AD capabilities and the rise of potential adversaries possessing them requires an innovative offset strategy that incorporates force development with balanced capabilities and operational approaches needed in defense of EABs. The joint force must conduct an analysis of alternatives, through the holding of wargames and simulation, to determine the trade space in the best combination of technologies and the organizational constructs to achieve the required operational agility to maintain access and maneuver in a contested environment. A balance in high-low technology is possible through a cognizant assertion to not lose resiliency at the cost of efficiency, or capacity at the cost of technological capability in the development of the future force. The foundation of adversarial A2/AD systems is built on capacity that outlasts the joint forces technical capability, U.S. future force development must not follow the same track that brought us here. Guiding documents ranging from the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan (JSCP) to the Air Force Future Operating Concept (AFFOC), informed by operational approaches like JAM-GC and Inside-Out, call for the procurement and implementation of emerging technology in defense of EABs, they must be adhered too. A partial list of implications for force development from the AFFOC calls for: "-Tailored forward presence from small, resilient bases, using dispersal, warning, active and passive defenses, rapid repair capabilities, and streamlined logistics through the use of additive manufacturing.
-Algorithm-based (as opposed to hardware based) human-computer interface systems -Strong, mutually-beneficial partnerships with an array of joint, interagency, multinational, academic and commercial entities." 
58
A key point that must ring true in the future force development is the requirement for a balanced capabilities mix. In implementing a high-low technology mix with a limited budget, we must guard against the joint forces infatuation with technology and the insatiable desire to increase capability at the expense of capacity and resiliency, in this case "quantity has a quality all its own." The last 20 percent of technology development results in 80 percent of procurement costs. For the low-technology platforms, the 80 percent solution is good enough. 
59
60
Gunzinger & Clark, Winning the Airwaves: Regaining America's Dominance in the
Parris Island, SC; Commanding Officer 
Marine Fighter Attack Squadron 533
Marine Corps Air Station
31
Marine Corps Air Station, Beaufort, SC. Lieutenant Colonel Bailey
Gold Star
Air Medal Individual Action with combat distinguishing device, Air Medal Strike/Flight Award with numeral 12, Navy/Marine Corps Commendation Medal
Navy/Marine Corps Achievement Medal
The views expressed in this academic research paper are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the U.S. government, the Department of Defense, or Air University. In accordance with Air Force Instruction 51-303, it is not copyrighted, but is the property of the United States government. 