# ID: 62149ae68b184fe69a1a1f67c4e53ef3
# Title: The Sensor Irony: How Reliance on Sensor Technology is Limiting Our View of the Battlefield
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
This study shows that Department of Defense (DOD) overdependence on air and space-based sensor technologies reduces the surveillance and reconnaissance (S&R) capability of the operational-level commander and sets the conditions for initial failure on the future battlefield.
An analysis of DOD capability priorities from 1950 to present shows a steady increase in reliance on technological solutions coupled with reduced manpower. Within his vision of department-wide transformation, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld gave new impetus to this technological focus. Transformation, more than just improving capabilities, fundamentally changed how DOD viewed the conduct of war. Analysis shows that transformation was not necessarily a bad concept, but was flawed in its extreme interpretations and subsequent execution.
Analyzing the capabilities and limitations of DOD's current and predicted S&R force reveals a wide disparity between ground and air/space-based systems. Further assessing these systems against battlefield constraints reveals an S&R force structure that, while functional in a permissive environment, will not perform as advertised against plausible future threat scenarios.
Many potential adversaries currently possess the ability to negate U.S. S&R capabilities. While it is never too late to fix a problem, DOD must first acknowledge that a problem exists. Ground S&R assets, particularly at the Army Corps/Marine
Analyzing the capabilities and limitations of DOD's current and predicted S&R force reveals a wide disparity between ground and air/space-based systems. Further assessing these systems against battlefield constraints reveals an S&R force structure that, while functional in a permissive environment, will not perform as advertised against plausible future threat scenarios.
Many potential adversaries currently possess the ability to negate U.S. S&R capabilities. While it is never too late to fix a problem, DOD must first acknowledge that a problem exists. Ground S&R assets, particularly at the Army Corps/Marine Expeditionary Force, and Army Division/Marine Expeditionary Brigade level, must return to time tested and historically justified capabilities if the U.S. is to avoid future mission failure or unnecessary loss of life and treasure.   
This study will show that Department of Defense (DOD) overdependence on air and space-based sensor technologies reduces the surveillance and reconnaissance (S&R) capability of the operational-level commander and sets the conditions for initial failure on the future battlefield. As stated in the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), "technological advances, including dramatic improvements in information management and precision weaponry, have allowed our military to generate considerably more combat capability … with the same or, in some cases, fewer numbers of weapons platforms and with lower levels of manning."
1
On the satellite photographs of Marja that Marines scrutinized before launching a massive assault against the Taliban a week ago, what they assumed was the municipal government center appeared to be a large, rectangular building, cater-cornered from the main police station. Seizing that intersection became a key objective, one deemed essential to imposing authority and beginning reconstruction in this part of Helmand province …. But when Marine officers reached the area, they discovered that two-dimensional images can be deceiving … the flat roof of the municipal building turned out to be a concrete foundation, and the police station was a bombed-out schoolhouse. 
2
4
1
5
Military historian John L. Romjue wrote that "we are an Army historically unprepared for its first battle." 
6
Just as in past conflicts, the U.S. armed forces will have to overcome future capability gaps while in contact with enemy forces.
The 2008 National Defense Strategy states that: "Implementation of any strategy is predicated on developing, maintaining and, where possible, expanding the means required to execute its objectives within budget constraints."
7
Our prime weapon in our struggles with terrorists, insurgents, and warriors of every patchwork sort remains the Soldier or Marine; yet, confronted with reality's bloody evidence, we simply pretend that other, future, hypothetical wars will justify the systems we adorepurchased at the expense of the assets we need. 
8
Technology is not inherently detrimental to military operations; quite the contrary. "History is littered with prophesies of technical and scientific inadequacy, such as Lord Kelvin's famous retort, 'Heavier-than-air flying machines are impossible. 
'" 9
Joint doctrine provides little by way of operational guidance should it lose, for any extended period of time, digital network connectivity, Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite coverage, platform data links, etc. Thus, DOD leadership seems to assume that it will always have use of this technological backbone and, by extension, its aerial and space-based S&R systems. This may be a mistake. That said, the technical vulnerabilities of the U.S. network backbone exceed the parameters of this unclassified study. As such, this issue will only be discussed in the most general terms. Nonetheless, as an underlying principle, this paper assumes that, despite scores of experts working to protect existing capabilities, enemy forces may still find ways to diminish U.S. network effectiveness, and thereby marginalize any technology-based advantage.
This study compares operational commander information needs against fielded and future collection assets. Beginning with the evolution of DOD S&R capability priorities and ending with a detailed study of S&R assets, the first chapter provides an itemized list of predicted S&R capabilities which assumes no change to current procurement trends. These capabilities are then analyzed across the spectrum of plausible battlefield conditions, thus highlighting predicted capability gaps with reference to commander information needs, asset requirements, and the fundamentals of reconnaissance. 11 This is followed by a brief case study in Chinese military intent and capabilities. The case study provides a real-world backdrop to view the capability gaps of the preceding chapter.
As a pre-requisite, the reader should have an intimate knowledge of the operational level of war as well as the 1980/90s DOD concepts of the "Revolution in Military Affairs" (RMA), Net-Centric Warfare (NCW), and Information Dominance/Dominant Battlefield Awareness. 
12
2
Manuel 3-90, Tactics, (Washington, D.C., 2001), 13-1. 12
At the conclusion of this study, the reader will have a fundamental understanding of the sensor irony facing both the DOD leadership and operational commanders.
Through critical analysis, the current and predicted reliance on aerial and space-based S&R will be shown to be both dangerous and misguided in light of the threat possibilities. As stated previously, the U.S. is not risking loss of a war, but could save itself considerable loss in manpower and resources by correcting current S&R trends.
This chapter begins with an outline of the DOD S&R capability priorities. These priorities provide insight into the genesis and evolution of S&R capabilities from the 1950s through the present. The second half of this chapter describes the collection assets that will be available to the operational commander for the perceivable future as predicted by the S&R trends.
Marine Corps Colonel James Howcroft 1 wrote that during the Cold War arms race with the Soviet Union, strategic and national level objectives were seen as key to gaining victory over communist conventional armed forces. Targets "were generally static sites, such as headquarters, missile silos, airfields, or railroad marshalling yards.
Intelligence collection was prioritized to provide accurate targeting data and follow-on bomb damage assessment … for manned and unmanned airborne weapons." 
2
3
With a focus on strategic targets and a desire to curtail defense spending, U.S. leadership sought to reap savings through reduced military manpower. Author and University of Wisconsin-Madison political science professor, David W. Tarr, wrote that the United States "clung to the hope throughout the 1950s that it could exploit its presumed technological superiority to reap significant political, economic, and military dividends." 
4
Union and Iraq." 7
Under Rumsfeld's new leadership, DOD initiated a shift away from threat-based planning and toward capabilities-based planning, and in so doing changed "the way warfighting needs are defined and prioritized." 9 Capabilities-based planning sought to "identify capabilities that adversaries could employ and capabilities that could be 6 Michael Ignatieff, Virtual War, Kosovo and Beyond (New York: Picador USA, 2000), 172. 
7
Defense from 1975
-1977. 9 DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, 4.
Clay Risen, assistant editor for The New Republic, said that "Rumsfeld's business revolution is changing more than the way the military is structured; it is altering the very way war is fought …. Rumsfeld has argued that the U.S. Armed Forces are so technologically advanced that traditional doctrine -and thousands of years of military history -are largely irrelevant." 
12
13
The 2004 National Military Strategy states that the goal of the joint force is "full spectrum dominance -the ability to control any situation or defeat any adversary across the range of military operations." 
14
15
Admiral Cebrowski viewed the strategic environment and U.S. overmatch in capabilities such that the transformation to a capabilities-based force meant removal of "legacy systems, doctrines, and processes … if we pay for the new by relinquishing the old -as we should and are likely to do -it will not only go faster, but will accelerate." 
16
17
18
When we put this all together we see that a new American way of war is emerging … you have to do something decidedly different and that thing that is different is the substitution of information for mass. Organizational structures are going to change … a lot of lines have to disappear off the map and off the organizational charts. 
19
Consistent with Rumsfeld's and Cebrowski's vision, DOD reductions in manpower and traditional systems led to a number of S&R initiatives. While even a cursory description of each initiative is outside the scope of this paper, they fall into five general categories: maintain a technological advantage over potential adversaries, gain decision superiority, achieve persistent surveillance capability, maintain dominance in space-based operations, and increase special operations forces (SOF). As will be established in the next chapter, this relative shift away from consideration of traditional threats and removal of the systems required to function against them created a number of S&R capability gaps.
It has been, will always be, and should always be the goal of the United States military to maintain technological superiority over potential adversaries. "Sustaining America's scientific and technological advantages over any potential competitor contributes to the nation's ability to dissuade future forms of military competition." 
20
21
"European colleagues … are able to build, launch, and operate a new satellite system in about five years and for less than a billion dollars. By contrast, a U.S. spy satellite system, although admittedly more complex than a European equivalent, can take more than ten years and cost billions of dollars to develop." 
22
23
24
25
The intent to gain and maintain decision superiority is tied to and supported by the third priority category, persistent surveillance, arguably the most discussed component of the Rumsfeld S&R vision. Written in 2004, Joint Publication (JP) 2-01 states that:
Long dwell ISR platforms such as the Global Hawk and Predator UAVs [unmanned aerial vehicles], distributed undersea and unattended ground sensors, battlefield surveillance radars, and special operations forces (SOF) have enabled a paradigm shift in which it is possible to provide near-continuous surveillance over large portions of the battlespace to monitor, track, characterize and report on moving objects and dynamic events. 
27
28
29
30
31
Other than limited SOF and the limited covert capabilities of other U.S. government agencies, ground-based S&R forces do not operate within contested or denied areas without being overtly deployed under conflict conditions. Thus proponents of the Rumsfeld persistent surveillance initiatives champion the universality of air/spacebased S&R assets during both peacetime and combat. However, because persistent surveillance "requires collection systems and assured access to air, land, sea and spacebased sensors,"
32
There are other points of conflict within the persistent surveillance discussion, but few are as contentious as the above. Namely, that mission requirements usually exceed platform capabilities and availability, often requiring high-demand, low-density assets that are not resident with the theater of operations. 
33
34
The 2006 QDR tasked the DOD intelligence community, in cooperation with the Director of National Intelligence, to implement an imagery intelligence approach designed to achieve "persistent collection capabilities." 
35
36
37
Everett Doman, Associate Professor of Comparative Military Studies at the U.S. Air Force's School of Advanced Air and Space Studies, observes that the U.S. has become so reliant on space-based systems that it is now vulnerable to significant new challenges if it fails to maintain them. 
38
39
36
37
38
39 Ibid.,
163.
40
At first glance, the fifth Rumsfeld S&R category, increase SOF, may seem to contradict the thesis premise that the U.S. is overly dependent on air/space-based collection assets; after all, the 2006 QDR said that since 2001 SOF experienced an 81% increase in baseline budget, and a key 2007 programmatic decision increased SOF manning by a further 15%. 
41
42
43
By way of review, Secretary Rumsfeld tasked DOD to "improve effectiveness dramatically across civilian and military functions as the foundation for increased efficiency." 
44
45
While there are promising signs that senior leaders are aware of the potential pitfalls discussed in the previous sections, this awareness has yet to translate into acquisition guidance that corrects for the negative trends. According to Del Kostka, a Technical Executive with the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, "the complex acquisition process through which DOD identifies, procures, and implements advanced ISR systems is characterized by gaps in capabilities, growing competition for assets, and systems that do not fully complement one another." 
46
45
46
47
Concerned with the lack of cohesion, the 2004 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) directed DOD to "develop a comprehensive 'roadmap' to guide development and integration of DOD ISR capabilities for fiscal years 2004 through 2018." 
48
49
In accordance with the NDAA's direction, DOD developed its ISR Roadmap. As to hedge against uncertainty." 53 Acknowledging the fact that U.S. forces may have to operate without a complete understanding of the operational area is a healthy dose of realism which contrasts with earlier ideals. One prime way the department plans to hedge against this future uncertainly is the development of redundant systems, the second NDS S&R priority.
"The Department will invest in hedging against the loss or disruption of our traditional advantages, not only through developing mitigation strategies, but also by developing alternative or parallel means to the same end." 
54
After acknowledging that the U.S. will not operate with perfect knowledge, the next logical step is to preserve the ability to function after first contact; the third NDS priority. "We must build both our ability to withstand attack … and improve our resiliency beyond an attack. An important change in planning for the myriad of future potential threats must be post-attack recovery and operational capacity." 55 Significant change is required if the current S&R apparatus is to function effectively during and after 
53
54
22. 55 Ibid.,
12.
59
The remainder of this chapter describes the systems that will be available to the operational commander in the foreseeable future. The section focuses primarily on known capabilities; however, applicable trend analysis often provides insights into anticipated future capabilities. Realizing the scope and scale of the assets within the S&R community, well over $47 billion in 2008, 60 some systems will represent a more expansive family of systems. Obviously system security classification limits the fidelity of publishable asset capabilities, but not so much so that it is detrimental to this analysis. 
61
In their article, "Global Distributed ISR Operations: The Changing Face of Warfare," U.S. Air Force (USAF) Lieutenant General David Deptula and Colonel James Marrs make the case for a global network-centric warfighting capability. "This rapidly evolving paradigm, called distributed ISR operations, links platforms and sensors, forces forward, and human ISR warfighting expertise around the globe in ways that make networked combat operations routine." 
62
72. 61
62
63
DCGS currently links twenty global locations with nine more sites scheduled for future development. 
64
67
68
With the DCGS command and control structure in mind, this section will now assess the capabilities of the three main components of air/spaced based ISR: unmanned aerial systems (UAS), manned aircraft, and satellites. Either by design or operator creativity, many of the below systems perform duties in addition to S&R. Furthermore, while it is also understood that any system in the inventory has the potential to support the commander's S&R effort, assets with minimal impact are not included in this list. The reader should note that volumes of data exist for each of the discussed systems, but only data critical to the crux of this analysis is included. Thus information such as optic/radar physical pan limitations, while exploitable by a knowledgeable enemy force and required for a holistic discussion of system capabilities, are generally outside the scope of this paper. Sentinel, and the RQ-4 Global Hawk. The MQ-1 Predator's primary mission is interdiction and armed reconnaissance against critical, perishable targets; it has the ability to self-designate and launch two AGM-114 Hellfire missiles. "When the MQ-1 is not actively pursuing its primary mission, it acts as the Joint Force Air Component Commander [JFACC]-owned theater asset for reconnaissance, surveillance and target acquisition in support of the Joint Forces commander [JFC]." 
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
The final system in this category is the RQ-4 Global Hawk, "a high-altitude, longendurance unmanned aircraft system with an integrated sensor suite" that provides global ISR support and will eventually replace the USAF U-2 airplane. 
79
Countries around the globe remain as focused as the U.S. on exploiting UAS technology. In many instances this includes U.S.-based companies legally selling technology to foreign entities; aside from the RQ-170 Sentinel, each of the above systems has been sold to international customers. Given this, the U.S. cannot assume that potential adversaries are ignorant of its possible UAS capability.
The U.S.'s manned aircraft capabilities are represented by the USAF MC-12 Liberty, RC-135V/W Rivet Joint, E-8C Joint Stars, and U2S Dragon Lady. The USAF MC-12W Liberty is a medium-to low-altitude, twin-engine turboprop aircraft with a primary mission to provide ISR support directly to ground forces. The MC-12W is a JFACC asset in support of the JFC. 
80
81
80
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
The last segment of this aerial ISR section is space-based systems. Though these systems exist primarily to support national and strategic objectives or provide commercial imagery, they routinely support the information needs of the operational commander. Assessing how supportive they can be, however, requires some conjecture based on existing technologies. For even though an amateur telescope can track most space-based systems, and the launches, flight paths, and schedules of space assets are readily accessible through multiple open-source intelligence venues, 89 the full capabilities of each given system remain classified. "In all, more than 800 satellites are used for military and commercial purposes according to an estimate made in 2005. Nearly half of these are operated by the U.S. Government or private sector." 90 This includes such well known constellations as the Global Positioning System and Milstar communications system, 91 as well as meteorological, ballistic/nuclear launch tracking, 
92
93
IMINT satellites use film, electronic cameras and/or radars to produce images of objects on the ground; some are capable of better than 4 inch resolution. Operating in low earth orbit (LEO), (see Figure 
4
96
The Improved Crystal satellite is also known as Advanced Crystal, IKON, and KH-12. 
97
Despite its technological superiority over other photographic intelligence systems, the Improved Crystal is still unable to 'see' through clouds. 
98
99
100
Though proven and highly capable, the continued availability of space-based imagery is subject to the ever-changing political desires of U.S. leadership. In 2009, the U.S. Congress decided not to fund an FY08 DOD initiative called the Broad Area Spacebased Imagery Collector (BASIC). The program called for the purchase of one imaging satellite with commercial-grade optics (approximately 3.6 foot resolution) with the option of a second purchase. The additional constellation was to launch in 2012 in order to avoid a lapse in capability due to the age and fuel remaining in the Improved Crystal spacecraft. 
101
102
101
102
103
This specific discussion highlights an operational limitation of all space-based systems; maneuverability. With an obvious need to extend the lives of the spacecraft, U.S. leadership must weigh the need to reposition an asset from its existing orbit against its resulting shortened lifespan; when it runs out of fuel the system is lost. Even with all of the international and domestic attention focused on Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan in 2010, U.S. leadership said it would take up to two years to reposition three GPS satellites to support troops that were losing coverage in the mountainous terrain. 
104
The U.S. SIGINT satellite system currently consists of three constellations in both geostationary and highly elliptical orbits. The systems are designed to assist in missile launch tracking as well as detect transmissions from radios, radars, and other such electronic systems. This data is useful in locating, typing, and possibly tracking adversaries systems. The constellations are not capable of intercepting communications over wired land lines such as a standard telephone system and global under-sea fiber optic cables. The overall system is designed to have each constellation complement the other, though all are capable of monitoring the entire electro-magnetic radio spectrum frequency range. 
105
106
107
The Mentor constellation, also known as Advanced Mentor and Advanced Orion, is in geosynchronous orbit (GEO). This configuration allows each satellite to remain over a single point on the earth and pivot its field of view to observe a desired coverage area.
While the exact coverage capability is classified, it is believed capable of monitoring a few thousand miles square at one time. Due to the curvature of the Earth there are gaps in coverage between each satellite. The U.S. attempts to cover these gaps with the smaller Mercury systems and the highly elliptical orbiting (HEO) Trumpet constellation. The latest satellite in the Mentor constellation was launched in January 2009 and is expected to provide coverage throughout the next decade. 
108
109
From manned, to unmanned, to space-based assets the U.S. maintains a formidable array of aerial S&R capability. It also maintains a world-renowned groundbased combat force. But what of its ground-based S&R capability, and how do the air and ground systems link together to answer the operational commander's information needs?
As with the aerial systems, this section will describe the capabilities and limitations of the ground-based S&R force in light of their applicability to the operational commander.
108 GlobalSecurity.org, Space Menu, Systems, Mentor. 
109
111
Unlike the aerial systems, most ground-based S&R capability is designed primarily for execution at the tactical, not operational level. Thus, there is little utility in analyzing the capabilities and limitations of each individual system. Rather, applicability to the operational commander is in the aggregate capabilities and limitations of the S&R units he will have available. By analyzing the Global Force Management Implementation Guidance (GFMIG) 112 the ground S&R assets available to the CCDR fall into two general categories, Special Operations and Ground Maneuver. 
113
5
While each organization focuses on a given specialty, as a whole, they all train for unconventional warfare, foreign internal defense, special reconnaissance, direct action, combating terrorism, counter proliferation, and information operations. 
115
112
113
117
Regardless of circumstances, the U.S. military will eventually accomplish a given mission. Thus, a brief discussion of specialization is in order. After all, with nearly every ground combat asset supporting Operation Iraqi Freedom since 2004 performing primarily light infantry tasks, why would the U.S. need specialized ground S&R? This is a critical point when discussing current and predicted ground-force structure, because the same Rumsfeld-era transformation goals that fuelled the explosion in aerial ISR have drastically reduced their specialized ground-based partners.
In 1933, Secretary of War Henry Stimson noted in his annual report to the President that "behind the Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery lies a long history of battle experience out of which have developed certain fundamental methods applying to the tactics, training, and organization of each of these arms and to their combined employment in war." 118 At that time, U.S. armed forces were struggling to adapt to the lessons learned from World War I. The advent of armor and aviation led many to believe that historically tested S&R principles were no longer relevant in the face of new technologies. The subsequent 75 years of S&R modifications are the subject of countless analyses, books and monographs focused on this topic. It is sufficient to note, however that since the mid-1990s the U.S. military has seen a steady decrease in specialized ground-S&R capability 119 in favor of more general purpose capabilities. However, when tested on a future battlefield, the current and predicted ground combat force may have significant trouble adhering to the time-tested fundamentals of reconnaissance and surveillance.
The overall decrease in S&R capability is felt first and foremost at the nexus of the operational and tactical levels of war. "If a combatant commander determines that the information needed to answer a RFI [request for information] is unavailable, the commander may task organic collection assets or those of a subordinate organization or request multinational or national-level support to satisfy the requirement." 
120
A cursory review of the GFMIG reveals that an operational commander's information tasking will move through at least three echelons before a trained organization can be found (see Figure 
6 below
The issue of fewer trained S&R forces is exacerbated by the multiple roles they are required to perform. While S&R forces have historically performed both reconnaissance and security missions, they were separate formations providing early warning for the follow-on brigades. Army modularity reduced all but the Stryker Brigade Combat Teams to two combat maneuver battalions, leading brigade commanders to task their reconnaissance squadron to conduct maneuver specific functions within the Brigade composite S&R capability that is second to none. Should every system work as envisioned the U.S. could reasonably obtain the information dominance it desires; and therein lies the issue. When the limitations of individual systems are comparatively applied to future scenarios, the U.S. may find that it does not have the effective S&R capabilities it currently assumes.
By applying DOD's anticipated S&R capabilities against the information needed by the operational commander (see Appendix A for more detail) across the full scope of battlefield considerations, this chapter highlights the information collection gaps that could exist in future conflicts. Beginning with an assessment of the non-permissive aspects of the future operational environment, the chapter describes the current sensor allocation process and then assesses the abilities of S&R assets with respect to terrain, weather, and threat considerations. In so doing, the reader will clearly see the capabilities and limitations of the predicted S&R force.
In July of 1949, the United States was confident in its position on the world stage.
Though there were innumerable tensions across the globe, the U.S. had the strategic edge -a functioning nuclear weapon; a capability so powerful that defense senior leaders began acquisition and reorganization projects to capitalize on its strength. Pundits and experts wrote scores of books and journal articles on how the U.S. military could use this revolutionary asset to transform the very way wars were fought. However, in August of that same year the Soviet Union successfully tested its own nuclear weapon. It would be an understatement to say that this sent shock waves through the establishment. In a single act, America's primary threat had all but nullified the U.S. decisive advantage.
With a similar belief in its S&R technological superiority and mastery of the global commons of sea, air, space, and cyberspace, could the United States find itself in a similar position today? An understanding of the current and future operational environment will help to answer this question. In his attempt to do just that, defense policy analyst and Air War College professor Dr. Jeffrey Record said "I believe that the age of large-scale conventional interstate warfare opened by the French Revolution is drawing to a close, and with it the relevance of Clausewitz's postulation of total war among states."
1
2
3
In his discussion of the difficulty in establishing national strategy, Dr. Colin 
Gray,
4
5
6
9
10
11
McConnell noted that the U.S. must prepare its institutions for what he called the "profound threats of the times … terrorists inside and outside the United States, nuclear proliferators, and rogue and failed states." 
12
13
14
16
The rise in global interdependence and technology proliferation requires the U.S.
to prepare for a broad range of capabilities. During the Cold War, the U.S. maintained the lead in technological innovation in areas such as weapon systems, computers, and satellite technology. However, over the last 20 years "its lead has dwindled as innovation has moved from the public to the private sector and technological know-how has spread across the world. Worse still for the United States, its adversaries have been quick to adapt to technological improvements." 
17
18
Despite the desire by many to dismiss conventional threats, they are a plausible and potential near-term reality. Based on a per capita GDP, many countries will have the ability to field large conventional militaries in the coming decades; in fact, the global trend is one of substantial potential rearmament. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
They are being developed, but are joint forces being adequately prepared to handle such a threat? The impact of such weapons would carry with it the most serious potential consequences for the communications, reconnaissance, and computer systems on which the Joint Force depends at every level. 
27
"As with the profusion of inexpensive precision weapons, technological advances and increasing wealth will place the ability to conduct military operations in space within the reach of an increasing number of players."
28
29
30
Though the volumes of debate surrounding what has been called the cyber-war are outside the scope of this paper, its potential disruptive effects for the U.S.'s S&R capability are worthy of note. Despite the legion of experts working diligently to maintain U.S. cyber security, the U.S. is accepting significant risk if it assumes that military secrets will always remain secret. "Small groups or individuals …can attack vulnerable points in cyberspace … compromising sensitive information and materials, and interrupting critical services such [as] … information networks." 
31
32
operations, both at home and abroad. "Software tools for network-attack, intrusion and disruption are globally available over the Internet, providing almost any interested adversary a basic computer network exploitation or attack capability." 
33
In summary, S&R forces must be prepared to function in an unpredictable and often amorphous operational environment. A virtually endless list of possible aggressors exists, collectively representing the full scope and scale of military capabilities -each working to defeat U.S. capability. The more sophisticated military opponents could mount "attacks on computers, space, and communications systems [that] will severely degrade command and control of U.S. forces. Thus, those forces must possess the ability to operate effectively in degraded conditions." 
34
"The foremost challenge of collection management is to maximize the effectiveness of limited collection resources within the time constraints imposed by operational requirements." 
35
Sensor capability factors are technical or performance characteristics including range, dwell time, and timeliness. 
36
34
43. 35
36
Battlefield factors include threat, weather, terrain, and contamination. 
37
As Figure 
9
Franklin Hagenbeck, Commanding General of CJTF Mountain in Afghanistan, said that due to rough terrain and weather "it was very difficult for our overhead ISR platforms to identify the cave complexes. So it took 'boots on the ground' to find the caves. The shadows, alone, precluded our discovering a cave until our Soldiers were almost on top of it." 40 Military strategist Dr. Norman Friedman wrote that while space-based systems were significantly limited due to orbits and system capabilities, lower-flying aircraft proved far more useful. "The problem was analogous to one encountered in the Gulf War, when the best surveillance systems, mainly satellites, seemed to operational commanders not to be responding to their needs. Mountainous terrain severely limits space-based effectiveness and ground mobility. In the permissive environment reflected in Figure 
9
Akin to the mountainous terrain challenges, S&R in urban terrain centers on abilities to negotiate the density and varied structural heights; from subsurface to supersurface. More importantly, urban terrain requires assets to interact with the occupying population. Colonel Howcroft notes that while aerial assets can often provide high resolution images of individual buildings, "we still cannot see who is inside, whether he is armed, or if he is hostile. It requires a man on the ground to go into the building or to communicate face-to-face with the inhabitants of the neighborhood to collect and evaluate the intelligence."
42
10
Weather affects both the platform and its sensor capabilities. It affects a platform's ability to operate in inclement conditions, such as lightning and ice storms. It also impacts a sensor's ability to observe through natural constrains such as clouds and rain, as well as battlefield obscurants such as smoke, fire, and dust.
68 As evident in Figure 
11
Only those that can operate above storm ceilings and have radar to attempt signal penetration can function during most inclement weather conditions. This fact exacerbates the results of the prior terrain analysis, because inclement weather conditions can exist in each of the terrain scenarios. A forested region with routine cloud cover and periodic rain storms would negate the capabilities of all but a few of the total available systems.
At this point the reader is intuitively able to recognize the network-dependency of air/space-based systems. While ground-based systems are also highly dependent on network viability, they remain combat capable without it; albeit in a degraded capacity.
It is the consequences of network disruption that links the preceding system capabilities section with the following discussion of threat capabilities.
Terrain and weather impact U.S. capabilities in relatively predictable ways; this is not always the case with threat forces. The only constant is that opposing forces will always seek to mitigate U.S. advantages, particularly with respect to the military. Just as the USSR counter-balanced U.S. power by creating their own nuclear weapon, threat forces will eventually find a way to match or beat U.S. capabilities.
Traditional threat capabilities are well known and need no description here.
However, history does provide examples of threat ingenuity that warrants consideration for even modern-day S&R systems. Both examples show that the most secure U.S.
systems are within reach of threat forces should they decide to act against them.
The first example takes place on 1 May, 1960. A then classified U2 Dragon Lady flew from Peshawar destined for Bødo, Norway, and was to photograph two Russian intercontinental ballistic missile sites enroute. Both sites were known to be surrounded by heavy anti-aircraft systems. As the U2 approached Sverdlovsk, flying at 67,000 feet, the Soviets volley-fired 14 SA-2 surface-to-air missiles. Although the missiles were clearly unable to reach that altitude, "the aircraft disintegrated in the shock waves caused by the exploding missiles." 
43
44
45
In line with a perpetual cyber threat, Chinese military writings emphasize the development of innovative strategies and tactics to balance the capabilities of technologically superior opponents. 7 "The Chinese are working hard to ensure that if there is a military confrontation with the United States sometime in the future, they will be ready." 
8
9
10
11
The 2008 NDS maintained that in addition to cyber and information warfare attacks, China is likely to continue expanding its conventional military capabilities. Most germane to this topic is their focus on space and anti-satellite capabilities. 12 A People's Liberation Army (PLA) analysis of U.S. and coalition military operations reinforced the importance of operations in space. They identified that battlefield monitor and control, information communications, navigation and position, and precision guidance all rely on satellites and other sensors. PLA writings emphasize the necessity of "destroying, damaging, and interfering with the enemy's reconnaissance/observation and communications satellites," 
13
15
16
17
18
19
13
China, 2009," 13-14. 14
15
16
23. 17
21
22
shows that China develops these systems both for their own use as well as for global export, 
23
1
Analyzing the capabilities and limitations of DOD's current and predicted S&R force reveals a wide disparity between ground and air/space-based systems. Further assessing these systems against battlefield constraints reveals an S&R force structure that, while functional in a permissive environment, will not perform as advertised against plausible future threat scenarios.
The U.S. should always strive to maintain technological superiority over future opponents, but not at the cost of creating an exploitable gap in battlefield capability. The predictable effects of terrain and weather on S&R systems highlight the current and projected limitations across the S&R force. When threat capabilities are applied, however, it becomes evident that many U.S. air/space-based systems are no longer assured as options to answer the operational commander's CCIR. Yet it is on the assumption that these platforms will provide full-spectrum information dominance that justified the decades-long degradation in ground S&R capabilities.
Many potential adversaries currently possess the ability to negate U.S. S&R capabilities. While it is never too late to fix a problem, DOD must first acknowledge that a problem exists. Ground S&R assets, particularly at the Army Corps/Marine Expeditionary Force, and Army Division/Marine Expeditionary Brigade level, must return to time tested and historically justified capabilities if the U.S. is to avoid future mission failure or unnecessary loss of life and treasure. "In the end, our enemies will not outfight us. We'll muster the will to do what must be done -after paying a needlessly high price in the lives of our troops and damage to our domestic infrastructure. We will not be beaten, but we may be shamed and embarrassed on a needlessly long road to victory." that there is a circular, 'chicken-and-egg' relationship between policy and strategy that is both necessary and healthy. However, years in both Afghanistan and Iraq prove that operational commanders often create and execute plans without the guidance that is supposed to form the base of their strategy.
Armed with a basic understanding of the operational level of war as well as the role of the operational commander, the line of thinking returns to the premise questionwhat does the operational commander need to know? While DOD doctrine does not directly answer this question, it does provide some insights. All italicized items within the next section highlight areas of probable information need.
As referenced in Figure 
13
13
15
• operational environment and nature of anticipated operations
• national and multinational strategic direction and guidance
• political and military intentions and objectives with possible COAs
• enemy center of gravity with related critical factors
• enemy high value targets
• operational characteristics such as strength, composition, disposition; reinforcements; logistics; time, and space factors (including basing utilized and available); and combat/noncombat efficiency and proficiency in joint operations One final information management concept is worthy of note, that of Commander's Critical Information Requirements (CCIR). "CCIRs comprise information requirements identified by the commander as being critical to timely information management and the decision-making process that affect successful mission accomplishment." 
16
It is important to remember that the levels of war are not mutually exclusive.
"Geographic CCDRs … remain acutely aware of the impact of tactical events. Because of the inherent interrelationships between the various levels of war, commanders cannot be concerned only with events at their respective echelon, but must understand how their actions contribute to the military end state." 
17
The tactical commander, immersed 24/7 in the cultural nuances of his local environment, is now, more than ever, in possession of the most accurate picture of the battlefield. It may be only a small piece, but just as operational success is an accumulation of tactical successes, so is an accurate intelligence picture at the operational level an accumulation of smaller, accurate intelligence pictures from below. 
18
This appendix assesses the DOD concepts of the "Revolution in Military Affairs" (RMA), Network-Centric Warfare (NCW), and Information Dominance/Dominant Battlefield Awareness. While inherent weaknesses in these concepts have contributed to their relative decline over the past several years, the appendix defines the fundamental concept behind each idea and describes their pervasive nature in terms of both past and current acquisition priorities; the effects of which remain prevalent in today's service.
It is important to note the state of national affairs during the genesis of these [DOD] must undertake reforms to reduce redundancies."
1
In their book on the subject, Harlan So the detractors of RMA seems to take issue not with a technologically enhanced force, but with the idea that a procurement focus on technology will eventually lead to an extreme condition where a smaller force would eventually count on the technology to overcome "fog," "friction" and the realities of war. Military correspondent Michael
Gordon and Lieutenant General (Retired) Bernard Trainor make this very point in their coverage of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The [Bush] administration put far too much confidence in American military technology, Special Operations Forces, and clandestine operations. Rumsfeld's principles of transformation were in large measure a codification of the long-promised 'revolution in military affairs'… During the march to Baghdad, the approach was effective … but after the fall of Baghdad … military technology was less decisive against an opponent that faded away into Iraqi cities only to fight another day … to gain control … the United States needed more boots on the ground.
11
While it is clear that technological improvements have a rightful place in DOD procurement priorities, it is equally clear that misplaced priorities have had and will Let's look at networking … when we shift from being platform centric to network centric we shift from focusing on things to focusing on behavior or action … what we are really talking about is a new theory of war because we are talking about new sources of power. The United States Air Force talks about being able to destroy a target using only one bomb where it used to take 1,000 bombs. If you look at the difference between the 1,000 and the one and how it is done the only difference is the [information technology]. You have a 1,000 to one substitution of information for mass. 
21
In 2001, DOD leadership made a fundamental assumption that they would be able to maintain network connectivity as described above, and embarked on a transformation plan to adjust the force based on those perceived efficiencies. In what should be an obvious point, Martin Van Creveld notes that "The more centralized the system, the greater the danger that it will be paralyzed if enemy action causes the directing brain to be eliminated or communications with it to be impaired." 
22
Perhaps acknowledging this reality, the military's senior strategies show a downward trend in enforcing the precepts of NCW. The 2004 NMS identified eight capability areas that "provide a transformation focus for the Department,"
23
24
25
26
Communication and information technologies will significantly advance the capabilities of the Joint Force. Nevertheless, those same advances will be available to America's opponents and they will use [them] to attack, degrade, and disrupt communications and the flow of information … [it is] essential that joint forces be capable of functioning in an information hostile environment, so as not to create an Achilles' heel by becoming too network dependent. 
27
armed forces are still feeling the effects of the initial concept.
As RMA proposed a vision of technical solutions to warfare challenges and NCW was the medium to attain the vision, Information Dominance was the goal of NCW;
"network-centric warfare states that technology … will provide the information superiority that is at the heart of all DOD concepts." 28 Information dominance has many aliases, such as dominant battlefield awareness, the information war, and information superiority; these terms are often interchanged in the references throughout this section.
military has been in Iraq, it actually has tended to be information poor …. American soldiers would really only start getting the requisite amount of information after they moved out into the population in 2007. In retrospect, this seems like common sense. After all, Clausewitz … notes that the people are the greatest single source of information available. 'We refer not so much to the single outstandingly significant report, but to the countless minor contacts brought about by the daily activities of our army,' he explained. 
32
To those that would attempt to gain near-perfect knowledge of any battlefield situation, Martin Van Creveld wrote that success in war is inconceivable unless the commander is "grounded in an ability to tolerate uncertainty, cope with it, and make use of it." 
33
34
35
Human conflict … will not change no matter what advances in technology or computing power may occur: fog and friction will distort, cloak, and twist the course of events. Fog will result from information overload, our own misperceptions and faulty assumptions, and the fact that the enemy will act in an unexpected fashion.
Combined with the fog of war will be its frictions -that almost infinite number of seemingly insignificant incidents and actions that can go wrong, the impact of chance, and the horrific effect of combat on human perceptions …. Although many pundits have touted the ability of information to "lift the fog and friction of war," such claims have foundered on the rocks of reality. 
36
The most probable sensor system is the L-3 Wescam MX-15i electro-optical camera. The system produces full motion video using one of two daylight cameras or an infra-red camera. Together the three camera settings provide FOV options from .43° to 31.8°, with a maximum x19 zoom. 
Author and retired U.S. Marine Colonel T.X. Hammes maintains that while RMA is not clearly defined, the discussion does focus on the "technological aspects of warfare -in particular, the military-technical revolution and how to quickly apply that 'revolution' to our forces, to assure our continued superiority in combat." 3 U.S. forces do not want a fair fight and the DOD should leverage every opportunity to maintain its edge.
Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,(Washington, D.C.,  
2006), v.
Rajiv Chandrasekaran, "Offensive is Just the Beginning in Marja," The Washington Post,February 21,  2010.   
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, 55.   
Ibid.
Director of National Intelligence McConnell said that "U.S. intelligence agencies will never have enough analysts to fully examine all the data they collect." Mike McConnell, "Overhauling Intelligence," Foreign Affairs (July/August 2007), 53.
John L. Romjue, From Active Defense to AirLand Battle: The Development of ArmyDoctrine, 1973-1982.  (Fort Monroe: Historical Office, United States Army Training and Doctrine Command, 1984), 6.   
DOD, The National Defense Strategy,(Washington, D.C., 2008), 18.   
Ralph Peters, "The Counterrevolution in Military Affairs: Fashionable Thinking about Defense Technology Ignores the Great Threats of Our Time," The WeeklyStandard, 6 February 2006, 18.   
Everett C. Dolman, "A Debate About Weapons in Space: For U.S. Military Transformation and Weapons in Space," SAIS Review (2006), 168. Lord Kelvin was a leading physicist and then president of the Royal Society in 1895.
Ibid.
David W. Tarr, American Strategy in the Nuclear Age(New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc, 1966), 69.
Ibid.
DOD, The National Military Strategy of the United States of America: A Strategy for Today; A Vision for Tomorrow,(Washington, D.C., 2004), 23.   
Ibid., viii.   
Arthur Cebrowski, "Transforming Transformation," Transformation Trends, April 19, 2004, 9.   
Ibid., 5.   
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, vi-vii.   
Arthur Cebrowski, "Speech to the Network Centric Warfare
Conference," Center for Defense Information, Military Reform Project; available from http://www.cdi.org/mrp/tt-17feb03.pdf; Internet; accessed 15 October 2009.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,
18.
Ibid.,[2][3] 
DOD, Joint Publication 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations  (Washington, D.C., 2004), III-24.
Ibid.
Ibid.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,
46.
Ibid.,
31,
35.
DOD, The National Military Strategy,
19.
DOD, 24.   
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,
31.
Ibid., 57.   
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment: Challenges and Implications for the Future Joint Force,(Suffolk, VA, 2008), 23.   
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,[5][6] 44.  
DOD, The National Military Strategy,
19.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, 65.   
Ibid., 70.   
Ibid.,
72.
Ibid.
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 5.   
David H. Petraeus, Multinational Force-Iraq Counterinsurgency Guidance, 6 June 2007; available from http://www.airforce.forces.gc.ca/CFAWC/Contemporary_Studies/2007/2007-Jun/2007-06-06_MNF-I_COIN_Guidance-Summer_2007_v7_e.asp; Internet; accessed October 6, 2009.
James R.Howcroft, "Technology, Intelligence, and Trust," 26.   
Raymond T. Odierno, Nichoel E. Brooks, and Francesco P. Mastracchio, "ISR Evolution in the Iraqi Theater," Joint Forces Quarterly, no. 50 (3rd Quarter 2008): 52.
See Appendix C for specific system characteristics and source data.
Thom Shanker and Eric Schmitt, More Satellites Will Act as Eyes for Troops, The New York Times, 24 February 2010, available from http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C07E2DD143CF937A15751C0A9669D8B63&scp=5&sq =thom+shanker&st=nyt; Internet; accessed 3 March 2010.
United States Special Operations Command Public Affairs, USSOCOM Fact Book.
DOD, Joint Publication 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States(Washington, D.C.,  2009), IV-2.
War Department, Report of the Secretary of War to the President, Annual, (Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1933), 31.
Jeffery Record, The Creeping Irrelevance of U.S. Force Planning, (Monograph, Carlisle Barracks: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 1998), 1.
Ibid.,
15.
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 24.
Dr. Gray is a Professor of International Politics and Strategic Studies at the University of Reading, England and founder of Washington's National Institute for Public Policy.
Colin S. Gray, "Why Strategy is Difficult," Joint Forces Quarterly, no. 22 (Summer 1999): 12.
DOD, The National Defense Strategy of the United States of America,(Washington, D.C., 2005), 2.
George W. Bush, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America,(Washington, D.C.: The  White House, 2006), 36.   
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, A-3.
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment,[3]
[4]
Ibid., iv.
Mike McConnell, "Overhauling Intelligence," 58.
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 1.
Ibid.
Ibid.,
13.
DOD, Defense Intelligence Strategy,(Washington, D.C., 2008), 4.   
Mike McConnell, "Overhauling Intelligence," 56.
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 3.
Ibid.,
25.
Ibid.
Ibid., 26.   
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 13.   
DOD, Joint Publication 2-01, I-2.
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 4.   
DOD, The National Military Strategy, 6.   
DOD, Joint Publication 2-01, I-2.
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment,[38][39] 
Ibid., 23.   
Ibid.
DOD, Defense Intelligence Strategy,
19.
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 7.   
DOD, Defense Intelligence Strategy,
19.
DOD, The National Military Strategy, 6.   
Ibid., 
James R.Howcroft, "Technology, Intelligence, and Trust,
" 22.
Due to its labor market and reverse engineering the latest technologies, the Chinese spend an order of magnitude less on its equipment than does the U.S.; particularly in space programs. United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 50.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, 29.   
DOD, "Military Power of the People's Republic of China, 2009," Annual Report to Congress,(Washington, D.C., 2009), 38.   
Ibid.
George W.Bush, The National Security Strategy, (2006) 41-42.   
Keith B. Alexander, "Warfighting in Cyberspace," Joint Forces Quarterly, no. 46 (3rd Quarter 2007): 59.
DOD, "Military Power of the People's Republic ofChina, 2009," 16-17.   
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 27.
DOD, "Military Power of the People's Republic ofChina, 2009," 14.   
Ibid., VIII.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,[29][30] 
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 3, 22.   
Ibid., 27.   
Ibid., I.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report,[29][30] 
Martin L.Van Creveld, Technology and War: From  
B.C. to the Present,[231][232] 
Sun Tzu, The Art of War, Translated by Samuel B. Griffith (London: Oxford University Press, 1963), 145.   
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, 1.   
DOD, Joint Publication 3-0, xi.
The Center of Gravity is "the source of power that provides moral or physical strength, freedom of action, or will to act." Its critical factors, or components, are Critical Capabilities, Critical Requirements, and Critical Vulnerabilities. DOD, Joint Publication 1-02, 81.
DOD, Joint Publication 2-0, Joint Intelligence(Washington, D.C., 2007), xi.   
DOD, Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Operation Planning(Washington, D.C., 2006), B-2.
Ibid., 
DOD, Joint Publication 3-0, IV-15.
James R.Howcroft, "Technology, Intelligence, and Trust,
" 25.
DOD, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, 63, 65.  
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 19.   
Martin L.Van Creveld, Technology and War, 312.   
Ibid.
Michael Ignatieff, Virtual War, 171.   
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid., 173.   
Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor, COBRA II: The Inside Story of the Invasion and the Occupation of Iraq, (New York: Pantheon Books, 2006), 499-500.
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 48.
Vice Admiral Cebrowski served as the director of the Office of Force Transformation from 2001-2005. In this role, Admiral Cebrowski was an advocate for change across the armed forces, making policy recommendations directly to Secretary Rumsfeld. John Garstka was an Assistant Director within the Office
Director, Office of Force Transformation, Office of Secretary of Defense, "Network-Centric Warfare: Creating a Decisive Warfighting Advantage,"(Washington, D.C., winter 2003).
Arthur Cebrowski, "Speech to the Network Centric Warfare 2003 Conference."
Martin L.Van Creveld, Technology and War, 317.   
DOD, The National Military Strategy, 23.   
Ibid.
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2005), 14.   
DOD, The National Defense Strategy, (2008), 20.   
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 23.  
United States Joint Forces Command, The Joint Operating Environment, 5,
22.
I would like to thank 
COL James Dickens
Dr. Paul Melshen
Dr. Gail Nicula
Dr. Bryon Greenwald
A special thank you goes to my wife, Tammy, my daughter, Allyson, and my son, Andrew, whose support proved invaluable. Tammy's ability to keep us all pointed in the right direction, Andrew's daily reminder to "make good grades and stay out of trouble," and Allyson's weekly offer to assist me with my "book" made the perpetual wirebrushing from COL Dickens seem that much better.
A paper submitted to the Faculty of the Joint Advanced Warfighting School in partial satisfaction of the requirements of a Master of 
Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy
Joint Forces Staff College or the Department of Defense
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
footprint. 
121
121
122
This section evaluates asset capability with respect to key terrain challenges in predicted conflicts. These assessments are considered in a permissive environment unless otherwise noted.
Jungle and densely wooded terrain has always been challenging terrain for armed conflict. Military historian Max Boot notes that in the jungles of Vietnam the U.S. attempted to overcome jungle challenges through industrial means, comparing the two competitors to the "Jetsons" and the "Flintstones." 
38
39
8
38
What does the operational commander need to know? In order answer this question one must generally understand some implied concepts within the question itself;
namely the operational level of war and the operational commander. According to Joint Publication (JP) 1-02, the operational level of war links "tactics and strategy by establishing operational objectives needed to achieve the strategic objectives, sequencing
According to Ullman and James, "What is most exciting among these [military]   revolutions is …the capability to have near-perfect knowledge and information of the battlefield … while depriving the adversary of that capacity and producing 'systems of systems' for this purpose." The resulting information dominance would allow the U.S. to apply limited precision assets at key locations in order to win decisively. 
29
30
Consider the following from author Tom Ricks:
This Appendix provides specific system configuration and capabilities data for the equipment addressed in Chapter 2.
The most common sensor configuration based on published technological systems is the Raytheon AN/AAS-52 MTS-A, or the L3 Wescam 14TS. 
Sensor capabilities are represented by the Raytheon AN/DAS-1 MTS-B, which improves the range of the EO/IR cameras in the MTS-A discussed in the Predator sensor package, and adds an additional image-intensifying TV camera. 
4
25. 5
ere the g a maximum aircraft ceiling capacity, slant 
3
4
7
The 
The current sensor package is known as the 85000 COMINT suite, and its primary component is the E-Systems ES182 Multiple Communication Emitter Location System (MUCELS). 
17
18
19
The E-8C currently uses the Northrop Grumman AN/APY-3 multimode sidelooking phased-array radar. The radar is mounted underneath the aircraft and provides a 120° FOV that can monitor one side of the aircraft at a time; it can shift sides as needed. 
22
Operating primarily in WAS/MTI, the system is able to locate slow-moving ground targets up to 150 miles from the aircraft then switch to SAR/FTI to create radar imagery of stationary assets. 
23
24
The radar is believed capable of resolutions between 2-3 feet, 
35