# ID: 6271864fc01441e2aa8385c0f49aa3ba
# Title: United States Military Governance
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph contends military governance is an inescapable, crucial aspect of war into which the US military, specifically the Army, must pour effort, resources, and excellence to ensure that our wars are worth winning in the first place. Strategic, competent governance subdues chaos and provides dignity and paths forward to populations reeling from the loss and devastation of war. The monograph reviews how military governance figured into largescale combat operations including the American Civil War, the Spanish-American War, World War I, World War II, the Dominican Crisis, and contemporary conflict including Iraq and Afghanistan. The monograph utilizes a single case study, the World War II Rhineland Campaign: 1943-1945, to analyze how the US military executed its largest military governance operation. The vast body of research on this topic can be distilled down to this simple yet profound consensus point: the US military must plan and prepare for the execution of military governance duties with the same, or perhaps greater, level of care, forethought, and vision the conflict itself required. Action must be taken in accordance with the DOTMLPF framework to address military governance prior to the next conflict. Ignoring the requirement prior to war would be both consistent with our tradition and to our peril. The United States Military has only completed half of the task on the day we proclaim our victories. The other half, the military governance piece, will test our competencies, our patience, and our resolve. A war is not truly won if the communities left in the wake are treated as afterthoughts.
Even though US ground forces have engaged in activities necessary for political consolidation during and following wars for most of the country's 250-year history, the lessons from these experiences remain elusive. Despite the recurring operational challenges associated with shaping the political landscape during and following combat operations, US military and political leaders have consistently failed to devote appropriate attention and resources to organizing for the political requirements of military interventions.
-Nadia Schadlow, War and the Art of Governance
The potential for large-scale ground combat operations has increased over the last decade. The 2017 National Security Strategy points to China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran as rising peer and nearpeer competitors increasingly capable of challenging the United States militarily and economically after nearly three decades of US hegemony as the sole super power in the world. 
1
Training for large-scale combat operations has been a significant shift for the military since 2016 as it emerges from an intense decade-and-a-half period of limited contingency operations in both Iraq and Afghanistan. While great emphasis and energy are currently placed on training the force to fight and win on the highly lethal battlefield, little effort is expended on what comes following battlefield success. The US military is significantly underplaying its eventual role in administering and enabling governance both during and after large-scale combat operations.
In Joint Operations (JP) 3-0, the military depicts a model that describes the phasing of joint combat operations. The phases are to shape, deter, seize the initiative, dominate, stabilize, and enable civilian authority. 
3
4
The US Army has made great strides in training its soldiers for phase three operations, "dominate," and the training of offense and defense, but there has been little effort to prepare for phase four and five operations, "stabilize," and "enable civilian authority," respectively. Historically, as a result of scale, the Army has been the only service that can decisively acquire and stabilize territory for the purpose of reestablishing political order or enabling US policy objectives. 
5
6
7
8
This monograph will utilize a single, qualitative case study and detailed literature review examining the US experience with and utilization of military governance. This approach will facilitate a structured, detailed examination of military governance that will highlight common best practices. The featured case study offers excellent examples of how the United States executed military governance operations during World War II. In the Rhineland Campaign of 1943-1945, US military governance was executed during combat operations in newly conquered German territory, and in conjunction with German civil authority after Germany's surrender. The insights revealed by the case study, coupled with 7 US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 8-1. 
8
9
This monograph highlights several important issues regarding the future of military governance.
First, the literature review and examination of military governance since the American Civil War clearly indicate that the US military cannot divorce itself from military governance. The United States military must be prepared to execute military governance operations in both large-scale ground combat operations and limited contingency operations in future conflicts. Governance operations have been an unavoidable component of American military intervention throughout the American experience at war. 
10
Lessons learned from the US military's experience executing governance in the Rhineland, 1943-1945, demonstrate that military governance detachments were critical to the campaign's success. It offers a detailed account of a coordinated effort to train a cadre of professionals in governance and civil administration prior to conflict. It illustrates the necessity of direct-commissioning specialty skilled administrators from the civilian sector to increase capability. Military governance professionals were more successful if governance was their primary duty while alternate efforts to reassign front-line combat soldiers to understaffed military government units following combat operations fell short. The Rhineland events highlight the importance of attaching military government units to Army, Corps, and Division headquarters during combat operations, to best synchronize operations, and why detaching governance units from tactical headquarters after combat operations end is a must. In this case, command and control was synchronized under a territorial command and control architecture that was closely aligned with the post-surrender German government structure. 11 Most importantly, it showed military governance operations must be integrated as part of the plan from the start of campaign planning. Even though the US Army did not desire to execute military governance operations during combat, or the four years following German capitulation, there was no viable alternative.
The research goal of this monograph extracts military governance lessons learned from a blended analysis of both the campaign and literature review and apply them to make nuanced recommendations on how today's military should prepare for governance operations in future large-scale combat operations.
The questions of military government are among the most subtle and complicated which a commander must solve, for they concern the political life of the people governed and the political objectives of the occupying power. It will be only through close study of past experiences, successful and unsuccessful, orthodox and innovating, that the guidance for the future will be obtained.
-George Benson and Mark Wolfe, Military Government and Organizational Relationships   The 1 st Squadron, 91 st Cavalry arrived for a fifteen-month deployment in northeast Kunar and eastern Nuristan provinces in May of 2007. This deployment was unique in that it would span two summer fighting seasons from May 2007 -July of 2008. Leaders of the Squadron had spent the previous year preparing its soldiers, physically and mentally, for intense combat operations. Leaders felt confident they had effectively trained the soldiers to fight and win at the Squad, 
Platoon,
Troop,
and Squadron 11
Over the next fifteen months, the Squadron would be exposed to an intricate, almost confounding, web of tribal governance and the rich, multi-layered political dynamics that accompany it. The author would learn that in his area, tribal governance, not district or provincial government, mattered most. The personal relationships painstakingly cultivated with each tribal leader, coupled with consistent fairness and transparency in all governance matters, would equal success and unprecedented force protection for our soldiers. The problem was, none of the Squadron leaders were trained for governance operations.
They were trained in the intricacies of tactical-level warfare. What we failed to realize at the time was that our monumental skill gap was not unique to our Squadron alone. Battalions across the region were confronting the same unnerving reality that they could not deliver governance operations with any sort of assurance that they were doing it correctly. A common theme emerged from the literature on governance.
While our experiences occur in varied geopolitical contexts, the American military leader has continually had to rely upon his or her ingenuity to overcome a lack of training to accomplish missions and enable governance policy objectives. 
13
12
13 Carl Friedrich, American Experiences in Military Government in World War II (New York: Rinehart and  Company Inc., 1948), vi.  governance strategies on the fly, hoping on a wing and a prayer that their efforts would lead to stability and success. 
14
15
While, typically, broad guidance for military governance exists in the context of these campaigns, it grants so much latitude that the range of styles deployed in its execution at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels is as varied as the natures of the conflicts and the personalities of the leaders themselves.
The range of execution strategies is a result of both the strengths and weaknesses of the occupying military leaders charged to govern as well as the leadership of the occupied territory at the local, district, provincial, and national levels. Third, there exists a prevailing warning from military officers across these campaigns lamenting their forces' lack of appropriate training and preparation to execute the governance tasks their situations demanded. Finally, the scale required to successfully execute governance operations snaps into focus as officers and leaders from the local to national levels find themselves embroiled in the work. Governance operations consume time, energy, resources, and brain power. Careful consideration and planning for governance operations now can pay dividends to the next generation of military leaders who will face similar challenges. It is paramount the military refine a detailed tactical governance training curriculum of best practices. Our military government lessons have been hard-won. We cannot let them fall silent and forgotten in the annals of history.
In the American Civil War and Reconstruction period from 1861 to 1877, both during the execution of hostility and post-war reconstruction, governance operations were critical to the success of Union forces. 
16
The first period started with President Abraham Lincoln's 1862 appointment of military governors who were tasked with administering vital southern states' governance and ends at the conclusion of the war. 17
The second period begins at the conclusion of the war and stretches through Reconstruction.
President Lincoln appointed war governors in the occupied territories of North Carolina, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Louisiana that coincided with the Union Army's movement south. 
18
Since the states could not legally secede, they were still members of the Union." 
19
20
21
17 James McPherson, Ordeal by Fire: The Civil War and Reconstruction (Newark, NJ: McGraw-Hill Inc., 1992)
18
19
20
21
22
While Maslowski described the occupation of Nashville as only a partial success story, it does illustrate the colossal challenge the task of military government and administration represented for the occupying force. In other areas, Union commanders alluded to defensive reasons to justify their controversial decisions to abandon some cities completely. When Major General William Sherman captured Atlanta, Georgia in the summer of 1863, he demanded the city be cleared of all civilians.
Sherman realized the obligation his Army would have to the citizens of Atlanta, if they were allowed to remain in the city, and believed that obligation surpassed the skillset and the capacity of his Army. In his book, The Memoirs of General William T. Sherman, Sherman features a letter exchange between himself, acting as the mayor of Atlanta, and General John Bell Hood, the commander of the Confederate Army in Tennessee. In it, Sherman dictates the timeline for the evacuation of the city.
23
24
The second period of military governance to review is the period of Reconstruction. In Allen Guelzo's book, Reconstruction: A Concise History, he defines this period as lasting from 1865 to 1877. 
25
Many governors petitioned Congress and the US President to dissolve military government or request they not be sent to assist. When appointed military government soldiers did arrive, protests erupted and local citizens demanded the troops leave, to no avail. 
26
Finally, he emphasized the influence Army leadership asserted throughout the Reconstruction years as the force stationing levels declined in the South. 28 25 Guelzo, Reconstruction: A Concise History, 1.
26 Ibid., 786-787. 
27
28
The American Civil War authors paint a familiar picture when describing how the Union Army executed governance operations. Military governance across the South was a necessary but inexplicably unanticipated component of the war effort. While military governance was executed in different ways in cities across the South, leaders consistently dealt with governance related issues. The Union Army's experience with governance in the American Civil War set a clear precedent for future American wars.
The military would have to consider how it would support and execute governance operations during and after combat operations as part of its strategy. The American Civil War would remain the Army's most in-depth and encompassing experience until World War II. 
29
The Spanish-American War was fought for five months in 1898, largely over Cuba's desire for independence from Spain. The United States supported Cuban independence and sent the USS Maine to the Havana Harbor to send a strong message to Spain and to protect American interests and citizens in Cuba. When the Maine exploded, more than 250 American sailors and marines were killed which fueled US resolve. 
30
31
29
30 Daniel Brannen, Spanish-American War (Farmington Hills, MI: The Gale Group, Inc., 2003), 3-5. 
31
Puerto Rico, Cuba, Guam, and the Philippines.
32
McKinley, emphasized the importance of maintaining laws the Spanish had in place whenever possible.
He was convinced the status quo was an important component to keeping the peace, enabling his Army to be successful in executing military governance, and facilitating the successful transfer of authority. The US would proclaim the kindly intensions of the United States toward all peaceful and lawabiding inhabitants. They were to be protected in their persons and property, and in their private rights and relations. The transfer of authority was to occasion a minimal derangement Municipal laws were to remain for the present in force. Existing officials and courts, on accepting American supremacy, were to continue to function under military supervision. "Our occupation," the President wrote, "should be as free from severity as possible." 
33
In a cable to Secretary Alger on May 19th, 1898, President McKinley issued an executive order regarding the occupation of the Philippines and basic guidance for governance to both Alger and the Secretary of the Navy, John Davis Long . It stated "as the levy of all contributions in territory occupied by a belligerent is a military right derived from the law of nations, the collection and distribution of duties and taxes in the Philippines during the military occupation of the United States will be made, under the orders of the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy, by the military or naval commanders, as the case may be, of the ports or places which may be in the possession of our forces." 
34
Military government would become the mission in Cuba, Guam, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico. The American Presidency Project, accessed January 15, 2019, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=69292. 
35
36
report covered the period of December 1918 through January 1920. 
37
The US Army would occupy the portions of Rhineland with the absolute authority to govern but with only the broadest guidance on how to do so. "The armistice provided that the supreme governmental power in occupied Germany should be lodged in the military authorities of the occupying Army." 
38
39
Officers in the Third Army were not well-versed on the German's system of government. While many possessed a cursory grip of the German government's autocratic policies and understood their intention of adopting a new democratic-based system as a result of the Armistice, little was understood about how governance systems operated at the local and state levels. The Army headquarters resolutely leaned into the task of providing its leaders a German government crash course in the days prior to occupation of the Rhineland. There was no Army doctrine or manual to guide leaders in the task to come; it had to be created. As Hunt wrote:
A pamphlet entitled "Notes on German Local Government," was prepared by the Second Section of the General Staff at G. H. Q. This pamphlet contained important notes on the organization of the German governmental system and in addition devoted several pages to German laws on billeting and requisitions. It further contained notes on the German administration of justice. This pamphlet was at that time the only source of information distributed among officers of the army on the organization, government and laws of the country which they were called upon to govern. 
40
41
It is extremely unfortunate that the qualifications necessary for a civil administration are not developed among officers in times of peace. The history of the United States offers an uninterrupted series of wars, which demanded as their aftermath, the exercise by its officers of civil governmental functions. Despite the precedents of military governments in Mexico, California, the Southern States, Cuba, Porto Rico, Panama, China, the Philippines and elsewhere, the lesson has seemingly not been learned. 
42
Military government is simply military authority exercised in accordance with the laws and usages of war. Military oppression is not military government; it is an abuse of the power which the law of war confers. As military government is carried on by military force, it is incumbent upon those who administer it to be strictly guided by the principles of justice, honor and humanity-virtues adorning a soldier even more than other men, for the very reason that he possesses the power of his arms against the unarmed. 43
There was a clear understanding that the US Army had to be disciplined and just to positively influence the perceptions of the local German population. With general guidance, the US Army would prove in the Rhineland occupation what it had continually proved throughout the American wartime experience; it 
40 Hunt,
American Military Government,
[29]
[30]
42
43
Major General Joseph Dickman, commander of the Third Army and in charge of the US Army occupation of the Rhineland in 1918, also wrote an account of the war, The Great Crusade. Students of military government should review chapters nine and ten to benefit from the author's thoughts on the Armistice with Germany, the near simultaneous formulation of the Third Army, the advance west through Luxemburg, the initial guidance he provided his soldiers, and the march to the Rhine river during occupation. 
44
The American experience with military governance during World War II was executed on a massive scale. Unlike the three previous wars reviewed, significant doctrine emerged that established the basic parameters for the governance of occupied territory. Military government would be a necessary component of the war in the Pacific and European theaters both during the fighting and after surrender agreements were signed. American military government and the occupation of Axis nations would be critical to re-establishing normalcy, rebuilding those nations, and the peaceful transition of power back to the governments of Germany, Japan, and Italy. Since the end of American occupation following World War II, American military forces have remained in all three countries as allies and partners.
The most influential manual for governance in World War II was the FM 27-5 series, 47 Military Government, published in July 1940. The manual discussed both the basic policy and legality of military government in occupied territory. 
48
49
50
The object of civil affairs control through military government is to assist military operations, to further national politics, and to fulfill the obligation of the occupying forces under international law. This assistance is rendered by maintaining order, promoting security of the occupying forces, preventing interference with military operations, reducing active or passive sabotage, relieving combat troops of civil administration, and mobilizing local resources in aid of military objectives and carrying out governmental policies of the United States which usually are predetermined. 51 47 An updated version of FM 27-5 was published in 1943. 
48
49
50
51
The other important clarification of the updated manual was the recommendation to keep existing governance in place in occupied territory if possible. 
52
Field Manual 27-10, Rules of Land Warfare, published in October of 1940, must also be mentioned as a critical document that provided guidance to US military personnel prior to World War II.
While FM 27-10 provided the guidelines for the conduct of US servicemen during war in accordance with international law, it also had a detailed chapter on the military government in occupied enemy territory. 
53
54
55
52
53
54
55
"If in addition to military government all civil affairs, i.e., army operations concerned with civilian populations overseas, are taken into consideration, it may be said that the lives of more than 300 million people in various parts of the globe were vitally affected by the civil affairs operations of the American Army." 56 Importantly, American military leaders appropriately anticipated the requirement for US governance operations following the war and established a school of military government in May, 1942 in Charlottesville, Virginia. 
57
While the scale of military governance was unlike anything before seen in the American military experience, there were many similarities to past efforts. US military governance became the primary tool by which our government could influence the development of the occupied nations. 
58
59
War II, published in 1948, details the formulation and execution of American policy in the Pacific, European, and Mediterranean Theaters of Operation. Friedrich, like COL I.L. Hunt expressed during World War I, explored a common theme in his book, that the mistakes and policy miscalculations the US military made executing governance operations came down to a simple factor: lack of training. Friedrich 
56
58
59
60
The book Americans as Proconsuls: United States Military Government in Germany and Japan,   1944-1952, proffers fantastic insight into the struggle of implementing military government in each Theater of Operation. The book was the result of a collaboration of authors who all served in occupying military governments during the war. They describe the planning that went into post-war Europe, occupation, and military government, and demonstrate there was significant analysis of past efforts with the hope of not repeating history's mistakes. 
61
Following World War II, the emergence of the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) as global super powers in a bi-polar international system, changed US military governance policy. Military governance was utilized as a component of the US strategy to counter communism during the Cold War. 
64
65
65
66
In the beginning of the crisis, Palmer commanded a force drawn from the Marine Corps and Army. Throughout the crisis, the 82nd Airborne Division was the primary military unit on the ground after the Marines redeployed. Palmer's chapters on establishing the government and his assessment of the performance of US forces are critical to understanding the crisis. 
67
68
69
70
68
69
70
71
72
73
The disintegration of the USSR in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower and global hegemon for three decades. US intervention in foreign conflicts increased, including US involvement in Bosnia, 1994-1995, and Kosovo in 1999. In these conflicts the United States deployed its forces to prevent ethnic cleansing, provide humanitarian intervention, and serve as peacekeeping forces.
As peacekeepers, the US military advised the military and government, and maintains forces in both countries as of 2019. In every conflict, military governance has been a component of US military strategy in some way.
Since September 11, 2001, and  Over the course of the last eighteen years of limited contingency operations including stability operations and counterinsurgency in Iraq and Afghanistan, traditional near-peer and peer adversaries have been modernizing their forces. For the first time in three decades, US status as the sole superpower is being challenged by rising, or re-emerging, powers including China and Russia. 
75
74
75
Scale Combat Operations (LSCO) against a near-peer or peer adversary is rising. To that end, the literature review has highlighted that military governance in a key component of LSCO, as it has been in every type of conflict the US military has been involved with across the conflict continuum in the American wartime experience since the civil war. Military governance must be viewed as something the US military will do in all future conflict; therefore, action must be taken to address it prior to the next conflict. Ignoring the requirement prior to war would both be consistent with our tradition and to our peril.
Military Governance in the Rhineland Campaign, World War II In the philosophy of war there is no principle more sound than this: that the permanence of peace depends, in large degree, upon the magnanimity of the victor. The section contrasts the preparations made by the US Army to carry out military governance against the enormous scale the campaign demanded. It highlights several issues the US military will need to consider in the face of future conflicts, particularly the complexities that arise when the occupying force fails to anticipate tactical challenges on the ground. It demonstrates that, whenever possible, the soldiers and leaders tasked to execute military governance should hold themselves separate and apart from those who experienced the horror of close combat operations with the enemy. It underscores the importance of enabling local indigenous control and working within the confines of existing government at all levels. While made difficult by the Allied policy of denazification, 76 finding and empowering German leaders willing to take responsibility for their communities, cities, or regions, better enabled normalcy for the German population and, in turn, decreased violence and increased cooperation. This was extremely difficult during the combat phase as German men were committed to fighting the war. In most cases, the only German citizens found in villages, towns, and cities during the combat phase were women, children. The environment demands leaders at all levels clearly understand US policy and national objectives and internalize that they will make decisions in the pursuit of those objectives using their ingenuity, sense of justice, and morality, with very little guidance. Finally, the reader should take away the inescapable lesson of the war. The success or failure of military governance rides heavily on the quality of the leaders and soldiers tasked with executing it. Anything less than our best jeopardizes the operation.
Training Governance Detachments, Forces Available, and Task Organization Shortly after the United States entered World War II, the War Department researched the prospect of needing specially trained men for military governance. Interestingly, one of the main documents reviewed was the report written by I.L. Hunt, the civil affairs officer responsible for military governance for Third US Army in World War I, previously mentioned, during the occupation of the Rhineland in 1918. 
77
78
77
78
grade and specialty officers at the Provost Marshal General's company officer school. These schools would be referred to as Civil Affairs Training Schools (CATS).
At the school for military government, officers rotated through a three to four-month curriculum focused on the theater of operation in which they would serve. Selection was rigorous within the Army for the school of military government, yielding a formidable group with extensive backgrounds in government, local language, policy, law, education, and public works. 
79
82
83
84
As of 22 April 1944, when the last Civil Affairs Training Schools (CATS) for North Africa and European Theaters were closed, 3700 officers had been selected and trained for these areas. Except for a comparatively small number of CA officers remaining in the Mediterranean Theater, 
79
81 Civilian universities were utilized as partnership universities. This was a mutually beneficial relationship and provided a level of education, within specific government specialties, that could not be taught with the same level of rigor in military schools. 
82
83
84
85
86
87
By October 1944, the Civil Affairs (CA) detachments were reorganized into military governance detachments. Total personnel were increased over the previous CA detachments and were better organized for operation at specific levels of German society and governance. The reorganization was to 
85
86
87 Ibid., 48.
align with the phases of governance operations as they related to the occupation of the Rhineland, the amount of German territory conquered, and the eventual surrender of all German forces. These phases coincided with the "Carpet Plan," "Plan Eclipse," and the "Static Plan." 
88
90
was the plan for governance in occupied Germany after surrender. 
91
The table below shows the task organization of the military governance detachments. 
88
Board,
Civil Affairs and Military Government Organizations and Operations,
[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]
[96]
[97]
[98]
90 Ibid., 95.
91 Ibid., 97.
92 Earl Ziemke, "Improvising Stability and Change in Postwar Germany," in Americans as Proconsuls: United States Military Government in Germany and Japan, 1944-1952, ed. Robert Wolfe (Carbondale: Southern  Illinois University Press, 1984), 53.  Forces European Theater, Study Number 32, 1945), 30. The composition of MG detachments is depicted above. The types of MG detachments were lettered "E", "F", "G", "H", and "I". They were organized to take over all of the political sub-divisions of Germany, namely: Provinz or Land, Regierungsbezirk, Stadtkreis, and Gemeinde. These detachments were destined for localities under the so-called "Carpet Plan."
Prior to Allied soldiers entering Germany territory, the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) issued a handbook for military governance. The manual described how Allied forces would execute military governance prior to the defeat of Germany. It designated that the Commander of SHAEF would control the legislative, executive, and judicial rights of Germany and Austria as the occupying power. The Supreme Allied Commander directed that military governance was a command responsibility and delegated execution of his authority to his Army Group commanders. 
93
93 Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, Handbook for Military Government in Germany Prior to Defeat or Surrender (Washington DC: The Army Library, 1944), paragraph 1-14.  Rules of Land Warfare, as mentioned in the literature review, were two other manuals not specific to the European theater for which leaders could reference.
As military government detachments were integrated under the command of the tactical commanders, they followed the trace of frontline combat soldiers. With an initial strength of around 7500 US soldiers, military governance detachments were sufficient in strength for the initial phases of occupation. As more German territory was occupied and the number of towns and cities under Allied control increased, military governance detachments were stretched beyond the limits of their capacity. 
95
97
98
99
95 Holborn,
American Military Government,
34. 96
97
98
99
citizens was a monumental task to achieve as Allied forces advanced east. In the American sector alone, the number of displaced people was initially estimated in the tens of thousands and by the surrender of Germany in May 1945, that number had ballooned to over five million. 
100
102
The denazification policy made re-establishing German local policing as difficult as empowering civil administration for military governance units. The inherent lack of able-bodied German men in remaining in the communities made this an especially difficult task. Through the first five months of 1945, cobbling together German police forces in towns and cities was a huge problem. 
103
101
102
103
Still, it was becoming clear military government would soon be a primary mission for the Army so the increase in personnel, trained or not trained, was a necessity. "By 30 April 1945, deployment of military government detachments had progressed to the point where 207 such detachments were actually functioning in Germany." 
105
106
107
109
Lieutenant General Lucius Clay was appointed as both the Deputy Commander of US Forces in Europe and the Office of Military Government United States (OMGUS) in the American Zone to command and control all governance operations. 110 This was done to get the territorial governance structure in place and secure the military government detachments under the new command and control structure. "Military District Commanders will command and control Military Government activities in their Districts through a Territorial Military Government Detachment chain of command which will 
106
107 Maginnis,
Military Government Journal,
246. 108
Board,
Civil Affairs and Military Government Organizations and Operations,
116. 109
110 Holborn,
American Military Government,
49.
The transfer of command and control of the military governance detachments from the tactical units to OMGUS was not immediate upon its creation. The timeliness of transfer of control varied by unit across the American zone. This lack of timeliness was one of the biggest mistakes starting on Victory-Europe Day. Victory-Europe Day should have been a clear transition point for the way American military governance was being executed. The big lesson here was that during combat operations, the military governance structure was rightly under the control of the senior American commanders. Once the Germans surrendered, this should have triggered a change in the authorities and US command relationship for military governance. 
113
Division and Corps headquarters did not have the right structure or capacity to deal with civil authority or with the emerging issues of re-establishing economy, trade, or exports. "From Corps on down there was a recurring tendency for tactical troop commanders to overlook the special tasks of military government officers." 114 This was not efficient and slowed down both decision-making and the lateral communication between military governance units. In the case of occupied Germany, the faster military governance 
111
112 Holborn,
American Military Government,
50. 113
114 Friedrich,
American Experiences in Military Government,
65.
Another challenge was the governance detachment integration of the Allied soldiers and leaders had previously fought as combat soldiers against the Germans. Whether assigned to detachment security roles or governance positions within the detachment, shifting gears and accepting their new roles was challenging. Many of these soldiers and leaders had spent months, even years, fighting the Germans in close combat and the cognitive dissonance was deafening. After being conditioned to kill Germans, it was extremely challenging for those assigned to turn off their feelings of animosity and activate the sense of empathy and understanding required to do the work of administering German governance and working with community leaders to rebuild. Governance officers struggled mightily with the soldiers reassigned from combat units. More surprisingly, they even had a hard time with new soldiers who had entered the theater after combat operations and did not get a chance to fight. These soldiers and leaders had been indoctrinated for one thing, but they arrived in Germany to experience the opposite of what they had mentally prepared themselves for. Instead of battling the Germans, they were to collaborate and assist in the rebuilding of German communities, some from the ashes. 
115
116
115 Friedrich,
American Experiences in Military Government,
249. 116
117 John Gimbel, "Governing the American Zone of Germany," in Americans as Proconsuls: United States Military Government in Germany and Japan, 1944-1952, ed. Robert Wolfe (Carbondale: Southern Illinois  University Press, 1977), 92. conference 118 American leaders in OMGUS worked hard and fast to replace their staff with vetted German civil administration officials. General Clay cut his military staff from "12000 to 6000 by 
February 1, 1946." 119
122
Finally, there was an absolute realization that military governance planning in large-scale combat operations must be a component of the operations planning process from the plan's inception.
Governance operations must be viewed as an unavoidable, critical mission requirement for the Army. It cannot be an afterthought or a secondary planning priority. 
123
This monograph argues military government is an inescapable necessity of the American experience in war. The study highlights that whether executing large-scale combat operations or limited 
118
119
120
121
122
The study makes plain several concepts from which to draw recommendations for military governance operations in the future. Governance operations must be part of the operational plan from the beginning. It cannot be considered a secondary effort to the combat phase and must be planned simultaneously, as an equal component. Failure to do so, the study argues, places the military at a disadvantage and forces leaders to make critical decisions planning and executing governance operations during, not prior to, the effort. Next, while it is not fiscally responsible or feasible to create new formations in the Army today based on the budget and Army end-strength, it is feasible to establish triggers to initiate the growth. As a part of war plans, the US military should create triggers to initiate governance structure, training, and personnel requirements once it is determined that hostility is imminent. The trigger could initiate a Doctrine, Organization, Training, Material, Leadership and  
US Department of Defense, The
National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), 2-3. 2 US Department of Defense, The
National Defense Strategy of the United States (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 2.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), V-8.
Ibid., V-10, VIII-19.
Nadia Schadlow, War and the Art of Governance: Consolidating Combat Success into Political Victory (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2017), 3.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), vii.
Schadlow, War and the Art of Governance, 3.   
War Department, Field Manual (FM) 27-10, Rules of Land Warfare (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 1940), 75.
Allen Guelzo, Reconstruction:  A Concise History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 1.
Maslowski, Treason Must Be Made Odious, 125.    
William Sherman,  The Memoirs of General William T.Sherman (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University  Press, 1957), 117-128.    
Ibid., 119.   
Russell Alexander Alger, The Spanish-American War(New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers,  1901).
Margaret Leech, In the Days of McKinley (New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1959), 272.   
I. L.Hunt, American Military Government in Occupied Germany 1918-1920 (Washington, DC:  Government Printing Office, 1943), 25.   
Ibid.   
Starr, US Military Government in Germany,[82][83] 
The General Board, Civil Affairs and Military Government Organizations and Operations, 96.   
The General Board, Civil Affairs and Military Government Organizations and Operations,[138][139] 
The author is proud to have been a member of the 
Advanced Strategic Leadership Studies Program
Dr. Barry Stentiford
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
Education, Personnel, and Facilities (DOTMLPF) approach to expand military governance readiness. The DOTMLPF analysis is commonly used by the US military to analyze future programs and determine resourcing requirements across the seven categories.
Many of the DOTMLPF requirements that would be initiated based off standing triggers can be anticipated and determined now. Specially trained governance personnel within the current military including the Active, Reserve, and National Guard force for repurposing into military governance units, can be identified now. As was executed in World War II, a direct commissioning program could draw senior civilian governance professionals with critical skills into the military's reserve corps. Expanding government civilian corps authorizations also accomplishes this aim. The trigger to approve new authorizations and increase the Army's end strength must be determined. Once determined, the program should be carefully analyzed and pre-approved, taking into account new governance functions, like the cyber and space domains, that have emerged. The framework of governance units, not unlike the government detachments created in World War II, beginning with the size and scale of each, needs to be analyzed for how military government units will augment Divisions, Corps, and Theater Army headquarters in future combat operations, and how they operate after the enemy's surrender.
The US military must better prepare and position itself for the reality it faces in the execution of military governance operations in the future. As the military pivots from nearly eighteen years of limitedcontingency operations to training and preparing for large-scale combat operations, we must recognize that military governance is inextricably bound to future conflict. Failure to adequately prepare our military for the missions it must accomplish is simply obtuse. The US military has the time now to build a framework, think through triggers for implementation, and develop a broad-strokes concept for execution.
We should not allow ourselves to be caught flat-footed the next time we are forced as a military to execute the daunting task of governance because we know how this works. Governance falls to us. To pretend otherwise is to be disconnected from reality.