# ID: 62a5091727f6425bb7d255099962aaae
# Title: Russia's Limit of Advance
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
This report documents research and analysis conducted as part of the project Defeating Russian Deployed Joint Forces, sponsored
2. Summary Analysis of Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xv 1.1. Primary and Secondary Case Analytic Criteria and Emphases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 1.2. Analytic Methodology Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 2.1. Summary Scenario Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 2.2. Key Stressors Examined in the Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 2.3. Characteristics of Military Fixed-Wing Transport Aircraft in Russia's Inventory . . . . . . . . . 17 2.4. Range-Payload Trade-Offs Used in the Venezuela Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 2.5. Large Landing Ship Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2.6. Sealift Asset Demand, by Vehicle Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 2.7. Example Sealift Sortie Load Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 3.1. Estimated Additional Days to Close a Ready Airborne Unit, Kuril Islands Scenario . . . . . 39 3.2. Estimated Additional Days to Close by Sea, Kuril Islands Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 4.1. Summary Analysis of Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 A.1. Analysis of Soviet and Post-Soviet Ground Combat Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 B.1. Russian Order of Battle, Western Military District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 B.2. Russian Order of Battle, Southern Military District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 B.3. Russian Order of Battle, Central Military District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76 B.4. Russian Order of Battle, Eastern Military District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 B.5. Selected Russian Military Equipment Characteristics for Deployment Calculator . . . . . . . . 79 xi
By the time of its 2014 incursion into Crimea, Ukraine, Russia had regained a significant portion of the military power it lost after the fall of the Soviet Union, reemerging as a perceived threat to democracy. It soon became clear that Russia had broader interests than Europe-and perhaps a capacity to realize wider-ranging military objectives. Since the mid-2000s, Russia has been quietly accelerating its global engagements and has, more recently, increased its interests in Venezuela, various African states, and Asia. These developments have spurred renewed interest in Russian capabilities in the analytic community.
The focus of this research, Russia's ground combat deployment capability, stemmed primarily from sponsor requirements and resource limitations. But the insights from this analysis help fill an important knowledge gap that extends beyond an understanding of Russia's ability to support ground deployments. We argue that the capacity to deploy ground combat units is a better measure of overall conventional power projection than air or naval power alone. Air and naval forces are limited by an array of overflight and passage restrictions, but they also benefit from international agreements that guarantee considerable freedom of movement. In contrast, ground deployment depends on and reflects global and regional diplomatic influence or, alternatively, brute force to obtain on-the-ground access. Air and naval forces can be deployed independently, but ground forces require joint and, often, combined operations that tax a broader cross-section of the Russian military infrastructure.
Our research, conducted between 2016 and 2018, explored the ability of the Russian Ground Forces (RGF) to deploy combat capabilities outside Russia's borders. The RGF is Russia's equivalent of the Soviet Army. We considered other ground combat elements in our assessment, including special operations forces and airborne units. The overarching purpose of this research was to help U.S. and allied analysts and policymakers determine the extent of Russia's ability to project ground combat power, control geographic space, and threaten U.S. and allied interests around the world. We specifically addressed the following questions:
1. How far and how fast can Russia deploy a capable ground force? 2. What effects would such variables as distance, terrain, political accessibility, and the availability of logistics assets have on a Russian deployment?
The notional scenarios and findings presented here focus on these primary questions, but we also offer some analytic observations on Russian force capacity, lift capacity, and deployment speed.
Deployment is the rotation of forces into and out of an operational area. Our analysis addressed movement to an operational area: Can the Russians get there? If so, how fast, and xii Russia's Limit of Advance: Analysis of Russian Ground Force Deployment Capabilities and Limitations with what type of support? We addressed sustainment as a limiting requirement in our qualitative analysis but did not include sustainment or redeployment in our quantitative analysis. Note that our analysis also does not include the movement of all classes of supplies and supporting equipment. Adding all prospective materiel to our notional scenarios would greatly increase lift requirements and reduce the overall speed of deployment. The priority of this research was the movement of ground combat forces.
A companion report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios, presents additional details on the notional scenarios that informed our analysis. 1
A variety of factors limit Russia's ability to deploy its ground forces worldwide, including lack of materiel capacity; a shortage of organic lift capacity; conscript service limitations; inadequate international overflight, transit, and basing access; inadequate long-range sustainment; and vulnerability to interdiction beyond the range of Russia's integrated air defense system (IADS). Although our assessment did not consider the entire Russian joint force or Russia's overall ground combat capability, our key finding suggests that present and future estimates of Russian military power should not extrapolate perceived close-in strengths to worldwide force projection capabilities.
Working from these overarching analytic criteria and historical case studies, we focused on distance from the Russian border to the objective area as the central variable for analysis. This distance classification allowed us to describe RGF projection capabilities and limitations over time and space. We aggregated these distances into three ordinal increments. We assessed each historical case and notional scenario as border, near, or far (see Figure S.1).
A border scenario occurs directly adjacent to the Russian border. A near scenario occurs one country removed from the border or fewer than 500 kilometers away across a narrow body of water. A far scenario occurs more than two countries removed from Russia's borders, both 1 Ben Connable, Abby Doll, Alyssa Demus, Dara Massicot, Clinton Reach, Anthony Atler, William Mackenzie, Matthew Povlock, and Lauren Skrabala, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2563/1-A, 2020.
Adjacent to Russian border 1 country removed from border 2 or more countries removed from border BORDER NEAR FAR one country removed and across a significant body of water more than 500 kilometers from Russia's border, or on an ocean-separated continent.
To assess RGF deployment capacity, we built an unclassified order of battle (OOB) for the Russian armed forces, focusing on ground force capability. 
2
S
Table 
S
Rows in Table 
S
Stress points are color-coded according to the level of demand placed on Russian lift capabilities or the time required to deploy to an area of operations (closure time). These ratings required some subject-matter expertise in interpreting the data. Given the structural differences between the scenarios, it was not possible to develop a precise numeric rating scale. Our color-coding is therefore descriptive rather than empirically conclusive.
For asset availability, green indicates that the required force does not stress the overall force availability of the RGF, the airlift requirement does not stress overall available air transport aircraft availability, and the sealift requirement does not stress overall available sea transport asset availability. Yellow indicates low-moderate stress on any of these three assets. In other words, the deployment would cause Russian leaders to carefully consider asset availability for other mission requirements. Orange indicates high-moderate stress on any of these assets: The deployment would force Russian leaders to make practical trade-offs with other missions and, perhaps, lower operational tempo elsewhere.
Red indicates high stress or excess demand on any of the three assets. For example, the red shading for airlift to Venezuela in wave 1 shows high stress on Russian military airlift capabilities. The tyranny of distance, restrictive overflight access, inadequate refueling stopover access, and long routes require transport aircraft to carry less cargo. This deployment would use so many assets that it would necessarily require the cancellation of other national missions and would make additional missions requiring airlift deployment untenable. In our analysis of sealift requirements for the Kuril Islands case, we determined that organic sealift was insufficient to meet the mission requirement: The 60 or more days required to move forces in the second wave made the deployment all but untenable using organic military sealift.
Assigning colors to closure times required slightly more subjectivity than the assessments of calculated lift requirements. The central requirement for green coding was mission demand: Did the closure time allow the commander to execute the assigned mission in a timely and effective manner? In the Kazakhstan case, the force closed in seven days from port of embarkation to port of debarkation. We assessed this to be timely and sufficient to allow the commander to effectively employ the force. In the Syria case, in which the RGF deployed a ground force to rescue an encircled Russian ground combat element, we determined that the estimated 32-day closure time placed the mission at high-moderate risk.
There are clear disparities between the cases, resulting primarily from the unique mix of forces, distance, route availability, and geography that can affect deployment. For example, there are far more red (highly stressing) factors in the border Kazakhstan scenario than in the near Tajikistan scenario. Although straight-line distance favors Russia in the Kazakhstan scenario, the larger number of forces, the geography, and the types of forces required for movement place greater strains on the RGF and supporting organizations.
Table 
S
However, reliance on civilian transport comes with trade-offs. These assets are not specifically designed for military use. They are not camouflaged, they do not carry organic selfdefense or military damage-control measures, and they are primarily crewed by civilian workers who may or may not have experience working under combat conditions. Furthermore, military forces do not carry spare parts for nonmilitary lift assets, and these assets are not designed to carry the wide variety of military equipment that accompanies a standard BTG. 
3
Applying our RGF deployment calculator and determining the draw from each deployment on the overall force suggests three findings relative to Russian ground force deployment. First, the size and capability of the organic military transportation fleet is a major limiting factor in Russia's ability to deploy ground combat units. Organic asset availability-even given our best-case assumptions-is inadequate in two-thirds of our cases.
Second, although Russia has a large number of ground combat forces, its limited number of immediately ready ground forces makes large combat deployments difficult. In the Kazakhstan case, which requires a deployment along the Russian border, the size of the force required places significant stress on the overall force vis-à-vis other requirements.
Third, far cases are particularly challenging for the RGF. Each case demands the use of commercial assets to close the force. Venezuela, the only far case that exceeded 1,000 nautical miles from the Russian border (at approximately 5,000 nautical miles), places high stress on organic airlift and exceeds organic sealift capacity. Excessive closure time for the wave 1 deployment, the combat-ready airborne force, puts the mission at risk at approximately seven days, not taking into account a likely additional five days on either end of the port-to-port movement.
These calculations and overall findings only reflect the application of the RGF deployment calculator and the ratio-of-forces analysis. We were able to draw several additional observations and conclusions from our research concerning Russia's ability to deploy ground combat units and Russian military capabilities overall.
Military reforms under Russian President Vladimir Putin, structural reorganization, equipment modernization, and combat experience in places like Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine have helped reshape the RGF from the immediate post-Soviet doldrums to become what many analysts believe is an effective combat force with at least a moderate capacity for deployment. Our analysis of historical cases, the OOB, and the notional scenarios highlights other strengths of Russia's ground force deployment capability.
The RGF can execute rapid, effective, and efficient road, rail, and short-range air transportation within, between, and from Russia's Western and Southern military districts using primarily organic transportation capabilities. Operations within and from these districts are also far less vulnerable to interdiction than deployments from the Central and Eastern military districts and to areas far beyond Russia's western border. Relatively flat and open terrain also gives the RGF an advantage in these districts.
For the most part, Russian armored and support vehicles are lighter and smaller than many of their Western counterparts. When the RGF or missile forces do build a large vehicle for static defense, they often produce a complementary mobile version. An average motorized or mechanized BTG would be difficult to deploy by air. Even with relatively low-weight equipment, air movement is inefficient and costly for units with significant numbers of vehicles. However, ground, rail, and sea deployment are fairly straightforward. For sea transport, the relatively small physical dimensions of Russian vehicles are also an advantage.
Russian special operations forces (primarily Spetsnaz) and airborne forces (VDV) are generally highly capable and ready to deploy on short notice. Spetsnaz are the go-to units for Russian political and military leaders, and, at the time of this research, were engaged in Syria, possibly eastern Ukraine, and other combat zones.
At the outset of this research effort, we surmised that the RGF was not as capable of deploying far outside Russia's Western and Southern military districts as it was within or near those two districts. Analysis confirmed this assessment; however, we needed to consider several serious limiting factors when assessing Russia's ability to deploy ground combat units beyond its xviii Russia's Limit of Advance: Analysis of Russian Ground Force Deployment Capabilities and Limitations borders-particularly beyond the two districts with the highest level of Russian air defense cover.
Russia's armed forces comprise a mix of contract and conscript personnel. Contract personnel are usually volunteers who are available for worldwide deployment without major restrictions. Conscripts are civilians who serve 12-month tours in the armed forces by law, typically as junior enlisted soldiers. Short terms of service prevent conscripts from perfecting their military specialties, including the noncombat transportation duties that are essential to successful deployments. Units that include large numbers of conscripts often suffer from degraded performance because conscripts are generally less experienced, less qualified, and less capable than most contract soldiers.
Due in great part to lingering social and political blowback from the 1979-1989 Soviet-Afghan War and the disastrous First Chechen War in the mid-1990s, Russian political leaders generally try to avoid deploying conscripts beyond Russia's borders or into combat. Russian civil society is highly sensitive to conscript casualties. Russia cannot practicably deploy all-or likely even most-of its available RGF units to an overseas conflict without risking significant domestic disapproval. Therefore, although we found that 215 BTGs may be available for combat deployment, in practice, it is possible that Russian political leaders would consider deploying only a small percentage of those units that are not already committed to homeland defense or other operations.
At the height of its late-period power, the Soviet Army and other ground forces had approximately 2.1 million personnel out of an overall military force of more than 4 million. 
4
5
6
Collectively, our historical case studies, deployment calculations, OOB analysis, and notional scenarios reveal a significant gap in the sustainability of ground force deployments beyond Russia's borders, as well as outside the border deployment area around the Western and Southern military districts. Figure S.3 summarizes our assessment of Russia's sustainment capability for ground force deployments. Drawing on the collective analysis presented in this reportincluding a comparative analysis between real-world cases and our notional cases-we determined that Russia is highly capable of deploying forces along its border, but this capability drops off quickly as the distance increases.
Border deployment capacity using organic assets is limited primarily by military district: It is stronger in the west and weaker in the east. But the impact of distance in the border cases is primarily related to time: Russia can still effectively sustain a deployment in the east if it has more time to prepare. It demonstrated this capacity with Exercise Vostok 2018, in which it moved large forces from west to east to conduct large-scale joint and combined maneuvers. As shown in Figure S.3, the RGF can readily sustain a reinforced army-sized component along Russia's border. This drops sharply to a reinforced brigade for near cases as the ground element becomes increasingly reliant on air and naval sustainment, and it plummets to a reinforced battalion-sized force in far cases.
Sustainment can be improved by using nonorganic assets, with the time and distance caveats noted here. Figure S.3 also notes that combat sharply increases sustainment requirements and further reduces organic sustainability.
Russia has few consistent and reliable international allies. This is particularly true beyond Central Asia, where it retains considerable influence and even, as in Tajikistan, an ongoing military presence. Russia's western border is effectively bounded by inhospitable NATO states. A large part of its southern border is bounded by China, a nation that is unlikely to provide overflight or basing rights to Russia in situations that do not directly benefit Chinese interests.
Figure S.4 summarizes our assessment of Russian international access, with each country color-coded according to its availability to support Russian military operations. Our subject-matter expert interpretation of each relationship is characterized in one of the following 
Less dependable (situation-dependent)
Non-NATO restricted (generally unavailable) NATO restricted (generally unavailable) Insufficient information for rating or highly flexible relationship with Russia ways: (1) dependable, or always available; (2) less dependable, with availability being situationdependent; (3) non-NATO restricted but generally unavailable; or (4) NATO restricted and generally unavailable. 
7
The map suggests that Russia must navigate narrow sea channels, execute torturous air routes, and rely on insufficient long-term organic air and sea sustainment assets to move and sustain its forces beyond the border deployment range.
Figure S.5 shows our assessment of the vulnerability of Russian lines of communicationground, air, and sea transit routes. Russia can defend its lines of communication successfully in border cases. However, there are differences between western and eastern deployments: Western deployments are less vulnerable due to capability differences. In near cases, Russian forces are vulnerable along their lines of communication in that they can extend air and naval escort to protect assets but only with great difficulty, due to sustainment and access limitations. Vulnerability in near cases increases as assets move beyond the shore-based umbrella. Far cases are highly vulnerable due to the challenges of extending escort, a lack of sustainment for escorts, and a lack of political access to supporting installations. Figure S.5 visualizes the framework for our assessment of the vulnerability of Russian lines of communication, by distance. 
7
Vulnerable NOTE: Vulnerability varies depending on deployment location and differences in capabilities. For example, western deployments are less vulnerable than other deployments.
Highly vulnerable xxii Russia's Limit of Advance: Analysis of Russian Ground Force Deployment Capabilities and Limitations
Figure S.6 presents our concluding assessment of RGF deployment capability. It is derived from all of the sources and analyses presented in this report and is designed to consolidate the strength and weakness assessments described in Chapter Four. This figure does not take military or political opposition into account. For example, it shows an equal capacity to deploy through northern China as through Iran, but, in practice, these would be two very different propositions. Understanding actual power projection capability-the ability to effectively deploy and fight against a known opposing force-would require separate analysis. However, this research helps lay the foundation for those types of analyses.
This summary assessment shows that Russia can deploy its ground forces in a relatively limited area adjacent to its western border. We rated its ability to deploy ground forces as unlimited within its own borders, high-capacity in 13 countries outside of Russia, mid-capacity in 12 countries, limited-capacity in 17 countries, and restricted in the remaining countries. 
8
We defined RGF deployment capacity as follows:
• Unlimited: Rapid deployment of a large ground force is possible with minimal operational risk. • High capacity: Time and terrain are the only serious limiting factors.
• Mid-capacity: Russian forces are vulnerable to interdiction, adding time and terrain limitations.
Unlimited High capacity Mid-capacity Limited capacity Restricted
• Limited capacity: There is a significant risk of interdiction, and forces must travel longer distances from Russian bases. • Restricted: Slow timelines for all but the smallest forces, lack of capacity, and significant risk.
Capability weakens within Russia from west to east, but this is primarily a factor of time: Sufficient lead time can reduce the west-east power differential. Capability drops off sharply beyond the border cases. We did not find a strong Russian ground force deployment capability in any prospective far case anywhere in the world: In each of these cases, Russia would be constrained by its lack of organic assets, lack of access, and vulnerability to interdiction. Removing the possibility of interdiction from the equation still does not give Russia a significant capability with its organic assets. The limits imposed by conscript forces and lack of sustainment make far cases exercises in risk and cost. Syria is once again a benchmark: That operation has proven to be sustainable, but only with one of Russia's handful of international fixed-port networks, a willing allied government, and a major investment in nonorganic sustainment capacity.
Our analysis provides only one part of the answer to a question of great complexity, one that is perhaps of existential interest to some allies of the United States: What is Russia's current capacity to project ground combat power? We show how many forces Russia can physically move over a given distance and a given period of time. Power projection includes deployment, but also the ability to fight at the far end of the deployment arc.
For example, Russia might be able to deploy a ground combat brigade to the Kuril Islands, but how capable would this deployed force be against a given adversary? What if it had to fight the Japanese Self-Defense Forces, even for a limited period? What if the United States intervened with all its military power in an extended conflict? Understanding power projection requires a deeper analysis of force composition, training, will to fight, and physical capabilities, as well as a comparative analysis of effectiveness against a given adversary in a given context. Some generalizations could then be drawn about intrinsic Russian ground combat power. These generalizations-integrating deployment capacity and combat capability-could be used to create a ground combat power projection model that could be applied to many different scenarios. 
This research, which concluded in late 2018, examined the ability of the Russian Ground Forces (RGF) to deploy ground combat units outside of Russia's borders. The overarching purpose was to support broader analyses and assessments of Russia's ability to project conventional ground combat power, control geographic space, and threaten U.S. and allied interests around the world. Our analysis specifically addressed the following questions:
1. How far can Russia deploy a capable ground force, and at what cost? 2. What effects would such variables as distance, terrain, political accessibility, and the availability of logistics assets have on a Russian deployment?
We addressed several related issues that emerged during our research, including the vulnerability of deployed Russian ground forces and lines of communication; the collateral impact of notional deployments on overall RGF capacity and other, ongoing missions; and the impact of geographic variations in Russia's internal transportation network and military force density on its global deployment capabilities. This report presents findings from our research and introduces the six (+1) notional scenarios developed to support the analysis. See the accompanying report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios, for more detail on each scenario.
1
In brief, the RGF is the military land component of the Russian Federation. Its predecessor is the Soviet Army. The RGF consists of 300,000-400,000 personnel and employs equipment ranging from infantry rifles to main battle tanks and long-range artillery. 2 Deploying elements of the RGF by air or sea requires joint support from the Russian Air Force and the Russian Navy. Russian Airborne Forces (Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska, or VDV), Naval Infantry, and special operations forces (primarily Spetsnaz) may be considered separate branches or elements of the armed forces of the Russian Federation, but we included them in our analysis alongside the RGF because they are typically deployed as ground combat forces. This report includes a detailed order of battle (OOB) to help describe RGF components and capabilities, which informed our analysis and findings.
In the immediate aftermath of Russia's 2014 incursion into Crimea, Ukraine, the national security community sharply accelerated its analysis of Russian military capabilities. Russian President Vladimir Putin's bold gambit snapped Western analysts and policymakers out of their post-Cold War quiescence: By 2014, Russia had regained a significant portion of the military power it had lost after the fall of the Soviet Union, and it had reemerged as a perceived threat to democracy-at least in Eastern Europe. Russia's 2015 deployment to Syria to bolster the regime of President Bashar al-Assad prompted renewed fears of Russian military might. Although the Syria deployment was troubling to observers, Europe was the more immediate concern. Many Western policy and military analyses centered on Russia in Ukraine and on the Russian threat to the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. During this same period, a range of experts on Russia and the military threat in Europe wrote extensively on Russia's military capacity in Eastern Europe. 
3
In March 2016, Putin announced the withdrawal of Russian combat forces from Syria.
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
As we conceptualized this project, it had become clear that Russian leaders have also sought to regain their capacity for worldwide military deployment to directly influence global affairs through the threat or use of conventional force. It follows that the U.S. national security community will require a more thorough understanding of Russian deployment capabilities, with an analytic emphasis on the real strengths and limits of Russian power abroad. Can Russia replicate the advantage it holds in Eastern Europe in places like Syria, Central Asia, or even such far-flung places as Venezuela? If Russia can deploy a credible ground force, can it sustain and secure its lines of communication? What is the extent of its global network of bases in the post-Soviet era, and what are its limits? These uncertainties raise a crucial, overarching policy question: How far has Russia progressed toward regaining the great-power status of the Soviet state?
This report specifically addresses ground force deployment while acknowledging and peripherally incorporating the joint force. Russia has a large joint force capable of extending air, naval, and space power around the world. An ideal study would examine all aspects of Russian conventional force deployment-air, naval, ground, and space. We recommend that follow-on research pursue this holistic analysis, but our focus and objectives are narrower.
This focus on ground combat deployment stems primarily from both sponsor requirements and resource limitations. We also argue that the capacity to deploy ground combat units is a better measure of overall conventional power projection than air or naval power alone. Although air and naval forces are limited by an array of overflight and passage restrictions, they also benefit from international agreements that guarantee considerable freedom of movement. Ground deployment depends on and reflects global and regional diplomatic influence or, alternatively, brute force, to obtain on-the-ground access. Air and naval forces can be deployed independently, but ground forces require joint and, often, combined operations that tax a broader cross-section of the Russian military infrastructure. Air and naval units can influence physical terrain and people, but only ground units can persistently control terrain and people. We address Russian air and naval capabilities in the context of support to deployed ground units. 
11
We use the U.S. Army definition of deployment. It is "the rotation of forces into and out of an operational area." 12 According to the Army, deployment "is composed of activities required to prepare and move forces, supplies, and equipment to a theater." 13 Ground combat deployment capability can therefore be described and assessed in terms of available forces, lift capacity, the viability of lines of communication to and from the area of operations, sustainment over time, and speed of deployment from initial order to the point at which a capable force is assembled and ready to fight. 14 While deployment is defined as rotational, due to limitations in research 
11
DIA-11-1704
DIA-11- -161, 2017. 14 . 14
The ability to secure lines of communication is highly sensitive to the given mission and the locations and capabilities of opposing forces. Small-scale, locally focused combat, such as the ongoing mission in Syria, requires almost no specialized security for lines of communication, while a regional or global war against the United States and its allies might place all Russian deployed forces at considerable risk if robust security measures are not in place. Sustainment can also vary by mission type, but it can be estimated under combat and noncombat conditions. For example, it is possible to estimate the burn rate of munitions, fuel, and other classes of supply on a per-day basis in a notional high-intensity combat situation.
Although all these factors are interrelated, only lift capacity and speed of deployment can be effectively quantified and generalized for baseline analysis. We were able to develop a general but grounded starting point for lift and speed calculations for any given scenario. Force capacity, which we define in terms of available battalion tactical groups (BTGs), can be measured adequately at the unclassified level. Our analysis of deployment capability therefore focused on force capacity, lift capacity, and speed but also considered the requirements for securing and sustaining lines of communication (see Table 
1
Working from these overarching analytic criteria and our historical case-study analysis, which we discuss in the next section, we determined that the most useful analytic variable was the distance of a given operation from the Russian border, allowing us to best describe RGF projection capabilities and limitations over time and space. Distance lends itself to relatively easy classification. Framing deployment capability in terms of distance facilitated our more detailed analysis of force capacity, speed of deployment, and sustainment challenges. Other variables that might be relevant include equipment type, equipment availability, relative combat power, adversary type, mission type, deployment cost, and sustainment cost. However, data on these variables are not always accessible. For example, we could not accurately and consistently determine the cost of any past, current, or prospective Russian deployment. We did include other variables in our scenarios and analyses as appropriate and when data were available. For example, we included equipment type, adversary type, and mission type in our OOB and notional scenario descriptions. sion, including defeating an opposing military force. The goal of securing lines of communication is to prevent opposing forces from disrupting the transit of air, naval, or ground assets to and from the area of operations. We aggregated distance into three ordinal increments. We assessed each historical case and notional scenario as border, near, or far (see Figure 
1
Force capacity assessment is a potentially fraught undertaking. Without knowing the exact number of Russian troops, their equipment, and their readiness for deployment, it is not possible to accurately determine the overall impact of any given deployment on the total force. Compounding the data challenge-which we describe in greater detail in the following section-is the diversity of unit types in the RGF. There are motorized infantry battalions made up primarily of foot soldiers and trucks; mechanized infantry battalions centered on infantry fighting vehicles; armored, artillery, and electronic warfare battalions; and an array of airborne, support, and other ground units that are not technically affiliated with the RGF but possibly available for deployment.
We settled on using the BTG as the unit of measurement for force capacity. 
15
16
15
1
17
18
This section briefly summarizes our methodology. Chapter Two presents further detail on our RGF deployment calculator, Chapter Three includes a longer discussion of our notional scenario selection, Appendix A outlines the motivation and process for our historical case selection, and Appendix B presents the OOB that informed our analysis and describes its development.
This research proceeded in three sequential phases, with a parallel effort to list and describe contemporaneous Russian joint military capabilities in a holistic OOB analysis (see Table 
1
We created a database of all significant Soviet and Russian ground combat force deployments during the period from 1945 (the end of World War II) to 2017. We selected cases based on two criteria: (1) a minimum of 1,000 troops, including, in some cases, Soviet or Russian naval personnel, and (2) actions beyond peacetime advising, such as irregular warfare support or conventional combat. See Appendix A for a more detailed explanation of our methodology and selection process.
Building from our historical case-study analysis, deployment calculation estimates, and refined assessment criteria, we selected and designed notional RGF deployment scenarios. The goal was for the scenarios to be (1) research-grounded and able to facilitate analytic forecasting, (2) unclassified and suitable for wargaming and simulation, and (3) controlled test cases drawn from a transparent and unclassified OOB that would allow us to implement our RGF deployment calculator. Our selected scenarios • illustrate Russian joint task force deployments of more than 1,000 ground personnel 
19
6
19
We developed a deployment calculator as a method to determine the time and lift requirements to move a given RGF contingent via isolated, point-to-point road, air, and sea routes as part of the deployment process. The calculator was both a method of analysis and an output of this research. Its transparent design and generalizability make it potentially useful for future applications and follow-on work. To this end, we have dedicated Chapter Two to describing the deployment calculation methodology, its data baselines, and its formulas.
An OOB is generally understood to be a list, accompanied by brief descriptions and locations, of the units, equipment, and personnel in a military organization. We developed an unclassified OOB of the Russian military to inform our notional scenarios. It includes details on air transport, sea transport, and ground military units, their locations, and their equipment and personnel. It also provides a general understanding of Russian military capabilities that is sufficient for broad strategic discussions or notional calculations of capability and movement. See Appendix B for an overview of the OOB and Chapter Three for a more in-depth discussion of the OOB's role in our notional scenarios.
Using our compiled OOB, we counted brigades or brigade equivalents in the RGF, VDV, Naval Infantry, and Spetsnaz. We then derived our count of BTGs from the brigade total. This count assumes that commanders can generate, at most, three BTGs per RGF brigade, two groups per Naval Infantry brigade, and one group per Spetsnaz brigade. Our group count includes motorized rifle, tank, artillery, and rocket artillery units. We did not count air defense, logistics, or engineer units. Our analysis, derived from the unclassified OOB with necessarily imperfect data, suggests that Russia could generate a maximum of 215 BTGs from its RGF, VDV, Naval Infantry, and Spetsnaz forces. 
20
The majority of Russian military power is located in its Western and Southern military districts. Figure 
1
This western-southwestern emphasis resulted from an array of geopolitical realities and security requirements. Most of Russia's population and transportation networks are in the western and southwestern parts of the country. Moscow is located in the Western Military District. Russia's primary security concern is the threat posed by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) along its western border with Europe. Force density and security demands in western Russia led to the creation of a dense integrated air defense system (IADS) in both the Western and Southern military districts. This air defense system provides exceptional security for the entirety of the Russian basing and transportation network under its umbrella, as well as for several hundred kilometers from Russia's border into Eastern Europe. Deployment from western Russia is comparatively safe and easy. We include this important distinction in our analysis in Chapters Three and Four to highlight the idiosyncratic lift and speed challenges posed by Russia's interior dimensions and variations in network and hub density.
The remainder of this report is organized as follows. Chapter Two describes the development and application of our RGF deployment calculator. Chapter Three describes our notional scenarios and presents a detailed example of their structure and parameters using the Kuril Islands deployment. Chapter Four presents our summary analysis of the data and scenarios, along with our findings and a recommendation for extending this research. Appendix A presents a baseline assessment of historical Soviet and Russian deployments from 1945 to 2017 to show how the Soviets and Russians have deployed and to explore both continuity and change in deployment patterns and capabilities over time. Appendix B presents a summary of the OOB. An accompanying report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios, presents a more comprehensive review of each of the six (+1) notional scenarios. 
21
This chapter has a narrow aim: to present our methodology for determining lift requirements and closure times for the delivery of Russian ground combat forces to operational areas outside of Russia. We created an RGF deployment calculator to support our scenario development and to facilitate our analyses of RGF deployments. We therefore describe the calculator in the context of the notional scenarios. However, the calculator can be applied to any scenario: It can be used with the same data for logistics calculations, or it can be used for the same purpose with different data, with minor modifications-for example, if new data on the same types of Russian military equipment become available. The approach to building an equivalent calculator for Iranian, Chinese, or other ground combat forces would be similar to the process described here.
The primary audience for this chapter is the community of analysts with expertise in the Russian military capabilities. It therefore assumes some expert knowledge of the RGF, Russian military equipment, and military logistics concepts. Sources for descriptions of specific military equipment are cited throughout this chapter. The accompanying report includes a more comprehensive list of readings on the background and context for our scenarios and Russian airlift, sealift, and rail transport capabilities.
The RGF deployment calculator was informed by the OOB presented in Appendix B. It was designed to assess Russian, not U.S., equipment and deployment methods and standards. Calculations in this chapter and in the scenarios do not address the movement of all classes of supply. The calculations also do not take into account all the vagaries of military deployment, such as adverse weather conditions or breakdowns.
A calculator is generally understood to be a machine, set of tables, algorithm, or some other mechanism used to execute mathematical equations. Our calculator is a set of basic equations and algorithms derived from our analysis of the RGF, Russian transportation networks, and our subject-matter expertise on logistics networks. It provides the ability to forecast and analyze the number and type of transportation assets and the amount of time necessary to move a Russian ground combat force from point to point in isolated movement sequences. By itself, the calculator cannot provide an estimate of an entire movement from the issuance of a combat order to closure on the assembly area. This kind of comprehensive analysis would require additional analytic steps.
As we demonstrate in our notional scenarios, these point-to-point calculations lend some stability and reasonable accuracy to our deployment timeline forecasts. With the calculator, transportation network data, and the OOB, it was possible to estimate the number of days required to deploy a Russian ground task force from the issuance of a warning order to closure. 
1
Full movement analysis might benefit from a computer simulation, similar to U.S. Transportation Command's Analysis of Mobility Platform or Joint Flow and Analysis System for Transportation. However, even these simulations fail to capture the many factors that can affect deployment timelines, including political access challenges, contractor availability, force readiness limitations, and route changes.
2
Calculators are only as good as the equations they employ and the data they process. Our calculator is designed to give precise but only generally accurate results because (1) it relies on an unclassified OOB, which is necessarily inaccurate to some degree, and (2) the equations are generated from publicly available technical military equipment data, transportation network data, and lift requirement estimates. These types of data rarely reflect the challenges of realworld movement or variations in equipment, human behavior, and the operational environment. For example, a ten-year-old Russian transport truck with worn tires driven by an inexperienced junior soldier through snow on imperfect roads will not reach its objective at precisely the time forecasted by our generalized calculations. 
3
This chapter builds from our OOB analysis and our related analysis of the Russian transportation network and hubs. Each estimate, such as the carrying capacity of an An-22 military cargo aircraft, is composed of aggregated and analyzed data. We identified the best available information, compared it with other data, and derived our estimates from what we found to be the most accurate sources. For example, the data on the An-22 in Table 
2
2
or two sources for our aggregated estimates; more source data can be found in Appendix B of this report and in the references, organized by topic, in the companion report. 4
Our notional scenarios are described in more detail in the companion report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios. Table 
2
We applied the calculator to each scenario and later refined the calculator based on our completed scenario analysis. This iterative process ensured that the calculator input was reasonable and-at least in these notional cases-tested.
Because we tailored the calculator for the RGF and built it from our OOB, we necessarily describe its use in the context of our notional RGF deployment scenarios. The calculator consists of a series of assumptions, data baselines, and calculations for three categories of RGF transport: air, sea, and ground. In the discussion that follows, we also address state defense structure, diplomatic challenges, and emerging capabilities to help analysts understand the institutional dynamics that are likely to affect force movements.
All deployments-and particularly rapid, long-distance movements of large units-are complex undertakings involving many simultaneous activities. Parallel movements of units using limited infrastructure assets through an overlapping network require tight planning and syn-  The Ukraine scenario involved too many forces to allow precise analysis. However, we included it as an additional, informative scenario. Thus, we refer to it as a "+1" case throughout this report.
chronization to execute smoothly and efficiently. Although many of these processes can be examined using physics-based modeling, intangibles, such as policies, procedures, coordination across organizations, and human error-not to mention deliberate interference by an outside party-will introduce uncertainty into deployment time calculations.
To begin unwrapping this complexity, we identified the most stressing deployment time drivers in each of our scenarios, which are summarized in Table 
2
5
Air is the least economical and least efficient way to transport ground combat forces. Most Russian equipment is designed primarily for rail transport. 
7
8
2
9
10
7
8
9
12
13
14
15
It is worth noting that the Ukrainian government has owned the Antonov State Company-producer of the An-124, An-22, and other, smaller transport aircraft-since its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Russia's annexation of Crimea and ongoing military operations in eastern Ukraine led the owned company to cut ties with Russia. 
16
17
We developed our deployment calculator to describe Russian transport sorties. Airlifts are executed in sorties, or the individual mission movements of one or more aircraft. Typically, it 
11
12 Aleksey Prushinskiy, "Repair and Upgrade of Russian Non-Commercial Aircraft in 2011-2012," Moscow Defense Brief, No. 6 (44), 2014.
13 "Объединенная авиастроительная корпорация. Досье" ["United Aircraft Corporation: Dossier"], TASS, February 20, 2016.
14 "ОАК берется за ремонт шасси и крыльев" ["United Aircraft Corporation Takes on Chassis and Wing Repair"], Kommersant, October 28, 2013. takes many sorties to deploy a single ground combat unit. A sortie can be executed using multiple aircraft or using the same aircraft multiple times.
To ensure consistent comparisons across scenarios, we based our sortie calculations on equipment weight and personnel capacity. In reality, airlift plans for contingencies must take into account several other variables when determining the mix of lift platforms, as well as the actual configuration of cargo and personnel aboard the individual platforms. Force-flow priorities, spread-loading combat capabilities to minimize the impact of platform loss, and individual platform constraints in terms of total weight, weight distribution, volume, dimensions, and safety regulations will affect asset demands and closure rates. Because we did not have data on Russian airlift standards and procedures, we used maximum weights in all scenarios except for Venezuela.
Given the readiness challenges and future procurements highlighted earlier in this chapter, we assumed that 60 out of 110 Il-76s and six out of nine An-124s were available in each of the six notional scenarios. We did not include the An-22 because of low inventory and readiness and because medium-lift air platforms were generally not appropriate for the scenario needs. We used the following calculations to determine fleet mix and demands. Large and small nonmilitary aircraft are large civilian airliners used for military deployment purposes; use of civilian aircraft for troop movements is common in Russia and in other military forces.
For personnel transport, 
18
In all scenarios, we assumed that Russia would choose flight legs that would maximize cargo capacity. For Venezuela, however, the leg across the Atlantic Ocean exceeded the ranges at maximum cargo weight of both the An-124 and Il-76. Therefore, using data on platform cargo weight versus range trade-offs, we used the payloads and ranges listed in Table 
2
18
19
Route length and leg number determinations depended on assumptions about overflight and refueling access. Restrictions in several scenarios led to less-direct routes and, thus, additional legs and refueling requirements. We determined time spent at refueling stops and at aerial ports of embarkation (APOEs) and debarkation (APODs) using the total number of sorties required and maximum-on-the-ground capacity at the airfields. Across scenarios, we assumed that there would be a maximum of four aircraft on the ground at each airfield at any given time for 24-hour operations. We incorporated the number of sorties, maximum aircraft on the ground, and hours of operation into a RAND model designed for C-17 cargo aircraft using the method described in U.S. Air Force Pamphlet 10-1403, Air Mobility Planning Factors, as a proxy for large Russian transport aircraft. 
20
21
The Russian Navy lacks sufficient organic sealift assets to adequately transport and support expeditionary ground combat forces beyond Russia's borders. Post-Cold War divestment and limited immediate access to the merchant fleet has left Russia with a small sealift capability that is primarily concentrated in the Black Sea. Table 
2
20
21
The Syria Express effort to transport and resupply Russian units engaged in operations in Syria highlighted the need for Russia to enhance its capabilities to transport large numbers of troops and equipment by sea. Russian Minister of Defense Sergey Shoigu stated in August 2017, "Our main efforts must be directed into building large-tonnage ships and other universal and multi-functional ships capable of meeting the needs of the armed forces in distant maritime areas." He went on to identify a requirement for 60 or more new ships by 2020. 
22
23
24
25
In addition to lift asset constraints, Russia also faces potential risks to route and port access. The Bosporus Strait is the only way for Russia's Black Sea fleet to reach Syria and beyond. Although the 1936 Montreux Convention guarantees access to the strait, such guarantees may be waived during times of war. 
26
27
24
28
For a more efficient comparison across scenarios, we based sortie calculations on equipment numbers. In all cases except the Naval Infantry in the Kuril Islands scenario, personnel were transported primarily by air. As noted earlier, load plans for lift assets involve diverse considerations. For sealift, tiedown provisions, available floor space, possible detrimental maritime effects, and predetermined cargo compartment configuration standards are also potential limitations. 
30
2
In scenarios using Novorossiysk as the port of embarkation, we assumed that seven of 15 total Project 775 and three of four total Project 1171 ships would be available for use. 
31
29
30 Tiedown provisions are planning factors for strapping equipment to ship or aircraft decks. Floor space is the available space on a ship or aircraft deck to position equipment. Detrimental maritime effects include accelerated metal rusting, corrosion of electronic equipment, and other salt-air and -spray effects. Other limitations include overhead space restrictions; oddly shaped equipment; bulkhead, deck, or overhead irregularities; and hazardous material regulations or concerns. 
31
2
To determine sealift closure times, we assumed a 24-hour initial load time at the sea port of embarkation (SPOE). Unload times once ships reached the sea port of debarkation (SPOD) depended on the number of ships and the capacity of the ports in each scenario. When data were not available, we generally assumed that developed ports could handle four roll-on/rolloff ships over a 24-hour period, and we did not assign unload limits to those amphibious landing sorties. Finally, we assumed that the steam rate for vessels was 18 knots. However, due to Russia's limited organic capacity, vessels may be required to make multiple sorties back and forth between the SPOE and SPOD.
Given Russia's large geographic expanse, rail transport is essential for rapid deployment and sustainment of troops, particularly in the areas around its borders. In fact, rail is so vital to contingency and even steady-state operations that there is a separate branch of Railway Troops, consisting of ten brigades and several independent battalions that provide maintenance, opera- tions, and security support in their assigned military districts. 
32
2
33
34
35
36
32
37
For easier comparison across the scenarios, we based our rail calculations on equipment and personnel. These calculations assumed that railcar availability would not be not a limiting factor, although, in practice, there may be delays in redirecting railcars to load points. To determine railcar demand, we assumed a railcar length of 15.4 meters and a maximum axle weight of 23.5 metric tons. 
38
B
We calculated convoy closure times using an unclassified Microsoft Excel tool available through the U.S. Army Combined Arms Support Command Deployer's Toolbox for road marches, inputting requirements for the number of vehicles, vehicle spacing (day and night), 
37
February 7, 2017. 38
Travel time Unloading at destination speeds (day and night), and time spent halted for rest or maintenance. 
39
We designed the calculator for our notional scenarios, but we built it with real-world data. It provides a practical and reasonably accurate tool to determine baseline lift requirements and closure times for the movement of Russian ground combat forces from point to point. With the OOB, any user could apply the calculator to a notional scenario and develop a reasonable estimate of RGF deployment activities. However, given the aforementioned data caveats, we recommend relying on more-accurate data, if available. Note that changes in data for lift platforms would necessarily change the calculations: Each calculation is derived from unclassified OOB assumptions about each type of equipment.
This chapter presents one of our notional scenarios, the Kuril Islands, to illustrate the scenario development process. The companion report provides similar but less comprehensive background and context for the other scenarios. 1
Building from our case-study analyses, deployment calculation estimates, and refined assessment criteria, we selected and designed notional cases of RGF ground force deployment. The goal was for these scenarios to be (1) research-grounded and able to facilitate analytic forecasting, (2) unclassified and suitable for wargaming and simulation, and (3) controlled test cases drawn from a transparent, unclassified OOB that would allow us to implement our RGF deployment calculator. It is important to note that we emphasized plausibility over likelihood to generate a variety of deployment conditions: We prioritized testing RGF deployment capabilities across a range of scenarios at various distances and intensity levels over selecting only those scenarios that seemed very likely to occur. For example, we selected what we determined, in consultation with subject-matter experts, to be a low-likelihood but generally plausible lowintensity Venezuela deployment to stress test Russian long-range deployment capabilities. 
2
3
4
Connable et al., 2020. 2
• place a contingent of combat-ready RGF troops on the ground outside Russia's borders • capture a range of deployment distances • require different types of ground, overflight, and naval capabilities and levels of access • could be reasonably described using our OOB • are plausible even if they are not likely, given current political conditions. Building from our historic case studies and subject-matter expert input, and applying these criteria, we selected six cases for analysis: (1) Kazakhstan, (2) Kuril Islands, (3) Tajikistan, (4) Serbia, (5) Syria, and ( 
6
Each scenario starts with a notional 2019 road to war briefly describing a plausible series of events leading to the Russian deployment. We selected 2019 for two reasons. First, two years from 2017 was far enough into the future to help suspend disbelief that might emerge in a nearer-term notional event. Second, two years was also a sufficiently brief period to ensure that the underlying assumptions about the notional political situations and in the unclassified OOB remained relevant: We would not have to account for notional major improvements or degradation of Russian military or civilian transport capabilities.
To the extent possible, we built each notional scenario from real-world information. For example, the entire OOB, including the locations of bases and patterns of movement, represent real-world analysis. We extrapolated only to generate the notional sequence of events. This included creating reasonable political and deployment conditions in team discussions and in scenario review sessions with our subject-matter experts. Given our analytic focus on capacity, lift, and speed, the scenarios capture pre-combat movement and not the combat that occurs after deployment. Russian military units in the scenarios were drawn directly from the OOB. Distances were obtained using Google Earth Pro. The process for developing the Kuril Islands scenario, discussed next, is representative of our approach.
In the Kuril Islands scenario, Russia is faced with a perceived threat from Japan in this archipelago located approximately 350 kilometers from Russia's Sakhalin Island and approximately 650 kilometers from Russia's territorial coastline. Russia and Japan have long argued over the sovereignty of the southern Kuril islands of Iturup and Kunashir. In the scenario, Japan postures forces on Kunashir; Russia deploys to Iturup to disrupt a prospective invasion and, possibly, to attack the Japanese forces on Kunashir.
while some cases just above this threshold met our other criteria. It is useful to reiterate here that the data on personnel per deployment are inconsistent and not provable.
The following four figures present background and context for the scenario. Figure 
3
Figure 
3
Figure 
3
The Eastern Military District joint task force reinforces Iturup and seizes the islands of Kunashir, Shikotan, and Habomai to defeat Japanese forces and reclaim the sovereign integrity of Russian territories before the hard freeze of winter.
with MV-22s (Osprey tiltrotor aircraft), infantry combat vehicles, APCs, and limited amphibious assault vehicles
18th Machine Gun Artillery Division and border guards Supporting units: Long-range aviation; aerial resupply; national-level intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; and Spetsnaz
1. Establish secure air and sea lines of communication from mainland Russia to Iturup to support resupply and flow of reinforcement forces onto the island.
2. Reinforce Russian forces on Iturup to deny further Japanese force expansion and build forces in preparation for the next phase.
3. Seize Kunashir, Shikotan, and Habomai islands.
is Japanese fires into the area of operations and against Russian forces on the ground at Iturup. Political decisions, resource limitations, and military exigency often upset rational planning models. Our notional forces included ground, air, and sea forces with long-range defensive and offensive missile capabilities. Figure 
3
Figure 
3
Figure 
3
Figure 
3
An ultranationalist Japanese government comes to power in 2019 vowing to uphold territorial claims, such as to the "northern territories" of Etorofu (Iturup), Kunashiri (Kunashir), Shikotan, and Habomai islands.
After the election, Russia bolsters its presence on Kunashir, which hosts part of its 18th Machine Gun Artillery Division and coastal defense cruise missile systems. It also conducts Naval Infantry rotational deployments.
After conducting joint exercises with U.S. forces in October, Japanese forces launch surprise air-and sea-based attacks. Japanese aircraft strike while destroyers and frigates patrol Kunashir. Japan deploys short-range air defense assets to the island. The United States claims it is unaware of Japan's plans but reaffirms its treaty commitment to defend the Japanese homeland if it is attacked.
Russia establishes a joint task force from its Eastern Military District to regain control of its former land in the east.
The Kuril Islands stretch from northeast Japan to eastern Kamchatka, Russia. 
Russia believes that if Japan controls even part of the island chain, the United States could negotiate basing rights to the Kurils. This would directly threaten Russia.
Iturup is the only Russian source for the rare metal rhenium, which is critically important for electronics production.
U.S. treaty commitments to Japan will influence Russian decisionmaking about strikes on Japan (e.g., ballistic missile defense, air power, sea power).
NOTE: SSBN = ship, submersible, ballistic missile, a nuclear missile-equipped submarine.
Spetsnaz. 
5
6
Figure 
3
5
6
7
3
For this scenario, Russia has notionally decided to deploy a combination of Naval Infantry, air assault, air defense, and motorized rifle troops as the core of the ground combat contingent within the larger joint force. The ground deployment is supported by a mix of combat aviation, submarines, and naval escort ships to secure the lines of communication and to provide close air support and deep interdiction strikes as needed. Each unit symbol is shown on the map. These symbols are U.S. military operational graphics depicting unit type, size, and, in some cases, unit designator. 
8
3
7
8
3
Figure 
3
Figure 
3
The following figures illustrate the movement plan in greater detail. Figure 
3
Support vehicles 560
Navy ships and subs 14
• 2 squadrons (25) Su-35s
• 2 squadrons (28) Su-30s
• 1 squadron (12) Su-34s
• 2 squadrons (24) Su-24s 
Reinforce Russian forces on Iturup to deny further Japanese force expansion and build forces in preparation for phase 3. Seek to deploy within 36 hours of notification.
Seize Kunashir, Shikotan, and Habomai islands as soon as forces are available and conditions on islands permit. All units will conduct some road or rail movement to either an SPOE or an APOE. From there, they load onto ships or aircraft, move to the debarkation area, and offload at an SPOD or APOD. In this scenario, the units that move by sea require additional ground movement to the joint assembly area to prepare for the combat assault.
Our analysis of this air movement suggests that multiple sorties would be required using organic military transport aircraft alone. It would take approximately 3.5 days to move the entire force from the APOE to offload at the APOD. Note that this 3.5-day estimate does not include the time it would take to release a combat order, select units, prepare for deployment, and move units by ground from their bases to the port of embarkation. For nonairborne units, this could add days, weeks, or even months to a deployment. For a ready-alert airborne unit on 72-hour deployment notice, this might result in a best-case air closure time of 8.5 days (3.5 days from APOE to APOD plus five additional days) from the point at which the Russian political leadership decided to conduct the operation. Table 
3
These rough estimates of additional time apply only to the most-ready VDV units. A Russian BTG in an organization like the 5th Combined Arms Army might be at any point in its normal training and readiness cycle when the unit selection process is completed. It might be prepared to deploy within 72 hours but, in all likelihood, it would take up to ten days to prepare for deployment-hence our "immediately ready" category in Figure 
3
Figure 
3
Closure can take even longer as movement friction and deviations compound the normal challenges associated with deployment preparation. Figure 
3
Figures 3.17 and 3.18 present assumptions and possible deviations for sealift. Figure 
3
This trade-off between speed and risk presents something of a no-win situation for the Russian commander. There is a choice between closing the force so slowly that it loses all surprise and momentum or closing the force quickly at the risk of losing any reasonable chance of success in combat. Second-wave sea movement is the critical weak point in the Russian ground force deployment. Also note that the loss of any organic amphibious ships would undercut the Russian amphibious operation from Iturup to Kunashir. Movement of the ground force elements from the assembly area to the objective area-a phase of the operation that we did not assess in our scenario-would be quite challenging even with all available amphibious ships.
As with air movement calculations, the sea movement calculations represent only the port-to-port shipment of RGF units. Using the same calculations in Table 
3
3
Figure 
3
• Additional commercial aircraft can be used for cargo and personnel if risk is low. • If risk of interdiction is high, there will be increased reliance on organic assets with slower closure times. • Alternative: High risk of air interdiction requires shift to sealift, which will slow closure; ships are also vulnerable.
Japan attempts to interdict transport aircraft as they fly past Hokkaido.
Fighter escorts, additional sorties to distribute cargo and minimize loss of combat power per aircraft lost sian shipping en route to the Kuril Islands. 9 Japanese F-15-class fighter-bombers operating out of Chitose Air Base on Hokkaido are also within strike range of Iturup Airfield and the surrounding waters. 10 Japanese commanders could choose to forward deploy aircraft to Mendeleyevo Airfield in central Kunashir Island, located approximately 100 nautical miles 
9
10 Japanese Air Self-Defense Force, undated.  
• Naval Infantry equipment and some personnel travel by sea using organic assets and land near the Burevestnik Airfield marshaling area. Personnel who do not fit on amphibious ships travel by air. • Fleet is adequate for initial wave and does not require roundtrips to close the force.
• Force needs 1 day to load to SPOE, 36 hours to unload at beaches near Burevestnik Airfield, with sea travel at 18 knots. 
We assume that route 1 is taken by longer-range vessels, route 2 for short-range movement to avoid use of Vladivostok. NOTE: The analysis did not include motor transport or other support units. Adding these units would increase lift demands and closure times. Because of the short reaction time required, it is assumed that the only amphibious assets available are those in the Pacific Fleet, including two Project 775/II, one Project 775/I, one Project 1171, one Project 21820, one Project 11770, and three Project 1176 vessels. Smaller vessels are faster than larger vessels but have shorter operational ranges.
Release combat order 0.5 
Bastion-Ps (Russia)
Long-range anti-ship missiles (Japan) NOTE: The S-300 and S-400 are Russian air defense missile systems. The K-300 Bastion-P is a mobile coastal defense anti-ship missile system. Range rings for these systems were estimated by averaging ranges from multiple sources during our OOB analysis.
from the Iturup Airfield.
11
12
Each of our scenarios focuses on Russian ground combat deployments to conflicts against local forces. We treated U.S. interdiction as a separate variable. In the Kuril Islands scenario, we examined the threat posed by the Japanese Self-Defense Forces and only indirectly addressed the possibility of U.S. interdiction. Although we do not present a detailed analysis of U.S. involvement in the scenario, reconnaissance and strike elements based in Japan would be well positioned to make the Russian operation all but untenable without significant reinforcement of strategic air and naval assets.
In this notional scenario, the Russian commander was able to quickly deploy sufficient forces to secure the few built-up areas on Iturup and establish a reasonably capable air defense umbrella. However, massing sufficient forces to attack and seize Kunashir would be significantly more challenging. Wave 2 of the sea movement highlights the general shortcomings in contemporary RGF deployment capability outside of Russia's Western and Southern military districts. Lack of sufficient organic transport and amphibious vessels makes the operational concept untenable if the commander assumes the possibility of Japanese interdiction. Thus, Russia must accept a safe but slow two-month closure of its ground force or risk a Japanese attack en route on large commercial ships. The threat of Japanese interdiction could be mitigated but not eliminated by the use of escort vessels and aircraft operating out of the Eastern Military District.
Even with escort, screening, and air defense, it would be almost impossible to prevent just one Japanese aircraft, land-based missile, or submarine from striking a vulnerable nonmilitary roll-on/roll-off ship and sending a quarter of the Russian force to the bottom of the Sea of Japan or the Sea of Okhotsk. Loss of two or three organic naval ship assets over the course of the two-month deployment might set Russia back, but we assume that it would move additional ships into place over the two-month deployment to make up for maintenance and combat losses.
This scenario examined only one of many possible operational approaches to securing Iturup. Another approach would be to attack the Japanese to the south, on Kunashir, to dis-rupt attacks on the Russian deployment. This could be accomplished with direct amphibious assault, airborne assault from the Russian mainland, or both. Direct assault on Kunashir (or perhaps even raids into northern Hokkaido) would significantly improve Russia's prospect of surprise. If executed vigorously with the support of air, naval, and, perhaps, long-range groundbased missile strikes, it could succeed.
However, this approach has many significant limiting factors, including the small number of available Russian amphibious ships and transport aircraft, the relative size of the Japanese defending force against the initial wave of Russian forces, and the difficulty of reinforcing and resupplying the initial invasion force from safe Russian ports (outside the range of Japanese interdiction and well within the main Russian SAM network). Moving directly to Iturup with air defense, electronic defense, and immediate resupply capabilities for the attacking force is the only logical approach. Unfortunately for the Russians, in this notional scenario, the logical approach appears to be operationally unsound.
Although Chapter Four draws findings from our notional scenarios, we do not present the other cases in the same detail as this one. For a more thorough treatment of the five other scenarios that informed our analysis, as well as our +1 Ukraine scenario, see the companion report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios. 
13
This chapter presents our analysis of RGF deployment capabilities. It is derived from the three components of our research: (1) the historical case studies, (2) OOB analysis, and (3) notional scenarios. We viewed the notional scenarios as an analytic tool to derive real-world conclusions about Russian deployment capability. All the calculations in the scenarios were made using real-world planning considerations and actual-if only generally accurate-Russian equipment and transportation network data. Our analysis focused on the movement of forces to the area of operations.
The first part of this chapter presents aggregated results from the six notional scenarios, showing where the RGF and the military transport system were stressed by operational requirements. Then, we examine observed strengths and weaknesses in the ground combat deployment system. We conclude with our summary analysis of the RGF's overall deployment capability.
Our notional scenarios ranged from high-to low-intensity, with deployment distances ranging from border to far. In each scenario, Russia was required to deploy a joint task force centering on an RGF BTG.
Table 
4
1
Rows in Table 
4
The final row in the table presents analytic notes on the major stress points. These stress points are color-coded according to the level of demand placed on Russian lift capabilities or the time required to deploy to an area of operations (closure time). These ratings required some subject-matter expertise in interpreting the data. Given the structural differences between the scenarios, it was not possible to develop a precise numeric rating scale. Our color-coding is therefore descriptive rather than empirically conclusive.
For asset availability, green indicates that the required force does not stress the overall force availability of the RGF, the airlift requirement does not stress overall available air transport aircraft availability, and the sealift requirement does not stress overall available sea transport asset availability. Yellow indicates low-moderate stress on any of these three assets. In other words, the deployment would cause Russian leaders to carefully consider asset availability for other mission requirements. Orange indicates high-moderate stress on any of these assets: The deployment would force Russian leaders to make practical trade-offs with other missions and, perhaps, lower operational tempo elsewhere.
Red indicates high stress or excess demand on any of the three assets. For example, the red shading for airlift to Venezuela in wave 1 shows high stress on Russian military airlift capabilities. The tyranny of distance, restrictive overflight access, inadequate refueling stopover access, and long routes require transport aircraft to carry less cargo. This deployment would use so many assets that it would necessarily require the cancellation of other national missions and would make additional missions requiring airlift deployment untenable. In our analysis of sealift requirements for the Kuril Islands case, we determined that organic sealift was insufficient to meet the mission requirement: The 60 or more days required to move forces in the second wave made the deployment all but untenable using organic military sealift.
Assigning colors to closure times required slightly more subjectivity than the assessments of calculated lift requirements. The central requirement for green coding was mission demand: Did the closure time allow the commander to execute the assigned mission in a timely and effective manner? In the Kazakhstan case, the force closed in seven days from port of embarkation to port of debarkation. We assessed this to be timely and sufficient to allow the commander to effectively employ the force. In the Syria case, in which the RGF deployed a ground force to rescue an encircled Russian ground combat element, we determined that the estimated 32-day closure time placed the mission at high-moderate risk.
Table 
4
There are clear disparities between the cases, resulting primarily from the unique mix of forces, distances, route availability, and geography that affect the deployments. For example, there are far more red (highly stressing) factors for the border Kazakhstan scenario than for the near Tajikistan scenario. Although the straight-line distance favors Russia in the Kazakhstan scenario, the larger number of forces, the geography of the movement, and the types of Moderate stress on resources or restrictions on speed and forces.
High stress on resources and restrictions on speed and forces.
forces required for movement in that scenario place greater strains on the RGF and supporting organizations. These conclusions do not mean that the RGF could not or would not seek to execute a given mission. In each case, we note that the Russian military could choose to hire or acquire civilian transport capability to help close the force. In some cases, this would make the closure time far more efficient. For example, in Chapter Three, we described the differences in closure time between organic and civilian transport-augmented movements at approximately 58 days (five to six days versus 63). All military forces, including the U.S. military, make wide use of civilian transport. Russia has demonstrated the effective use of civilian transport in Syria.
However, reliance on civilian transport comes with trade-offs. These assets are not specifically designed for military use. They are not camouflaged, they do not carry organic selfdefense or military damage-control measures, and they are crewed by civilian workers who might or might not have experience working under combat conditions. Furthermore, military forces do not carry spare parts for nonmilitary lift assets, and these assets are not designed to carry the wide variety of military equipment that accompanies a standard BTG. 
2
3
2
for the deployment of the wave 1, combat-ready airborne force at approximately seven days, not taking into account the likely additional five days on either end of the port-to-port movement.
These calculations, case analyses, and overall findings only reflect the application of our RGF deployment calculator and ratio-of-forces analysis. We were able to draw several additional observations and conclusions from our research concerning Russia's ability to deploy ground combat forces. We were also able to draw additional conclusions about Russian capabilities. The remainder of this chapter describes various strengths and weaknesses in Russian ground combat deployment capability, with a continuing emphasis on force capacity, lift capacity, and speed of deployment.
Military reforms under Russian President Vladimir Putin, structural reorganization, equipment modernization, and combat experience in places like Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine have helped reshape the RGF from the immediate post-Soviet doldrums into what many analysts believe to be an effective combat force with at least a moderate capacity for worldwide deployment. 
4
In this section, we make some comparisons between Russian and U.S. military equipment. These comparisons are presented to provide context for the primary audience of this report-U.S. military leaders, staff planners, and analysts-and a better understanding of the mobility of Russian equipment.
5
Russia developed its modern military capabilities with the express purpose of defending against a NATO ground invasion, nuclear attack, or both. This motivation necessarily led to a force and military base distribution that prioritized the western border area that now runs generally from Murmansk in the north to Dagestan in the south. Requirements to move efficiently along interior lines of communication, to rush forces to the front, and, if necessary, to mass forces to attack westward all demanded the creation of a dense network of rail, road, and airport links and nodes in western Russia. This western emphasis aligned with the natural development of Russia's population centers and civil transport networks. Russian ground forces can execute rapid, effective, and efficient road, rail, and short-range air movements within, between, and from the Western and Southern military districts using primarily organic transportation capabilities.
Operations within and near the Western and Southern military districts are also far less vulnerable to interdiction than deployments from the Central and Eastern districts and to areas far beyond the western border region. The Soviet Union viewed NATO air-delivered precision strike as a central threat. To counter this threat, Soviet (and, later, Russian) military leaders built up a dense IADS running along the western border and centered on the area west of Moscow. 
6
Terrain also gives the RGF an advantage in these districts. A lack of major terrain features, such as mountains or seas, between the border with Norway in the north and the edge of the Caucasus Mountains in the south has always made western Russia vulnerable to ground invasion. However, the relatively flat, open expanses that characterize many parts of Eastern Europe also provide an advantage in enhancing the speed and efficiency of ground deployments to these areas. Some river crossings might be required in an extreme combat situation, but, in general, bridge availability, bridge capacity, ground water saturation in low-lying areas, and urban buildup are the only significant terrain-limiting factors to east-west ground movement. There are no seas or mountain ranges to cross to move Russian forces into Eastern Europe. Matters grow a bit more complex in the Southern Military District, where the Caucasus Mountains straddle Russia's border. However, Russia proved capable of overcoming this barrier during its 2008 Georgia campaign.
Our OOB analysis shows a trend toward Russian acquisition of larger and, in some cases, outsized military rolling stock. 
7
8
9
10
Russian special operations forces (primarily Spetsnaz) and airborne forces (VDV) are generally highly capable and ready to deploy on short notice. Spetsnaz are the go-to units for Russian political and military leaders, and, at the time of this research, they were engaged in Syria, possibly eastern Ukraine, and other combat zones. Russia has a long history of developing capable airborne forces. This development process, which began during the Soviet period, has culminated in the present-day VDV. 
12
13
At the outset of this research effort, we surmised that the RGF was not as capable of deploying far outside of Russia's Western and Southern military districts as it was within or near those two districts. We believed that the Syria deployment included in our historical case studies was impressive on its face but revealed weaknesses that might reflect broader limitations across the force. Analysis confirmed this assessment: Several serious limiting factors need to be considered when assessing Russia's ability to deploy ground combat forces beyond its borders, and particularly beyond the two most heavily weighted military districts under the cover of the Russian air defense network. These factors pertain to organization and movement; in considering them here, we can gain insights that complement or expand upon the findings from the application of our RGF deployment calculator. Executing the notional scenarios in a wargame or military combat simulation would help answer further questions about the combat effectiveness of deployed RGF units.
Russia's armed forces comprise a mix of contract and conscript soldiers. Contract soldiers are usually volunteers who are available for worldwide deployment without major restrictions. 15 11 U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, 2015a, ch. 4, p. 4; "M1A2 SEP," Military-Today, undated.
12 David M. Glantz, The Soviet Airborne Experience, Fort Leavenworth, Kan.: Combat Studies Institute, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, November 1984; Rod Thornton, Organizational Change in the Russian Airborne Forces: The Lessons of the Georgian Conflict, Carlisle Barracks, Pa.: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, December 2011. 
13
TASS, March 11, 2016. 14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
In practice, these policies appear to be rather flimsy. It is not clear that a presidential decree carries the same weight as a law, and, in any event, it is possible that Putin could violate his own decree as he sees fit. Hesitation seems to be more closely associated with the risk of domestic disapproval that attended the reliance on poorly trained conscripts in the Afghanistan and Chechnya deployments. Although evidence is thin, there have been many reported cases of conscripts quietly deployed to operations in Ukraine. 
22
23
24
All these efforts to work around or compensate for deployment restrictions suggest that, barring a massive conventional war with a peer competitor, Russia cannot practicably deploy all-or perhaps even most-of its available RGF units overseas into combat without risk of significant social and political blowback. Therefore, while we assess that 215 BTGs may be available for combat deployment, in practice, it is possible that Russian political leaders would consider deploying only a small percentage of those units not already committed to homeland defense or other operations. 
25
Analysis of the Soviet military in the 1980s, during the period of the Afghanistan War and the eventual decline of the Soviet Union, showed a marked drop in popular enthusiasm for military service. This coincided with a decline in conscription and an increase in conscription dodging and both legal and illegal deferments. 
26
27
One might think back to dire U.S. assessments of Soviet military power during the Cold War and draw unreliable comparisons with today's RGF. At the height of its late-period power, the Soviet Army and other ground forces numbered approximately 2.1 million personnel out of an overall military force of more than 4 million. 
28
29
30
4
As noted earlier, civilian or nonmilitary government assets can help compensate for a lack of organic military lift capacity. Civil transportation and state mobilization assets certainly support deployability. However, organic asset availability best reflects immediate deployment capacity: If the military owns it, it can use it for any purpose. Military aircraft and ships can be deployed to combat areas with far fewer considerations than civilian assets. Nonmilitary assets are less reliably available and more physically vulnerable, particularly under combat conditions. Looking solely at organic capability, less is less. In other words, fewer troops-and, specifically, fewer contract troops-on the RGF payroll equates to fewer deployable troops and less deployment capability. Less organic lift means less capability to move troops and equipment, a lower Lower capacity in comparison to the late and immediate post-Soviet periods may be reflected in the case studies discussed in Appendix A. The Soviet military was quite active well beyond its borders, routinely deploying to far locations and often with fairly large force packages. Soviet leaders twice deployed division-sized elements to far locations and twice deployed corps-sized elements to near locations. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation has executed only one far deployment consisting of approximately one ground combat brigade. It is not clear that lowered activity is directly related to lower capacity. Political considerations and decisions certainly factored into the lower operational tempo of the Russian armed forces after 1991. However, lower capacity also affects political decisionmaking: Less capacity equates to limited options and increased risk. Putting aside the impossible task of assigning causality to this trend, it is sufficient to say that sharply lowered capacity coincided with sharply lowered long-range deployment capability.
Collectively, our case studies, OOB analysis, and notional scenarios revealed a significant gap in ground force sustainability beyond Russia's borders, as well as outside of the border deployment area around the Western and Southern military districts. Lack of an overarching deployment authority equivalent to U.S. Transportation Command makes deployment a devolved and often inefficient process; there is no unifying institutional function for joint deployment. Standards for sustainment, identification of joint transportation gaps, transportation intelligence, detailed studies targeting deployment improvements, and other sustainment activities that U.S. Transportation Command conducts for the United States are dispersed across various Russian military organizations and programs.
This report detailed significant gaps in Russia's organic sustainment capability. Its recent deployment to Syria highlighted a lack of organic naval sustainment. This gap is more acute for forces afloat: The lack of sufficient organic naval resupply and refueling ships is a known shortfall. 
31
4
Border deployment capacity using organic assets is limited primarily by military district: It is stronger in the west and weaker in the east. But the impact of distance in the border cases is primarily related to time. Russia can effectively sustain a deployment in the east if it has more time to prepare. As shown in Figure 
4
Sustainment can be improved by using nonorganic assets, with the time and distance caveats noted earlier. Figure 
4
Russia has few consistent and reliable international allies. This is particularly true beyond Central Asia, where it retains considerable influence and even, as in Tajikistan, an ongoing military presence. Russia's western border is effectively bounded by inhospitable NATO states. A large part of its southern border is bounded by China, a nation that is unlikely to provide overflight or basing rights to Russia in situations that do not directly benefit Chinese interests. With the collapse of the international communist order, and given Russia's current nonideological approach to policy, there is little incentive for nation-states to fully commit to Russian alliance or hegemony. 
32
33
Figure 
4
34
Combat sharply increases demand for sustainment and reduces near and far organic sustainability Brigade (+) sustainment Barely sufficient for battalion (+) implies a good but inconsistent relationship that may or may not generate access depending on the scenario. "Non-NATO restricted" indicates that these non-NATO states would be unlikely to provide access to Russia in most situations. And "NATO restricted" applies to NATO states that would be unlikely to provide access to Russia in most situations. For many countries, we had insufficient information for coding.
The map suggests that Russia must navigate narrow sea channels, execute torturous air routes, and rely on insufficient long-term organic air and sea sustainment assets to move and sustain its forces beyond the border deployment range in any scenario that might involve diplomatic restrictions on movement or an outright threat to Russian transportation assets.
Absent a comprehensive analysis of Russian sea and air combat power and a comparative analysis of U.S. and allied military power, we can provide only a subject-matter expert assessment the vulnerability of Russian lines of communication, shown in Figure 
4
Non-NATO restricted (generally unavailable) NATO restricted (generally unavailable) Insufficient information for rating or highly flexible relationship with Russia communication successfully in border cases. However, there are differences between western and eastern deployments: Western deployments are less vulnerable due to capability differences.
In near cases, Russian forces are vulnerable along their lines of communication in that they can extend air and naval escort to protect assets, but only with great difficulty due to sustainment and access limitations. For example, in the Kuril Islands scenario, Russian shorebased air defense assets provide limited security at their maximum range, and Russia has the organic capability to sustain guided-missile ships and other combat platforms outside of the shore-based defense umbrella. Vulnerability in near cases increases as assets move beyond the shore-based umbrella.
Far cases are highly vulnerable. National assets, such as IADS, protect lines of communication for only a short portion of the port-to-port journey. Access limitations that result in narrow and torturous transit routes apply to both sustainment and combat assets, and narrow channeling through NATO (e.g., Bosporus) or non-NATO but U.S. allied air and shipping lanes (e.g., Japan) creates vulnerabilities by proximity: Russian assets may have the right to move through narrow channels close to hostile states, but in doing so they expose their assets to strike. Flying over or transiting through waters controlled by hostile states is always an option, but it is quite dangerous for obvious reasons. Figure 
4
We offer two examples to help illustrate our vulnerability assessment. Figure 
4
Figure 
4
Vulnerable NOTE: Vulnerability varies depending on deployment location and differences in capabilities. For example, western deployments are less vulnerable than other deployments.
Highly vulnerable a far case. Russian line-of-communication security in the Ukraine case is excellent: Forces are operating primarily by ground and wholly under the IADS. 
35
In the Tajikistan case, Russia reinforces its existing, albeit relatively small, military presence. As in the Ukraine border case, Russia deploys primarily by ground, but the distances and terrain make the deployment more difficult. Tajikistan is closer to the Central Military District, which has relatively less capability than the Western and Southern districts. This area is protected by some organic long-range air defense assets, but it is not under the umbrella of the dense western IADS. In this case, Russia can use 24 combat aircraft, 13 SAM systems, and 54 man-portable air defense systems to defend the force and secure the sustainment corridors. In this notional scenario, we assumed the continuing presence of U.S. airpower in Afghanistan, including F-16 and A-10 strike aircraft capable of conducting strikes against the Russian force.
High vulnerability becomes apparent in the Venezuela case. Russia would be very hard pressed to deploy long-range fighter aircraft to support this deployment at each leg of the journey. It would be equally hard pressed to deploy combat ships to escort its transport vessels from Russia to Venezuela. Even a limited escort capability would be highly vulnerable to the worldwide strike assets available to the United States, should it choose to intervene. These threats include B-2 stealth bombers that can attack globally from the continental United 35 Note that the IADS rings in the figure are purposely imprecise and included for illustration only. States; combat ships, including aircraft carriers supporting strike aircraft and refuelers; and long-range attack submarines. In the notional Venezuela scenario, Russia deployed 24 SAM systems, three anti-aircraft artillery systems, and two missile ships. This firepower is inadequate to defend against a dedicated U.S. military strike. The figure includes examples of U.S. expeditionary ground combat forces-the 82nd Airborne Division, the Marine Corps, and the 75th Ranger Regiment-to highlight the vulnerability of the deployed Russian force at the objective area.
Figure 4.7 presents our concluding assessment of RGF deployment capability, which consolidates the strength and weakness assessments presented in this chapter. Here, capability refers to a collective assessment of capacity, access, speed, and sustainability during the initial phase of a deployment; we did not assess Russia's ability to sustain a deployed force over time. Vulnerability is a combination of physical vulnerability to strike and the stress of access restrictions on line-of-communication security.
This summary assessment shows that Russia can deploy its ground forces in a relatively limited area adjacent to its western border. Based on the preceding analyses, discussions with experts on the Russian military, and our own subject-matter expertise, we rate Russia's ability to deploy ground forces as unlimited within its borders, despite some east-west limitations; high-capacity in 13 countries outside of Russia; mid-capacity in 12 countries; limited-capacity in 17 countries; and restricted in the remaining countries. 36 Note that the RGF would be hard pressed to sustain a deployed force in any limited-or restricted-capacity deployment without significant support from an ally or partner. We defined RGF deployment capacity as follows:
• Unlimited: Rapid deployment of a large ground force is possible with minimal operational risk. • High capacity: Time and terrain are the only serious limiting factors.
• Mid capacity: Russian forces are vulnerable to interdiction, adding time and terrain limitations. • Limited capacity: There is a significant risk of interdiction, and forces must travel longer distances from Russian bases. • Restricted: Slow timelines for all but the smallest forces, lack of capacity, and significant risk.
Deployment capacity degrades within Russia from west to east, but this is in great part a factor of time: sufficient lead time can reduce the west-east power differential. Deployment capacity drops off sharply beyond the border cases. We do not find that Russia has effective ground force deployment capability in any prospective far case anywhere in the world: In each of these cases, it would be constrained by its lack of organic assets, lack of access, and vulnerability to interdiction. Removing the possibility of interdiction from this equation still does not give Russia a significant capability with organic assets: The limits imposed by conscript forces 
36
A variety of factors sharply limit Russia's ability to deploy the RGF worldwide, including lack of materiel capacity; shortage of organic lift capacity; conscript service limitations; inadequate international overflight, transit, and basing access; inadequate long-range sustainment; and high vulnerability to interdiction beyond the Russian IADS.
To present a credible, well-rounded global threat to its adversaries, shore up allies and partners, effect forcible entry, and hold territory in contested spaces, Russia needs to be able to move ground combat task forces around the world. The RGF is the core of Russia's conventional ground combat power. If the Russian joint force has a sharply limited ability to deploy the RGF outside the immediate area around the Western and Southern military districts, our analysis suggests that Russia's status as a reemerging global military power is at least questionable.
Our analysis provides only one part of the answer to a question of great complexity, one that is perhaps of existential interest to some allies of the United States: What is Russia's current capacity to project ground combat power? We showed how many forces Russia can physically move over a given distance and a given period of time. Power projection includes deployment, but also the ability to fight at the far end of the deployment arc. For example, Russia might be able to deploy a ground combat brigade to the Kuril Islands, but how capable would this deployed force be against a given adversary? What if it had to fight the Japanese Self-Defense Forces, even for a limited period? What if the United States intervened with all its military power in an extended conflict? Understanding power projection requires a deeper analysis of force composition, training, will to fight, and physical capabilities, as well as a comparative analysis of effectiveness against a given adversary in a given context. Some generalizations could then be drawn about intrinsic Russian ground combat power. These generalizationsintegrating deployment capacity and combat capability-could be used to create a ground combat power projection model that could be applied to many different scenarios.
Such a model would be a valuable planning tool for the U.S. military-and for the U.S. Army in particular-and it would be worth the investment required to build an accurate and realistic one.
Whereas the Soviet Union frequently deployed forces well beyond its borders, the Russian Federation has deployed to only a single far case. 
7
8
9
7
8
9
None of the adversaries in the post-1945 cases threatened Russian ground troops or transport vessels with massed long-range artillery; multiple-sortie precision aerial strikes; highlevel electronic, electro-optical, or space reconnaissance capabilities; cruise missile attacks; submarine-launched anti-ship missiles and torpedoes; or other components of advanced military forces. With the exception of the U.S. sea embargo of Russian transport shipping during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, since 1945, no near-peer adversary has seriously threatened or struck the ground, sea, or air lines of communication needed to support a Russian ground combat deployment. 
10
Since World War II, Russia has, albeit with notable inconsistencies, maintained one of the world's premier ground combat forces. For most of the Cold War, the Soviet Army was the dominant land force in Europe. Soviet leaders routinely deployed ground combat forces around the world ranging from small advisory groups to corps-sized land armies. In many cases, the Soviets were able to secure their lines of communication using large surface and subsurface warfare fleets, long-range air arms, and a network of allied states willing to host Soviet military assets. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian military has waned and then waxed. Operations in the early to mid-1990s were few and disastrous. The 1994 attack on Grozny, Chechnya, marked a historic low point. The Second Chechen War, beginning in 1999, marked a turning point. Operations there, in Georgia, and now in Ukraine and Syria have demonstrated Russian resilience and military power.
But recent successes in places like Crimea and Syria should be viewed through an objective lens. In comparison with Chechnya in 1994, the post-2000 operations give the impression of a rapidly improving and expanding Russian ground force power projection capability. Comparisons with the late Soviet period offer a different perspective. Russia's military deployments in the post-Soviet period are anemic compared with Soviet activity. Even the well-publicized success in Syria looks middling next to the massive (albeit near) ground operation in Tajikistan or even the far ground advisory operation in Egypt in the 1960s. Peeling back Russian propaganda reveals the single beyond-border, post-Soviet deployment-Syria-to be as much a story of inadequacy as it is a story of potency and global power. The RGF is strong, capable, and dangerous when it is closely pinned to its western and southwestern military infrastructure. Thus far, Russia has not demonstrated an ability to globally project its ground combat power while sustaining the levels of strength and capability that it enjoys within its borders. In other words, Syria is no Manchuria. 
This appendix summarizes the OOB that we developed for the RGF and the associated forces that we considered in our analysis, as well as these equipment characteristics that we used for our RGF deployment calculator. These tables are drawn from a variety of sources, which are listed in the topical bibliography in the companion report.
1
An OOB is generally understood to be a list, accompanied by brief descriptions and locations, of the units, equipment, and personnel in a military organization. The fullest and most accurate OOBs are derived from classified intelligence. We began this endeavor knowing full well that an OOB built from open-source information could never compete with the accuracy, detail, or reliability of a classified analysis. However, our objectives were less demanding: We needed a sufficiently realistic and detailed Russian military OOB to help generate sufficiently realistic and detailed notional scenarios. Here, we define sufficiency in terms of generalizability and acceptability:
1. Are the data sufficient to calculate generalizable estimates of deployment lift and speed? 2. Would policy consumers accept the data as reasonably accurate and complete? 3. Would experts on the Russian military accept the data as reasonably useful?
Although we could not capture every detail of every unit, our initial literature review and discussions with subject-matter experts suggested that we could come up with a reasonable and sufficient description of the RGF structure down to the BTG level and produce a similarly detailed description of supporting air and naval capabilities.
There are hundreds of Russian military units at the battalion level and above. The development of the database was a supporting and not a central research effort, so we could not build the OOB from the ground up. Resource limitations demanded a reliance on some existing aggregated data. Given these restrictions and our limited objectives, we took three steps to develop an imperfect but sufficient OOB drawn from open-source materials. The OOB included air and naval forces to help us determine Russian deployment capabilities and secu-rity requirements for lines of communication. It also included assessments of road, rail, seaport, and airport hubs and networks in Russia. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Building from this useful but imperfect baseline, we referenced a wide array of other Russian-and English-language sources to fill gaps and check for accuracy. This effort leaned on many additional sources, which are listed by topic in the companion report. 
9
This effort spanned more than a year, and the result is an OOB that should be sufficient for developing and analyzing notional, unclassified scenarios similar to the ones described in this report. It provides detail on air transport, sea transport, and ground military units; their locations; and their equipment and personnel. It offers a reasonable, general understanding of Russian military capabilities that is sufficient for broad strategic discussions or notional calculations of capability and movement. Given the challenges with source material and the limits of knowledge in the unclassified domain, it is also inaccurate and incomplete to some degree. It does not include the full array of Russian military forces, such as fighter squadrons, missile batteries, or combat ships. U.S. and allied government analysts should not use this OOB for official analysis and reporting. However, these analysts may benefit from having a reasonably sufficient unclassified database for other uses.
Tables B.1-B.4 present the OOB by military district. Each table begins with the units' overarching command. It then lists the major unit (e.g., 1st Guards Tank Army) and subunits for main battle tanks, infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs)/APCs, and artillery.     
Table 
B
High stress on resources and restrictions on speed and forces. NOTE: VDV = Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska [Russian Airborne Forces]. BTG= battalion tactical group. NATO = North Atlantic Treaty Organization. xvi Russia's Limit of Advance: Analysis of Russian Ground Force Deployment Capabilities and Limitations
16
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan
26  
26  
NOTE: Estimates of the number of other vehicles take into account average vehicle size, including large support vehicles.
NOTE:
NOTE:
Fast-attack submarines 19th Submarine Brigade and 10th Submarine Division
Fast-attack submarines 19th Submarine Brigade and 10th Submarine Division
An OOB is generally understood to be a list, accompanied by brief descriptions and locations, of the units, equipment, and personnel in a military organization.
The issue of civilian crew limitations can be (and often is) moderated by the use of military augments or military replacement crews. The United States uses its Merchant Marine force for this purpose during times of war, and it routinely augments civilian ships with military liaison and logistics officers during exercises and noncombat movements. Russia took a different approach in the Syria case by purchasing civilian ships and incorporating them into the Russian fleet for the specific purpose of resupplying its expeditionary force. Russian civilian airlines and transportation companies often use military-designed transport equipment (e.g., the An-124), so there are some opportunities to match civil assets to specific military equipment measurements and spare-part requirements.
These estimates by U.S. intelligence agencies, often disputed, can be considered only generally accurate. See, for example, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Soviet Military Manpower: Sizing the Force, declassified intelligence analysis report,Langley, Va., August 1990, and Steven W. Popper, The Military Manpower Burden and the Estimation of Soviet Force Size, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, P-7542, March 1989
.5  This includes the VDV and Spetsnaz. Unclassified sources estimate RGF manpower at approximately 350,000. See, for example, Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, Washington, D.C.,DIA-11-1704DIA-11- -161, 2017, p, p
. 50.6  This information is drawn from our literature review and OOB analysis and was compiled and verified using more than 20 sources.
We were not able to accurately rate every country. The total number of countries in the world is in flux, at least at the margins.
Ben Connable, Abby Doll, Alyssa Demus, Dara Massicot, Clinton Reach, Anthony Atler, William Mackenzie, Matthew Povlock, and Lauren Skrabala, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2563/1-A,
2 Estimates of the total number of RGF troops in the public domain vary-often to a significant degree. See, for example, the blog post "Where Conscripts Serve," Russian Defense Policy, May 6, 2017, for low, medium, and high force-count estimates.
See, for example, Keir Giles, Russia's "New" Tools for Confronting the West: Continuity and Innovation in Moscow's Exercise of Power, London: Chatham House, March 2016, and Timothy L. Thomas, Russia Military Strategy: Impacting 21st Century Reform and Geopolitics, Ft. Leavenworth, Kan.: Foreign Military Studies Office, U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, 2015.
Patrick Wintour and Shaun Walker, "Vladimir Putin Orders Russian Forces to Begin Withdrawal from Syria," The Guardian, March 15, 2016.
See, for example, Southfront, "How the Russian Navy Provides 'Syrian Express," translated from Russian, December 28, 2015.
RT News, "Russia Used Iranian Airfield for Syrian Operation at Tehran's Invitation-Official," August 23, 2016; Erin Cunningham and Karen DeYoung, "Strikes from Iranian Air Base Show Russia's Expanding Footprint in the Middle East," Washington Post, August 2016.
As discussed later in this chapter, this report uses three terms to code the distances of Russian deployments: border, near, and far.
Daniel Dolan, "Opinion: Russian Tank Deal with Nicaragua 'Back to the Future' Moment for U.S.," U.S. Naval Institute,
May 9, 2016;
9
October 7, 2016.
We developed this generic organization from several sources, including Lester W. Grau and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces, Fort Leavenworth, Kan.: Foreign Military Studies Office, U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, 2016; and Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017.
For a primer on reading operational graphics, see Army Doctrine Publication 1-02, Terms and Military Symbols,Washington, D.C., August 14, 2018, ch. 3.   
Estimates of the total number of possible BTGs across the force vary considerably. Our discussions with subject-matter experts generated a range of counts that did not help us refine our analysis. Without considering airborne, special forces, or naval infantry capabilities, the RGF have far fewer BTGs.
Connable et al., 2020.   
This observation is derived from many discussions with deployment analysts and planners at U.S. Transportation Command and Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command.
  3  In addition, official equipment data are often inaccurate or even intentionally misleading. Manufacturers sometimes overstate or understate performance characteristics.
Each scenario also includes an array of scenario-specific assumptions and calculations.
In some cases, this could add days or even weeks to deployment timelines. We could not generalize these additional timelines because each unit is in a different state of readiness at any given point in time, and military planners may be willing to accept more risk concerning the readiness of deploying units in certain circumstances. For example, a quickly developing crisis may lead planners to accept greater risk in terms of unit performance by deploying units before they reach full capability. Mission intensity also matters for determining required readiness levels: High-intensity combat preparation differs significantly from preparation for stability operations.
See Mikhail Barabanov, ed., Новая армия России [Russia's New Army], Moscow: Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, 2010.
Oleg Varfolomeyev, "Ukrainian Aircraft Manufacturer Antonov Diversifies Away from Russia," Eurasia DailyMonitor,  Vol. 13, No. 149, September 15, 2016.    
Tom Waldwyn, "Russian Military Lift Risks Atrophy," blog post, International Institute for Strategic Studies, July 6, 2017.
The tool was derived from planning factors described in Army Field Manual 55-15, Transportation Reference Data, Washington, D.C., October 27, 1997.
These professional engagements were conducted informally and anonymously. All experts understood the notional and unclassified nature of our scenario development process.
Our historical case review suggested that this was a reasonable level. Most cases below 1,000 personnel were purely advisory missions. None of the cases below 1,000 personnel involved a significant ground combat deployment capability,
Aircraft crews typically measure distance in nautical miles. Ground artillery crews typically measure distance in kilometers. Therefore, we use nautical miles for the air distance measurement and kilometers for the ground distance measurement.
  12  These forces would also be vulnerable to Russian long-range strike. Distances were calculated using Google Earth. Japanese Ground Self-Defense Force M-270 multiple-launch rocket systems could be equipped with long-range missiles capable of firing more than 100 kilometers. See, for example, Mary Kate Aylward, "Then and Now: Long Range for the Modern Age," Army AL&T, April-June 2018.
Connable et al., 2020.   
Recall that the Ukraine scenario involved too many forces to allow precise analysis and therefore was treated as an additional, informative scenario.
See, for example, Roger N. McDermott, Russia's Strategic Mobility: Supporting 'Hard Power' to 2020? Stockholm,  Sweden: Swedish Defence Research Agency, April 2013..   
For example, see
Grau and Bartles, 2016;
Michael Kofman, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, Olesya Tkacheva, and
We did not conduct a full comparative analysis of Russian and U.S. equipment, nor is our overall analysis comparative by design. However, we include some limited comparative analysis in this chapter.
See, for example, "Ukrainian Army Kills Russian Officer, Captures Russian Contract Soldier in Donbas," Euromaidan Press, June 29, 2017, and Paul Richard Huard, "The War in Ukraine Is Killing Lots of Russians," War is Boring,
November 18, 2014.
  23  The official estimate of participating troops in late 2017 was 48,000. See "48,000 Russian Troops Took Part in Syrian Campaign-Defense Minister," South Front, December 22,
2017. 24 "Duma Committee Passes Bill on Short-Term Military Contracts," RT, November 2, 2016; Valentyn Badrak, Lada Roslycky, Mykhailo Samus, and Volodymyr Kopchak, "Russia's Desperation for More Soldiers is Taking It to Dark Places," Atlantic Council, April
24, 2017.   25  In all likelihood, Russian leaders have not thought through where these limits might be. We will not risk conjecture; it is sufficient to note the existence of this additional, if poorly defined
, restraint. 26 See, for example, Steven W. Popper, The Military Manpower Burden and the Estimation of Soviet Force Size, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, P-7542, March 1989; Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Soviet Military Manpower: Sizing the Force, declassified intelligence analysis report, Langley, Va., August 1990; and U.S. Department of Defense, Military Forces in Transition, Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1991.    27 "Putin: Russia Will Abjure Conscription Service in a Short While," Pravda, October 24, 2017.
These numbers, which were estimated contemporaneously by U.S. intelligence agencies, are often disputed and can be considered only generally accurate. See, for example, Central IntelligenceAgency, 1990, and
Popper, 1989.
This includes the VDV and Spetsnaz. Unclassified estimates generally place the RGF at approximately 350,000 personnel. See, for example, Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017, p. 50.
  30  This information is drawn from our literature review and OOB analysis. It was compiled and verified using more than 20 sources.
This lack of capability was highlighted during the Syria campaign as Russian ships struggled to find sufficient refueling ports. See, for example, Camila Domonoske, "After NATO Objections, Russian Warships Won't Refuel at Spanish Port," National Public Radio, October 27, 2016. This is a long-standing challenge. A 2001 analysis of the Russian navy also highlighted the lack of organic resupply capability; see Brian T. Mutty, The Russian Navy and the Future of Russian Power in the Western Pacific, thesis, Monterey, Calif.: Naval Postgraduate School, December 2001.
For an analysis of the impact of this approach in the Middle East, see James Sladden, Becca Wasser, Ben Connable, and Sarah Grand-Clement, Russian Strategy in the Middle East, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, PE-236-RC, 2017.
"Russia, Cyprus Sign Military Deal on Use of Mediterranean Ports," Reuters, February 26, 2015; Prashanth Parameswaran, "A Vietnam 'Base' for Russia?" The Diplomat, October 15, 2016; W. Alejandro Sanchez, "Forget Venezuela, Russia is Looking to Nicaragua," National Interest, September 25, 2017.
Coding was based on analyst subject-matter expertise and documentation related to Russian international alliances and overflight. Some of this material was drawn directly from the case research. For example, Russia's difficulty obtaining
We made this selection based on a literature review and the collective subject-matter expert opinions of the research team.
The 1,000-troop cutoff distinguished most of the advisory missions from the combat missions. Soviet deployments to advising missions without direct combat action tended to fall under this number, while combat deployments tended to involve more than 1,000 troops. For examples of Soviet-era deployments, see Alex P.Schmid, ed., Soviet Military Interventions Since 1945, New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books, 1985.   
In separate, ongoing research, we discovered that a U.S. military service has incomplete, inconsistent, and generally inaccurate records of its own deployments even through 2017. We have no reason to believe that the Russian military has substantially better records than the U.S. military, or that all deployment data have been shared publicly.
This analysis draws heavily from two edited volumes on Soviet deployments:Schmid, 1985, and Bradford Dismukes  and James M. McConnell, eds., Soviet Naval Diplomacy, Elmsford, N.Y.: Pergamon Press, 1979. It also draws from a range of declassified intelligence reports, technical reports, individual case histories, and other U.S. government documents on Soviet and Russian military activity. For additional sources related to these historical cases, see the companion report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios(Connable et al., 2020).
  5 Schmid, 1985 (p. 123), offered a comparative 22-point chart that helped us distinguish between advisory, or "military assistance," and military interventions.
See U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, Cuban Missile Crisis, October 1962, Washington, D.C., webpage, undated, and Alan Taylor, "Fifty Years Ago: The Cuban Missile Crisis," The Atlantic, October 15, 2012.
Connable et al.,  
Each scenario analysis also included ports of debarkation and, as necessary, road, rail, and other networks in the objective area.
3 Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017;
Grau and Bartles, 2016
.4  See, for example, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, Worldwide Equipment Guide, Volume 1: Ground Systems, Fort Leavenworth, Kan.,
2015. 5 Catherine Harris and Frederick W. Kagan, Russia's Military Posture: Ground Forces Order of Battle, Washington, D.C.: Institute for the Study of War, March 2018. This work was published after we concluded our research and thus was not incorporated into
our OOB.6  GudrunPersson, ed., Russian Military Capability in a Ten-Year Perspective-2016, Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish Defence  Research Agency, 2016; International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2016,  
London, 2016.
7
updated 2017.
8
2016 and early 2018.9 Connable et al., 2020.   
We thank 
MG William Hix
Christopher McPadden
MG Bradley Gericke
Our
LTC Andrew Brown
RAND Arroyo Center
Strategy
Doctrine
Francisco Walter
Tony Vanderbeek
Mark Calvo
We are grateful to RAND colleagues 
Raphael Cohen
Ryan Schwankhart
Kimberly J. Marten
Department of Political Science at Barnard College
by the 
Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff
G-3/5/7
U.S. Army
U.S. Army
RAND Corporation
United States Army
RAND operates under a "
Federal-Wide Assurance
FWA00003425
Code of Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects Under United States Law approvals by RAND's Institutional Review Board
Human Subjects Protection Committee
U.S. Army
This appendix presents our analysis of Soviet and Russian Federation ground force deployment cases from 1945 to 2017. It begins with a summary assessment of the 15 selected cases and concludes with observations about historical trends and the implications for the analysis of Russia's current deployment capabilities.
The purpose of examining these historical cases was to provide a brief comparative assessment to help analysts put present-day RGF power into context. Rather than present a comprehensive analysis-which would require considerably more detail and structure-this quick overview is intended to serve as a guide for ongoing and prospective research. These cases can help address such questions as (1) the degree to which Russia can achieve the global influence once held by the Soviet Union, (2) the RGF's relative force deployment capability in comparison to the Soviet Army and other armed forces, and (3) the true global threat of Russian ground combat power. For example, it is useful to consider Russia's current far deployment to Syria, which involves approximately one reinforced brigade, alongside the failed Soviet corps-level near deployment to Tajikistan or the partially successful far division-sized deployment to Yemen.
We created a database of all significant Soviet and Russian ground combat force deployments from the end of World War II to 2017, a period of modernization for Soviet and, later, Russian deployment capabilities and policies. 1 Bounding this data set required establishing reasonable cutoff points. Based on an initial review of possible cases, we selected two criteria: (1) a minimum of 1,000 troops, including, in some cases, Soviet or Russian naval personnel, and (2) actions beyond peacetime advising, such as irregular warfare support or conventional combat. 2 There is a significant caveat to this analysis: It is unlikely that our sources on deployed personnel numbers are wholly accurate or consistent. In all likelihood, even Russian military leadership has an incomplete understanding of exactly how many troops deployed in each historical case. 
3
4
Building from the case selection process, we rated 15 Russian ground deployments from the Manchuria case in 1945 to the Syria case that was ongoing as we concluded this research. In Table 
A
This research was aided by a detailed order of battle for Russian ground forces and a specially designed calculator, which help advance understanding of the factors that stress Russia's ability to deploy forces and project power locally and globally. A companion report, Russia's Limit of Advance: Scenarios, presents more detail on the context and characteristics of the notional scenarios that underpin this research. 