# ID: 6325e8333a8f4a3ca6779578dd7a2854
# Title: Russian Airpower in the Second Chechen War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2001.0
# Fulltext:
The Second Chechen War, which began on 23 September 1999 with massive Russian air strikes, bore little resemblance to the inconclusive campaign that had ended just three years earlier. In the earlier conflict, Russian Air Force operations concentrated on achieving control of the air, directly supporting Russian ground forces, and attacking rebels in the foothills and mountains of southern Chechnya. Aside from the very brief initial campaign against the Chechen Air Force, Russian airpower played a minor supporting role to ground forces during the First Chechen War, achieving only limited tactical successes. During the Second Chechen War, Russian commanders used airpower extensively, with mixed results. By examining the use of Russian airpower in the Second Chechen War, the author identified implications for the United States Air Force conducting small-scale, high-intensity operations. The monograph examines the background to the Chechen wars and the use of airpower in the First Chechen War to set the stage for the analysis of the Russian use of airpower during the Second Chechen War. The author considered if Russian Air Force employment concepts and equipment, used during the Second Chechen War were adequate, feasible, and acceptable, by western standards. When measured against the criterions, the employment of Russian airpower in the Second Chechen War yielded mixed results. Russian Air Force employment concepts were adequate, successfully accomplishing all military objectives. However, airpower failed in its most important objective, reducing Russian ground force casualties. Russian Air Force employment concepts and equipment were unable to accomplish the mission, within allowable constraints, making them infeasible. Finally, the failure to comply with international laws of war, and consider the effect of the air campaign on the political end state made the Russian use of airpower in the Second Chechen War unacceptable. The author?s analysis of the Russian use of airpower in the Second Chechen War yielded three implications for the U.S. Air Force conducting similar operations. First, airpower may limit ground force casualties in deliberate attacks against an enemy vulnerable to air attacks. However, conventional airpower cannot reduce ground casualties in guerrilla warfare, or street fighting. Secondly, bombing campaigns aimed at destroying industrial infrastructure have significant adverse effects on the end state and post-conflict operations. Finally, aircraft must be capable of conducting precision attacks in all weather conditions.
Under no circumstances should events in the Chechen Republic be considered combat operations in the classic sense. 
1
To the people living in the war ravaged villages scattered along the border between Chechnya and Dagestan, 23 September 1999 began like any other day. They could neither see, nor hear, the Russian warplanes approaching from the northwest with their deadly cargo and grimly determined crews. With the concentration of a surgeon, the weapon systems officer (WSO) peered intently into the eerie glow of his radarscope. It was difficult to determine the exact location of his target among the bright radar returns of the structures and built-up areas of the Chechen village of Shali, near the Dagestan border. To his left, the pilot scanned the ground rapidly unfolding in front of their supersonic Su-24 Fencer fighter-bomber, searching for the tell tale trace of a deadly Stinger shoulder-fired surface-to-air missile. Seeing nothing, his thoughts turned to the approaching target run. He armed the weapon release system, turned toward the final attack heading and prompting his WSO, grunted "adna minutka," one minute to go.
As the sleek jet bore down on the target, the WSO continued to fine-tune his radar, turning down the gain and refining the aiming crosshairs. Confident of his aiming, he gave the pilot clearance to release. With grim satisfaction, the pilot depressed the pickle button, whispering under his breath, "sbros," bombs away. As the bombs rippled from the pylons mounted under the Fencer's wings, the jet shook gently from side to side, as if grateful of the burden suddenly lifted.
Below and far behind the streaking fighter, explosions rocked the ground as glass shattered and smoke rose from the rubble. The airmen, now safely out of the target area, silently pondered their first combat mission since the First Chechen War ended in 1996. Perhaps this time things would be different. 
2
3
2
3
During the Second Chechen War, Russian commanders used airpower extensively, with mixed results. On September 22, 1999, following aerial bombardment of Chechnya's capital city of Grozny, in which warplanes hit the airport, an oil refinery, a TV tower, and the area surrounding Chechen President Aslan Mashkadov's residence, Russian Prime Minister Putin denied that he was planning any large-scale [ground] offensive. Putin continued to play down reports of a looming ground invasion, saying, "we will not thoughtlessly put our boys under fire." 
4
5
6
By examining the use of Russian airpower in the Second Chechen War, the author identified implications for the United States Air Force conducting small-scale, high-intensity operations.
Written accounts have characterized these conflicts as small-scale contingencies, military operations other than war, and military operations in urban terrain (MOUT). Many authors and researchers have postulated that future combat operations will increasingly take place in and around urban terrain. Major General Robert Scales, the former Commandant of the U.S. Army War College, wrote that the American military is likely to confront such situations in the next century. 
7
The Russian involvement in Chechnya is of particular interest because it involves modern, well-equipped forces against an outnumbered, but resolute, opponent in urban terrain. The Second Chechen War provides an excellent backdrop in which to evaluate the performance of a modern air force conducting combat operations against an opponent in and around urban terrain. Surprisingly, researchers have written very little on the extensive use of Russian airpower in Chechnya. One of the most useful pieces is Air Operations in Low Intensity Conflict: the Case of Chechnya, written by Timothy Thomas, an expert on the Russian military employed by the Foreign Area Studies Office at Fort Leavenworth. Mr. Thomas identified several important problems faced by the Russian Air Force in the First Chechen War. 
9
The author analyzed Russian Air Force employment concepts and equipment using criterion outlined in Joint Publication 5-0, Doctrine for Planning Joint Operations. These criterions are adequacy, feasibility, and acceptability. Adequacy determines whether the aspect under 7 Robert H. 
Scales, Future Warfare (Carlisle Barracks: Strategic Studies Institute, 1999), 178. 8
The strategically vital regions of Chechnya and Dagestan have seen centuries of conflict along ethnic and political fault lines. 
11
I-13. 11
The army totally ignored local conditions, religion, and customs. No one planned the operation. It was started 'Russian style' in the off chance that it would work. 
15
16
17
16
In 1992, following their hasty withdrawal from Chechnya the Russian forces left General Dudayev a considerable stockpile of military hardware. Scattered between three military airfields were some 260 Russian aircraft of various types, including Mig-17 fighters and ground-attack jets. 
18
Russian Su-24MR reconnaissance jets detected Chechen rebels fuelling L-29 Delfin and L-39 Albatros jet trainers for possible attack missions. Like many western jet training aircraft, ground crews could easily configure the L-29 and L-39 with wing stations capable of carrying bombs and rocket pods. Other indications that Dudayev intended to use his air force were the preparation of alternate landing strips along highways and road segments. Despite his planning and preparation, General Dudayev's air force never entered the fight. 
19
18
A former Russian bomber commander, General Dudayev must have been displeased to lose his meager air force before he could use it. With chilling defiance, he wired a note to the Commander of the Russian Air Force, his former colleague General Deinekin: "I congratulate you and the Russian VVS on another victory in achieving air superiority over the Chechen Republic. Will see you on the ground." 
20
The second phase of Russian Air Force involvement in Chechnya began, when Russian ground forces advanced toward Grozny on 11 December 1994. The supporting infantry, poorly trained and led, was unable to keep up with the Russian armor. The tanks advanced more rapidly than the infantry and, unprotected, became easy targets for the Chechen guerrillas fighting from well-concealed positions in the urban fortress. Major General Yevgeny Nikitenko, the deputy head of the General Staff's Military Science Directorate admitted that planners had "miscalculated" the scale and intensity of the rebel resistance. He further implied that if given another chance, Russian troops would enter Grozny only after "massive bombardment" by Su-24s and Su-25s to "destroy the mini-army that Dadayev had set up." 21 This lesson figured heavily in Russian plans for the Second Chechen War. However, the slaughter did not result entirely from disorganized troops and bad tactics. Severe weather and a general lack of coordination between air and ground units significantly hampered close air support during this phase.
Starting a campaign when forecasters expected weather conditions to severely restrict flying operations was a serious failure of Russian military planning. Colonel General Yevgeny 121-124. 
20
22
23
Coordination problems between ground and air units, amplified by outdated communications and navigation equipment, made close air support a risky proposition. Chechen rebels benefited from excellent intelligence and made a special effort to hunt down Russian Forward Air Controllers, or avianavodchiki. When the weather did allow close air support, Chechen directionfinding units quickly located forward air controllers and targeted them with artillery. 
24
25
The third phase of Russian Air Force involvement in the First Chechen War was in many ways the most successful. Clear weather allowed Russian Su-25 Frogfoot attack jets to support the army's drive across the Ardun River to Gudermes and Shali. In response, the Chechens Furthermore, the war failed to provide a permanent solution to the problem of Chechen independence. Rebels continued to harass federal troops in the region and returned to the capitol city of Grozny. Almost immediately, Russia's victory began to sour. 
30
31
29
In March 1999, outlaws kidnapped the leading Russian envoy to Chechnya, Russian Interior Ministry General Gennady Shpigun, from the Grozny airport, in Chechnya's capital city. 
32
34
3. 33
34
35
36
37
38
First, in the second conflict, Russian military commanders enjoyed almost unlimited authority over the conduct of the operations. Political leaders promised to restrain from frequent moratoriums and cease-fires and allow the military commanders to make independent decisions concerning the momentum of the offensive and deadlines for specific objectives. Secondly, Russian armed forces would enjoy a significant numerical advantage this time. At the start of the 1999 campaign, the Russian armed forces arrayed against the Chechen troops rapidly built to almost 100,000 men. Thirdly, senior leaders in the Russian military reorganized the North Caucus Military District to dramatically improve joint operations and unity of effort. Finally, in contrast to the headlong "rush to battle" of the earlier conflict, the Russian military entered the Second Chechen War with a definite plan. 
39
40
39 Timothy L. Thomas, "A Tale of Two Theaters: Russian Actions in Chechnya in 1994 and 1999," Foreign Military Studies Office, Internet, http://call.army.mil/call/fmso/fmsopubs/issues/chechtale.htm. accessed 14 January 2001, 2. 
40
Exactly the same tactics were deployed during Operation Desert Storm, in the bombing of the former Yugoslavia and in the various United States attempts to strike back at the world's most wanted terrorist -Osama bin Laden. Yet in the midst of war, even the most carefully planned military operations occasionally cause civilian casualties, and we deeply regret that. 
41
The Second Chechen War, which began on 23 September 1999 with massive Russian air strikes, bore little resemblance to the inconclusive campaign that had ended just three years earlier. In the earlier conflict, Russian Air Force operations concentrated on achieving control of the air, directly supporting Russian ground forces, and attacking rebels in the foothills and mountains of southern Chechnya. Aside from the very brief initial campaign against the Chechen Air Force, Russian airpower played a minor supporting role to ground forces, achieving only limited tactical successes. The Russian Air Force planned very few missions in advance, instead reacting to the whims of ground commanders, even if the target was insignificant. During the Second Chechen War, the Russian Air Force applied airpower on a much greater scale, with expectations to match. 
42
42
43
The Russian Air Force organization for the Second Chechen War was built around units of the 4 th Air Army, headquartered at Rostov-on-Don, with additional units from the Privolzhsky Military District. After the conflict began, Russian authorities formed a separate headquarters for the united Air Force and Air Defense combat group at Makhachkala, the Dagestani capital.
Grouping in the North Caucasus, tightly controlled air operations from his headquarters and a combat management center. Mobile command and coordination posts assigned to front line ground troops ensured a close link between air and ground operations. By mid-September 1999, http://members.nbci.com/082499/aviation/chechnya/103099.htm. accessed 25 February 2001, 3. 43 Lack of coordination and disunity of effort characterized Russian operations during the First Chechen War. Having learned from these mistakes, the Russian Armed Forces implemented wide-ranging changes. The most important change allowed combined command of army, air force, Ministry of Internal Affairs and other security forces in the North Caucasus Military District. Air assets from the Interior Ministry cooperated with army and air force aviation units, moving far beyond the basic procedures established during the previous war. Timothy L. Thomas, "A Tale of Two Theaters: Russian Actions in Chechnya in 1994 and 1999," Foreign Military Studies Office, Internet, http://call.army.mil/call/fmso/fmsopubs/issues/chechtale.htm. accessed 14 January 2001, 2. over three-hundred Russian combat aircraft were under General Gorbenko's centralized command, twice the number deployed for the First Chechen War. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
We lack weapons to defend ourselves against Russian air attacks. Our best weapon is the high morale of the Chechen population. 
50
The first phase of Russian Air Force Involvement in Chechnya began on 23 September 1999.
Following weeks of intermittent air strikes against rebel positions inside Chechnya, the Russian Air Force launched an air campaign designed to isolate the Chechen rebels and reduce the risk to Russian forces operating in the theater. Mindful of the public relations disaster of the First Chechen War, Russian officials downplayed the ground offensive. Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said that he, "could not rule out the possibility of launching ground operations in the breakaway southern region. Until now, the military has favored an air war that would keep casualties to a minimum." 
51
The coalition allied against Iraq applied it successfully during the 1991 war to free Kuwait, and NATO chose the airpower option to force Milosevic to withdraw from Kosovo in 1999. The Russian Air Force commander, General Anatoly Kornukov, proudly declared that there were "certain parallels" between the Russian air strikes in Chechnya and the NATO campaign in the Balkans. However, as military specialist Pavel Felgengauer pointed out, "Chechnya is not Yugoslavia… In Chechnya, nobody is in charge. You cannot bomb Chechnya into submission because there is nobody to submit." 
52
The initial Russian air campaign against Chechnya had three objectives: to prevent further attacks by Chechen rebels, destroy the rebel support structure, and to isolate the rebels economically. To meet the first objective of preventing further rebel attacks, Russian combat aircraft attacked several rebel bases, destroyed seven bridges, and mined or destroyed over twenty kilometers of roads and paths used by the rebels. The second objective, closely related to the first, required Russian jets to attack the rebel's material base. According to the commander of the Russian Air Force, aircrews hit seven supply bases, seven training camps and four weapon storage sites during the first week of air strikes. The last objective most closely resembled NATO's aerial attacks against Belgrade in 1999. To cut the rebels off from their financial base, based largely on illegal gasoline trading, planners selected several industrial targets. To this end, Russian aircrews destroyed numerous small fuel processing plants and four oil refineries, including the largest refinery in southern Russia, located in central Grozny. Additionally, aircrews targeted ten large oil storage facilities, one electrical power plant, and two weapons factories. 
53
The second phase of the Russian operation in Chechnya, to rout rebel formations, also relied heavily on Russian airpower. During this phase, the Russian Air Force sought to isolate the rebels in the larger towns and cities, and create favorable conditions for the ground offensive. This phase began in early October 1999 as strategic targeting gradually gave way to interdiction and close air support. In order to isolate the rebel formations, the Russian Air Force continued its theater-wide bombing campaign against the rebel support base, while aggressively cutting supply routes. 
54
55
56
58
During the encirclement of Grozny, Russian airpower mercilessly pounded suspected rebel positions inside the city with very little apparent concern for collateral damage. While western news media reported on the devastation in Grozny and other towns, the Air Force Commander in Chechnya defended his tactics. "We generally do not operate against villages; this is all a fabrication. We delivered several strikes on Grozny. But, there we used correctable aerial bombs whose probable deviation amounts to one meter. We delivered the strikes absolutely precisely." 
59
This leaflet addresses such of Grozny's defenders who retain common sense and see things as they are. You are encircled. All roads to Grozny are blocked. You are the losers with no chance to win. Your commanders are at a loss what to do next. Death is taking its toll in your ranks day in, day out. Resistance is pointless. The federal command is offering you your last chance… All who 57 Timothy L. Thomas, "A Tale of Two Theaters: Russian Actions in Chechnya in 1994 and 1999," Foreign Military Studies Office, Internet, http://call.army.mil/call/fmso/fmsopubs/issues/chechtale.htm. accessed 14 January 2001, 
3. 58
choose to stay in the city will be regarded as bandits and terrorists to be destroyed by air raids and artillery fire. 
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
However, the situation as it existed at the end of February 2000 provided a logical ending point for the evaluation of Russian Air Force employment concepts in the Second Chechen War.
Aerial Operations occurring after this date were minor in scale and involved employment methods typical of the final phase of the Russian strategy.
The first phase of the Second Chechen War saw Russian airpower used independently, for strategic bombing and theater-wide interdiction. While these missions continued during the second phase, the main effort shifted to supporting the ground forces in isolating the major cities and towns and destroying rebel formations. The Russian Air Force conducted suppressive air strikes, enabling maneuver-by-fire tactics by ground forces. According to Russian officials, Russian aircraft employed precision-guided weapons extensively in an effort to minimize collateral damage and civilian casualties. During the third phase of the Second Chechen War, the Russian Air Force once again realigned its efforts. Engaging an elusive enemy, fighting from well-protected bases in the mountainous terrain required a level of flexibility not previously seen from the Russian Air Force. Russian aircrews refined hunter-killer tactics as attack jets, working with reconnaissance assets, struck mobile and fleeting targets. In all phases, the Russian Air Force used appropriate employment concepts in an attempt to achieve the military objectives, at 69 Aleksandr Drobyshevskiy, "Armed Forces Problems and Solutions: The Shield and Sword Are in Reliable Hands," Armeyskiy Sbornik (April 2000): 10-13, FBIS-CEP20000629000307, 1 April 2000, 3. 70 G.D. Bakshi, "The War in Chechnya: A Military Analysis," Internet. http://www.idsa-india.org/an-aug-300.html. accessed 17 January 2001, 9. acceptable cost within their capabilities. The controlling factor in this equation was Russian Air Force equipment, principally aircraft and weapons.
No one fears the rebels. Now let them be the ones who fear. For the staff of the aviation grouping is now combat-oriented. They all want one thing-to eradicate this infection as soon as possible. 
71
The operational environment faced by the Russian Air Force in Chechnya called for fixedwing aircraft capable of employing a wide variety of weapons. The air defense threat from antiaircraft guns and shoulder-fired missiles limited the effectiveness of attack helicopters, especially over urban terrain. During the Second Chechen War, commanders relied increasingly on the more survivable fixed-wing aircraft. According to the commander-in-chief of the Russian Air Force, General of the Army Anatoliy M. Kornukov, "in analyzing the combat experience of employing aircraft in the North Caucasus, the conclusion can be drawn that the majority of fire missions during combat operations were performed by Air Force aircraft." 
72
73
(March 2000
): 32-36, FBIS-CEP20000508000178, 8 March 2000, 5. 72
74
75
76
The proximity of suitable airfields and relatively small theater of operations negated the need for long-range aircraft or air refueling tankers. The threat to low-flying aircraft, relative sanctuary above the defenses, and the proximity of suitable airfields suggested a reliance on Russian frontal, or tactical, aviation.
Russian commanders needed aircraft capable of navigating and locating targets in mountainous terrain, often in poor weather. A heavy bomb load would be required, with the capability to strike small targets accurately. Additionally, Russian aircraft would need to support ground troops operating in open, urban and mountainous terrain. It was a tall order, and no single
Russian aircraft could answer the call. Instead, the commander of the combined air formation Journal (Winter 1997): 55. 
74
75
Technology, 14 February 2000, 78. 76
According to Lieutenant General Valeriy Gorbenko, Bomber aviation accomplished combat missions mainly in the mountain areas against guerrilla camps and against bandit bases. The ground attack aircraft carried out support of the ground troops during the entire operation and operated only against visually visible targets, they accomplished missions for the localization of the combat operations areas and to prevent transport movements of reserves, ammunition, and weapons by the enemy. And, of course, a large portion of the work was laid on their shoulders. 
77
The most plentiful fighter-bomber in the Russian Air Force inventory, the supersonic Su-24 Fencer, was widely used in the Second Chechen War. The upgraded Su-24M Fencer-D deployed for operations in Chechnya represented the second generation of this versatile strike aircraft. A new navigation and attack system, combined with a laser designator allowed the Fencer-D to deliver the most advanced precision guided weapons. The ability to fly in any weather condition and deliver precision-guided weapons made the Fencer-D a natural choice for operations in Chechnya. 
78
78
79
A normal Fencer attack sequence begins with the crew flying towards a known target, using the on-board navigation systems. The weapon systems officer then refines the target location using radar or infrared (IR) sensors. These sensors cannot detect targets hidden behind shadows caused by intervening terrain or obstacles. Small point targets, or aim points in complex urban environments are particularly difficult to detect. If the target is not identifiable on the sensor, the pilot can release the bomb on coordinates. The computer constantly updates the release point, based on the weapon's ballistic characteristics and the aircraft's flight data. However, without global positioning systems (GPS) updates to the aircraft navigation systems, this technique may result in significant miss-distances. This may explain the reports of Russian "carpet bombing." 
80
81
82
Ideally, this pattern will intersect the target and one or more weapons will achieve the desired results. The remaining weapons, impacting off-target, may cause serious collateral damage.
Group, 1999), 424-426. 
79
March 2001
, February 2001. 80
Frogfoot.
The Frogfoot saw extensive service during the eight-year war in Afghanistan, flying over 60,000 sorties. 
83
The faster and heavily armored Frogfoot attacked with less warning and quickly exited the lethal envelopes of the short-range air defense systems. Russian commanders in Chechnya favored the Frogfoot over attack helicopters for close air support in urban terrain.
During the Second Chechen War, Frogfoot pilots normally attacked from 16,000 to 20,000 feet after visually acquiring the target. 
84
Frogfoot pilots used unguided rockets and bombs for most targets. For point targets, such as mortar positions and bunkers, the Frogfoot pilots employed laser-guided Kh-25ML (NATO AS-1999), 425. 
83
85
86
Although the Frogfoot proved highly effective at close air support, it was even more deadly in the "free hunt" mission. Operating in pairs, the Frogfoot pilots searched broad areas, often in front of advancing Russian troops, for targets of opportunity. Once the pilots detected a target, they employed cooperative tactics to destroy it while protecting each other from ground fire.
Russian Frogfoot pilots destroyed numerous rebels targets during these missions and more importantly, they reduced the rebels freedom to maneuver. Surprisingly, Russian pilots did not use this tactic during the First Chechen War. 
87
88
The probability of finding and killing mobile targets increased when Russian planners teamed the attackers with reconnaissance jets. Operating as "hunter-killer" teams, reconnaissance jets located lucrative targets for pairs of Su-25 Frogfoot or Su-24M Fencers. 
89
90
Fencer-E is fitted with side-looking multi-mission radar in the nose and an infrared reconnaissance system under the center fuselage. Other sensors include TV, panoramic and oblique cameras. Using a laser designator, the Fencer-E can pinpoint target locations and potentially guide weapons released from other aircraft. The aircraft can transmit data to ground stations using an onboard data link. Specialists can then comb this data for targets, and pass candidates to the operations center for immediate tasking. 
91
92
Precision-guided weapons (PGM) can tremendously improve accuracy and reduce collateral damage. The Russian Air Force employed very few PGMs in the First Chechen War, perhaps saving them for use in a conventional theater. During the Second Chechen War, Russian aircrews reconnaissance and target acquisition mission for a flight of several Su-25 ground attack jets. "War in Chechnya: Russian AF Losses," Internet. http://www.aeronautics.ru/chechnya/losses/index.htm. accessed 24 February 2001. 
90
92
93
Russian PGMs used in the Second Chechen War, required clear weather and identifiable targets. In contrast, some modern U.S. weapons, aided by GPS, are capable of striking targets in any weather. 
94
Laser-guided bombs were the most commonly employed PGM in the Second Chechen War. 
95
96
93
94
96
Datalink-guided weapons, with either infrared or television sensors, are the most accurate precision-guided weapons, but require intensive mission planning and target study. Russian Fencer crews employed the television-guided Kh-59 (NATO AS-13 Kingbolt) against stationary targets in Grozny, Urus-Martan and other heavily defended areas in Chechnya. 
97
98
We work on precise targets. Working on population points is categorically forbidden. We work with precision, guidable weapons on rebel fortifications and bases in population points. These are guided missiles and correctable aerial bombs. All operations are documented. Photo images are made of each strike. It is possible to account for each weapon application. 
99
97
March 2001
, February 2001. 98
The commander of the Russian Air Force even gave a NATO style briefing, waving his pointer as he narrated combat videos of Russian precision air strikes against Chechen targets, evoking comparisons in the press to NATO's former commander, General Wesley K. Clark. 
100
Russian Air Force involvement in The Second Chechen War pitted modern, well-equipped forces against an outnumbered, but resolute, opponent. This conflict provided an excellent backdrop in which to evaluate the performance of a modern air force conducting joint combat operations against an opponent in and around urban terrain. By examining the use of Russian airpower in the Second Chechen War, the author identified three implications for the United States Air Force conducting small-scale, high-intensity operations in and around urban terrain.
First, airpower may limit ground force casualties in deliberate attacks against an enemy vulnerable to air attacks. However, conventional airpower cannot reduce ground casualties in guerrilla warfare, or street fighting. Secondly, bombing campaigns aimed at destroying industrial infrastructure have significant adverse effects on the end state and post-conflict operations.
Finally, aircraft must be capable of conducting precision attacks in all weather conditions. The first phase of the Second Chechen War saw Russian airpower used independently, for strategic bombing and theater-wide interdiction. While these missions continued during the second phase, the main effort shifted to supporting the ground forces in isolating the major cities and towns and destroying rebel formations. The third phase of the Second Chechen War saw the Russian Air Force once again realign its efforts. Engaging an elusive enemy, fighting from wellprotected bases in the mountainous terrain required flexible air interdiction. In all phases, the Russian Air Force adapted its employment concepts in an attempt to achieve the military objectives, at acceptable cost within their capabilities.
The author analyzed Russian Air Force employment concepts and equipment using criterion outlined in Joint Publication 5-0, Doctrine for Planning Joint Operations. These criterions are adequacy, feasibility, and acceptability. Adequacy determines whether the aspect under consideration satisfies the requirement and accomplishes the mission. Feasibility determines whether the aspect accomplishes the mission within constraints. Finally, acceptability determines whether the aspect complies with the laws of war, and is worth the cost in lives, material and time.
103
The author judged the adequacy of Russian airpower in the Second Chechen War by how well it accomplished the objectives of the air campaign. While most air campaign objectives changed with each phase of the operation, one remained constant throughout the conflict.
Commanders repeatedly stressed the importance of limiting Russian casualties, especially during operations in urban terrain.
Aversion to casualties helps explain why the Russian authorities chose to open the operation with an extensive aerial campaign, which they compared to NATO's action against Slobodan Milosevic earlier in the year. While Russian ground forces were moving into northern Chechnya, the Russian Air Force launched a massive bombing campaign to destroy Chechnya's basic economic and governmental infrastructure and isolate the rebels. 
104
To meet the first objective of preventing further rebel attacks, Russian combat aircraft attacked several rebel bases, destroyed seven bridges, and mined or destroyed over twenty kilometers of roads and paths used by the rebels in the first week of the sustained air campaign. 
105
The second phase of the Russian operation in Chechnya, to rout rebel formations, also relied heavily on Russian airpower. During this phase, the Russian Air Force sought to isolate the rebels in the larger towns and cities, and create favorable conditions for the ground offensive. This phase began gradually in early October 1999 as strategic targeting gave way to interdiction and close air support. In order to isolate the rebel formations, the Russian Air Force continued its theater-wide bombing campaign against the rebel support base, while aggressively cutting supply routes. 
109
110
The bloodiest fighting of the First Chechen War occurred during the month-long battle for Grozny. During the Second Chechen War, Russian troops took control of the capital with minimal losses after extensive bombardment. According to Lieutenant General Gennadiy Troshev, first deputy commander of the Combined Troop Grouping, only 100 men died from the Federal forces during the entire Grozny operation. 112 However, airpower did little to reduce the casualties caused by guerrilla attacks. By late January 2001, over 2,700 troops had lost their lives in the Second Chechen War, with an average of twenty soldiers dieing each week in guerrilla attacks and mine explosions. 
113
114
115
116
Moscow's strategy for the Second Chechen War was to contain and isolate Chechen guerillas, destroy rebel bases, and set up an alternative authority to govern Chechnya. The Russian military planned to support these objectives by localizing the conflict, routing bandit formations, and annihilating rebel units in the foothills and mountains. The Russian Air Force successfully accomplished its objectives in all three phases of the operation. However, it failed in its most important objective, reducing Russian ground force casualties.
Russian Air Force employment concepts during the Second Chechen War were feasible if they accomplished the mission within constraints. Constraints on Russian Air Force operations and equipment in the Second Chechen War included environmental factors, such as weather, and the desire to avoid collateral damage. As Russian Air Force planners learned, these two constraints are often at odds. Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin instructed his commanders to "avoid casualties among the general population," and said: "We have nothing to gain by doing otherwise." In a widely publicized statement explaining Russian actions in Chechnya, Prime Minister Putin stressed that, "The Chechen citizens, after all, are our citizens too. Our land and air forces strive to target only opposing armed forces. The whole reason we chose accurately targeted strikes on specifically identified terrorist bases was to avoid direct attacks on Chechen communities." 117 Prime Minister Putin's stated intention to avoid collateral damage proved infeasible with the aircraft and weapons deployed to Chechnya.
The marginal flying weather in the region required the Russian Air Force to deploy aircraft capable of bombing through clouds with reasonable accuracy. The most capable aircraft available in sufficient numbers was the Su-24 Fencer. However, the Fencer was not equipped with advanced synthetic-aperture radar or satellite navigation systems, typical of advanced western aircraft, and was unable to accurately drop bombs from medium altitude. 
118
119
Frogfoot effectively employed a variety of precision-guided weapons. and energy ministry, "It's the only way we can earn the money we need to revive Chechnya's economy." 
130
131
When measured against the author's criteria of adequacy, feasibility, and acceptability, the employment of Russian airpower in the Second Chechen War yielded mixed results. Russian Air Force employment concepts were adequate, successfully accomplishing all military objectives. However, airpower failed in its most important objective, reducing Russian ground force casualties. Russian Air Force employment concepts and equipment were unable to accomplish the mission within allowable constraints, making them infeasible. Finally, the failure to comply with international laws of war, and consider the effect of the air campaign on the political end
14  
14  
Benjamin S. Lambeth, Russia's Airpower in Crisis (Washington: Smithsonian Institute Press, 1999), 134.
"North Caucasus Conflict: A Day-by-day Timeline," Washington: Center for Defense Information, Internet, http://www.cdi.org/issues/Europe/sept.html . accessed 9 January 2001.
Russia: War Clouds over Chechnya, Foreign Media Reaction Daily Digest, October 1, 1999, Washington: United States Information Agency Washington, Internet, http://www.fas/man/dod101/ops/war/1999/10/wwwh9801.htm. accessed 14 January 2001.
Ibid.   
Benjamin S. Lambeth, Russia's Airpower in Crisis (Washington: Smithsonian Institute Press, 1999),
Benjamin S. Lambeth, Russia's Airpower in Crisis (Washington: Smithsonian Institute Press, 1999), 135.
David A. Fulghum, "Chechnya Cripples Russian Aviation," Aviation Week and Space Technology, 7  August 1995, 20-21.   
Benjamin S. Lambeth, Russia's Airpower in Crisis (Washington: Smithsonian Institute Press, 1999), 127.
"First Chechnya War 1994
-1996
Vyacheslav Kondratyev, "The Awesome Sky over Chechnya," Krylya Rodiny (January 1996): 1-5, FBIS-UMA-96-055-S, 20 March 1996, 33.  
 27  First and second generation laser-guided bombs, like the ones used by the Russian Air Force, are released ballistically, like normal free-fall bombs, then corrected to the target using semi-active laser guidance to compensate for minor release errors and winds. This type of non-proportional laser guidance was first used to guide bombs by American forces during the Vietnam War. More modern laser-guided bombs, such as the U.S. Paveway III series, use proportional guidance techniques and autopilots and are much more accurate. Vyacheslav Kondratyev, "The Awesome Sky over Chechnya," Krylya Rodiny (January 1996):1- 5, FBIS-UMA-96-055-S, 20 March 1996, 34. Duncan Lennox, ed., Jane's Air-Launched Weapons.   (Surrey, UK: Jane's Information Group,
1999).28  Pavel Felgenhauer, "The Chechen Campaign," Internet,
Ralph Peters, "The Russian Way of War," The Wall Street Journal, 13 December 1999, A-34.
Thomas Valasek, "Interview with Shamil Basayev: Chechen Commander of the Eastern Section of the Chechen Front," Jane's Defense Weekly, 6 October 1999, Internet. http://www.cdi.org/issues/Europe/basayev.html. accessed 3 March 2001, 1.
M.A. Smith, "The Second Chechen War: The All Russian Context," in The Second Chechen War, ed. Anne C.Aldis (London: Conflict Studies Research Centre, 2000), 4-7.
"Second Chechnya War 1999-???," Federation of American Scientists, Military Analysis Network, Internet, http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/ops/war/chechnya2.htm. accessed 14January 2001, 6-7.   
"Whirlwind over the Caucasus," Internet, http://members.nbci.com/_XMCM/082499/aviation/nws001/afm104.htm. accessed 24 February 2001, 2.
"Whirlwind over the Caucasus," Internet, http://members.nbci.com/_XMCM/082499/aviation/nws001/afm104.htm. accessed 24 February 2001, 2. Beginning 2 August 1999, the Russian Air Force flew sorties only sporadically until 23 September 1999 when massive air and missile attacks opened the air campaign. The commander of the Russian Air Force, Colonel-General Anatoly Kornukov reported the numbers cited in the text during a press conference 17 November 1999. Venik, "Chechen War Chronicles, 17 November 1999" Internet, http://members.nbci.com/082499/aviation/chechnya/111799.htm. accessed 25 February 2001, 1. The former commander of the Russian Air Force, General Deinekin, reported that the Russian Air Force flew 14,000 combat and combat support sorties during the First Chechen War. Benjamin S. Lambeth, Russia's Airpower in Crisis (Washington: Smithsonian Institute Press, 1999), 129. Between 29 November 1994 and late December 1995, the Russian Air Force flew over 9,000 sorties, more than 5,300 to conduct ground attack and bombing. Aerial reconnaissance sorties numbered 672 during this time. Vyacheslav Kondratyev, "The Awesome Sky over Chechnya," Krylya Rodiny (January 1996):1-5, FBIS-UMA-96- 055-S, 20 March 1996, 35.  
46 "Second Chechnya War 1999-???," Federation of American Scientists, Military Analysis Network, Internet, http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/ops/war/chechnya2.htm. accessed 14January 2001, 6-12.   
Jeff Thomas, "Russia's Second Chechen War," (Washington: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1999) Internet, http://www.csis.org/ruseura/ex999.html. accessed 23 December 2000, 1.
"Whirlwind over the Caucasus," Internet, http://members.nbci.com/_XMCM/082499/aviation/nws001/afm104.htm. accessed 24 February 2001, 2.
"Whirlwind over the Caucasus," Internet, http://members.nbci.com/_XMCM/082499/aviation/nws001/afm104.htm. accessed 24 February 2001, 2.
Duncan Lennox, ed., Jane's Air-Launched Weapons.  (Surrey, UK: Jane's Information Group, 1999). "Whirlwind over the Caucasus," Internet,
Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 5-0 Doctrine for Planning Joint Operations (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1995), I-13.
104 Jeff Thomas, "Russia's Second Chechen War," (Washington: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1999) Internet, http://www.csis.org/ruseura/ex999.html. accessed 23 December 2000,
2.105  Venik, "Chechen War Chronicles, 29 September 1999 to 7 October 1999" Internet,
Simon McGregor-Wood, "The Spoils of War," ABC News Online, 3 April 2000. Internet, http://www.abcnews.go.com/sections/world/DailyNews/Chechnya000403_water.html . accessed 17 January 2001.
Venik, "Chechen War Chronicles, 12 April 2000," Internet,   
Paul Jackson, ed., Jane's All the Worlds Aircraft 1999-2000, (Surrey, UK: Jane's Information Group, 1999), 424-429.
announced that he was pulling his fighters back from Dagestan on 12 September 1999. 
106
107
The second objective, closely related to the first, required Russian jets to attack the rebel's material base. According to the commander of the Russian Air Force, aircrews hit seven supply bases, seven training camps and four weapon storage sites during the first week of air strikes.
While these strikes met with varying degrees of success, they were insufficient to destroy the rebel supply base. Russian air attacks may have had the effect of spreading out an already distributed supply system and increasing the risk of concentrating large amounts of material.
The last objective most closely resembled NATO's aerial attacks against Belgrade in 1999.
To cut the rebels off from their financial base, based largely on illegal gasoline trading, planners selected several industrial targets. By 26 September 1999, Russian air strikes had destroyed Chechnya's oil refinery, a key component of the region's economy, and shutdown Grozny's gas distribution plant. Along with the oil infrastructure, Russian warplanes destroyed the regional communications network, including the television and cellular phone facilities. 
108
Russian precision-guided weapons were well suited to the targets they attacked. However, the Russian Air Force did not employ them in sufficient numbers to reduce collateral damage to acceptable levels, by western standards. 
120
121
122
Compliance with international laws of war and the cost in personnel and equipment determined whether Russia's use of airpower during the Second Chechen War was acceptable.
The Hague and Geneva Conventions, along with customary law establish definite rules regarding how combatants wage war. These customs and treaties describe four general principles of the law: proportionality, discrimination or distinction, unnecessary suffering, and military necessity. 
120
122
The first two principles, proportionality and discrimination are particularly germane to Russian Air Force operations in Chechnya.
According to the law of war, "the loss of life and damage to property must not be out of proportion to the military advantage to be gained." The principle of proportionality requires planners to "consider the collateral effects of the attack and must ensure that the military advantage to be gained by the attack outweighs the risk of death or damage to civilian life and property." Furthermore, the most fundamental principle of the law of war, the principle of discrimination, requires that combatants must be distinguished from non-combatants. The rules regarding targeting, stemming from the law of war and the Hague Convention, prohibit the attack of undefended towns, dwellings, or buildings. 
123
124
The most horrible thing is that Russian planes bombed, this evening, residential areas. That is a most sacrilegious thing. Everyday the Russian command declares that they are not bombing [the] Chechen population, that they are bombing places where terrorists are located. I can officially assure you that there is not on terrorists who suffered from those [strikes], even if they were here. Over four hundred people have been killed in the month of bombing raids, and one-third of those killed are women and children. 
125
Secretary of State, expressing her deep concern, said, "while they (Russia) have had concerns 
123
128
Contrary to its goals, the air campaign may have created new enemies among the Chechen population Russia hopes to govern. "Every bomb which falls on Chechnya today produces tens of people who are capable of doing anything to fight Russians." 
129
Secondly, bombing campaigns aimed at destroying industrial infrastructure have significant adverse effects on the end state and post-conflict operations. Finally, aircraft must be capable of conducting precision attacks in all weather conditions. If the future is indeed the stepchild of Somalia and Chechnya, as former Marine Corps commandant, General Charles Krulak postulated, then military planners would benefit greatly from a careful study of Russia's operations in the Caucasus 132 . Airpower planners and air force commanders should pay particular attention to the limits of airpower in small-scale, highintensity conflicts against resolute opponents in difficult terrain. As General Charles Boyd, the former deputy commander of the U.S. European Command wrote soon after Operation Deliberate Force: "Despite its appeal to the amateur strategist, a reliance on airpower alone-the strike optionin this type of terrain with these kinds of targets has never held any real promise of conflict resolution." 133 If a key to success exists, it must surely be the thoughtful combination of all capabilities brought by a joint force, operating with a singularity of purpose. 