# ID: 639c7d9bd1cc4236ade444d149fdf4fb
# Title: The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
In the French and Indian War, Britain's arrogance in land warfare in North America resulted in two years of near constant defeat and devastation to its forces and colonial residents. However, through an open-minded analysis of the situation, Britain improved its planning, logistics, diplomacy, tactics, operations, and strategy to make the most of its naval superiority. In a war where agile, irregular, and amphibious warfare were required to win, Britain adapted and won. Their processes and actions provide a classic study for modern-day joint operations leaders to examine.
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal for the well-rounded strategist, not a how-to or how-not-to manual. Geoffrey Till's often-quoted advice is worth mentioning again:
The chief utility of history for the analysis of present and future lies in its ability, not to point out lessons, but to isolate things that need thinking about. . . . History provides insights and questions, not answers. 
2
3
By the mid-1750s in Europe, diplomatic and royal machinations had led to a reversal of old allies. Prussia and Britain aligned against Austria and France contra their alignment in the previous War of Austrian Succession, which occurred from 1740-48. 
4
5
The French had operated in the area using the soft power of trade with as little impingement on the indigenous way of life as possible. Few French settlers entered the area, preferring to stay near the Saint Lawrence River settlements. The interior was traversed by French frontier traders, coureur de bois, which sometimes intermarried with the Native Americans and adopted their lifestyle. As Richard White stated, the French government, traders, and trappers often sought a middle ground with the Native Americans by employing a light footprint model of colonialism. The various tribes of the Ohio region managed a largely peaceful coexistence with the French, because they were not entering the Ohio region in large numbers and did not try to acquire massive plots of land for agriculture or speculation. 
6
7
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal by one of Washington's indigenous allies. Washington found out the hard way that his objectives and the objectives of his Native American allies were not exactly the same. Fearing his force would be overcome by a follow-on French force, Washington retreated to an impromptu fort and awaited the French response. A larger French force did come and enveloped the poorly constructed fort. Washington surrendered under what he thought were generous but normal terms written in French, only to find out later that he had admitted to assassinating the French diplomatic envoy. Thus, brewing tensions in Europe were further enflamed by actions in North America. Along with the reversed alliances in Europe, this war would reverse the history of where European wars would start. 
8
When word of Washington's failure made its way to London, the British leadership felt they could not let the French insistence on retaining the Ohio Country stand. The British decided to send the experienced British Army major general Edward Braddock to take command of the military effort in North America. Braddock arrived in early 1755 with two understrength British Army regiments from Ireland. Upon arriving, Braddock managed to upset everyone he came into contact with due to his arrogance. Having had no experience in North America, Braddock developed an ambitious but complicated plan to subdue French influence in North America.
Braddock's strategic plan was to cut off French resupply by taking key points along the Saint Lawrence River while simultaneously taking the Forks of the Ohio forcefully with a main column that he would lead personally. His would be an overland route through wilderness with a huge logistical train. The other three would be amphibious campaigns in one form or another. One would have a small unit leader at its head and move to meet one of Europe's best French generals along the Lac du Saint Sacrament (later named Lake George) and the Lake Champlain corridor to secure the prominent French Fort St. Frederic (Crown Point). Another, led by the governor of Massachusetts, would attack along Lake Ontario to secure Fort Niagara and control the Great Lakes supply chain. The final campaign would conduct a seaborne landing to secure French forts in Nova Scotia. The three amphibious operations were designed to cut off the Ohio backcountry from further French support. 
9
10
Following the debacle of the 1755 British campaigning season, the British colonists' frontier settlements were extremely vulnerable. The only thing stopping French forces from pushing east and suing for peace was the fact that a huge chunk of their force had expended itself at the Battle of Lake George, including the capture of senior French general Jean Armand, Baron von Dieskau. The New France governor general Pierre de Rigaud Vaudreuil de Cavagnial and his Troupes de la Marines officer brother, Francois-Pierre de Rigaud de Vaudreuil (often referred to simply as "Rigaud" to distinguish the two brothers), were both North American born and bred. They supported the indigenous way of war and released their native allies, with and without French accompaniment, to terrorize the British colonies' frontier. From the winter of 1756 to 1757, the British frontier was pushed back to within 200 miles of the Atlantic Ocean. The French wanted to create a buffer to protect their vulnerable line of supply from Canada to Louisiana. They thought that if they thoroughly demoralized those on the frontier, they could focus on keeping their native allies happy long
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal enough for French forces in Europe and at sea to mitigate the British numerical advantage in North America and at sea. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War
America. Colonel James Wolfe, a Pitt favorite, had learned much from Rochefort that would be applied later at Louisbourg and Quebec. During the winter of 1757-58, Pitt, First Lord of the Admiralty George Anson; and commander in chief of the forces, Field Marshal John Ligonier, focused on British Army and Royal Navy strategic coordination. The three examined British history, lessons learned, and expert testimony on amphibious operations. Britain may have had some bickering between the navy and the army at sea and in the field, but the London leadership was adamant that the strategic superiority of the Royal Navy had to be married with the British Army to make the most of the nation's strengths. 
17
18
19
In addition to planning strategic objectives, Pitt, Anson, and Ligonier were deeply involved in assigning the leadership to the specific campaigns. Anson and Ligonier were not averse to skipping over older, more experienced officers in their respective services for younger, more enterprising officers. They assigned Major General James Abercromby as military head in North America, who might have been the exception to the previous statement, but he had strong support from the king.
In any case, the plan was not much different from Loudoun's, but the key was in the preparation in London and the execution by more junior officers. Ligonier chose Brigadier General John Forbes and Major General Jeffrey Amherst for specific and separate campaigns to achieve while Abercromby would focus on the main thrust with the well-respected acting Brigadier General George Augustus Howe, acting as his deputy. Abercromby would attack Fort Carillon (later named Ticonderoga), where Montcalm had secured the Lakes Champlain and George corridor. Amherst's task was to complete the capture of Nova Scotia by taking the seaside fortress of Louisbourg. Forbes got the unenviable job of taking Fort Duquesne at the Forks of the Ohio. Forbes would be cutting a new road to the forks again and had both Braddock's and Washington's failures to avoid. However, the support infrastructure would be better this time, and he promised himself to be patient in the task.
Lord Loudoun's one major accomplishment was setting up a robust logistical system to support the obvious campaign lines. Along with the enhanced logistical capabilities came improved intelligence and movement security provided by Rangers and British regulars using newly adopted (by the British) woodcraft and irregular warfare techniques. Finally, Pitt removed the leadership regulations and funding issues that had so annoyed the colonial governments. The result was a surge of militia and recruits into the British regiments for use in the three campaigns. Along with the stronger footing of the land forces, Britain retained its naval superiority. The Royal Navy increased the number of ships and sailors under sail and committed a huge effort to seal off French ports and the Mediterranean. The result for New France was severe shortages of everything, including food. The Royal Navy and the British Army had developed a close working relationship and it would deliver huge benefits in 1758. 
20
21
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War
nearly every point around the British Atlantic, including Scottish Highlanders, Irish regulars, troops formally stationed in Hanover, English regiments, Royal Americans, and garrisoned troops in Nova Scotia. American Rangers were present, including companies from Rogers' Rangers, but led by his brother, James Rogers, because Robert Rogers was personally requested by Abercromby to assist with the Ticonderoga campaign. 
22
23
24
25
26
27
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War
Nothing more can be said to explain the battle. It was simply poorly led by a British general, again. 
28
On 12 August 1758, his batteau (canoes of Canadian design) and whaleboat force headed for Oswego along creeks, rivers, and Lake Oneida. At Fort Oswego, they turned north onto the open Lake Ontario to Fort Frontenac. Upon arrival, he landed on a small island and immediately conducted a reconnaissance of the fort and found it lightly defended. The garrison was full of supplies and was completely surprised by his arrival on the beach below the fort. On 28 August 1758, Bradstreet took Frontenac after a light defense by the small French force. He had no desire to take prisoners, so he let them free with personal possessions and a promise from the French commander to release an equal amount of British prisoners on his honor. Bradstreet's force loaded up their boats with booty and destroyed what they could not carry. In the span of 24 hours, one of France's most important supply forts had been reduced to ashes. Bradstreet had not lost a single man in the amphibious raid. Although not anywhere near the size of the Louisbourg amphibious operation, Bradstreet knew frontier logistics, picked people who trusted him, and knew how to keep the element of surprise from being compromised-three critical components of an amphibious operation. 
29
30
As 1759 dawned, Pitt realized that Abercromby was not the man for the job of closing down the war in North America. Amherst was named his successor and Abercromby was sent back to Britain with a face-saving promotion to lieutenant general. After the great successes of 1758, including his own at Louisbourg, Amherst was eager to take advantage of the situation in 1759 and put together a plan to force the capitulation of New France. Forbes died from his illness in early 1759 but wrote stridently to Amherst to take his lessons about dealing with the tribes. Amherst learned much in 1758, but Forbes's prescient letters were not part of his education. Amherst was as arrogant as Braddock or Loudoun but took command when the strategic calculations of the tribes were changing. Wolfe chafed under Amherst's command and had gone back to Britain to lobby for the mission to take Quebec in 1759. Bradstreet was promoted to colonel but relegated back to his role as chief logistician for Amherst's army. 
31
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal assistance, but their main accomplishment in this area was convincing the tribes around the eastern Great Lakes not to openly support the French. 
32
33
34
35
36
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal had honorable reputations in Europe to uphold and the nature of the warfare around Quebec was nasty. Additionally, Wolfe had fallen gravely ill and feverish, likely from kidney stones and rheumatism irritated by stress. With steep cliffs, artillery command of the river, and seemingly no suitable amphibious landing locations, the area around fortress Quebec was more challenging than Duquesne, Frontenac, Louisbourg, or Niagara. As for troops at Quebec, the French effectively outnumbered the British two to one. As the summer ebbed away, Wolfe became desperate. Would his legacy be death in the field from a weak constitution and dishonor from war crimes? The French remained hopeful that they could hold out until the winter, when the British advantages would be mitigated and the French advantages improved by the Canadian winter. By late August, Wolfe knew his chances of decisively engaging Montcalm were slipping away. He decided on an incredibly risky plan of landing upriver from Quebec on a small shingle beach named L'Anse au Foulon at the base of steep cliffs. He risked all for a final roll of the dice. Had he failed, it would have been one of the great disasters of British military history. Luckily, his boldness paid off. 
37
38
39
40
41
Overnight, Montcalm still thought the northeastern diversion was the main landing force and the Plains of Abraham force was the diversion. Bougainville's overwatch force near Cap Rouge feared the worst when morning came and they saw the British fleet and all of their landing craft sailing downriver to the landing site. Once Montcalm saw the situation for what it was, he had little time to decide what to do. Wolfe spared no time in getting the rest of his force to the plateau and deployed across the width of it. He posted Rangers and natives in the woods along the flank and began sniping at the forming French defenses. Montcalm decided to deploy the majority of his forces and face Wolfe immediately. Although Montcalm held a numerical advantage, much of his force was militia and allied tribes. These troops had been spectacular on the frontier, but this would be a traditional European engagement that would require discipline and precise maneuvers. These advantages belonged to Wolfe, whose force was almost entirely comprised of British regulars. Montcalm, fearing Wolfe's force would continue to grow, decided to advance to contact. The disorder in the French ranks began to show immediately with an uneven line and undisciplined movements. The British held fast and fired volleys in strict discipline. The British fire was far better controlled and more deadly. As French discipline broke down completely, the British fixed bayonets and charged forward and chased the French force back to the walls of Quebec. The two sides had lost an almost identical amount of men. Although Wolfe and Montcalm were dead, the British commanders pressed the advantage and reinvigorated the siege. Quebec surrendered on 17 September 1759. Wolfe's great gamble had succeeded. 
42
43
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal ments in 1760. As the 1760 campaigning season began, Amherst dispatched a force to the Cherokee homelands to ruthlessly quell the Cherokee rebellion and secure the rear. The fighting with the Cherokee would drag on for more than a year, but it was never a serious threat to Amherst's plan for Montreal. The force with which the Cherokee war was handled may have given the Seneca and the other Great Lakes tribes pause in their consideration of an uprising as well. Therefore, with his rear and flanks secure, Amherst focused on Montreal and the remaining French forces. In the winter of 1760, the French had counterattacked Quebec, but had failed to take it. When the news of Quiberon Bay arrived and they realized that the spring would not bring supplies and reinforcements from France, they fell back to Montreal to await the inevitable British assault. Amherst's plan was to use the rivers to attack from the east, west, and south. Although, these were not large-scale amphibious assaults like Wolfe's in 1759, they were amphibious operations in support of the three prongs. Working methodically but successfully to convince the French-allied tribes to abandon the French, it took him the entire 1760 campaign season to move three columns on Montreal. However, by early September, Amherst had obtained the French surrender and New France effectively ceased to exist. 
44
45
46
47
48
Britain's strength at sea was not always a foregone conclusion. France did rebuild its navy after the French and Indian War and use it to a much greater effect during the American Revolutionary War. However, Britain's insistence on linking the Royal Navy to its core strategy in the French and Indian War, while also improving in other areas, was decisive. Although not continual, this concept of land and naval coordination was so important to Britain that a century and a half later British statesman Sir Edward Grey would say, "The British Army should be a projectile to be fired by the British Navy." 
49
Although amphibious operations were ubiquitous, both sides used them in different ways. France generally used small-scale riverine and lake amphibious operations to deliver combat power, often made up of irregular forces. Britain also learned to conduct these smaller-scale amphibious operations with light troops. However, Britain was far more effective in using large-scale lake, riverine, and seaborne amphibious operations to land large quantities of troops at strategic locations. The decisive difference in North America was the British Army's willingness to improve itself and learn from its earlier mistakes. Almost from a standing start, they grew and, in some cases, mastered frontier warfare. The same can be said for the rising competence in logistical concerns in the wilderness and in amphibious operations. Their competence in frontier war and logistics combined with their willingness to use the Royal Navy's professionalism in amphibious operations meant Britain was able to create and sustain an incredibly flexible force. In modern terminology, Britain became a truly joint force by mastering strategic operational planning, utilizing mass in support of
The Amphibious Imperative of the French and Indian War MCU Journal strategic objectives, and enforcing the terms of unity of effort between naval and land forces. From 1758 onward, Britain was able to deliver decisive combat power to almost any point on the globe. The Bay of Fundy, Louisbourg, Frontenac, Fort Duquesne, and Quebec campaigns were turning points at each stage of the French and Indian War. Without them and the combined force amphibious operations that enabled them, the war in North America probably could not have been won. 
50