# ID: 64f4bd932a9f41d7b09ab588c9f9a45b
# Title: Inculcating Quality Concepts in the US Air Force: Right Music, Wrong Step
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1994.0
# Fulltext:
In its effort to inculcate total quality management concepts, the Air Force neglected to consider critical aspects of educational psychology. As a result, concepts were neither universally understood nor accepted, and an attitudinal backlash undermines the future Quality Air Force culture. Subject matter based on military history and experience, and a reoriented philosophy toward initial quality education and training, provides a different approach to inculcating quality concepts. Life's a dance you learn as you go, Sometimes you lead, sometimes you follow. Don't worry 'bout what you don't know, Life's a dance you learn as you go.
can get its people on the dance floor, stepping in the same direction, in time with the music. Finally, this paper proposes curricula subject matter and a lesson outline for an improved QAF introductory course.
"We must understand the ways human beings learn and acquire new information." 
5
Therefore, teaching concepts, or attempting to inculcate concepts, requires a different approach than teaching factual information. A renown educator, Walter B. Kolesnik contends "a new, unfamiliar concept is best introduced by relating it to a known idea." 
6
Instilling new concepts requires attitudinal reform. According to James M. Olson and Mark P, Zanna's "Attitudes and Attitude Change," "The frames of reference we build up are composed of the attitudes we have and the beliefs we have."
7
The individual should not be made to feel that his existing attitudes are basically unsound or are all wrong. Rather he should be led to believe that the proposed new position is but a relatively minor adjustment of his original one and that it is compatible with his own set of values. 
9
10
The sustained effort must include repeated message transmission, Mublk commitment to the change, a plan of instruction founded on sound educational theory and psychology, and educators skilled in communication appreciative of the nature of their students, the nature of the change, and the nature of the environment after the change occurs. These aspects represent the crux of the difficulty experienced during the Air Force effort to inculcate quality.
When the Air Force initiated its quality inculcation efforts, it focused on Total Quality Management (TQM), as espoused by W. Edwards Deming the acknowledged "Father of TQM". Students of the Executive Quality   Unfortunately, rather than addressing the direct relationship between the old management techniques and operating styles and those required by TQM (and why TQM was fht new method), much of the material required a "leap of faith." This course violated the first principle. It failed to establish relationships between old and new! Further, instructors failed to appreciate the student's frame of reference, thereby giving less than adequate consideration to the second principle-understanding frames of reference.
Military members, as a group, share a frame of reference different from that of other social groups. Much of that frame of reference is based on the nature of the profession-the profession of arms. Reference points such as authority, loyalty, standardization, and status represent factors the educator must consider when attempting to define an Air Force frame of reference. Bettinghaus describes the challenge of addressing this phenomenon through his description of authoritarian figures.
People possessing an authoritarian personality tend to be highly reliant on the moral authority of their own reference group, tend to adhere fairly rigidly to middle-class values, and become preoccupied with the relative power and status of other people and with their own power and status. Such people tend to make absolute judgments regarding the values they hold, and to see the world in black and white. They are not easily swayed by messages that might seem to contradict the beliefs they have or the authorities they rely on, despite the judgments of others that the message is rational and logical.13
Because it failed to focus on the group frame of reference, the Air Force missed an opportunity to structure introductory course content to facilitate the understanding and acceptance of the new quality concepts. Rather than the stereotypical "do-it-because-the-boss-said-so" approach, the Air Force should have related quality concepts to current modes of operation, widely recognized organizational problems, and military history. Had such relationships been explored during course development, those designated (vice volunteers or recruits) to instruct would be more operationally knowledgeable, as well as more highly skilled in persuasive communication techniques.
1 3 Bettinghaus, p. 58.
As a result, the Air Force violated the third principle, in that instructors were not provided adequate instruction and training for the type of courses they were charged to teach. Although many attended civilian courses and clinics targeting TQM, the focus remained (rightly) on civilian business/industry application and provided no militaryspecific relationship analysis. Therefore, the newly TQ'd communicators shared no comparative reference point from which to teach, nor did they share a common foundation to provide their students basic information. Failure to take maximum advantage of senior Air Force leaders with quality experience and orientation (to teach the instructors and provide a historical reference point) put the designated communicators in the position of attempting to persuade a tough audience without a full compliment of tools. The overall end result. The Air Force manufactured a perceived lack of credibility which exacerbated the beginnings of an almost universal attitudinal backlash.
By 1994, that backlash is real and expressed openly among senior officers attending the Air War College and among some who addressed the college from the stage. If the Air Force is committed to the quality culture, it must be concerned about this phenomenon. Recouping those who reject the quality culture may not be entirely possible, particularly as long as mixed signals come from the highest levels of command. The Air Force can, however, make a commitment to those who will next lead.
Possible solutions take two forms: curricula (subject matter) and presentation (educator training). From an implementation standpoint, both areas should be addressed simultaneously. Meaning that educators receive additional training with the new curriculum material. From a resource accounting standpoint (critical budgets), curriculum must serve as the primary focal point. Curriculum developers can change subject matter content and lesson focus quickly and relatively inexpensively. Presentation, or educator training, is more time intensive and involves greater resource expenditure. The remainder of this paper describes suggested subject matter which address basic quality concepts through the educational psychology principles mentioned above. Basic QAF concepts and definitions are outlined in The Quality Approach, a quick reference guide published by the Air Force Quality Institute.
"Quality Air Force is an integrated system of three components built on Leadership. Quality Focus, the Improvement Process, and Quality in Daily Operations are the system elements." 14 Conceptual adjectives furti,'-r define each of those elements, and leadership. Those adjectives are the QAF "basic concepts": visioning, customer focus, empowerment, teamwork, data-based decision making (using tools and metrics), process improvement, and leadership involvement. Each concept is historically proven; addressing that historical relationship helps students begin to expand their frames of reference.
The military student does not seek to learn from history the minutiae of method and technique. In every age these are influenced by the characteristics of weapons currently available and the means at hand for maneuvering, supplying, and controlling combat forces. But research does bring to light those fundamental principles, and their combinations and applications, which, in the past, have produced success.Is General Douglas MacArthur QAF Leadership QAF leadership is the basis of the QAF culture. Chapter II in The Quality Approach provides a quick reference guide for aspiring, quality leaders-definitions, recipes, and duty descriptions. It does not provide an historical foundation for those definitions, recipes, or duty descriptions. Carl von Clausewitz wrote about the military genius or the genius for war in his classic stady, On War. He described key attributes of the military genius which apply directly to the QAF leadership style addressed in The Quality Approach. Among the attributes Clausewitz described are: courage; intellect; coup d'oeil; determination; strength of character, will, and body; self-control; and a sense of human dignity. 
16
Clausewitz addresses courage from two perspectives: "courage in the face of personal danger, and courage to accept responsibility." 
17
15
16
Clausewitz refers to "the powers of intellect"--combinations of intelligence, sensitivity, discrimination in judgment, and the ability to remain calm even amid turmoil (classic chance, fog, and friction). The genius has "first, an intellect that, even in the darkest hour, retains some glimmerings of the inner light which leads to truth;
and second, the courage to follow this faint light wherever it may lead." 1 9 QAF Values and Principles address competence, tenacity, respect for the individual, and dedication to the mission as critical QAF leadership aspects 2 0
Powers of the intellect directly relate to perceptiveness and insightfulness.
The Clausewitzian concept of coup d'oeil "refers to the quick recognition of a truth that the mind would ordinarily miss or would perceive only after long study and reflection." 2 1 Today we might call this capability intuitive insight. Within the QAF culture, intuitive insight is part of the visioning process. A vision is more than a statement of "what we want to become." 
22
23
24
The attribute of determination is linked to intellect. Clausewitizian determination "proceeds from a special type of mind, from a strong rather than a brilliant one." 2 5 This is the determination the QAF leader uses when making a decision that may have undesirable consequences, but is the correct and proper decision to achieve the goal. It is the determination the leader maintains as he or she manages the change to a quality culture.
Determination is also closely linked to strength of character, will, and body. In this "catch-all" category, Clausewitz describes several leadership attributes which can be grouped as personal and physical coping skills.
I 8 The Quality Approach, pp. 11-3 -5. 
19
26
Closely related are self-control and a sense of dignity; Clausewitz uses these terms in the same manner we do today. The critical point regarding self-control is "the urge to act rationally at all times." 
27
28
29
What this task requires in the way ot higher intellectual gifts is a sense of unity and a power of judgment raised to a marvelous pitch of vision, which easily grasps and dismisses a thousand remote possibilities which an ordinary mind would labor to identify... the sovereign eye of genius itself, would still fall short of historical significance without the qualities of character and temperament we have described. 
30
Quality Focus is dominated by senior leader activity. It includes the vision of the quality culture subordinates work toward, strategies and plans to get there, and a public (demonstrated) commitment to quality concepts. It also includes leaders at every level who support the vision by aligning local strategies and plans with those at the top and who likewise demonstrate their commitment through daily activities and operational procedures.. The process of working toward a defined vision, in the quality culture, is cyclical: determining direction toward a goal, developing activities to get there, implementing the activities, determining if progress is made, and adjusting as necessary (determining direction). The cycle continues for every activity. Communication skills are critical during each phase of the cycle because "everyone must know the organizational plans and strategies, and understand how those 
Therefore I say: 'Know the enemy and know yourself; in a hundred battles you will never be in peril.
When you are ignorant of the enemy but know yourself, your chances of winning or losing are equal. If ignorant of both your enemy and of yourself, you are certain in every battle to be in peril. 
32
Further, the QAF leader learns to realize when change needs to be made. The successful QAF leader uses this knowledge to make ordinary resources and forces (capabilities) extraordinary. 
33
34
39
In the QAF, the Improvement Process defines the organization's operating style. The QAF Credo calls for an operating style that inspires continuous improvement. 
40
The structured approach to process improvement includes using cyclic problem-solving techniques (described under Quality Focus above) and basic analytical tools. The end result is a data-based decision making process, or "management by fact." 
42
Comparative data collection, or benchmarking, has its historical basis in the 4 th century B.C. Sun Tzu's concept of knowing your enemy is exactly what benchmarking data gives you.
The elements of the art of war are measurement of space, estimation of quantities, calculations, comparisons, and chances of victory. Quantities derive from measurement, figures from quantities, comparisons from figures, and victory from comparisons. Every individual from the highest commander to the lowest private must always remember that inaction and neglect of opportunities will warrant more severe censure than an error of judgment in the action taken.
The criterion by which a commander judges the soundness of his own decision is whether it will further the intentions of the higher commander. 
52
For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. We need leaders who are grounded in the principles of command, yet who are responsive to new ideas; who have not only the flexibility to cope with and direct change, but the audacity to take the measured risk in order to gain victory on the battlefield. 5 4
The QAF leader demonstrates Quality in Daily Operations in the way he or she conducts themselves and in the ways they interact with subordinates and superiors. For example, using quality concepts during staff meetings (start on time, stop on time, stick to the agenda [passed out before hand), use a facilitator to keep things on track, and so forth) sets the tone and the example. The QAF leader rewards and recognizes those actions (individual and team)
that support the quality culture and organizational goals. A simple voice in praise can reap huge returns.
You must get around and show interest in what your subordinates are doing even if you don't know much about the technique of their work. And when you are making these visits, try to pass out praise when due, as well as corrections or criticisms. 
55
Do essential things first. There is not enough time for the commander to do everything. A leader is best when he is neither seen nor heard. Not so good when he is adored and glorified. Worst when he is hated and despised. "Fail to honor people, they will fail to honor you." But of a Great Leader, when his work is done, his aim fulfilled, the people will all say, "We did this ourselves." 57
Basic QAF concepts are timeless. During the past 50 years, technology advancements caused minor evolutions in leadership styles and organizational structures, particularly in the military services. The 2 0 th century Air Force remained individually focused in a stove pipe. Leaders concentrated on promotability rather than accountability, acceptability rather than responsibility, and on retainability rather than sustainability. The demands of the 2 !st century require change--change in organization and another evolution in leadership style. Overcoming the comfort of the old is difficult only if history's security blanket is not used to warm modem men and women to the task at hand.
Let it be admitted that the modem technological revolution has confronted us with military problems of unprecedented complexity, problems made all the more difficult because of the social and political turbulence of the age in which we live. But precisely because of these revolutionary developments, let me suggest that you better study military history, indeed all history, as no generation of military men have studied it before.5S
The Quality Air Force culture is not a new concept. It is a combination of the best aspects of cultures, management techniques, leadership styles, and organizational structures from military history. It is this combination that makes understanding and acceptance difficult for some. It is on the one hand, a radical change, while on the other hand, a renewal from a distant past. Some aspects feel familiar, some feel new. Against the backdrop of an entire world in change, adopting the QAF culture now may seem foolish. In fact, now is the only time available.
QAF leaders have the courage to move forward into the 21st century while honoring our quality heritage.
In essence, courage is the ability to react positively to the challenge of the unknown. The unknown is in the main synonymous with the future, whose events are anticipated only in the light of experience, the sole heritage of the past. 59 J.M. Cameron PRESENTATION TECHNIQUES 57Lao-TZU, Ibid., p. 182. 58Frank Craven, Ibid., p. 170. 
59
If we wish to think clearly, we must cease imitating; if we wish to ceae imitating, we must make uae of our imagination. We must train ourselves for the unexpected in place of training others for the cut and dried. Audacity, and not caution, must be our watchword.6-J.F.C. Fuller
The quality culture is part of the Air Force today, yesterday, and tomorrow. It is, however, dependent upon each Air Force member. the senior leader for demonstrated guidance, the educators for communicating the concepts, and each individual member for accepting the challenge to carry on the heritage of excellence they inherited. The transmission methods and techniques continue to be critical steps in the folk dance of quality.
Without those steps, dancers cannot keep time to the rhythm of change-there can be no dance. This is a 21st century concert: Those attuned will lead; the rest will follow, learning as they go.
6 5
Westenhoff, p. 144.
Let it be said: 'It was done right, it was done well.' Perfection must be your credo of work and quality your way of life.
Konstantin
Tzu's perspective, it is a matter of recognition, willingness to innovate, and technique. The QAF leader recognizes the limitations and endless possibilities in every situation. The cyclic nature of work in the quality culture provides opportunities for developing that recognition skill. The cyclical quality focus process is also circular. Not in the "what goes around comes around" circle of repetition, but in a circle of reproduction. As each cycle ends, a new cycle begins; it is a continuous improvement cycle/circle. 31The QualityApproach, p. 1-2. 32 Sun Tzu, The Art of War, translated by Samuel B. Griffith, Oxford University Press, 1963, p. 39. 33 Sun Tzu defines extraordinary forces by example: they act when and where their blows are not anticipated. Ibid., p. 91. 34Ibid., p. 91. . . What they need to observe is your obvious, visible and dramatic, determination to batter down all barriers to understanding, and then implementation." 38 The need for open lines of communication (LOC) is no less important for effective organizational functioning than it is for effective battle management-LOC, a concept we routinely study vis-a-vis winning battles. The sk illed communicator can keep those LOCs open, often without saying a word. The former Chief of Naval Operations, Elmo Zumwalt, relates the following story when describing how his ship moved from last to first in efficiency and effectiveness among those in his battle group:
42  
42  
54John 0. Marsh, Jr. Leadership: Quotations from the Military Tradition, p. 25 1.
54John 0. Marsh, Jr. Leadership: Quotations from the Military Tradition, p. 25 1.
Bettinghaus, Erwin P., Persuasive Communication, Third Edition, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1980, p.  49.   
Kolesnik, Walter B., Educational Psychology, Second Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1970, p. 280.   
Bettinghaus, p. 24.    9Oison, James M. and Mark P. Zanna, "Attitudes and Attitude Change," Annual Review ofPsychology,  Vol. 44, 1993, p. 130.   
1bid., p. 105.
1bid., p. 106.
The Quality Approach, pp. 11-2 -6.
1bid.
Clausewitz, p. 112.   
Ibid., 
The Quality Approach, p. 111-1.
37Westenhoff, p. 174. 3 3 Peters, p. 501.39  Peters, Thomas J. and Robert H. Waterman, In Search ofExcellence, Harper & Row Publishers, 1982,  pp. 236-237.   
, joint staff officer policies, and lines of authority from the President to incorporate quality began.
intended goal, and units routinely benchmark against other unit's operational readiness inspection results.
Benchmarking is not the "be all or end all" answer. The QAF leader, certain of his or her objectives, discriminates between "fog and friction" and the true facts. For example, General Mike Loh, Air Combat Command Commander, relates how the army commanders of France, England, and Austria went to Prussia to find out what made Frederick the Great's army so successful (benchmarking).45 They were, as Napoleon noted, "so infatuated with the manoeuvre of the otklique order, which was fit for nothing but to gain a few adjutant-majors a reputation." 4 6 They missed the point entirely, and Frederick reigned supreme for several more years. The key to Frederick's success was his understanding of the second category, cycle time.
Cycle time refers to a measurement of how long a process takes. A day is a 24-hour cycle; humans gestate on a 9-month cycle; the F-16 20mm cannon cycles 6,000 rounds per minute. 4 7 Frederick the Great understood this concept well.
He realized how artificially slow and heavy were the tactics of his age, and from the outset of his career he determined to base his system of war on what these tactics lacked-mobility and rapidity of fire. He states, 'A Prussian battalion is a moving battery... the rapidity in loading is such that it can triple the fire of all other troops. This gives to the Prussians a superiority of three to one.* 
48
Cost analysis involves more than a dollar computation. Cost can be calculated in terms of manpower, food, equipment--any resource required to complete a process. War in the 1 7 th century was an expensive undertaking, for both the victor and the vanquished. Napoleon's army was the most skilled at "living off of the land."
The French soldier lived on the enemy's country, and therefore the French trains needed but a fraction of the animals to be found in the Prussian supply columns. This added enormously to French mobility. 5 0 45 General Loh addressing the Air Command and Staff College, November 1992. 
46
World, Vol. 11, De Capo Press, 1955
, p. 196. 47 Modern Fighting Aircraft, F-16, Bernard Fitzsimons, ed., Salamander Books, Ltd., 1983, p. 40. 48 Fuller, p. 194 -195. 49 1bid., p. 414. 50
Presentation techniques focus on the educator as the primary communicator. However, communication is a continuous process and anyone who stands in front of an audience must be aware of the message they send-verbal and non-verbal. Bettinghaus' research indicates that "a single experience is all it takes for attitudes to begin to form."60 Senior leaders must decide to publicly commit to the quality culture and demonstrate their commitment both verbally and non-verbally at every opportunity. Their efforts help shape attitudes and frames of reference, and support classroom presentations by providing examples.
Classroom presentations must focus on quality concepts, described in day-to-day language. This language should encourage students to think in terms of the concepts, rather than learning a new vocabulary. *Too often students memorize definitions without having a real understanding of the concept defined." 61 It is permissible to use local terminology-it is not the word, but rather the concept that is critical. Supporting this idea, Tom Vanderpool, a quality expert at Gemini Consulting, says, "Abandoning the TQM acronym may be correct, abandoning the principles is not." 62 Additionally, educators must be enthusiastic, yet controlled, in their presentations. Individual and program creditability is on the line because "the quality movement's passion can be energizing, but it can also stray into zealotry" 63 ; an educator must not be viewed as a zealot. Finally, educators must feel free to exercise initiative and be creative in their approach to communicating: As Mary Stevens, director of product development at Herman Miller cautions, "Don't negate the uniqueness of your organization by adopting an off-the-shelf quality program."64
In the final analysis, creativity, combined with sound educational techniques based on proven educational theories, can ease the transition into the quality culture. Senior Air Force leaders must empower those chosen to educate to seize the initiative. Inculcating quality is a difficult task, requiring ingenuity, creativity, and a strong sense of who we are, where we are, and how we will cope with 2 1 st century challenges. J.F.C. Fuller's timeless words best describe the continuing challenge. 
60
Bettinghaus,
p. 22. 61Kolesnik,
p. 281. 62