# ID: 65c95cd1a652435ba297513d7ecf2e18
# Title: What's After Joint? Multi-Domain Operations as the Next Evolution in Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
This study describes potential problems facing future joint forces, and tests multi-domain theory as a possible solution. After framing the problem, this study uses micro-case studies and recent academic discussions to describe multi-domain operations and its conceptual evolution. It shows how the American joint model developed, the influence of the Goldwater-Nichols Act, and the difficulty of military transformation over the past three decades. After annotating some conceptual joint improvements, this study concludes with a specific discussion of why the adoption of multi-domain theory is an immediate requirement and improves joint operations through problem-based rather than Service-based solutions, integrated rather than deconflicted operations, and by creating options that exploit emergent opportunities.
15.
There are not more than five musical notes, yet the combinations of these five give rise to more melodies than can ever be heard. There are not more than five primary colors, yet in combination, they produce more hues than can ever be seen. There are not more than five cardinal tastes, yet combinations of them yield more flavors than can ever be tasted.
-Sun Tzu, The Art of War Picture a strategically important island within the operational reach of an enemy combatant. The enemy has garrisoned troops on this island, including a small air force contingent as a defense force. They also contest the surrounding seas with their naval assets. A traditional joint operation would likely unfold like this: the United States military would identify a joint force commander who would determine the best plan to control this decisive terrain, tell his subordinate service component commanders what role they have in the operation, and then use massive, overwhelming force to dominate the island. The Air Force typically establishes air superiority by destroying air defenses and the enemy air force before attacking operationally important targets to assist the landing. The Navy typically tasks a carrier or expeditionary strike group or to dominate the maritime environment around the island and transport marines for an amphibious landing. Depending on the size of the island, the Marine Corps or the Army would then execute the incursion, defeat the land forces, and establish control of the island. Three major assumptions are foundational to this scenario. First, that the United States has sufficient available combat power to defeat the enemy force. Second, time and space exist for the sequential operation described to occur. Finally, services can establish and maintain domain superiority.
Maintaining these assumptions will likely lead to disaster in future conflicts considering the increasing fiscal constraints, global US military requirements, technological proliferation, and adversary advances in anti-access strategies.
This study describes potential problems facing future joint forces and tests multi-domain theory as a possible solution. After framing the problem, this study uses micro-case studies and recent academic discussions to describe multi-domain operations and its conceptual evolution. It shows how the American joint model developed, the influence of the Goldwater-Nichols Act, and the difficulty of military transformation over the past three decades. After annotating some conceptual joint improvements, this study concludes with a specific discussion of why the adoption of multi-domain theory is an immediate requirement and how it may improve joint operations through problem-based rather than service-based solutions, integrated rather than deconflicted operations, and by creating options that exploit emergent opportunities.
Hew Strachan wrote that "getting the questions right is the first step to finding the correct answers." 
1
2
The US military can no longer assume that the Air Force will gain air dominance, the Navy maritime, the Army land dominance, and that space and cyber will remain uncontested.
Traditional battlespace conceptualization must shift since lack of access to one domain affects all domains. 
3
1
2 Helmuth Von Moltke, Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings, ed. Daniel Hughes (New  York: Random House Publishing Group, 1996), 149.  air, space, and the electromagnetic spectrum, including cyberspace. Competitors operate in, through, and between these mediums. Examples include Russian cyber intrusions, China's antisatellite testing, and Daesh's social media recruitment as a form of logistics. 
4
5
6
7
The military has invested billions of dollars in war-fighting capabilities that rely on the spectrum. 
8
Jeffery Reilly noted that it "mandates an innovative level of operational planning that facilitates prioritized allocation of bandwidth, efficient data exchange, flexible security requirements, and the organizational processes necessary to support the operation." 
9
10
11
12
13
Increasingly powerful, inexpensive, and commercially available technology is decreasing America's traditional technological advantage. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Multi-domain operations have existed organically throughout history. For example, militaries have used light, as a portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, for millennia to signal between elements. Much like launching a rock through the air via a sling, these simple examples show that the use of multiple domains in battle is not necessarily complicated. In these cases, the electromagnetic domain enables coordinated land action and the slingshot allows weapons greater flexibility through another medium. A more concrete example from antiquity exists in the case of Ramses III versus the Sea Peoples.
In 1178 B.C., Ramses III of Egypt faced a serious threat from the Sea Peoples and their capable naval forces. 
22
23
24
25
Breasted,
[65]
[66]
26
"presence of mind" to deal with the unexpected, which is more important than specific solutions. 
27
28
The central idea of acting in and through one domain to achieve effects in another, supports a vast increase in methods and an upsurge in flexibility to achieve objectives. Linking service actions on the tactical level requires a mentality shift on an enterprise level. America's contemporary enemies have implemented strategies to neutralize US superiority based on their study of American warfare over the last 30 years. The hallmarks have been superiority through numbers, technology, and tempo. The foundation of the American warfare must shift to flexibility; creating options, enabling freedom of action, increasing synchronization, and placing the enemy on the horns of a dilemma. Defending against a particular strength is possible with appropriate strategy and resources; defending against a flexible enemy with numerous options becomes costprohibitive, even if one could identify each possible method of attack.
Studies about future warfare are speculative and short-lived by nature. Since future war cannot be determined with extreme certainty, associated theories must speculate based on trends and context. As Colin Gray wrote, "Future warfare poses a severe challenge to the scholar. It cannot be researched, documented, illustrated with exciting maps, [nor] have its mysteries revealed conclusively." 29 Since war seems intractably linked to the human condition, fresh conflicts will provide new information on the trends of war thus necessitating an iterative approach to the study of future warfare and associated theories. Gray, borrowing from Clausewitz, concludes that war has an unchanging nature, but a highly variable character. 
30
As the maxim states, past performance does not indicate future success. However, since war is between people according to General Rupert Smith, establishing patterns of thought and organizing for flexibility allows the military to leverage current strengths in the creation of innovative dilemmas for their enemies. 
31
29
30 Ibid,
380;
Clausewitz,
On War,
[76]
[77]
[78]
[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]
[83]
[84]
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
31
32
33
34
The mentality behind multi-domain operations sets the conceptual bar higher. Leaders and planners must think about the second order effects of action to aid other domains. They must specifically focus on acting directly on another domain to achieve freedom of action rather than solely domination of one's own domain.
32 Geoffrey Wawro, The Franco-Prussian War: The German Conquest of France in 1870 -1871 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 189. The Prussians were "latecomer to sea power" necessitating a modification of Moltke's campaign plans in order to shift significant troop detachments for coastal defense. The French Navy in 1870 consisted of 470 ships and was second only to England's Royal Navy in overall maritime power. Moltke tasked the Prussian coastal detachments with defending against French marine landings rather than defeating the French Navy. Prussian technology and doctrine were not geared for land to sea effects.
The multi-domain approach to the introductory situation contains numerous possibilities.
For instance, an electromagnetic effect and space action blind the enemy early warning. A small force transported undersea, rather than by traditional air or maritime means, creates temporary lodgment. Air Forces enable maritime freedom of movement for a limited initial incursion. A Marine task force establishes a beachhead, followed by an Army Brigade Combat Team with short-range air defense and sensors to defend against maritime units. Civil engineering units build or adapt an expeditionary airfield for appropriate air forces to maintain local air superiority. The military then continues expanding its control over domains in both time and space. These actions indicate an evolution in current plateaued joint operations. that maintained both armies and navies faced the same challenges of joint coordination that General Grant and Admiral Porter addressed at the battle of Vicksburg." 39 Rather than a singular military organization, America organized services with different functions. While reviewing the lessons of World War II, America created a separate Air Force and began tackling inter-service coordination specifically.
The National Security Act of 1947 set forth the separate organization of the Army, Navy, and Air Force under the Authority of the Secretary of Defense. It also established unified combatant commands, directed the elimination of duplication within military acquisitions, and desired integration of land, naval, and air forces into an efficient team without establishing an armed forces chief or general staff. 
40
41
43
Desert One or Operation Eagle Claw, the 1980 operation to rescue hostages from Iran, resulted in abject failure and the loss of eight servicemen, seven helicopters, one C-130, communications equipment, and secret documents. The after action review determined that the services inability to operate together was the underlying cause of failure. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
60
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
Around 2011, conversations increased about evolving joint operations as indicated by General Dempsey's question: "What's after Joint?" They gained notoriety with the release of the Joint Operational Access Concept in 2012. It was the precursor to current multi-domain discussions. Recent concepts highlight the synergistic potential of jointness. The Capstone Concept for Joint Operations V3.0 called for achieving "joint synergy" and noted the importance of thinking in terms of joint functions independent of a specific service. The 2013 Joint Operational Access Concept changed emphasis from service capabilities to domain-based capabilities. 
78
80
The introduction of the Cross-Domain Synergy in Joint Operations Planner's Guide highlights the imperative of combining capabilities across all domains. 
81
82
One germane example was the update to Joint Publication 3-18, Joint Forcible Entry Operations. The 2012 edition expanded the principles for success in operations with seize and hold contested lodgments to include control of all five domains. It specifically discusses the importance of control in the air, space, and maritime domains, while managing the electromagnetic spectrum and concludes with a need to integrate support operations in all domains. 
83
84
85
Joint Publication 1 states that "jointness" is perishable and "must be advance through continual joint force development efforts." Joint interoperability is "sustained through joint doctrine, education, training, and exercises." 
86
87
88
89
90
The changing environment necessitates an evolution in concept. Since World War II, American military operations have sought to gain sea and air superiority to enable land combat while maintaining dominance in space and the electromagnetic spectrum. Area denial strategies contest air and sea support, disrupt communications with hacking and jamming, impede space-89 Joint Publication (JP) 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), I-3. 
90
91
93
94
Robert Axelrod and Michael Cohen describe the increasing dissatisfaction with industrial models of thinking, primarily regarding their rigidity, slowness, and inability to adjust to changing circumstances and local conditions. 
95
96
96
98
99
100
A decisive battle during the American Revolutionary War, the Battle of Yorktown represents multi-domain operations and shows foundational elements for American joint warfare.
Components of the battle that crossed domains or enabled action in another domain include the French fleet enabling freedom of maneuver on the land by blockading the Chesapeake River and removing Cornwallis' Army's escape options. Additionally, French artillery struck the few British ships near shore, while the French Navy protected the allied advance through the outer defensive works. 
101
102
With no American Navy, Washington relied on French maritime power. While Washington had 97 Ibid, 9. 
98
103
104
As a relatively new discussion, the delineation between multi-domain and the current joint operations constructs may seem like semantics. However, joint and multi-domain differ in ends, ways and means. Ends evolve from coordinated separate service objectives to complementary enabling objectives with a mutual goal. Ways, or the actions achieving conditions for victory, transform from dominating one's own domain to achieving windows of temporary advantage and projecting power across domains to enable freedom of action for actors in another domain. Available means of massed forces with large forward bases, constant communication, and regular supply change to dispersed flexible forces operating with commander's intent in a rapid, self-sufficient manner. 
105
106
107
109
111
113
106
Concept suggests that multi-domain refers to air, space, and cyberspace. 
114
115
116
117
118
119
121
122
123
125
A critical barrier for leading in a multi-domain environment is the weak understanding of maneuver in other domains. Speed differences in operating environment alone change a basic understanding of time. The land component may measure pace in meters or miles per hour, 
121
122
Beaumont,
186. 123 Ibid,
190. 124
whereas the maritime uses tens of miles per hour, air forces use hundreds, or tens of thousands of miles per hour in space, and the electromagnetic spectrum moves at the speed of light. "Behaviors that…reinforce rather than undercut each other" improve mutual power according to Joseph 
Nye. 126
127
129
130
131
132
The military must evolve; stasis allows threats to catch up. Yaneer Bar-Yam observed that group behavior changes over time and less successful groups emulate winning strategies. 
133
134
135
However, multi-domain theory allows for expansion while maintaining the same fundamental principles.
According to Thomas Kuhn, "External conditions may…transform a mere anomaly into a source of acute crisis." 
137
138
139
142
Kuhn also suggests that during transition periods large, but incomplete overlaps will exist between problems solved by the old and new way of operating. 
144
138
139
140
Kuhn,
101. 141 Ibid,
169. 142
143
Kuhn,
169. 144 Ibid,
85.
146
147
149
154
156
Multi-domain theory improves on the joint model by fully integrating domains, developing problem-based solutions, and creating options. Joint theory originally combated insular service nature. Despite improvements, it has not achieved desired simultaneity and interdependence. It often only improves deconfliction. The nature of joint is working together.
The nature of multi-domain is interoperability, working across seams with knowledge of others' capabilities. Current multi-domain discussions essentially push warfighters not to ask, "How can I solve this?" and rather ask, "Who has the ability to solve this problem and which method best works here?" Joint warfare has been an American strength since the Gulf War. Currently, joint operations focus on the deconfliction and utilization of service capabilities. 157 Multi-domain operations integrate "across domains without regard for which service provides the action or capability." 158 This concept envisions a greater degree of integrated actions across domains to include integrating space and cyberspace operations into traditional battlespaces. It suggests a seamless application of combat power between domains, with greater integration at dramatically lower echelons than joint forces currently achieve. 
159
160
161
158
159
Multi-domain perspectives create cross-domain synergy through a comprehensive view of adversaries, the environment, and a singular multi-domain effort. 
162
Successful multi-domain operations depend on an underlying philosophy already found in military doctrine; one not yet practiced fully. Subordinates must receive a mission and be empowered to meet the commander's intent through adjustments as dictated by the situation. The Army's "mission command" and the Air Force's "centralized control, decentralized execution" doctrines represent this philosophy. 
163
162
163
Dr. Everett Dolman used chess as a metaphor to explain strategy in his essay Seeking Strategy. Extending his metaphor is useful for demonstrating the possibilities of multi-domain operations on tactical maneuver, training, and operational art. "Savvy chess players never seek to take the king; instead they force the king to move to a vulnerable square. Great players gain control or dominate a space next to the king, not the king's space, and then force the king to move into it." 
164
168
169
Any multi-service exercise should include specific multi-domain objectives and operations. For instance, asking services to combat each other tactically shifts some exercise objectives to a multi-domain theory from the typical joint coordination of actions Although massive coordination and assessment hurdles must be crossed, the benefits include broadening service personnel's perceptions and practicing actions to achieve direct effects on another domain. In conjunction, capstone events for traditional joint exercises provide opportunities to practice multi- domain coordination and planning. For example, using airborne intelligence as direct target guidance for maritime missile systems or linking an electromagnetic operation with a ground maneuver objective. The services must also re-think and expand the use of multiple domains in traditional tactics. Examples include expanding the use of the electromagnetic spectrum in shaping operations or inserting large forces via subsurface vessels similar to the insertion of airborne units via aircraft. John Kotter noted that fostering original ideas requires diversity and interdependence. 
172
Experimentation and moderate risk-taking, especially in training, lead to breakthroughs in a learning organization. The promotion system and training philosophy reward success and practice actions that previously worked. Moltke wrote, "Great successes in war are not to be obtained without great danger." 173 Success in training reduces motivation to innovate. 
174
175
172 Kotter,
32. 173
174
175 Bar-Yam, 85.  confusion." 
176
Services must include multi-domain discussions at the onset of professional education and reinforce the concepts whenever possible. Commissioning sources and subsequent developmental education are important for improving multi-domain use and understanding.
Currently education focuses primarily on the importance of the individual service working in the domain that they control. 
177
Multi-domain operations must include interagency and connections with industry, especially due to the economic and cyberspace linkages. The Roles and Missions Commission of 1995 highlighted the need for better government agencies coordination in national security strategy, intelligence sharing, and "operations other than war." 178 This conversation gained renewed interest following the intelligence failures of September 11, 2001, yet further bureaucratic and legislative reform continue. Many scholars have written on the need for a wholeof-government approach to strategy. Multi-domain theories are currently a whole-of-military approach against enemy systems.
Linking the whole-of-government and interagency action is a logical future step in multidomain operations. Freedman wrote, "The two spheres [civilian and military] need to be in constant dialog." 179 Integrating through domains increases the importance of linking military strategy to political and interagency strategies. Freedman further posited that, "military campaigns had to be designed according to their circumstances and successful commanders would show flexibility in their operational decisions." 180 Although multi-domain operations promises to increase understanding of maneuver in other domains, the complexity of modern warfare defies comprehension of all relative factors. Instead, the best practitioners use it to improve their judgment and open options. To borrow from Freedman again, they rely on their improved judgement to assess the most pressing problems, describe a means to advance to a better state, and improvise using a wide array of options in the presence of emergent opportunities. 
181
178
179 Freedman,
242. 180
181 Freedman,
[242]
[243]
182
183
184
185
186
188
In Start with Why, Simon Sinek discusses a golden circle with three concentric rings; why is in the center, how in the middle, and what forms the outer layer. 
189
190
191
192
Moltke wrote, "In all battles and under all circumstances, one must use everything that is available." 193 Multi-domain theory suggests that one use any assets available to cause desired effects in other domains; potentially in ways not originally intended for that asset. The range of options for the commander opens when a desired effect in one domain does not require use of that same domain. As enemies use anti-access strategies, the American military can use alternative means to gain access. For example, enemy air defenses may prevent intelligence collection, resupply, or targeting from the air. The solutions may include intelligence collection from space, undersea resupply, or targeting via land forces.
190 
Ibid,
39. 191
192
193
194
Counter-arguments include: the complication of action across domains, the complexity of forecasting alternative options, and the coordination of actions between services. The first of these echoes Clausewitz; "Everything in war is very simple, but the simplest thing is difficult." 
196
197
194 Dolman,
"Seeking Strategy,
" 17. 195 Ibid,
29. 196
197
Nichols Act. 198
200
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
Richard Swain posited, "Ideas are important. They affect man's understanding of the world and influence behavior. An army's doctrine is a body of ideas and concepts designed to anticipate circumstances a military organization might encounter, and to limit responses to those deemed best most of the time." 209 He also described doctrine as a means of explaining requirements for organizing, training, and equipping militaries and a way to avoid past errors. 
210
211
212
214
215
Due to their inability to determine novel ways to study war, Freedman postulated that, "writers on military strategy continue to assert their fealty to the great master [Clausewitz]." 
216
Paraphrasing Freedman, militaries adapt to shocks by reducing to subsystems that are more viable, decreasing dependencies, and finding alternatives. 
218
219
216 Freedman,
237. 217
218
221
222
223
Underestimation results in two primary effects according to James Marsh. The first is a "perversity of planning" regarding events outside of an organizations' control. 
224
225
226
The second effect of underestimation is on command, control, and motivation of an organization. 
227
228
229
230
232
233
Contemporary analysts have identified an impending crisis based on the proliferation of technology, anti-access strategies, growing multi-polarity, and increased complexity mixing regular and irregular warfare. Competitors are increasing their joint capabilities so military theory must evolve. The idea that past performance guarantees future success is dangerous against complex adaptive enemies. It is always easier to speak in buzzwords than to describe or take 
230
234
235
236
237
239
38 Ibid, xix.
95  
95  
Jeffrey M. Reilly, "Multidomain Operations," Air and Space Power Journal vol 30, no. 1 (Spring 2016): 66.
John Keegan, A History of Warfare (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1993), 64.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton  University Press, 1984), 173.    
Von Clausewitz, On War, 103.    
James N.Rosenau, Thinking Theory Thoroughly (London: Pinter, 1980), 34.   
United States Congress, Goldwater-Nichols Act, The Department of Defense Reorganization Act  of 1986, Pub.L. 99-43 (Washington, DC, 1986), accessed November 16, 2016, https://www.congress.gov/bill/99th-congress/house-bill/3622.
Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 1, Air Force Basic Doctrine, Organization, and Command (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 23.
David Packard, "President's Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management," Packard Commission Report, June 1986, 1, accessed December 8, 2016, http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695411-Packard-Commission.html.
Mark Bowden, "The Desert One Debacle," The Atlantic (May 2006), accessed December 8, 2016, http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2006/05/the-desert-one-debacle/304803/.
Roger A. Beaumont, Joint Military Operations: A Short History (Westport: Greenwood Press,  1993), 167.
Senate Committee on Armed services, Defense Organization: The Need for Change, Staff Report to the Committee on Armed services, Senate Report 99-86(Washington, DC, 1985), 367, accessed December 9, 2016, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-99/content-detail.html.
Kathleen J. McInnis, Goldwater-Nichols at 30: Defense Reform and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service (CRS Report No. R44474) (Washington, DC: Congressional Research service, 2016), 4, accessed November 6, 2016, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R44474.pdf.
Senate Committee on Armed services, Defense Organization: The Need for Change, Staff Report to the Committee on Armed services, Senate Report 99-86(Washington, DC, 1985), 365, accessed December 9, 2016, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-99/content-detail.html.
Ronald H. Cole, "Grenada, Panama, and Haiti: Joint Operational Reform," Joint Forces Quarterly (Autumn/Winter 1998-1999): 58.
Ibid, 59.    
James R. Locher III, Victory on the Potomac: The Goldwater-Nichols Act Unifies the Pentagon, (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2002), 153.
Admiral William Crowe, as quoted in: James R. Locher III, Victory on the Potomac: The Goldwater-Nichols Act Unifies the Pentagon (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2002), 157.
Kathleen J. McInnis, Goldwater-Nichols at 30: Defense Reform and Issues for Congress Congressional Research service (CRS Report No. R44474) (Washington, DC: Congressional Research service, 2016), 6, accessed November 6, 2016, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R44474.pdf.
United States Congress, Goldwater-Nichols Act, The Department of Defense Reorganization Actof 1986, Pub.L. 99-43 (Washington, DC, 1986), accessed November 16, 2016, https://www.congress.gov/bill/99th-congress/house-bill/3622.
Kathleen J. McInnis, Goldwater-Nichols at 30: Defense Reform and Issues for Congress Congressional Research service (CRS Report No. R44474) (Washington, DC: Congressional Research service, 2016), 9-10, accessed November 6, 2016, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R44474.pdf.
Center for Strategic and International Studies, "Defense Reform in the 21st Century: Guiding Principles for Reform Panel Discussion," March 2016, accessed November 16, 2016, http://csis.org/multimedia/video-defense-reform-21stcentury.
Ibid.
Peter Levine and Lt. Gen Thomas Waldhauser, Goldwater-Nichols Working Group Recommendations, Deputy Chief Management Officer, Information Memorandum, March 2016, accessed December 9, 2016, http://1yxsm73j7aop3quc9y5ifaw3.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wpcontent/uploads/2016/04/DoD-G-N-WG-recommendations.pdf; John J. Hamre, "Reform of the Defense Department," Testimony Before the Senate Armed Services Committee, November 10, 2015, 2, accessed December 9, 2016, http://1yxsm73j7aop3quc9y5ifaw3.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wpcontent/uploads/2016/04/DoD-G-N-WGrecommendations.pdf
.59  Kathleen J. McInnis, Goldwater-Nichols at 30: Defense Reform and Issues for Congress Congressional Research service (CRS Report No. R44474) (Washington, DC: Congressional Research service, 2016), 1, accessed November 6, 2016, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R44474.pdf.
Air Force Future Operating Concept (AFFOC), Air Force Future Operating Concept: A View of the Air Force in 2035 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 14.
Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 1-1, Air Force Basic Doctrine, Organization, and, Command (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), 1-2.
Marine Corps Warfighting Publication (MCWP) 5-10, Marine Corps Planning Process (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2010),1-6.    
William O. Odom and Christopher D. Hayes, "Cross-Domain Synergy: Advancing Jointness," Joint Force Quarterly vol 73 (April 2014), 123.
Francis Bacon, The Works of Francis Bacon, ed. James Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis, and Douglas Denon Heath (London: Longman, 1861), 210.
United States Navy, Naval Officer Candidate School, accessed November 9, 2016, http://www.ocs.navy.mil/ocs.html; United States Air Force, United States Air Force Officer Training School, accessed November 9, 2016, https://www.airforce.com/education/military-training/ots; United States Army, United States Army Officer Candidate School, accessed November 9, 2016, http://www.goarmy.com/ocs.html; United States Marine Corps, United States Marine Corps Officer Candidate School, accessed November 9, 2016, http://www.marines.com/becoming-a-marine/officercandidates-school. Curriculum overviews are available at each of these sites for the respective officer candidate schools. The author assumed that respective military academy and ROTC curriculum regarding service orientation is similar to the direct commissioning source of Officer Training or Candidate Schools.
Ibid, 79.    
The HolyBible, New International Version (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House,  2011). Proverbs 27:17 states, "As iron sharpens iron, so one person sharpens another."
Von Clausewitz, 120.    
Wawro, 157.   
Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, 1999), 145-146.
Advanced Operational Arts Studies Fellowship, 
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
Defense Information Security Agency, "Cross Domain Solutions," Network services. Last