# ID: 65f2916b67ef4a0fad591461833fcaf3
# Title: Russian potential for influence in the Romanian and Greek energy sector
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The purpose of the study is to assess the balance between vulnerability and power within the Romanian and Greek energy networks. The study presents visual analytic perspectives on the potential implications of Russian influence in the Romanian and Greek energy sectors; we found no network-analysis-type studies focusing on the energy sector, and we found few studies on Russian influence in the energy sectors of the two countries examined. Specifically, we explore the question, how could Russia exert influence over Romania and Greece through their energy sectors? To answer the question, we conducted phased research. First, we analyzed the energy companies' social networks and measured the actors' centrality (measures of indirect influence of power) and brokerage potential (measures path distance between companies within the network).
Second, we conducted a geospatial analysis of the gas pipelines infrastructure and energy companies and facilities' infrastructure to determine the geospatial control of the resources. Third, we conducted a comparative and temporal analysis of energy-related indicators to determine Romania's and Greece's degree of dependency on energy resources. This study concludes by identifying three intervention strategies and policy recommendations for each country to counter Russian influence through utilizing energy resources and companies.  
Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 roused an immediate threat in Europe that increased the need for reliable deterrence by smaller states against Russian aggression. For Romania and Greece, deterrence is best served by an approach that combines a heavy reliance on North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) membership, increased economic growth, and enhanced readiness and intelligence related to hybrid threats. 
1
Both Romania and Greece have historical connections with Russia. Formerly a satellite of the Soviet Union between 1945 and 1989, Romania is close to Russia's border;
and because of its geostrategic position (it opens to the Black Sea, and is the largest country in southeastern Europe and the 12th largest in Europe), Romania is inside Russia's "belt of insecurity and instability." 
2
2 Ulrich Kühn, "U.S.-Russian Relations and the Future Security of Europe," Arms Control Today 47, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2017): 18, http://libproxy.nps.edu/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/ 1874616273? accounted=12702. geographical position as a crossroad between Europe and Asia, with access to the Mediterranean Sea and proximity to the Suez Canal and the Middle East.
The purpose of the study is to identify the balance between vulnerability and power within each country's energy network. The study presents visual analytics perspectives on the potential implications of Russian influence in the Romanian and Greek energy sectors for two reasons: we found no existing studies that employ network analyses on the energy sector, and few studies on Russian influence in the Balkan states' energy sectors. Specifically, we examine the question, how could Russia exert influence over Romania and Greece through their energy sectors? To answer the question, we conduct phased research. First, we analyze the energy companies' social networks to determine their brokerage potential and influence. Secondly, we conduct a geospatial analysis of the gas pipelines, energy companies' spatial presence, and facilities infrastructure to determine the geospatial control of resources. Thirdly, we conduct a comparative and temporal analysis of energy-related indicators to determine Romania's and Greece's degree of dependency on energy resources.
The literature review is focused on the issues of combined warfare, economy and energy sector as means of combined warfare, the Russian use of energy resources as means of foreign policy, and the networks relevance and use on the issue.
In the article "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War: Combination Warfare and Future Innovation," James Callard and Peter Faber explain combination warfare in the 21st century, starting from Sun Tzu's "asymmetric" principles, then building on Qiao Ling and Wang Xiangsui's theory presented in their book, Unrestricted Warfare:
Assumptions on War and Tactics in the Age of Globalization. 
3
7
Several theories exist that may help explain Russia's use of hybrid warfare. 11 James and Faber, "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War: Combination Warfare and Future Innovation," 63.
12 Robert J. Art, "American Foreign Policy and the Fungibility of Force," Security Studies 5, no. 4, (April 1999):7, https://doi.org/10.1080/09636419608429287. a source of continuous conflict and insecurity." 
13
14
15
Several researchers have indicated that economic growth and industry is directly tied to energy. Ernst R. Berndt and David O. Wood research the relationship between energy and industry arguing that energy is such a significant input for an industry that not even technology can overcome its impact on the industry outputs. 
16
17
15 Jervis describes the core idea of the security dilemma as "the heart of the security dilemma argument is that an increase in one state's security can make others less secure, not because of misperceptions or imagined hostility, but because of the anarchic context of international relations"; see were an important factor that led to the outbreak of war in World War I and World War II.
Particularly, as the German industrial sector developed, German leaders were constantly seeking new "lebensraum" to confront the scarcity of resources. 
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia invested in its energy industry and took advantage of its vast natural sources. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), Russia was second in the world in crude oil production (12.6 percent of world total)
and in natural gas production (17.8 percent of world total) in 2016. Russia was also second in the world in crude oil net exports (12.2 percent of world total) and first in natural gas exports (23.6 percent of world total). 
29
30
Grigas identified "oil sanctions, 'gas isolation' and dissuasion of Western firms from investing in Baltic energy projects" 31 as other tools Russia uses in the economic domain.
The author argues that Estonia's, Latvia's, and Lithuania's entry into both the EU and NATO seemed to diminish the Russian influence over them. Nevertheless, Russian influence is "still perceived as a threat to their economies, energy sectors, and societies." 32
These countries' political fragmentations, their mixed ethnicity, and their high reliance of on Russian oil, gas, and infrastructure, creates opportunities for Russia to influence their policies. common EU security policy "as long as energy security of each individual state is not delegated to the supranational authority." 34
In his paper, "Natural Gas as an Instrument of Russian State Power," Alexander Ghaleb argues that the potential for the natural gas supply to be used as a coercion instrument of state power is higher than the oil one. 
35
36
38
39
40
42
As we conducted our research, we discovered a lack of empirical studies focused on Russia's potential influence on Romania and Greece. Also, the studies that do exist focus on relations between the EU and Russia, and they do not provide quantitative analyses of the oil, gas, and green energy firms' control of resources in Romania and Greece. Previous studies primarily examine Russian and EU policy comparisons; they do track imports and exports from Russia to the EU. Thus, identifying Russia's pathways of influence in the energy sector is the first step in developing ways to counter them.
Our claim is that Russia can exert influence over Romania and Greece using the energy sector as a means toward its security goals. Based on past examples of Russia's use of oil and gas blockades (see Ukraine and Baltic states examples in the preceding Literature Review section), we define influence as the ability of Russian companies, within the energy sector, to cut off other countries' capacity to provide the required energy sources for maintaining their independence and sovereignty in decision making. Our main assumption is that the greater a Russian company's influence is on an energy sector, the greater the potential it will have to coerce Romania and/or Greece. To measure the extent of potential for influence, we conducted extensive open-source research.
We began by looking for information about companies and the relations between them (affiliate, subordinate, cooperation) inside Romania and Greece. Based on that information, we collected relational data about the companies' connections to other companies outside of their respective country. We obtained the vast majority of our network data from news articles, company websites, and annual financial reports. For our spatial data, we extracted data from geospatial databases pertaining to natural gas pipelines and energy infrastructure. 
43
SNA is a set of theories and techniques that allows researchers to examine social structures and how those structures relate to real-world outcomes. 47 One-mode relational data consists of a single set of actors.
48 Two-mode relational data consists of two sets of actors.
representative picture of the energy networks. We converted the two-mode links into onemode links to create a completely one-mode, organizational social network. With this aggregate network, we were able to conduct social network analysis.
Specifically, we utilized network topographical measures and centrality to characterize and describe the energy networks. Network topography measures, such as density and centralization, describe aspects of a network's overall structure, which ultimately highlight potential tradeoffs a network may have to make regarding its attempts to balance security and performance. Centrality is a concept pertaining to "important" nodes, or actors. Like topography, several measures exist that help analysts identify central and peripheral players. We implemented SNA in the open-source tool, the Organizational Risk Analyzer (ORA).
In our research, we used geospatial analysis for two reasons. First, geospatial mapping allows us to assess where energy companies are geographically concentrated.
This approach lets us illuminate potential pathways and networks between organizations that are utilized in and around Romania and Greece. Second, we used geospatial analysis for obtaining a picture of the broader energy network and to map temporal trends related to how much influence each organization potentially has and whether that influence is growing or waning. Specifically, we use the geospatial mapping tool Quantum Geographic
Information System (QGIS), which is available open source and allows users to create maps, networks, criteria-based color-coded maps, and multilayer multi-criteria for analysis. 
49
Romania and Greece will likely continue to deal with this problem set in the future.
The issue of Russian aggression and the use of hybrid warfare is a significant problem not only for these countries, but also for NATO as it struggles to develop a strategy to counter and deter Russia. Visual analytics, which in this case is a combination of social network, geospatial, and temporal analyses, is an appropriate approach to examine this topic because illuminating Russia's pathways of influence is the first step to developing ways to counter them. These pathways have geospatial, temporal, and network aspects that lend themselves well to visual analysis.
Overall, this study seeks to identify possible countermeasures in the energy security strategy of Greece and Romania to prevent further Russian control over their respective energy sectors.
Following this Introduction, Chapter II presents the Romanian energy security analysis. In this chapter, we first place Romania in the geopolitical scene and review Romania's deterrence policy in relation to Russian hybrid warfare. Secondly, we review Romania's energy security and resources in the oil, gas, and green energy sectors. Finally, we conduct an SNA report of the energy companies that operate in Romania to refine the overall image of the Romanian energy sector.
Chapter III presents the Greek energy security analysis. In this chapter, we first examine Greek-Russian relations. Next, we review Greek energy security in accordance with EU, NATO, and national resources. Third, we integrate Greece in the geopolitical scene using geospatial analysis. Finally, we conduct an SNA report of the energy companies that operate in Greece, and we use temporal and quantitative analysis to refine the overall image of the Greek energy sector.
And finally, Chapter IV presents policy recommendations and conclusions. Based on our findings we first compare the two countries' research results and then propose possible courses of action to be considered in order to increase Romania's and Greece's energy independence.
By mapping the Russian network of influence in the energy sector, we can observe their pathways of influence in the energy sector and develop measures to mitigate it. The network approach will support the military intelligence branch to identify the economic dimension of the operational environment and make recommendations. Our research could be used as the basis for more-extended analysis of the Russian network in both Greece and Romania. We can logically assume that the Russian energy network is just one part of the wider Russian network in these countries. Other researchers could use our research either as a model to analyze a different part of the Russian network or as an initial point in order to reveal bonds between the Russian energy network and the other parts of the Russian network. Our research could also be used as a framework for other European countries.
Finally, the parallel study of the Greek and Romanian cases might reveal Russian patterns, trends, or even strategies in the energy sector.
The Armed Conflict Database reported that in "April 2014, pro-Russian separatists
[battled] Ukrainian forces in eastern regions of the country. The rebellion, which [had]   received material, personnel, and direct military support from Moscow, followed Russia's annexation of Crimea in March." 50 As a consequence of Russia's actions, NATO chose to update its passive deterrence strategies to more active ones. At the same time, the immediate threat to countries inside Russia's sphere of influence caused increased concern because of their proximity to Russia.
The increased concerns are shared also by Romania and Greece, and this chapter addresses those concerns from Romania's perspective. Its content is divided into two sections. The first section is a substantive background of the broader Romanian security environment. This chapter's second section is a data analysis of the Romanian energy sector security, which is described within the broader context outlined in the first section.
The scope of this section is to analyze NATO-Russia diplomatic, military, and cultural factors, followed by Romania's specific diplomatic and military facts and implications.
This section is critical for contextualizing the broader military and diplomatic dimensions of the NATO-Russian balance of power, and for understanding how the Romanian energy sector is embedded within the larger Russian hybrid warfare strategy.
Specifically, this section explores ways that EU diplomacy and NATO forces could be used to deter Russia from expanding its sphere of influence over its neighbors in Europe.
Russia's "belt of insecurity and instability" strategy may impact the security and sovereignty of countries inside Russia's sphere of influence. Therefore, Russia's sphere of 50 "Ukraine," The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) Armed Conflict Database, accessed April 9, 2018, http://acd.iiss.org/en/conflicts/ukraine-3fdb.
influence policy raises high concerns for NATO, which suspended cooperation with Russia in response to its annexation of the Crimean Peninsula.
In addition, even if not explicitly stated, Russia's intent is to maintain former Soviet countries and former communist countries under its influence, so it sees any NATO or EU expansion going against its interests. As early as 1997, Boris Yeltsin, the first president of the Russian Federation, had warned that "the eastward expansion of NATO is a mistake and a serious one at that." 51 Russia considers itself a status quo power that needs to protect its interests.
In order to protect its interests, Russia relies on a "belt of insecurity and instability" strategy on its border with NATO, because in internally divided states, Russian hybrid warfare can be effective. 
52
1
51 Ulrich Kühn, "U.S.-Russian Relations and the Future Security of Europe," Arms Control Today 47, no. 1 (2017): 18.
52 Kuhn. The success of NATO deterrent threats has two parts: credibility and intent. First, the military resources balance favors NATO, so the capability to deter a hybrid aggression is there. The question remains, however, will it be enough to deter Russia's use of hybrid warfare to expand its sphere of influence? The second part is the intent to do what NATO threatens to do, 54 in which Russia seeks to challenge the cohesion of the 28 NATO countries and employs hybrid warfare to have its claims accepted and to undermine NATO's will to take action. The last NATO official stance is that, despite more than two decades of efforts to develop dialogue and practical cooperation with Russia, the "cooperation [with Russia] has been suspended in response to Russia's military intervention in Ukraine, which the Allies condemn in the strongest terms; … however, the alliance does not seek confrontation and poses no threat to Russia." 
55
56
Romanian-Russian Relations  
Romanian-Russian relations, however, remain highly unbalanced in their political, economic, and regional dimensions due to the two countries' relative sizes and military resources. Figure 
2
3
2
Furthermore, Romania has agreed to host onshore Aegis interceptor missiles as part of the NATO European missile defense shield, and continues to support NATO maritime military drills in the Black Sea. Because of these actions, Romanian-Russian relations are likely to continue to deteriorate.
With the aim of remaining self-sustainable in light of Russia's influence and relative strength, Romania is taking two directions in working with NATO. The first direction is to actively maintain its diplomatic and military relations with the United States and NATO. the Russian government may take some risky decisions. This emphasizes the need for constant commitment and consistency within the NATO alliance.
Altogether, these diplomatic and military efforts to deter Russia, from inside Romania and from NATO, rely heavily on the assumption that the current balance of power is maintained. Yet, the assumption is flawed, because if even one of the 28 NATO countries does not vote to respond to an outside aggression, the aggressor can continue to pursue its interests without any repercussions. The aggressor's interest, therefore, is to create inside the alliance a lack of consensus about what the threshold is for a "grey area" aggression like cyber-attacks, subversion, or economic support of populist movements, and to develop new internal disturbances inside the alliance. The pressure on Russia's neighboring countries for timely measures to maintain their independence comes from their need to consolidate the balance of power stability assumption with facts: increased economic growth, increased military readiness, enhanced capabilities of internal first responders to deter hybrid threats, and close intelligence monitoring.
This chapter now turns to data analysis of the Romanian energy sector, with an emphasis on how Russia may target and influence that sector though hybrid warfare. In 2016, Romania's energy mix (illustrated in Figure 
4
4
63 Marcin Andrzej Piotrowski and Kinga Raś, "Russian Hybrid Threats to the Baltic States," Bulletin PISM, no. 67 (July 12, 2017): 2, http://www.pism.pl/Publications/PISM-Bulletin/Russian-Hybrid-Threatsto-the-Baltic-States# .  
While the link analysis was focused on Romania, in order to trace the ties to map influence, the network quickly expanded across Europe with a few connections reaching China and the United States. Once we had our two-mode link analysis network, we converted the two-mode data into one-mode data, which resulted in a one-mode, organizational social network. With this aggregate network, we used social network analysis to analyze the network's structure and to identify central organizations.
Next, we mapped our network geospatially, obtaining coordinates for corporation headquarters locations and energy infrastructure, and adding in a layer showing the natural gas pipeline network throughout Europe for obtaining the broader energy network picture.
Finally, using data gleaned from annual financial reports, we gathered financial and production data for the past three years in an attempt to map recent temporal trends and answer the question of how much influence each organization potentially has and whether
or not that influence is growing or waning.
The vast majority of the data we collected was unstructured and was obtained primarily from news articles, company websites, and annual financial reports. Our list of sources was extensive. We did find some limited structured data in the form of geospatial databases for natural gas pipelines and natural gas power plants from the open source global energy website ENIPEDIA. 
70
69 Grigas, Legacies, Coercion and Soft Power: Russian Influence in the Baltic States, 1.
As expected, the general overview of the energy sector presented in Figure 
5
8
6
analysis, is connected to every major energy company throughout Europe within two to three steps. Russian GAZPROM has economic ties with the German Energy On (E.ON), the Austrian Österreichische Mineralölverwaltung (OMV), the Hungarian Magyar Olaj és Gázipari Részvénytársaság (MOL), the Italian Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi (ENI), and the Romanian Rompetrol through the company's majority shareholder, Kazakhstan's KazMunayGas (KMG) 
International. 72
7
8
This research examines government and corporate organizations that make up the Romanian energy sector. Though most of the organizations are Romanian, the network also includes several European organizations involved in the energy sector that might be directly and indirectly linked to Russian entities, and who, therefore, might serve as nodes that can 74 See the aggregated energy network in Figure 
8
75 Adapted from DIVA-GIS Database, "Spatial Data Download"; Enipedia Database, "Power Plants," using QGIS.
influence the energy sector. A few subsidiaries of umbrella organizations are included in the network as well (Figure 
8
1
Conceptually, density measures how interconnected a network is while statistically the output ranges from 0 to 1, where a completely disconnected network has a density score of 0 and a fully connected network has a density score of 1; of course, most real-world networks are somewhere in-between. In the context of influence, a network with relatively high density may offer many avenues (i.e., links) through which information and influence may flow. Alternatively, a sparse network offers few links through which information and influence can disseminate. The Romanian energy network, as seen in the results in Table 
1
Due to the limited size of the network and our purposeful focus on Romania, it makes sense that the organizations with the highest values for betweenness centrality (brokerage potential), depicted in Figure 
9
81
In the case of our energy network, degree centrality (depicted in Figure 
10
83
With regard to the energy industry (Figures 
11
12
12
When analyzing the petroleum industry, however, a potential avenue of influence emerges, as Romania only produces about 25 percent of the petroleum that it uses per year.
These oil markets in Romania have been primarily served by four actors: OMV Petrom, Rompetrol, Lukoil, and MOL. These actors own and operate a significant percentage of the filling stations in the country but does not own or operate any of the refineries; thus, their potential impact is limited, and it was not included in the temporal analysis.
Romanian petroleum companies Petrom and Romgaz have experienced declines in profits while Rompetrol has made a modest profit. In Figure 
13
were unable to find annual financial reports for the Romanian branch of Lukoil and thus excluded that company from the majority of this analysis. Lukoil is a massive corporation that dwarfs all of the Romanian companies assessed combined, and therefore, comparing data for companies bounded in scope to Romania to data for a corporation that spans the globe does not accurately indicate Lukoil's direct influence within Romania. The trend that emerges when comparing profits for the past three years is that the two companies farthest removed from Russian control, Petrom and Romgaz, have experienced declines in profits over between 2014 and 2016, while Rompetrol, with KMG International as its majority shareholder, has recovered from a year of significant losses to two consecutive years of modest profits. We assess that these observations and trends are more likely due to a decline in global oil prices than any concerted efforts from Russia to affect the Romanian economy.  The gas that supplies the natural gas-fired power plants within Romania is mainly internally supplied. Analyzing natural gas production and energy production, Figure 
15
16
Overall, we began our analysis by building a relational network, starting with Romanian energy companies and following links outwards to determine potential influential actors. Based on the research scope, the aggregate network (see Figure 
9
However, removing key Russian controlled energy resources nodes also requires key resources node replacements in place in order to avoid instability in the energy market. For energy-dependent small states, the higher the market instability, the higher are the chances of state destabilization and therefore the higher exposure to outside influences is.
Our social network analysis also indicated that Romanian companies, namely Petrom and Romgaz, had the highest value for betweenness centrality (measures of brokerage potential, Figure 
10
11
We quickly learned that Romania is self-sufficient in the natural gas sector. Yet, within the petroleum sector, Russian giant Lukoil and Russian proxy majority shareholder, Kazakhstan's KazMunayGas (KMG) International of Romania's Rompetrol, control approximately 60 percent of the market.
When we visualized our relational data geospatially, the most significant insight was the ownership of petroleum infrastructure. Within the country, we identified five active oil refineries, three of which have been owned by Lukoil or Rompetrol. As we transitioned to our temporal and quantitative analysis, we analyzed refinery throughput in 2016. Lukoil and Rompetrol processed 8.45 of a total 13.38 million tons of petroleum products last year, which is about 63 percent. When looking at infrastructure ownership and refining capability combined, we conclude that Russian aligned companies control approximately 60 percent of the petroleum industry, giving Russia a significant potential for influence through the economy.
In conclusion, Russia controls sufficient petroleum industry infrastructure to leverage a "belts of insecurity" policy and create a resource buffer between the Russian Federation and NATO. This chapter has focused on the potential for Russian influence over Romania in supporting its own foreign policies, specifically in the energy sector. Our analysis highlights Russia's continued attempts to ensure and expand its position of influence over Romania within the energy sector. Romania is self-sufficient in the natural gas sector of the energy industry. Nevertheless, our research has highlighted a significant potential for Russian influence over Romania in the petroleum industry. This partially supports our initial hypothesis that Russia has the potential to influence the government of Romania through Romanian economic dependence in the energy sector.
A.
Energy is an important part of Russian hybrid warfare, which includes a wide variety of tactics. During the third conference of the Hellenic Association for Energy Economics (HAEE), Geoffrey R. Pyatt, the American ambassador to Greece, said "Russia has used its leverage over Europe's energy as a political tool repeatedly. One study found 55 instances of Russia using supply cutoffs for political purposes over a 14-year period.
Another For instance, the two countries have established a formal, Joint Inter-ministerial Committee that coordinates cooperation on issues such as economy, technology, and industry. 
96
97
98
Greece and Russia also maintain positive relations based on shared cultural characteristics. For example, Greece and Russia made a joint decision to declare 2016 as a "Year of Friendship and Cooperation" for the two countries. Also, the Greek diaspora who live in the southern region of Russia, particularly in the areas surrounded by the Black Sea, help maintain friendly cultural ties. In addition, the Universities of Moscow, Lomonosov, 96 Hellenic Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Greece Bilateral Relations with Russia."
97 "Greek-Russian Memorandum of Cooperation," Hellenic Federation of Enterprises, accessed July 5, 2018, http://www.sev.org.gr/o-sev/sev-hellenic-federation-of-enterprises/.
98 Angeliki Koutantou and Michele Kambas, "Greece, Russia to Expel Diplomats in Macedonia Tussle ahead of NATO Summit," Reuters, last modified July 10, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/usgreece-russia-diplomats/greece-to-expel-two-russian-envoys-moscow-to-respond-in-kind-russia-lawmaker-idUSKBN1K10PU?feedType=RSS&.
99 According to the Hellenic Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "the name issue arose in 1991, when the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia seceded from Yugoslavia and declared its independence under the name "Republic of Macedonia." Historically, the term "Macedonia," which is a Greek word, refers to the kingdom and culture of the ancient Macedonians, who belong to the Hellenic nation and are unquestionably part of Greek historical and cultural heritage."; see Hellenic Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "FYROM Name Issue," accessed July 12, 2018, https://www.mfa.gr/en/fyrom-name-issue/.
100 Niki Kitsantonis, "Tensions Escalate between Greece and Russia, With Macedonia in the Middle," New York Times, last modified July 19, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/19/world/europe/greecerussia-macedonia.html. and Kuban offer courses in Greek language, history, and culture. 
101
103
The economic ties between Greece and Russia are also strong, though heavily in Russia's favor. The percentage of Greek exports to Russia amounts to 0.81 percent of all of Russia's imports while the percentage of Greek imports coming from Russia amounts to 6.8 percent of its total amount. 
106
Following the third EU energy package, DEPA will have to adopt policies within the next few years that liberalize the gas market and promote healthy and effective competition. 
119
Tourism is the leading industry for the Greek economy, and Russian tourism contributes substantially to it. Tourism brings in 27.2 million international tourists and employs roughly 900,000 people. 
121
122
19
123
124
125
126 Hellenic Republic Ministry of Tourism, "Russia -Greece Memorandum in Tourism." 
This section contains three different analyses: a temporal analysis of Greek energy security, a social network analysis of the Greek energy companies' network, and a geospatial analysis of Russian energy exports in relation to EU energy dependency and the Greek energy infrastructures.
This section focuses on energy security as defined by prominent scholar Christian
Winzer. There are many different ways to define energy security, but Winzer's definition states, "energy security is the continuity of energy supplies relative to demand." 128 With this definition as a guide, we focused on three aspects of Greek energy security: primary energy supply, energy production and self-sufficiency, and energy imports and exports.
This approach aligns with the EU's five key areas regarding energy security, which are "increasing energy efficiency, increasing energy production in the EU and diversifying supplier countries and routes, completing the internal energy market and building missing infrastructure links, speaking with one voice in external energy policy, and strengthening emergency and solidarity mechanisms and protecting critical infrastructure." 129 According to the EU's five key areas, we focused on Greece's supplier countries and the structure of the Greek energy market.
Regarding Greek energy security policy, the priority and top objective of the Greek government (as described by the Ministry of Energy and Environment) "is to safeguard and manage energy resources in a manner which secures the smooth, uninterrupted and reliable supply of the nation's energy needs and access for all users to affordable, secure energy." 
130
Despite the increase in renewables and the effect of the economic crisis, oil and coal are still the two most significant fuels for Greece. Figure 
20
133
134
135
During the last decade, there has been a significant reduction in the usage of coal, from 8.4
Million Tons of Oil Equivalent (Mtoe) in 2006 to 4.4 Mtoe in 2016. 
136
137
138
135  
Greece lacks domestic oil and natural gas production, while coal production has been reduced due to environmental regulations. Figure 
21
141
142
144
146
147
23
148
As noted previously, Greece depends on oil and natural gas imports to satisfy domestic energy consumption. Figure 
24
150
25
According to Eurostat, "Russia was the largest supplier of natural gas to the EU, both in 2016 and 2017, and that the only other partners with a significant share in total extra-EU imports were Norway and, at some distance Algeria and Qatar"
154
26
Retaining emergency reserves is vital for countries such as Greece that lack domestic energy production, and Greece currently needs to improve gas reserves. To secure the oil supply, Greece follows IEA's stockholding obligations. IEA states that "all oil importers and large end users (such as power plants) are required to hold oil stocks equivalent to 90 days of their net imports made during the previous year." 
156
157
Transmission Operator (DESFA) does have a four-fold emergency plan, Greece is limited in its ability to cope with an emergency that affects natural gas supply. 
159
the lack of gas emergency reserves weakens Greece's bargaining position in a potential supply crisis and furthers dependency on Russia.
The state-owned company DEPA is Greece's exclusive importer of gas and owns the gas pipeline network and the LNG facilities located in Revithoussa Island (near Athens). To ensure the security of the country's supply, DEPA has signed long-term 156 International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA Countries, Greece 2017 Review, 40.
157 International Energy Agency, 48.   158 Hellenic Gas Transmission System Operator S.A. (DESFA), "LNG Facilities," accessed June 5, 2018, http://desfa.gr/en/national-natural-gas-system/lng-facility.
159 According to DESFA, alert Status 3 is activated "in the event of extremely high demand for gas, significant supply disruption and in the event that all relevant market-based measures have been implemented but the supply of Natural Gas is not sufficient to meet the remaining Natural Gas demand"; see Hellenic Gas Transmission System Operator S.A. (DESFA), "Emergency Plan," 16 and 19, accessed August 28, 2018, http://desfa.gr/userfiles/pdf/eishghsh-desfa-031115_rev2_english.pdf.
160 According to International Energy Agency, "the N-1 formula describes the ability of the technical capacity of the gas infrastructure to satisfy total gas demand in the event of disruption of the single-largest gas infrastructure during a day of exceptionally high gas demand"; see International Energy Agency,  Energy Policies of IEA Countries, Greece 2017 Review, 53.  contracts with the state-owned natural gas companies of Russia (GAZPROM), Turkey (BOTAS), and Algeria (SONATRACH). The contract with the Russian GAZPROM ensures the supply of natural gas to the Greek market up to 2026. The contract with the Turkish BOTAS concerns supplying natural gas up to 2021. Likewise, the contract with SONATRACH (LNG) ensures supplying LNG to the Greek market up to 2021. Figure 
27
164
As mentioned in Chapter I, according to a Dinu Patriciu Eurasia Center report for the Atlantic Council, Russia is building networks across Europe as part of the Kremlin's influence strategy. The authors argue that "whereas the ultimate goal in the near abroad is to control the government or ensure the failure of a pro-Western leadership, in Europe, the goal is to weaken NATO and the EU." 
167
the data collected to build the Greek companies' energy network were unstructured and obtained primarily from news articles, company websites, and annual financial reports.
Once the data were structured, they account for intercompany relations that fall between 2016 and 2018, thereby capturing the most recent picture of Greece's energy network.
Greece's network is a one-mode network, with direct organization-to-organization ties. 
168
Similar to the Romanian case, the network was built under two main assumptions.
The first is an inside out approach in which we started with Greek energy companies and then followed the links outward to determine potential influential actors. The second is the network's limited expansion in which the network includes only the organizations that might be directly or indirectly linked to Russia and that influence the Greek energy sector.
In other words, the network includes only the part of the Russian network that affects Greece and not the whole Russian network.
To examine the overall structure of the network, which highlights its potential strengths and vulnerabilities, this analysis applies three measures of network topography: density, degree centralization, and betweenness centralization. 
169
2
168 One-mode relational data consists of a single set of actors, which in our case is energy companies.
169 Network topography is used in order to describe the overall structure of the network. It is important because it indicates tradeoffs and highlights strengths and potential vulnerabilities. Using topography measures we can indicate how a network is growing or shrinking, and we can measure how interconnected and centralized or decentralized the network is. 
As with the Romanian case, degree centralization is used to measure the extent to which the network is built around specific companies; a low score suggests that there is not a single company in position to influence the overall activity of the network. 
173
Betweenness centralization is used for the same purposes as it was in Chapter II;
that is, to measure the extent to which a single company (or a few companies) controls the flow of information and resources in the network. In our network, the betweenness centralization score (.016) indicates that the network is decentralized in terms of brokerage potential and that the responsibility for exchanging information and resources is extensively distributed across the network. The absence of an indispensable center for the transmission of information and resources presents an obstacle to Russian interference.
Because Greece's energy network has no indispensable center for the transmission of information and resources, Russian strategies that involve the spread of misleading information and the disruption of resources are unlikely to succeed with ease. In summary, Greece's small energy network, comprised of 28 organizations, is fairly sparse and decentralized as indicted by both centralization indices. The overall structure of the network reveals that the network is resistant to external influence. Even if the Russians were able to infiltrate the network successfully, the distributed nature of the companies' network should mitigate the effects of Russian leverage.
In terms of company centrality, we utilized the following three centrality measures:
total degree centrality, eigenvector centrality, and betweenness centrality. Table 
3
As a review, we define degree centrality as the number of direct ties each actor has.
According to Stephen P. Borgatti, Martin G. Everett, and Jeffrey C. Johnson, degree centrality describes "an actor's level of involvement or activity in the network." 
175
176
177
Furthermore, we assume that the three major Greek companies are taking advantage of their position in the network to ensure their respective financial stability and prosperity.
Regarding the foreign influence, State Organization for Marketing of Oil (SOMO), the state-owned oil company of Iraq, and LUKOIL are both ranked fourth in total degree centrality, which makes them the most powerful foreign companies within the Greek network. Interestingly, SOMO and LUKOIL are also connected to each other, and therefore, SOMO might be vulnerable to Russian influence. 
178
Unlike the Romanian case, we also utilize eigenvector centrality to highlight relatively important companies. 
179
181
3
30
Betweenness centrality indicates potential brokers in social networks. As shown by the results in Table 
3
31
Along with examining the network itself, this thesis examines a broader regional and global picture to determine what potential vulnerabilities to Russia Greece's energy network may have. Greece is part of the EU, and the EU member states have developed a common energy policy. 
184
For the purpose of our analysis, we created several maps related to the energy sector of EU member states. Specifically, we created three sets of maps depicting the overall EU energy network: one set of maps of EU members' energy dependency rates in 2000, 2008, and 2017; a second set of maps of the Russian share (percentage) of natural gas and oil imports in 2017; and a third set of the Greek and the European Union gas infrastructures.
Our two main conclusions are the following: First, distance from Russia is a significant factor related to Russian influence in the energy sector. Second, most of the EU member states, including Greece, face the problem of potential Russian influence.
A comparison of the maps of energy dependency (Figure 
32
32
EU Energy Dependency Rate (2000
, 2008
, 2017) 185
33
32
33
34
187
35
35
4
95 percent. 190
191
Finally, the chapter provided a geospatial analysis, which enabled a comparison between Greece and other EU member states in terms of energy infrastructure. Consistent with its overall strategic vision, the geospatial analysis revealed that distance from Russia is correlated with Russian energy exports. In both natural gas and oil, we observed that the zones of high-energy dependency correlate with the strategic zones of insecurity and instability that Russia seems to be maintaining (see Chapter II). Although there has been a decline in the overall energy dependency rate among the EU member states since 2008, this is not the case in Greece. Yet, Europe still depends on Russian energy exports, especially in natural gas. As discussed in this chapter, Greece's energy infrastructure includes three entry points for natural gas; comparing their capacity with the Greek net import of natural gas, we can conclude that cutting off the Russian pipeline directly to Greece would create a supply crisis. Furthermore, Greece remains vulnerable to crises between Russia and the countries that the pipeline crosses.
In this subsection we propose three distinct courses of action for Romania to prevent further Russian control over its energy sector.
Leveraging NATO and international condemnation and resolutions against Russia following its actions in the Ukraine, Romania might be able to level sanctions against Russian-owned or connected companies such as Lukoil and KMG International.
Preventing those companies from doing business in Romania or freezing their assets may open up the market for greater expansion from Romanian or Western European companies to fill the void. This course of action is perhaps the most discriminate way to target only Russian-owned or connected corporations without hindering foreign investment from the rest of Europe. Yet, direct actions against such companies would have significant immediate effects on the price of oil and gasoline in the Romanian economy. Moreover, we are not experts on international law, and it is possible that imposing sanctions against private companies such as Lukoil might not have a very strong legal basis.
While Romania is currently a leading producer of natural gas in Europe, its reserves are limited. If Romania wants to remain energy independent from Russia, it needs to embrace other forms of energy production, either through solar, wind, hydro, or nuclear power production. This course of action proposes a long-term solution that is already being pursued by most of Europe and, to some extent, Romania. It will take the longest to implement, however, as infrastructure needs to be built, and it may not be cost effective to shift from natural gas energy production to renewables in the short term. Additionally, without sanctions or government interference, a free market economy legally would allow Russian companies to become or take over the green energy producers and maintain or expand their influence within the Romanian energy market. 
Greece is also capable of partially mitigating the Russian influence in its energy sector by following a combined strategy, meaning negotiations on natural gas and restrictions on the oil sector. Considering the exposure of the Greek energy sector to the Russian imports (natural gas: 67 percent, oil: 12.5 percent), Greece could follow different tactics in the oil and natural gas sector. First, Greece is capable of reducing Russian influence on its oil sector to the point of elimination. The Greek market for procuring oil is already open and there is a variety of supplier countries; apart from Russia, another six countries (Kazakhstan, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Libya) export crude oil to Greece. In addition, oil products are transported via trucks and ships, and therefore, Greece is not dependent on Russian means to import its crude oil. The two Russian companies involved with the Greek energy companies' network are LUKOIL and ROSNEFT, and the SNA reveals that LUKOIL is far more influential than ROSNEFT. If it does not eliminate the Russian oil imports, Greece could at least reduce or eliminate the imports coming from LUKOIL.
Second, in the field of natural gas, Greece is not capable of eliminating the Russian influence, but it is still capable of negotiating. There is already evidence of successful negations: in 2014, DEPA took advantage of the European Union's agreement with GAZPROM and achieved a beneficial renewal of its agreement with GAZPROM. As DEPA pointed out in its announcement, "with this agreement, which was completed with the contribution of the Greek Government and particularly the Ministry of Environment, Energy and Climate Change, the supply price of natural gas is decreased by 15 percent. This price level is now approaching the European average gas supply price, agreed to by GAZPROM EXPORT and the countries of continental Europe, through long-term contracts." 
203
Table 
6
Upon adding up the scores, for Greece, Course of Action 2 (Seek for alternative suppliers) emerged as the recommended course of action because it appears to be the most feasible and effective, and it also scores in the middle for cost, time, and perception.
Our research highlighted a significant potential for Russian coercive influence over Romania in the oil industry, and over Greece in the gas sector, partially confirming our initial hypothesis; however, we have only scratched the surface on the topic.
Further exploratory research should be conducted to map and assess the Balkan states' green energy industry's vulnerability for Russian control or dependence, and assess other industries for potential coercive Russian influence. Sample hypotheses for this research could be:
• Russia is infiltrating the green energy industry to create the potential for coercive influence over European states as they attempt to diversify away from dependence on natural gas and oil.
• Russia uses economic control of European states' media to influence public opinion in support of the Russian Federation interests.
Evaluating these hypotheses will help build a more complete picture of the many pathways of coercive influence that Russia maintains in an attempt to accomplish its political objectives. Considering that Russian actions in recent years have relied extensively on influence to coerce the governments of states along its periphery, illuminating Russian pathways of influence over Romania and Greece could provide a useful model for identifying similar vulnerabilities throughout Eastern Europe. Through accurately identifying these vulnerabilities, and mapping out the networks that sustain them, the governments of Europe can develop policies and strategies to counter coercive Russian influence throughout the region.
8  
8  
55 "Relations with Russia," NATO, April 9, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/ topics_50090.htm. the
67 See Callard and Faber, "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War," 61-68.
67 See Callard and Faber, "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War," 61-68.
study identified 41 examples in one year alone of Moscow linking political demands to energy deliveries." 91 Up until now, Greece has never been a victim of Russian energy blackmailing; however, we should remain aware of the fact that Russia could use energy as a political tool to influence Greece. The goal of this chapter is to analyze the potential for Russia to influence the Greek energy sector. It contains four different analyses: a political analysis of Greek-Russian relations, a temporal analysis of Greek energy security, a social network analysis of the Greek energy companies' network, and a geospatial analysis of Russian energy exports in relation to EU energy dependency and the Greek energy infrastructures. Based on the results of the analyses reported in this chapter, we have concluded that the Russian influence in the Greek energy field is multidimensional in that Russia holds sway based on controlling a vast portion of the Greek natural gas imports; it is well positioned regarding the current structure of the Greek energy infrastructures; and Russian companies maintain influential positions within the Greek oil network. 91 U.S. Embassy and Consulate in Greece, 2018, "Ambassador Pyatt's Remarks at HAEE Conference," May 3, 2018, https://gr.usembassy.gov/ambassador-pyatts-remarks-at-haee-conference/.
112 Figure 18. Russian Energy Exports: EU Average, Greece, and Germany (2000, 2008, and 2017) 113 In the field of investments, the relations are unbalanced again; Russians invest in Greece approximately 15 times as much as Greeks invest in Russia. According to the Central Bank of Russia, Russian investments in Greece for 2017 amounted to US$733 million, an increase of 7.3 percent compared to 2016. 114 This amount accounts for 0.19 percent of total Russian foreign investment. Russian investments in Greece are mainly in the sectors of energy, finance services, telecommunications, tourism, and real estate. During the recent economic crisis in Greece, Russian investors were intensely interested in investing in Greek infrastructure. 115 Russians have unsuccessfully tried to buy out infrastructure segments such as the port of Thessaloniki, DEPA (Public Gas Corporation of Greece), and TrainOSE. 116
127 Adapted from Greek Tourism Confederation, "Statistical Data of Incoming Tourism." 128 Christian Winzer, "Conceptualizing Energy Security and Making Explicit Its Polysemic Nature,"
143 Adapted from Eurostat/Energy, "Simplified Energy Balances -Annual Data, Primary Production." 144 Eurostat/Energy, "Simplified Energy Balances -Annual Data, accessed
143 Adapted from Eurostat/Energy, "Simplified Energy Balances -Annual Data, Primary Production." 144 Eurostat/Energy, "Simplified Energy Balances -Annual Data, accessed
184 Robert Larsson, Russia's Energy Policy: Security Dimensions and Russia's Reliability as an Energy Supplier,
James Callard and Peter Faber, "An Emerging Synthesis for a New Way of War: Combination Warfare and Future Innovation," Georgetown Journal of International Affairs 3, no. 1 (Winter/Spring 2002): 61-68.
Naval Postgraduate School Journal CTX (Combating Terrorism Exchange) presents a close look at Russia's aggressive behavior in Eastern Europe, focusing on Hybrid Warfare theory through a review that includes a set of articles meant to reveal Russian means of imposing their goals; see Naval Postgraduate School (U.S.), CTX (Combating Terrorism Exchange) 6, no. 4 (November 2016):109, https://calhoun.nps.edu/.handle.net/10945/51376.
Grigas, 4.   
"Energy Security," International Energy Security, accessed March 11, 2018, https://www.iea.org/ topics /energysecurity/.
Before moving forward, it is important to note that due to the sensitivity of some energy companies' activities in and around Romania and Greece, in some cases, we drew inferences about the existence and capabilities of their networks, based on educated guesses because of the limited ability to verify the companies' internal policies.
Adapted from "Romania," Jane's by IHS Markit, accessed April 9, 2018, https://janes.ihs.com/ dashboard/country/Romania.
"Romania GDP Annual Growth Rate," Trading Economics, accessed April 9, 2018, https://tradingeconomics.com/romania/gdp-growth-annual.
Remarks by President Trump and President Iohannis of Romania in a Joint Press Conference, The White House Office of the Press Secretary, June 9, 2017, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/ 2017/06/09/remarks-president-trump-and-president-iohannis-romania-joint-press.
"Home Page," Enipedia, accessed April 9, 2018, http://enipedia.tudelft.nl/wiki/Main_Page.
Adapted from references in Appendix A using ORA, table values extracted from the Energy Network SNA Report generated by ORA using the references in Appendix A.
Adapted from references in Appendix A using ORA, table values extracted from the Energy Network SNA Report generated by ORA using the references in Appendix A.
"Annual Report 2016," Romgaz, April 9, 2018:17, https://www.romgaz.ro/en/content/annualreport-2016.
81 "Annual Report 2016," OMV Petrom, April 9, 2018, http://www.bvb.ro/infocont/infocont17/ SNP_20170426122744_2016-Annual-Report.pdf.
Adapted from references in Appendix A using ORA, table values extracted from the Energy Network SNA Report generated by ORA using the references in Appendix A.
"About Gazprom," Gazprom, April 9, 2018, http://www.gazprom.com/about/.
Adapted from "Romania," Jane's By IHS Markit, accessed April 9, 2018, https://janes.ihs.com/ dashboard/country/Romania.
Adapted from "Annual Report 2016," Romgaz, April 9, 2018, https://www.romgaz.ro/en/content/ annual-report-2016; "Annual Report 2016," OMV Petrom, April 9, 2018, http://www.bvb.ro/infocont/ infocont17/SNP_20170426122744_2016-Annual-Report.pdf; "Annual Report 2016," Rompetrol, April 9, 2018, https://www.bvb.ro/infocont/infocont17/RRC_20170428142015_Annual-Report-for-2016-Eng.pdf.
Adapted from "Annual Report 2016," OMV Petrom, April 9, 2018, http://www.bvb.ro/infocont/ infocont17/SNP_20170426122744_2016-Annual-Report.pdf; "Annual Report 2014," Romgaz, April 9, 2018, https://www.romgaz.ro/en/content/annual-report-2014; "Annual Report 2016," Romgaz, April 9, 2018, https://www.romgaz.ro/en/content/annual-report-2016.
Adapted from "Annual Report 2016," OMV Petrom, April 9, 2018, http://www.bvb.ro/infocont/ infocont17/SNP_20170426122744_2016-Annual-Report.pdf; "Annual Report 2014," Romgaz, April 9, 2018, https://www.romgaz.ro/en/content/annual-report-2014; "Annual Report 2016," Romgaz, April 9, 2018, https://www.romgaz.ro/en/content/annual-report-2016.
Hellenic Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Cultural Relations and Greek Community," accessed July 25, 2018, https://www.mfa.gr/en/greece-bilateral-relations/russia/cultural-relations-andgreek-community.html.
World Bank, "Greece Trade at a Glance: Most Recent Values," April 29, 2018. https://wits.worldbank.org/CountrySnapshot/en/GRC/textview.
Karapetsas, Stefanidou, and Karitianos, Έκθεση 2017  για την Οικονομία της Ρωσικής Ομοσπονδίας και την Ανάπτυξη των Οικονομικών και Εμπορικών Σχέσεων Ελλάδας-Ρωσικής Ομοσπονδίας [2017 Report on the Economy of the Russian Federation and Greek-Russian Economic and Trade Relations], 27.
Germany is the largest importer of Russian energy products in the EU; see Eurostat/International Trade, "EU Trade since 1988 by SITC," accessed August 20, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/ database.
The port of Thessaloniki is the second largest port in Greece after Piraeus; DEPA is the company that dominates the Greek natural gas market; and TrainOSE is the company that controls all the urban and suburban railways in Greece.
Adapted from International Energy Agency, "Simplified Energy Balances -Annual Data, Primary Production," Eurostat/Energy, accessed August 25, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database.
"Simplified Energy Balances -Annual Data, Primary Production," Eurostat/Energy, accessed August 25, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database.
International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA Countries, Greece 2017 Review, 21.   
Eurostat, "Energy Dependence," last modified October 17, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ web/products-datasets/-/T2020_RD320.
Eurostat, "Energy Production and Imports," last modified September 18, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Energy_production_and_imports.
Eurostat/Energy, "Energy Dependency Rate," accessed August 22, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/data/database.
Eurostat, "EU Imports of Energy Products -Recent Developments," last modified July 4, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/EU_imports_of_energy_ products_-_recent _ developments.
Eurostat, "EU Imports of Energy Products -Recent Developments."
"Refining, Supply and Trade," Hellenic Petroleum (HELPE), accessed May 25, 2018, https://www.helpe.gr/en/investor-relations/key-data/our-businesses/refining-supply-and-trading/.
"Annual Report 2017,"Hellenic Petroleum (HELPE), accessed May 25, 2018, https://www.helpe.gr/userfiles/8ea1f0cb-9e62-48e4-b947-a27b00fb14bb/Annual_Report_web-160517.pdf ; Motor Oil, "Annual Report 2017," accessed May 25, 2018, http://www.moh.gr/media/PDF_inside_texts/ MOH_Annual_Report /MOH percent20ANNUAL percent20REPORT percent202016.pdf.
Adapted from Motor Oil, "Annual Report 2017."
Alina Polyakova et al., The Kremlin's Trojan Horses, 4.   
Adapted from references in Appendix B using ORA, table values extracted from the Energy Network SNA Report generated by ORA using the references in Appendix B.
The density score (.042) indicates that out of all potential ties only 4.2 percent are present in the network.
Vanitha Swaminathan and Christine Moorman, "Marketing Alliances, Firm Networks, and Firm Value Creation," Journal of Marketing 73, no. 5 (September 2009): 52-69, https://www.jstor.org/stable/ pdf/20619046.pdf, 55.
Sean Everton, "Network  Topography, Key Players and Terrorist Networks," Terrorist Networks 32, no.1 (June 2009): 12-19, http://hdl.handle.net/10945/46760, 16.
Adapted from references in Appendix B using ORA, table values extracted from the Energy Network SNA Report generated by ORA using the references in Appendix B.
Adapted from references in Appendix B using ORA.
Adapted from references in Appendix B using ORA.
Adapted from DIVA-GIS and Eurostat using QGIS; see DIVA-GIS Database (Spatial Data Download); and Eurostat/Energy (Energy Dependency Rate).
Adapted from DIVA-GIS and Eurostat using QGIS; see DIVA-GIS Database (Spatial Data Download); and Eurostat, "EU Imports of Energy Products -Recent Developments."
Eurostat, "EU Imports of Energy Products -Recent Developments."
Adapted from DIVA-GIS and Eurostat using QGIS; see DIVA-GIS Database (Spatial Data Download); and Eurostat, "EU Imports of Energy Products -Recent Developments."
Adapted fromInternational Energy Agency, 49.   
Adapted from DIVA-GIS and Eurostat using QGIS; see DIVA-GIS Database (Spatial Data Download); and Enipedia Database (NaturalGasInfrastructure).
Adapted from DIVA-GIS and Eurostat using QGIS; see DIVA-GIS Database (Spatial Data Download); and Enipedia Database (NaturalGasInfrastructure).
Trans Adriatic Pipeline, "TAP at a Glance."
"Agreement DEPA -GAZPROM Was Signed," Public Gas Corporation of Greece (DEPA), accessed June 10, 2018, http://www.depa.gr//press/002009001/page3.html.
We are thankful to the professors and staff of the 
Defense Analysis department at the Naval Postgraduate School
Their support helped us improve our professional development. In particular, we would like to recognize 
Professor Jesse Hammond
Daniel T. Cunningham
Special thanks to 
Professor Tristan Volpe
Department of Defense or the 
U.S. Government
We focused our research on Greece's oil and gas energy companies due to Russia's significant role in these energy sectors (albeit oil to a lesser extent). The vast majority of 166 Adapted from Hellenic Petroleum (HELPE), "Annual Report 2017."
A.
Greece's diplomatic relations with Russia are friendly while Romania's scarred relationship with Russia still needs to heal. Romania's December 1989 revolution ended 45 years of communism under the influence of the Soviet bloc. Due to Russia's relatively more robust economy and stronger military resources, its relations with Greece and Romania are highly unbalanced, and this will likely continue as Russia pursues its national interest in maintaining its post-soviet bloc spheres of influence. As such, Russia perceives any NATO expansion as a threat to its interests. Within this context, this thesis has analyzed Russian influence in the Romanian and Greek energy sectors with the goal of identifying courses of actions that these countries can take to prevent Russia from exerting control over their respective energy sectors.
The energy sectors of both Greece and Romania are fairly decentralized, which suggests they might remain resilient against Russian efforts to control them. No single company dominates either network. As indicated by social network analysis, Russia may be able to infiltrate the network successfully and leverage some companies, but the distributed characteristics of the network of companies should reduce that likelihood. Yet, the removal of energy resources nodes within these networks without alternative solutions to replace them will cause energy prices to rise and create instability in the energy market.
In the gas sector, while Romania is almost self-sufficient, Greece is highly dependent on Russia. Over 70 percent of Greece's gas resources are imported from Russia.
Because of Greece's geographic proximity to Russia, and the latter's attempts to maintain its sphere of influence, Greece is at risk of Russia directly cutting off the gas pipeline.
Furthermore, Greece remains vulnerable if Russia's relations with a country through which one of its pipelines passes deteriorates.
Because the oil market offers more supply alternatives than the gas one, the oil market in both Greece and Romania is more open and competitive. In Romania's case, though, three out of five oil refineries within the country are owned by Russian companies Lukoil and Rompetrol, which control approximately 60 percent of the market. As our social network analysis of Greece's energy sector indicated (see Chapter III), Lukoil is also a central player in Greece and has influence within the oil market.
Therefore, both the petroleum and the gas sectors are susceptible to influence from outside companies either owned by or aligned with Russia and can be utilized as means of Russia's "belts of insecurity" policy in order to create a buffer between the Russian Federation and NATO. In addition to their commitment to both NATO and the EU, Romania and Greece will need to take proactive security measures to limit Russia's ability to pursue its strategy.
Our analysis has highlighted Russia's continued attempts to ensure and expand its position of coercive influence over Romania and Greece via the energy sector. As a result of this analysis, we propose three distinct courses of action for each country (Romania and Greece) to prevent further Russian control over their energy sectors.
We compared our three courses of action according to five criteria (see Tables 
5
6
The Romanian government could decide to nationalize the energy. This would likely require the purchasing of all privately owned infrastructure that falls within Romanian territory. While this course of action would potentially provide the most direct, sudden impact to solve the problem of Russian influence in the energy industry, the massive cost could potentially bankrupt the government and cause severe public or international backlash. Additionally, Russia would most likely consider the move an act of hostility and possibly use it to justify aggressive actions toward Romania.
Table 
5
Upon adding up the scores, Course of Action 1 (Targeted Sanctions) and Course of Action 2 (Go Green) tied for the highest score, with each earning 12 out of a possible 15 points. Examining the results more closely reveals that the Go Green option is the preferable of the two options; even though it scores lowest on time, it provides a long-term solution to accomplish the task, and scores highest for feasibility, effectiveness, and perception.
In this subsection, we propose three distinct courses of action for Greece to prevent further Russian control over its energy sector.
A strategy based on the increase of inland energy production would be a sustainable solution. During the recent economic crisis, Greek energy consumption decreased; however, due to the downturn in the energy production, Greece's energy dependency is still high. Energy is the foundation for economic growth and stability; a further decline in consumption will undermine the Greek effort for sustainable growth. Therefore, one option is for Greece to develop its own upstream potential.  
196
196 Karolina Tagaris, "Exxon, Total, Repsol among Bidders for Oil Exploration off Greece," Reuters, last modified March 5, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-energy-greece-tenders-interest/exxontotal-repsol-among-bidders-for-oil-exploration-off-greece-idUSKBN1GH2O0.
197 The Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs states that "According to customary international law, which is also codified in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Greece has the right to extend its territorial waters to 12 nautical miles. Turkey itself already extended its territorial waters to 12 nautical miles in the Black Sea and the Mediterranean since 1964. During ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (Law 2321/1995), our country stated explicitly that it reserves the right to exercise this right at any point in time. In reaction to this legitimate position of Greece, the Turkish National Assembly issued a resolution on June 8, 1995 granting the Turkish government full and perpetual competence to declare war (casus belli) (authorizing it to use military means against Greece), should Greece decide to extend its territorial waters over 6 nautical miles"; see Hellenic Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Territorial Sea-Casus Belli," accessed June 15, 2018, https://www.mfa.gr/en/issues-ofgreek-turkish-relations/relevant-documents/territorial-sea-casus-belli.html.
between Turkey and Greece about determining the Greek and Turkish Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).
Recent developments reveal that Greece has great potential for seeking alternative providers in both natural gas and LNG: within the next two years, three major energy projects capable of changing the Greek energy map will be completed. First, Greece has joined the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) project, which aims to give Europe access to energy resources located in the Caspian region. 
198
200