# ID: 696d2785db1b489a86350c1686deda95
# Title: The New'special Relationship": Redefining America's Strategic Partnership with Germany
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Germany is the undisputed economic and political powerhouse of Europe. However, the balance of Berlin's instruments of national power is disproportionate, underscoring a long-standing doctrine of military restraint. President Joachim Gauck's 2013-2014 calls for Germany to assume more global responsibility have materialized via several forms: Germany's significant contributions in Afghanistan, response to Ebola, delivery of weapons to the Iraqi Kurds, and attempts to diplomatically resolve the crisis in Ukraine. As Germany's influence on the international scene increases, so must its commitment to invest, train, and employ military forces in defense of the international order from which it has so greatly benefited. The United States should encourage Germany in this regard and must take into account power shifts in the European status quo. Washington should deepen its political, economic, and military ties to Germany, investing in the long-term "special relationship" of the future.
The views expressed in this academic research paper are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US government or the Department of Defense. In accordance with Air Force Instruction 51-303, it is not copyrighted, but is the property of the United States government.     
The year 2014 was rated by the Pentagon as the most "complex year" since 1968 
1 -and 2015
Berlin's global political and economic influence as the driving force within the European Union presupposes certain responsibilities, among them the need to assert a greater military role on an international scale. Germany has too long been haunted by its past and cannot allow the shadows of the Second World War to cloud its future calculus. The German position as de facto leader of the European project necessitates Berlin shedding its long-held, non-interventionist dogma and embracing the concurrent military and security roles which are now demanded by today's complex challenges. While significant hurdles in the application of German hard power have been overcome since the 1990 Reunification, more must be done to fundamentally shift the dynamics. Such sweeping policy initiatives, however, remain decidedly in German hands.
In parallel, the United States, which has introduced a new security doctrine of heavier reliance on NATO allies (evidenced by the Libya intervention), must reexamine its current model of strategic partnerships in Europe to account for power shifts that will reshape the status quo. At the heart of this discussion is the fundamental question posed by former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger: "so who do I call to reach Europe?" 
2
Nonetheless, Germany itself is moving through a period of political "soul searching" in terms of rightsizing its role in the world. President Joachim Gauck's October 2013 address on the occasion of the celebration of German reunification and remarks during the January 2014 Munich Security Conference called for a more engaging global role for Berlin. Gauck's themes inspired what many Germany watchers call a "new" foreign policy and security approach. 
3
4
5
6
Responding to the global complexities of 2014, Germany undertook an ambitious foreign policy agenda, driven in large part by Russian aggression in Ukraine. But actual German commitment to modernize and invest in its military remains in question. With a defense budget of 1.3% of overall GDP, Germany falls visibly short of fulfilling the 2% NATO provision. 
7
The legacy of 20 th century German history has perhaps damaged more than just the will to invest in a robust military. Indeed, Germany's perception of itself has also significantly affected how it conducts foreign policy. Unlike other major capitals such as Washington, London, or Paris, Berlin did not play as significant a role in shaping international affairs as a world power throughout the centuries. 
8
The great military historian Russell Weigley wrote that military policy consists of "two primary elements, the structure of a nation's armed forces, and the strategy for their employment." 
10
During the Cold War, the existential threat posed by the then Soviet Union necessitated any serious German security policies to dovetail with Washington's strategic view. 
11
12
13
The reunification of Germany on October 3, 1990 was the political personification that signified the end of the Cold War. Despite the fanfare and hysteria that accompanied this watershed event, a reunited Germany also became a source of tension within European capitals.
Many quietly contemplated what kind of "new" Germany would emerge and what type of security doctrine it might exercise in an increasingly unipolar world. In 1994, Germany's Federal Constitutional Court issued a breakthrough decision allowing out-of-area deployments for the Bundeswehr. 
14
At the same time, international humanitarian crises of the 1990s such as the massacres in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia began to awaken a national consciousness of international responsibility amongst Germany's population. 
15
16
The terror attacks of September 11, 2001 sparked an international debate on security policy. Cross-border terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and their nexus to failed or weak states presented daunting challenges to world governments. 17 Globalization, viewed in most Western circles as an indispensable element to global economic prosperity, was subsequently exploited by terrorist groups such as al-Qaeda to advance their extremist agenda. Richard Aldrich eloquently remarked that "globalization has created a relatively borderless world in which states move clumsily but wherein their illicit opponents move elegantly." 
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
28
1
30
The experience of Afghanistan created a new generation of combat-tested German officers and non-commissioned officers virtually non-existent since 1945. This newly-acquired personnel baseline will undoubtedly prove invaluable as the Bundeswehr implements modernization plans. Conversely, the Afghanistan campaign also accentuated glaring shortfalls in German military readiness, experience gaps, and capability limitations. Berlin's current defense budget, at 33 billion Euros, equates to roughly 1.3% of total GDP-far below NATO's stated 2% goal. 
31
32
On 18 March 2015, the German government announced an increase in the defense budget by a total of 8 billion Euros extended throughout the next four years, or until 2019. 
33
34
35
Current Defense Minister Ursula von der Leyen has served in her current capacity since December 2013-the first female to ever hold this post in Germany. 
36
European Union Commissioner Jean-Claude Juncker's proposal for a European Union Army was met with positive comments from Germany, underscoring the European-centric approach favored by German political culture. 
37
38
The primary conclusion articulated in the final report is a recognition that "the world has changed and the Federal Foreign Office also needs to change." 42 Three major focus areas emerged from Review 2014: 1) Crisis -Crises will tend to be the norm in the next 10 to 15 years. We are responding to this by restructuring our organization and creating a separate Crisis Prevention, Stabilization and Post-conflict Peacebuilding Directorate-General. 2) Order -We are thus creating a place where we can make extensive use of our most important principle for international order, namely multilateralism. 3) Europe -We thought and talked a lot about Europe in this review. Many experts around the world regard Germany as the leading power in Europe, a power that should generate greater influence for the European model in world affairs. 
43
44
The debt crisis which has rocked the European Union's core since 2008 presents a significant hurdle in further institutional integration. The rise of the ultra-left SYRIZA party in Greece in January 2015 and failure to reach an agreement with its creditors on reforms/debt restructuring has put an immense strain on the common currency. Germany, with the largest economy in Europe and massive export engine, has provided the Greek government with significant financial assistance since the beginning of the crisis. According to the German Federal Ministry of Finance:
"A total of €73bn was paid out within the framework of the first program for Greece (eurozone share: €52.9bn; IMF: €20.1bn = XDR 17.5bn). Germany's share of the disbursed funds within the framework of the first program totals €15.19bn. On 31 March 2015, Greece repaid XDR 9.9bn to the IMF. This corresponds to around €12.7bn (using the exchange rate on 31 March 2015)." 45 (please see figure 
2
Additionally, Germany has made available over €210 billion as actual appropriation of financial guarantees to the European Financial Stability Facility. 
46
47
49
Russia While Germany will continue to advocate for a diplomatic solution the impasse, the need to reconstitute and expand NATO's collective military capacity has been brought to the forefront.
Germany's Forsa Institute conducted a series of polls in the summer of 2014 in the wake of Russia's intervention in Ukraine. It is interesting to note several of the results regarding German perceptions of how both their country and NATO fit into a broader security framework.
For example, in terms of the question, "Should NATO pursue a policy of permanently stationing troops in Poland and the Baltics?" 74% of Germans across all age groups and political parties responded with a clear "no." 56
To the question, "Should Germany assume greater international responsibility?" the results were much closer. 51% of respondents said no, while 46% stated that Germany should step up its role. 
57
Berlin's expanded engagement throughout 2014 also materialized in the form of assistance during the Ebola crisis as well as addressing the threat from the Islamic State.
Germany outfitted the first non-US aircraft capable of transporting affected Ebola patients. 
62
63
Germany exhibited a key shift in its foreign policy in 2014, both in rhetoric and in action.
The real transformation, however, is perhaps the new lens through which Germany now sees itself. President Gauck's calls for a more engaged Germany underscore a consciousness that the country plays far too important a role in the world to simply take a back seat. Additionally, Foreign Minister Steinmeier's "Review 2014," while not particularly detailed in substance, facilitated a necessary (and long-overdue) dialogue between German elites, interest groups, and citizenry to take an introspective look at Germany's in the world. This dialogue remains fluid in Berlin and is very far from complete.
Germany fundamentally views its future as tied to the European Union and European solidarity. There is a genuine resistance in today's political circles to forge an independent, "German" path versus an approach deeply anchored in European institutions. U.S. policymakers must understand that a strong Germany is the foundation upon which a strong European project is built. The balance of power and influence in Europe is shifting and key players on both sides of the Atlantic must react accordingly. This trend is masterfully articulated by former State Department Director of Political Affairs Nicholas Burns, who remarked, "It is very striking the way that Angela Merkel has become the undisputed leader of Europe." 67
Germany itself is still settling into this newfound role. German actions in the past year clearly demonstrate Berlin's desire to assume a more aggressive foreign policy and more engaged role in the world, including the option to employ military forces in overseas contingencies. However, the extent to which Berlin can make this transition depends on: 1) German political will to make difficult choices on defense prioritization and the extent of its global engagement; 2) Washington's willingness to publically and privately embolden Germany.
It is important to note that for every German foreign policy initiative or declaration, an equal amount of skeptics and detractors (both internal and external to Germany) emerge. Many within the European Union itself still resent a German-dominated Europe and view Berlin's moves with increasing suspicion. Nonetheless, in Germany the United States has an important partner that shares democratic ideals, economic might, international influence, and leverage with Russia. The democratic Germany of today remains an important guarantor as well as beneficiary of the current international order.
The U.S. has traditionally designated its relationship with Britain as a "special relationship" and many historical and pragmatic arguments support such a status. Washington cannot, however, take for granted the initiatives and policy shifts emanating from Berlin. For that matter, too many other players have already taken notice: China, arguably the world's fastest growing economic and military power, deems its relationship with Germany important enough to be designated a "special relationship." 68 For its part, Germany (to the chagrin of Washington) recently agreed to join the Asian Infrastructure Bank, China's challenger to the World Bank. 
69
States must recognize that the present and future leader of Europe is Germany-this reality demands a carefully tailored approach.
The United States must take a pragmatic view of current realities within the European Germany, as Europe's most prosperous nation, has an economic engine that carries a yet untapped potential for military development. At the time of this writing, some 2,500 German troops are deployed in more than a dozen hotspots around the world (see figure 
4
4
72
presents challenges in convincing smaller, economically-weaker NATO members to increase their collective defense expenditures.
Engaging Berlin on matters of strategic defense reform will be an arduous process that Furthermore, the tangible results of a robust intelligence sharing relationship with Germany would greatly assist in shifting German public opinion, which remains highly suspect of intelligence-related matters. Eventually, Germany should be admitted to the "Five-Eyes" intelligence sharing framework, along with the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, and New
Zealand. Such a sweeping initiative would add significant capability to existing members' capabilities as well as better integrate Germany into the framework. Ultimately, such a move will be an entirely political decision. Germany to date has not indicated a commitment to expand its intelligence sharing relationships in this manner-German public opinion, in the short term, would also likely prevent any agreement from materializing. These realities should not, however, inhibit US policy makers from making overtures toward this outcome.
The Germany of 2015 is a truly amazing success story; a nation divided after World War II, reunited, and leading the European project towards the safeguarding of international order and stability. There is no doubt that German economic dominance of the European Union will continue well into the future. Regardless of how the debt crisis is ultimately resolved, Germany will play a key role in maintaining the integrity and unity of the Eurozone. Berlin's newfound political influence will be channeled in the form of increased engagement through international organizations as well as the traditional European economic and security apparatus. There is still much internal debate to be had regarding the limits of Germany's future military and security engagements. However, most politicians in Germany today recognize the fact that their country simply carries far too much economic and political weight to remain silent in the security arena.
As NATO remains challenged by a resurgent Russia, Germany must maintain its bridge to Moscow while simultaneously improving its overall strategic defense structure. President
Gauck highlighted the German dilemma of moving forward with a dedicated security policy in that:
"We're…committed to NATO. However, we've been debating for years about the direction the Alliance should take, and we've done nothing to stop the depletion of its financial resources. We're not calling the alliance with the United States into question, but we have observed symptoms of stress and uncertainty about the future." 76 Indeed, Germany, with the burden of its history, is waiting for direct and indirect support from the United States as it makes significant transitions in its international role. 70 years are certainly sufficient for the country to move past the horrific legacy of National Socialism, for which today's generation of Germans cannot be held responsible. Germany has made significant strides into international leadership since reunification, but seems to be only glacially moving into a bona fide military/security vector.
Assigning a term "special relationship" to Germany does not automatically occur to most in the American and European policy communities. However, one must possess the vision to anticipate future realities vis-à-vis current political arrangements. Washington's future special relationship with Berlin will serve not only to expand bi-lateral relations, but will have international implications concerning the future global order. A more globally engaged Germany capable and willing to participate in security operations is critical to the maintenance of the current international order. There is perhaps no better statement supporting such a position than that of Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw Sikorski on 29 November 2011: "I fear German power less today," Sikorski announced, "than German inaction." These powerful words, from a senior leader of a country which historically suffered much at the hands of Germany, carry the potent message of just how greatly the world has truly changed. Policymakers in Washington must embrace such changes and develop strategies that benefit America's long-term interests.  