# ID: 6a7ab685a4a84c1ca1f03b67ffc4e857
# Title: Compilation of Theses Abstracts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1996.0
# Fulltext:
Primary issues and courses of action are provided to assist community leaders with deciding whether or not volunteers should be integrated into their existing disaster management plans.
If the decision is made to integrate volunteers, several recommendations are discussed to assist planners with developing implementation strategies to address the needs and concerns of both volunteers and paid responders.
This thesis examines the structure and intelligence process of the Los Angeles Terrorism Early Warning (TEW) Group to assess its effectiveness as measured through the application of a Program Logic Model.
This model verifies the links between the assumptions on which the program is based and actual program activities.
It further assesses its status as a "smart practice" based on measurable criteria that are beyond perception or peer approval alone.
The TEW is a regional, multi-agency and multi-disciplinary network that functions as a focal point for analyzing the strategic and operational information needed to prevent, mitigate, disrupt and respond to threats and acts of terrorism.
Although efforts toward prevention are difficult to measure in any program, input and outcome are assessable.
This method provides an effective means to evaluate a program while documenting what works and why.
Effectiveness should not be based solely on outputs; a structure that produces them is also an indicator.
The objective of this thesis is to establish a benchmark of practical standards for collaborative intelligence sharing operations that can be replicated by other regions and that will establish a common, nationwide, homeland security intelligence network.
Based on these criteria, it is reasonable to conclude that the TEW is in fact a practice."
It meets its intended goals and objectives when measured according to the parameters of the Program Logic Model, and has a structured process and system that leads to preferred outcomes.
This thesis reviews the background related to counterterrorism and law enforcement planning for major special events and identifies some of the strategic issues that have emerged in special events management since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
It focuses on the subjective and objective components of the systems currently used by DHS and the FBI to categorize and resource special events, and it evaluates whether the current approach to major event planning is sufficient for contemporary counterterrorism challenges.
The thesis considers how changes in the present system may improve interagency counterterrorism preparedness.
Finally, it applies risk management principles to the interagency special event planning process to determine if these principles are useful for developing a rational, politically defensible and fiscally responsible approach to federal resource allocation for major special events.
As the Department of Homeland Security continues to develop plans and strategies to guide government agencies towards a safer environment, state, local and tribal law enforcement agencies are struggling to define their role in the homeland security mission.
This paper proposes the creation of a National Law Enforcement Network made up of the state, local and tribal law enforcement agencies throughout the country.
The network design will allow local agencies to reach beyond the traditional law enforcement approach by establishing formal networks that facilitate local, regional, national and eventually global coordination of an effective strategy aimed at preventing future terror attacks in the homeland.
The creation of this network will ensure that every police officer in the United States understands their role in preventing future terror attacks.
Drilling down to the lowest local level to include businesses, industry and the private sector, the formation of the network expands detection and prevention capabilities well beyond the current level.
According to joint doctrine, winning the nation's wars is the primary purpose of the armed forces.
It is the foundation of joint professional military education and training, forming the basis for how the warfighter will prosecute a war, and is a reflection of the judgments of senior military leadership.
The joint and service warfighting doctrine of the 1940s and 1950s contained two aspects of war that are not reflected in current joint doctrine.
Combat now spans both war and "not war" in the new "military operation other than war," and the process of the military government has been completely replaced by the new "civil administration."
This two-part redefinition of war has created a new joint doctrine that is confusing, overlapping, compartmentalized and incomprehensible, and has resulted in many military failures in the decades since World War II.
In general, the second tenet of the Just War Theory dictates that the weak must be protected throughout the war effort.
International law of occupation states that certain functions and institutions of the defeated nation must be restored by the occupying power.
The military government, such as those found in past wars administered by the U.S. armed forces, is the vehicle to ensure that the war is prosecuted justly and done so in a manner that will win the peace.
This thesis recommends a return to a holistic continuum of war in two phases, formal hostilities and the post-formal transition to peace, which adheres to international law, incorporates all combat as "formal hostilities," is independent of size or scope and requires the armed forces to win the peace as they have successfully done in the past.
This thesis examines the potential destabilizing implications of conventional, prompt, global strike capabilities that operate from or through space.
Existing material on this subject is largely limited to debates over the merits of terrestrial versus space basing and arguments against deployment over perceived increases in the likelihood of inadvertent nuclear war.
This thesis addresses these issues, but takes the next step and analyzes the root causes and proposes possible solutions to the "security dilemma" these weapons may create.
The central finding is that in order to fully exploit the predicted advantages of conventional prompt global strike capabilities, significant changes to the enduring Cold War nuclear postures of the United States and Russia are necessary.