# ID: 6bca4530a4b0416cb06d0b329add7eb7
# Title: Shift Fire: Adjusting the Marine Corps' Warfighting Philosophy for the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The Marine Corps can better prepare for the challenges associated with the 21st century battlefield and provide a shift in mindset following the previous two decades of war by revising its warfighting philosophy of maneuver warfare to emphasize the increasing importance of unity of effort, surprise, and combined arms and how these tenets have evolved
I chose to conduct my research on the Marine Corps' warfighting philosophy and explore how and if it should change to meet the challenges of the 21st century. During my eleven years in the Marine Corps, I have believed in maneuver warfare as it is written in our doctrine, MCDP 1 Warfighting. However, there are many new challenges that the Marine Corps now faces that did not exist when it adopted the philosophy several years ago. In exploring this topic, I wanted to look at the concept of maneuver warfare and the 21st century battlefield to determine how we could better apply our warfighting philosophy to the challenges we may face in the future.
In conducting my research, I learned a great amount about the roots of maneuver warfare and gained a better understanding of some of the challenges we may encounter on a future battlefield.
I think the adaptation of maneuver warfare in the 1980s was a great period in Marine Corps history, and this paper by no means is intended to discredit the works of those who influenced that monumental shift in how we fight. By writing this paper, I hope to add to the discussion on maneuver warfare and share my views of how we may be able to better prepare the force for a future fight.
I would like to thank Dr. Claire Metelits and Lieutenant Colonel Terje Bruoeygard who served as my mentors during the writing of this paper. Their constant feedback kept me on track throughout this process, and I do not think I could have finished this paper without their continued guidance and recommendations. I would also like to thank the Leadership Communication Skills Center at Marine Corps University who provided feedback on this paper and all others that I have submitted while a student at Command and Staff College. Lastly, I would like to thank my wife, Amy, who has continued to support me not only during the several hours required to research and write this paper, but throughout my career.
The character of war continuously changes, and as the Marine Corps transitions from over fifteen years of conflict where it has grown comfortable operating from fixed positions and maintained technological advantages in weapon systems, it must now prepare the force for a fight against adversaries with near-peer capabilities. The 2018 National Defense Strategy highlights the reemergence of strategic competition by revisionist powers such as China and Russia. 
1
2
3
The Marine Corps' warfighting philosophy must continue to evolve to meet the demands of the 21st century and expand upon outdated concepts and principles that currently exist in its doctrine. As General Alfred Gray states, War is both timeless and ever-changing. While the basic nature of war is constant, the means and methods we use evolve continually. Like war itself, our approach to warfighting must evolve. If we cease to refine, expand, and improve our profession, we risk becoming outdated, stagnant, and defeated. 
4
5
6
The Marine Corps should not view maneuver warfare as an unalterable philosophy within its doctrine and rely solely on publishing different concepts that describe how the philosophy applies to the current and future battlefield. If maneuver warfare will remain, as it should, the foundation of how the Marine Corps fights, it must be easily understood, discussed, and applied by all Marines. Elements of maneuver warfare existed long before the Marine Corps adopted the philosophy and will continue to have a significant influence in future conflict. How the Marine Corps articulates its warfighting philosophy will contribute to how well it is prepared to handle the challenges on the battlefield in the next 10-30 years. This paper analyzes the Marine Corps' current warfighting philosophy and provides recommendations on how it must evolve to meet the demands of the 21st century. First, it will examine the roots of maneuver warfare and how it is currently described in Marine Corps doctrine. Next, it will provide a broad overview of some of the challenges the Marine Corps may face on future battlefields. Lastly, it will lay out how doctrine can be updated to provide a more focused approach to its warfighting philosophy than what currently exists to meet the demands of the increasingly complex future war.
When describing maneuver warfare and how it is incorporated into Marine Corps doctrine, it is important to first define what a warfighting philosophy is, what it is not, and the purpose of the philosophy. A warfighting philosophy is conceptually how an organization or unit (in this case, the Marine Corps) fights. It provides the framework for how to think about warfighting and serves as the foundation to how the Marine Corps applies combat power while remaining flexible to adapt to different situations. It is not and should not be a prescriptive set of rules or a checklist due to the ever-changing character of war and the uncertainty and friction associated with warfare. 
7
Elements of maneuver warfare have existed for thousands of years and its roots trace back to the beginning of warfare. However, the term was not regularly used within the US military until the 1980s. Several publications describe the background of maneuver warfare, and this section will touch on a few of the most influential to provide the reader with insight into the Marine Corps' warfighting philosophy, how it influences Marine Corps doctrine, and how it is interpreted within the 21st century.
Following the Vietnam War, Air Force Colonel and fighter pilot John Boyd studied historical battles and concepts dating back to Sun Tzu's era. Within his research, he determined that success on the battlefield was attributed to the commander who was able to make decisions and act faster than his adversary. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Corps has examples of maneuver warfare throughout its history and quotes retired General and former Secretary of Defense James Mattis who states, The Marine Corps had always allowed a great deal of freedom to tactical commanders, but at least now we had a better framework for what we were doing and it was maneuver warfare's tenets. And so it was more of an upgrading of tactical proficiency and operational art. It was not really replacing something. 
29
Like Piscitelli, Marine Major Ian T. Brown explores the history of the Marine Corps adaptation of maneuver warfare in A New Conception of War: John Boyd, the US Marines, and Maneuver Warfare. In describing the practicality in maneuver warfare, he also draws upon recent examples in Iraq and Afghanistan where commanders attribute their success to applying the tenets of maneuver warfare. 
30
31
32
The bulk of the discussion on maneuver warfare within MCDP 1 is outlined in its final chapter, "The Conduct of War," where it describes several characteristics of maneuver warfare including the concentration of fires and forces at decisive points, tempo, focus, surprise, and the flexibility to cope with uncertainty. 
33
34
Many scholars continue to discuss maneuver warfare and its application on the current and future battlefield. In the Small Wars Journal, Russell Glenn argues that the definition of maneuver needs to be expanded to answer the demands of the 21st century. He highlights how Leonhard's concept of maneuver warfare focuses exclusively on movement and the enemy. 
35
36
37
38
40
The factors that shape the basic nature of war such as friction, fluidity, uncertainty, and physical, moral, and mental forces remain constant, but the character of war and the means and methods used continuously evolve. 
41
Understanding this changing character of war and the future challenges of the 21st century is an essential step for the Marines of tomorrow to continue to have success on the battlefield.
As society continues to change, warfare has evolved from an industrial war to a war amongst the people. In the past, the industrial war model followed the sequence of peace, crisis, war, then resolution. 
42
43
The results of a war amongst the people are that Marines of today must be prepared to make decisions at a much lower level. While serving as Commandant in 1999, General Charles Krulak emphasized that Marines must be able to fight in the three-block war where they will conduct full-scale military operations, peacekeeping, and provide humanitarian aid all within three contiguous city blocks. 
44
45
As warfare evolves from the industrial war model to a war amongst the people, technology remains a significant driver to the changing character of war. Autonomous systems and increased lethality and ranges are becoming more prevalent to state and non-state actors.
Advancements in technology likely will include autonomous systems, human/machine collaborations to process information, assisted human operations to include sensors and communication equipment, and human/machine combat teaming to employ munitions. 
46
47
48
Today, military forces are impacted not just by the air, land, and sea domains that preceded the 21st century, but also by the cyber and space domains. Colin Gray describes these new challenges in Another Bloody Century stating that both the cyber and space domains have been militarized and will soon see combat. 
49
50
51
52
53
54
Russian tactics of ambiguous warfare in Crimea can serve as a preview of what US forces may face in a future conflict. Russian Chief of the General Staff, Valery Gerasimov, revised Russian military doctrine to include a 4:1 ratio of non-military to military actions with the former used to shape the political, economic, and social aspects through subversion, espionage, propaganda, cyber-attacks, or a combination of these actions. 
55
56
Upon initiation of armed conflict, Russian military forces fighting in Ukraine employed several TTPs that the United States may encounter in the future. As UAVs become more prevalent and easily accessible, Russian forces demonstrated the ability to employ the unmanned assets to conduct reconnaissance and gather intelligence. 
57
58
59
60
Although new technology can be expected on the future battlefield, the human dimension will remain a critical component in future warfare. Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan claims that, "historically, good men with poor ships are better than poor men with good ships." 61 As innovation continues to occur, a simultaneous effort must be made to provide training to individuals and modernize doctrine to best employ and integrate the new technology to achieve the desired effects. In the past, wars were won primarily by mobility and firepower, products of the industrial age. Gray argues that in the information age of warfare, the military must not view technology as weapons that win wars, but as weapons with which wars are won. 
62
The battlefield of the future will look significantly different from what the Marines of today experienced in Iraq and Afghanistan where they maintained advantages in technology and superiority in each domain. This future operating environment begins to level the playing field through instantaneous and widespread access to information and the continued proliferation of surveillance equipment that is capable of identifying physical and electromagnetic signatures. In their Center for Naval Analysis report on Russia's ambiguous warfare, Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan Evans state that, "success in this environment demands Marines to consider how to apply their warfighting principles on a battlefield that may include the instantaneous loss of air, fire
[power], and information superiority." 
63
Understanding the multi-domain battle and potential actions by adversaries, similar to the Russians' Gerasimov Doctrine, can help modernize the way the Marine Corps fights in the future. Releasing new operating concepts and white papers to describe how it must apply its warfighting philosophy to the current and future challenges only begins to create the dialogue needed to provide a shift in how Marines think about and execute maneuver warfare. A greater impact would be made across the Marine Corps through a revision of MCDP 1, Warfighting. In his Forward to the 1997 revision of MCDP 1, General Charles Krulak states that, "military doctrine cannot be allowed to stagnate, especially an adaptive doctrine like maneuver warfare. Doctrine must continually evolve based on growing experience, advancements in theory, and the changing face of war itself." 
64
Many aspects of MCDP 1 should be retained and only those tenets necessary to better describe how maneuver warfare has evolved should be revised. The publication should continue to provide the broad guidance envisioned during the initial version of Warfighting to allow for the judgement and initiative vital to maneuver warfare to continue. One of the main goals for the 1997 revision was to clarify some of the maneuver warfare concepts such as commander's intent, main effort, and center of gravity/critical vulnerabilities. 
65
The first area that should be revised when describing maneuver warfare is highlighting the importance of unity of effort. Several areas within the current publication imply that unity of effort is critical; however, a more detailed description should be included now that warfare has expanded to include the cyber and space domains along with the traditional domains of air, land, and sea. MCDP 1 provides a brief overview of the need to focus efforts to maximize effects through striking quickly and boldly. 
66
67
Marines of today and the future must consider other additional factors that did not exist twenty years ago. As discussed in the previous section, the concept of the Strategic Corporal emphasizes how decisions and actions are now being made at a much lower level. Multi-domain operations describe the increasingly joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multi-national environment that requires greater coordination across domains and integration across warfighting functions. This demands detailed synchronization of all forces operating together that maximizes friendly capabilities in both the physical and cognitive dimensions to achieve a common objective and decisive results against the adversary. The Marine Corps will be required to fight across domains and its foundational doctrine should provide an overview of each domain similar to how MCDP 1 describes the tactical, operational, and strategic levels of war. In addition to introducing the different domains, a subsection to maneuver warfare should expand upon the importance of unity of effort to highlight the need to synchronize actions and to provide the shift in mindset needed for the Marine Corps to be successful on the future battlefield.
The next principle that should be revised to meet the challenges of the 21st century is the element of surprise. MCDP 1 provides only a short paragraph on surprise within Chapter 4, but it also describes surprise and boldness in detail within Chapter 2, "The Theory of War" where it lists three ways to achieve surprise: deception, ambiguity, and stealth. 
68
Technological advancements coupled with the transition to a war amongst the people have made it extremely difficult to achieve surprise. While fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan, Marines primarily achieved surprise through ambiguity such as switching up patrol routes and times. The Marine Corps fought from fixed positions with little to no consideration to physical or electromagnetic signatures. Fighting against a near-peer competitor will require Marines to rely not only on ambiguity but on deception and stealth as well. As the Russians demonstrated in Ukraine, to be detected is to be targeted and killed. Marines must have a disciplined approach in the application of all three means of achieving surprise to stay alive on the future battlefield and maneuver to a position of advantage across domains. The ability to achieve surprise--either through ambiguity, deception, or stealth--will undoubtedly play a major role in the execution of maneuver warfare. The description of surprise within Chapter 2, "The Theory of War" should be moved to the final chapter when describing maneuver warfare to highlight the renewed importance of this tenet in an environment where each domain is contested. The element of surprise is a critical component of how the Marine Corps can gain an advantage; therefore, moving this tenet to Chapter 4, "The Conduct of War" would reinforce its relevance against a near-peer competitor.
Lastly, the Marine Corps needs to revise how it conducts combined arms as a critical component of maneuver warfare. Combined arms within MCDP 1 is discussed from the fire team to Marine Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF) level and describes only direct fire, indirect fire, and close air support to put the enemy in a dilemma. 
69
Marines must be able to expand upon the traditional understanding of combined arms and apply modern capabilities on the future battlefield. The information environment will play a major factor in future warfare, and Marine units must be able to counter or get ahead of adversaries who employ similar TTPs such as the 4:1 non-military to military actions employed by Russia. Multi-domain operations highlight these challenges and how combined arms should be conducted in the 21st century against a near-peer adversary. Even down to the platoon and company-level, leaders need to understand and be able to incorporate these new domains into operations in the same way units of the past incorporated artillery and close air support, especially in an environment that requires increasingly decentralized operations. The Marine Corps needs to embrace this concept not only in white papers but also in its principal warfighting publication, MCDP 1, to induce a greater understanding across the force and provide the shift in mindset needed to best employ new capabilities that will assist in placing the adversary in a combined arms dilemma.
While unity of effort, surprise, and combined arms should be revised within MCDP 1, the other tenets should remain. The decision-making cycle described by Boyd will remain vital to maintaining tempo and achieving an advantage over the adversary, and mission tactics will be even more necessary as units become more dispersed and more cautious of emitting signatures.
The basic concepts of maneuver warfare are nothing new, but how they are applied on the battlefield has and will continue to evolve. A revised warfighting philosophy would serve as the framework to shape how the Marine Corps organizes, trains, and equips its force while also stimulating greater innovation as the Marine Corps gains a better understanding of what the battlefield may look like in the next 10-30 years. A revision would initiate all Marines to re-read the doctrine, discuss the changes, and better understand how the warfighting philosophy should be applied. The experience of the current Marine Corps and changing face of war described by General Krulak in the Forward to MCDP 1 has now crossed the threshold where the Marine Corps would benefit from a revision to its current doctrine and shift the mindset of how it applies its warfighting philosophy.
As the Marine Corps continues to evolve and prepare for the future, it must first look at its warfighting philosophy to ensure it best meets the demands that it may encounter. Hanging on to outdated doctrinal concepts that were developed over 30 years ago leaves the current warfighting philosophy of maneuver warfare open to interpretation and only limits the shift in mindset needed to compete against either a near-peer adversary or a non-state actor with modern technology. The Marine Corps should continue to embrace the concept of maneuver warfare, but it must expand upon the current definition and tenets to better shape the force for current and future threats.
Will the Marine Corps be successful on the future battlefield if it continues to embrace maneuver warfare as written in MCDP 1? The answer is yes; the Marine Corps has always found a way to win, and it will continue to adapt while employing the same principles of war that have existed for centuries. However, revising its warfighting philosophy would provide a mindset shift that would limit some of the hard lessons learned on the future battlefield.
Maneuver warfare gave the Marine Corps a much-needed doctrinal foundation that provided a shift in mindset as it transitioned from the Vietnam War. As the Marine Corps now transitions from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, it should once again examine its warfighting philosophy against what it may face against a near-peer competitor and revise the late 20th century doctrine to better articulate how the philosophy would be applied to meet the challenges it may encounter in the next 10-30 years.
As adversaries of the future will most likely use a warfighting philosophy similar to Russia's ambiguous warfare, the Marine Corps may find itself more reactive, at parity, or even at a disadvantage once committed to battle. A more modernized warfighting philosophy that revises what currently exists in MCDP 1 and emphasizes unity of effort, surprise, and combined arms would put the Marine Corps of the future at the advantage desired in maneuver warfare, or at least put it in the best position for success to defeat an adversary with near-peer capabilities.
Doctrine is intended to be updated and the Marine Corps needs to begin with its warfighting philosophy to start taking the necessary steps to trigger the discussion and change in TTPs needed to win on the future battlefield.
A~~--ca......,,_ -~ _----~--~~-=--=----
Thompson
United States Marine Corps
Source: Connell and Evans, "Russia's Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps," p. 5. . 