# ID: 6e6e92487dd04018a9e53d60a0ff042d
# Title: How China Wins: A Case Study of the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis is an historical case study of the Sino-Vietnamese War of 1979. In February 1979, China,  under Deng Xiaoping's leadership, launched a ground war against the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. After three weeks of combat using mainly ground forces, the Chinese secured their operational objectives, then quickly withdrew. Though the People's Liberation Army had an unimpressive showing against a smaller, but well-experienced force, China ultimately used the war to improve its strategic position. China's willingness to use a military action to further its political strategy bodes ominously for China's future inclination to use military force to protect its interests. The analysis here draws parallels and identifies discontinuities between the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) that waged the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese War and today's CCP. This case supports that China is still willing to use military force to achieve strategic ends, at costs and in ways unfamiliar to America, but logical when viewed through the correct lens.
15.
The purpose of this study is to examine whether or not China won a strategic victory in its invasion of Vietnam in 1979, and what relevance that victory may have on today's study of Chinese strategy and military thought. Significant studies have focused on the regional issues that led China and Vietnam to war in February 1979. This study instead focuses on China's grand strategic framing of the war and why China may interpret its involvement as a strategic victory.
In the aftermath of the problems of political succession at the later stages of the Mao Tse-Tung (Mao Zedong) era and the domestic social turmoil of the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, Teng Hsiao-Ping (Deng Xiaoping) emerged as China's paramount leader. In February 1979, fewer than two years after he assumed his role as Vice Premier, and only months after normalizing relations with the United States, Deng's government decided to wage a limited war against Vietnam. China used Vietnam's 1978 invasion into Cambodia as a jus ad bellum, thus prompting China to conduct a cross-border invasion of its own in order to aid its political ally in Cambodia.
With nearly 450,000 mobilized soldiers, China began a limited war with strategic implications. 
1
2
3
This thesis explores whether or not the Chinese were successful in using limited war in 1979 to achieve their strategic political goals, both domestically and internationally. What was the decision-making process that led Deng Xiaoping to calculate that the benefits of going to war with Vietnam outweighed the risks? Since the late 1960s, China viewed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic's (USSR) ideological and materiel support to Vietnam as a threat to its southern periphery. China interpreted the USSR-Vietnam relationship as a growing encroachment on its interests-real or imagined. Furthermore, China feared encirclement by the Soviet Union through proxy states, especially after Vietnam joined the Soviet-led Council of Mutual Economic Assistance and signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union in November 1978. 
4
The format of this thesis is narrative in nature, but it pays homage throughout to the body of work that came before it. While this conflict in Asia is lesser known than others in the second half of the twentieth century, there are a considerable number of complete works, articles, and accounts that examine the war's details and offer astute analysis. Unfortunately, the following chapters will not cover all the literature written about this war, but will highlight several prominent themes and ideas to aid in the analysis. Chapter 3 focuses on China's interest in Indochina in the post-Reunification years, and the four main factors that led to war in 1979. Vietnam's tightening relationship with the USSR, the expulsion of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, the increase of border clashes and the buildup of troops on the Sino-Vietnamese border, and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam's (SRV) invasion of Cambodia each contributed significantly to China's decision to launch the war. Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia-a Chinese ally-was the last straw on the road to war that led Deng Xiaoping to invade and "put a restraint on the wild ambitions of the Vietnamese and to give them an appropriate limited lesson." 
5
Chapter 5 provides a tactical and operational understanding of the war. It examines the initial execution of operational plans, and assesses the point at which China believed its force had culminated after reaching operational objectives in March 1979.   This chapter collates the lessons from the war's execution to the aftermath of the fighting and gives a brief operational evaluation. The direct result of the three weeks of battle certainly informed how each side viewed their performance. Deng Xiaoping used the war to consolidate his internal control over the PLA in order to galvanize its modernization, as evidenced in the reforms that took place in that organization in the following decades. 
6
Finally, chapter 6 provides analysis, conclusions, and recommendations based on the war's outcome. It looks specifically at how the Chinese use war to gain a strategic political advantage, and whether or not this historical case study is a relevant example of their adeptness at this craft. It also analyzes how the Chinese defined victory with limited warfare and improved their geopolitical position vis-à-vis the USSR and the United States. The Chinese claim to victory despite heavy casualties may be a cultural behavior unique to the Chinese when deciding whether to employ its military power for a political end. The Sino-Vietnamese conflict in 1979 offers a chapter in modern Chinese history that builds on an historical cultural tradition of war as one of many means available to achieve the state's ends.
This study of the Sino-Vietnamese War of 1979 analyzes and explores several questions:
1. Why did China go to war with Vietnam? 2. Did China achieve its strategic political objectives, both in the domestic and international realms? Carter Research Library in Atlanta, Georgia to examine primary source documents from the subject period. The program also allowed time for a personal, primary research trip to Shanghai and Beijing, China to conduct oral history interviews with high-ranking, retired PLA officers who are veterans of the war, and each later taught its importance to generations of Chinese Staff Officers. Their recollections are individual in nature and only reflect their personal memories of the time in question, and are not used for generalization or further extrapolation beyond the stated scope. The author recognizes that many of the Chinese and Vietnamese official state documents may be subject to historical and cultural biases that are imperceptible to the author; however, there is value in examining primary and secondary references to official state records in Chinese and Vietnamese in order to provide balanced analysis.
In any study of China, one must decide which Romanization method to use. The current prevailing style taught to students of the Chinese language is a system known as Pinyin. The author will make every attempt to aid readers by keeping key historical personages' name spelling consistent. Mao Tse-Tung (Mao Zedong) and Teng H'siao-Ping (Deng Xiaoping) are not a problem because the spellings are not significantly different. However, Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi) and Sun Yat-Sen (Sun Zhongshan) are significantly different in Pinyin. To mitigate this problem, the first time a name or place is used, the Pinyin will be given in parenthesis immediately following the more recognizable spelling. Thereafter, in the remainder of the text, the Pinyin is used.
This thesis focuses primarily on why China defines its war with Vietnam as a strategic success. Chinese leaders faced enormous political challenges at home following the death of Mao in 1976 and the rehabilitation of Deng in 1977. The PLA, as an instrument of national power, atrophied in its military combat competencies since its height of effectiveness prior to the Cultural Revolution, and suffered greatly in the fight against Vietnam. 
7
The American Army's modern professional military education in the fields of military history and the art of war largely focus on warfare in the western world. The scope of military history used to instruct officer cadets at the United States Military Academy, and field grade officers at the Command and General Staff College, leans heavily on western theorists and models to educate its future military leaders. Theorists like Carl von Clausewitz and Henri Jomini, Alfred Thayer Mahan and Sir Julian Corbett, become part of the American military professional's lexicon, while Lao Tzu (Laozi), Sun Tzu (Sunzi), and Mao Zedong receive little attention. In the application of warfare, American military educational institutes provide only cursory studies of Asian military history, despite the fact that nearly one-fifth of the world's population and half the world's nuclear states are located in Asia. Clearly, more discussion and exposure to warfare on the Asian continent and warfare by Asians is of use to the Army as it plans for future effectiveness and relevance as an instrument of national power in Asia.
The Sino-Vietnamese conflict of 1979 provides a rich example of the People's Republic of China's (PRC) approach to limited warfare for strategic gain. It illustrates how a rising China dealt with contending superpowers-the Soviet Union and the United States-by deepening a rift with the former, achieving rapprochement with the latter, and avoiding a detrimental conflict with either. China, unlike the United States, is accustomed to high casualties in war, as borne out by the millions of dead Chinese soldiers and civilians often forgotten in the west's memory of the last century's wars. China under the CCP does not appear to shy away from casualties in order to achieve its strategic objectives through war, and that is an important cultural point to appreciate.
Of the various state actors in Asia, several American security professionals and academics see China as one of the most likely to use military power to affect regional stability in the near future, but often make the mistake of viewing China through selfimaging. 
8
Army Operating Concept (2014), China is on the short-list of two (Russia being the other) "competing powers" described as a "harbinger of future conflict." 
9
Finally, this paper aims to capture the value of an historic, strategic education using a case study where a western power was not the central actor. Future American military leaders will have to contend with China's rise over the next century, and a broader, deeper understanding of China's strategy-which includes the prospect of war-will better equip them to meet the challenge. Although ceding its Vietnam interest to the French, Li understood the value of withdrawing troops, so as not to be bogged down in an extended fight in Vietnam. 
5
6
Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, China and Vietnam enjoyed some support for one another's anti-imperialist struggles. By 1902, China served as a base for Vietnamese nationalist leaders like Phan Boi Chau, who modeled his revolutionary movement after that of China's Sun Yat-Sen (Sun Zhongshan). 
7
Vietnam also served as a base for Chinese political factions that fell out of grace with one another until the start of the Second World War.  relations. 
8
9
In actuality, once the Sino-Vietnamese war began, the support Moscow committed to
Hanoi would prove to be little more than political because the Soviets did not want to instigate a wider war with China. 
15
In case either party is attacked or threatened with attack, the two parties signatory to the treaty shall immediately consult each other with a view to eliminating that threat, and shall take appropriate and effective measures to safeguard peace and the security of the two countries. 
16
The United States recognized China's role as a regional power in Asia, on a scale that Vietnam would likely never reach. When the Chinese and the United States ultimately announced their normalized relations in early January 1979, Deng Xiaoping saw a clear path to flex Chinese might against the Vietnamese, and reassert China's place as the regional heavyweight. He would travel to Washington later that month, seemingly, with his mind already made up to attack Vietnam.
Factor Two: Overseas Chinese in Vietnam
Another exacerbating issue for Sino-Vietnamese relations was the large population of ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam. Overseas Chinese presented a problem for the ethnocentric tendencies of Indochinese states during this period, particularly
Vietnam. The Chinese, often involved for generations in trade and business, enjoyed a relatively positive relationship with their adopted states in times of peace. However, in times of conflict or political unrest, these minority groups became the scapegoat of paranoid governments, as was the case in Vietnam after the Second Indochina War. In March of 1978, the Vietnamese government ended private business in southern Vietnam using police and soldiers to confiscate the grounds and livelihoods of thousands of ethnic Chinese. In April, the Vietnamese government took action to unify southern and northern currencies, but confiscated any excess above a prescribed amount, thereby robbing many Chinese of their personal wealth. 
17
18
19
According to one researcher, nearly 200,000 Chinese died under the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, but China raised no compelling protest. 
20
21
22
The departure of so many Chinese from Vietnam back into China coincided with the hardening of border positions and escalated the argument over land demarcation.
During the Second Indochina War, land borders had not been an issue. In fact, porous borders and reciprocal training areas had been a cornerstone of Sino-Vietnamese cooperation in the wars against the French and Japanese earlier in the century. 
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
35
The aforementioned Cambodian and Vietnamese territorial skirmish was ultimately resolved when Pol Pot, along with his second and third in command, Nuon However, the Cambodians enjoyed a much warmer reception, conceivably as a deliberate slight to the Vietnamese delegation also in town. 
39
40
Despite warming relations with Cambodia and welcoming its independence, Chinese moderates like Zhou Enlai had reservations about the DK's domestic policy excessive use of military power. Specifically, the DK forced nearly a half million ethnic Chinese into cruel living conditions after an ordered mass exodus from Cambodian cities, similar to the policy Vietnam would make towards its overseas Chinese population in 1978. 
41
44
45
China's true commitment to Cambodia was tested when the Vietnamese launched a full-scale invasion of Cambodia in December 1978 to forcibly remove the Khmer Rouge from the capital in Phnom Penh. Following the invasion of Cambodia, China's leaders did not offer immediate military assistance to their ally. Without a direct land route to provide aid, and the risk of supplying by air or sea too high, China's support was initially through its rhetoric against Vietnam. Beijing leaders then had to decide how to respond in a way that would decisively demonstrate the CCP's support for Cambodia. 
46
The Frame is Set
The four main points: the SRV's closer relationship with the USSR as China sought rapprochement with the United States; the expulsion of ethnic Chinese; the increase in border clashes and the buildup of troops; and finally, the SRV's invasion of Cambodia, each contributed significantly to China's decision to go to war against Vietnam. Examined separately, each reason may not have galvanized Deng to take action, but when combined they created enough cause for China to launch its limited war.
The Chinese, in line with their tradition, sought first to evaluate the strategic advantage a war with Vietnam could bring, and then measured those advantages against possible drawbacks. The war itself came from deliberate planning and reasoning with the long-game in mind, rather than a disproportionate reaction to a slight offense. There were off-ramps on the road to war, but China was wedded to its own image as the power broker in Asia, and could not divorce itself from its self-appointed place as the historic Following Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, Deng felt compelled to react, but had to shore up support within the party. Hua, who had no military experience, would be forced to defer to Deng in military matters, increasing Deng's stature and decreasing his own along the way. Deng saw an opportunity to assert the PRC's willingness to shape Southeast Asia through military action. 12 Some historians argue that the need to punish Vietnam through war was easily reached by consensus at the highest levels. 
13
14
15
16
Casualties on the battlefield would not be a definite measure of success. However, the mobilization of units from all over China would confirm or deny China's ability to defend its borders, and deploy its army.
To the Chinese people, Deng could measure the success of the war by the furtherance of his new agenda, and the belief among the people that China was heading in a new, positive direction. The laobaixing (The Old Hundred Names, a Chinese pejorative referring to the masses of Chinese civilians), accustomed to seeing the PLA as the central government's arm during the Cultural Revolution, would now witness the PLA as defenders of Chinese interests on the periphery. Success would be measured by limited domestic unrest, controlled information about the war until it was complete, and the short nature of the war that would allow a quick shift back to the economic agenda. According to firsthand accounts of PLA officers serving during the war, heavy operational causalities were a concern for Deng's war planners, but losses were a factor that could be controlled, overcome, and ultimately accepted, as a means to achieving the stated objectives. 17
The international community at the United Nations (UN) also vehemently opposed Vietnam's invasion, allowing Prince Norodom Sihanouk the opportunity to plead the case of the deposed regime. 
18
19
In the weeks leading up to the February war, Deng and other Chinese officials went on the political offensive by increasing their rhetoric in international forums and exchanges. From 25 December 1978 when Vietnam invaded Cambodia, until 17
February 1979 when China invaded Vietnam, Deng Xiaoping explicitly told regional actors that China could and would "teach Vietnam a lesson," and that the result would benefit regional stability. 
21
22
Yaccoub Bishara stating:
The Vietnamese authorities are pursuing a policy of aggression and expansion abroad, thus seriously menacing the peace and stability in Southeast Asia and the whole of Asia. This has naturally aroused the concern and anxiety of all the countries in Asia and the rest of the world. We sincerely hope the United Nations will uphold justice, exercise its functions and authority and take all necessary measures so that the Vietnamese authorities will immediately halt their armed incursions and provocations against China, immediately stop their aggression and military occupation of Kampuchea, withdraw all their forces from Kampuchea and immediately cease all their acts jeopardizing the peace and security of Southeast Asia and the whole world. 
23
Everyone can clearly see the extremely serious character of the Chinese authorities' armed activities and arrogant threats against Viet Nam. The Peking leaders have openly threatened war against an independent and sovereign country, and claimed to have the right to use force against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. They have laid bare their hostile designs against Viet Nam and their bignation expansionist ambitions in South-East Asia. 
24
25
normalization of relations, and commit the United States to a mutual anti-Vietnam stance.
If Deng conveyed to President Carter China's intention to conduct a limited attack against, then he could ease U.S. concern that an expanding conflict might ultimately involve the superpowers. Deng also aimed to limit the further development of U.S.-Soviet relations, and possibly even get the Americans to help restrain the USSR while the Chinese dealt their punitive blow to Vietnam. According to NSA Zbigniew Brzezinski, it was with these goals that Deng travelled to America. 
26
In late January 1979, Deng Xiaoping arrived in Washington for direct talks with President Carter. Though not the premier himself, the Americans recognized Vice Premier Deng's rising star and received him with a warm welcome. The Nixon and
Carter Administrations are largely credited with normalizing relations with Communist China, and Deng's January visit was a milestone for how the two countries would continue their frank dialogue.
Over the course of two days, the two leaders-Carter and Deng-met formally in three separate roundtables. Prior to the meetings, the U.S. side assessed that the Chinese goals for the meetings would include securing a strong anti-Vietnam stance so the Chinese could "hit Vietnam with the appearance of United States acquiescence." 
27
28
29
Thailand from becoming the next victim of a Soviet-backed Indochinese Federation.
Deng warned that the Soviet Union would "make use of Vietnam to harass China," and that the Chinese "general view is that we must disrupt Soviet strategic dispositions. If we do not disrupt with strength, we will only create more trouble." 
30
The problem might be from the North. We do not expect a major reaction. But if there is one, they will have to withdraw troops from Europe. If they withdraw troops from the West, that will be beneficial from Iran and Europe.
We understand it will be difficult for you to give an affirmative answer. Sometimes one has to do what one does not wish to. Our warnings to Vietnam were of no use. We are happy about persuading countries not to give aid, but that doesn't put restraint on Vietnam. There is a question of timing: if we wait until Cambodia is subdued, they can use all their forces against us. If we do this well and quickly, we will have a more tranquil boundary. 
31
China not to take military action against Vietnam. The most compelling of his points stated, "Armed conflict initiated by China would cause serious concern in the United
States concerning the general character of China and the future peaceful settlement of the Taiwan issue. Our claim of peace and stability resulting from normalization would be refuted to some extent." 
32
33
Observing the United States negotiate for years with the Vietnamese over the terms of restoring diplomatic relations, the Chinese felt their offer was more timely and appealing than that of the Vietnamese. Since the PRC wrested the UN seat and international recognition from the GMD in 1971, Sino-U.S. relations stood on the brink of another breakthrough. Deng seized his opportunity to improve China domestically by promoting economic reform and dismantling the cult of Mao, while improving China's international standing by normalizing relations with America. The Americans feared that the Soviets had already filled the vacuum created by the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam; therefore, normalizing relations with China seemed the preferred choice to hinder the USSR's involvement in Indochina. From an analysis of the geopolitical situation, it can be inferred that Deng left for the United States with his decision already made.
The four factors described in chapter 3 were the reasons China used to launch its war against Vietnam. Deng, newly ascended to power, and surrounded by his handchosen clique of advisers, made the decision to launch the campaign against Vietnam.
With internal opposition muted, and the international community in resounding condemnation of Vietnam, Deng saw that China in a favorable position, and poised to increase its shi through military action.
Strategic success would be determined by keeping the Soviet Union from intervening on Vietnam's behalf. It is unlikely and unstated that Deng expected a complete withdrawal of Vietnam's troops in Cambodia because of this short war.
However, disrupting the Soviet's strategic disposition and reacting from a position of strength to Vietnam's border transgressions were incremental steps on the path to weakening Vietnam's position. 
34
Deng deduced that war would achieve China's strategic political ends and led to his ultimate decision to carry out the ground offensive. His stature within the CCP by this time had already cast a shadow on Premier Hua Guofeng's clout, and his backing by the PLA leaders made the decision an order they would not refuse. The probability for significant backlash from the international community was low, and the potential gain of strategic international and domestic advantage was high. Though Deng's star was rising and with a war of his design looming, he and Premier Hua still remained cordial and presented a unified political-military front. Against this backdrop, Premier Hua signed the mobilization order in early February for the PLA to prepare to launch the war against Vietnam. 
35
2
3
3
This chapter examines the tactical and operational levels of war, and how the PLA's commonly perceived failures on the battlefield were not, in fact, tantamount to a strategic failure. Forcing Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia-or at least force the Mao himself once said, "The view that strategic victory is achieved by tactical successes alone is erroneous, because it overlooks the fact that the first and the foremost problem in deciding the outcome of a war is whether or not the whole situation and its various stages are properly taken into consideration." 7 However, several seminal works that examine the PLA's tactical and operational losses clearly indicate that the Maoist ideology infused into the PLA throughout the Cultural Revolution did not equate to operational effectiveness in battle. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
20
Today, there is one fact that no one can deny: in the face of the invincible strength of the USSR and the fraternal socialist countries, the imperialists and international reactionaries, regardless of how bellicose they might be, think twice before recklessly unleashing a war against the world socialist system. They realize that the inevitable outcome of a military attack upon the USSR and the fraternal socialist countries closely linked to it by means of a bond of great friendship would be heavy retaliation. This situation has increased the bravery and confidence of the fighters for the revolution and peace in the world. 
21
The Soviet Union did not retaliate against China as Vietnam may have expected, but rather held only to the vague language of its Friendship Treaty that did not require the Soviets to provide direct military assistance. In verbal support to the Vietnamese, Soviet leaders offered strong official statements of condemnation of Beijing's actions from Moscow to Havana, but stopped short of actual military support. 
22
23
From the PLA's calculations, even if the Soviets had opened a second front, the Chinese forces massed on the border were prepared to meet them with numerical superiority. A source reports that intelligence at the time indicated that of the fifty-seven Soviet divisions along the northern Chinese border in 1979, only thirty percent were fully equipped, and only sixty percent were capable of a rapid mobilization. 
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Tactical and operational failures during the fight did not change the strategic aims of the war. The PLA experienced its trial by fire, Deng proved himself as a worthy Party helmsman once again, and the Chinese people offered no objection. While the fighting raged on south of the border, Deng had already shifted his efforts to the other reformist efforts, particularly the decollectivization of farms and increasing the state's pay to peasants for compulsory grain deliveries. 
31
Neither the PRC nor the SRV have released complete records of their numbers of war dead and wounded, but a senior, retired PLA officer with assumed access to such information puts the figure for the Chinese at 32,000 dead. 
32
1 O'Dowd, 53.
2 Ibid.
3 U.S. Liaison Office Peking to Secretary of State, Washington, DC, Cable, 22 February 1979, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material Collection, Cable File-PRC/Vietnam (1-10 February 1979 through 21 February 1979), Carter Library. The editorial goes on to emphasize China's almost immediate willingness to negotiate at the "appropriate level" for peace with Vietnam, another indicator its intention for limited war. It also states that, "The Chinese people urgently need an international situation of peace and stability," in order for it to achieve its modernization program. USLO Peking assessed that this statement was included for opponents to Deng's decision for a long war that could likely divert resources from economic modernization efforts. 
4
5 Brantly Womack, China and Vietnam: The Politics of Asymmetry (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 200. According to the author, the PLA successfully occupied five of the six northern capitals. In addition to Lang Son, Cao Bang, and Lao Cai, the PLA also took Lai Chau and Ha Giang. The sixth provincial capital would have been Hon Gai (also known as Ha Long) of Quang Ninh Province, but an attack there might would have posed a direct threat to the economic centers of Haiphong and the Red River delta. It can be assumed that seizing Hon Gai may have illicited an escalated response from Vietnam that was beyond the limits of what the CCP and the PLA were prepared to face. 
6
7
175-188, 192-198. 8
9
12 Special Coordination Committee Meeting at the Situation Room in the White House, Minutes, 18 February 1979, Donated Historical Material Zbigniew Brzezinski Collection, Geographic File, China, (People's Republic of)-Sino-Vietnamese Conflict (November 1978-16 February 199) through Cuba-Alpha Channel (December 1978), Box 10, Carter Library. The situation update from Admiral Turner indicate that Vietnamese Surface-to-Air Missiles (SAMs) may have been used in the northwest front, but that no units from Hanoi moved away from their defensive positions to respond to the Chinese attack.
13 O'Dowd, 67-68. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
The withdrawal of PLA forces from the three Vietnamese provincial capitals did not end the hostilities between the two countries. China and Vietnam would remain at odds in the international arena until at least 1989, when Vietnam finally withdrew all its forces from Cambodia, and the Chinese and Vietnamese governments signed the Paris Peace Accords normalizing relations in 1991. 
1
2
Internationally, Deng's estimate that the Soviet Union would not intervene was correct. In the months following, China would further seek to isolate Vietnam from the international community, while seeking détente with the Soviet Union. China's position in Southeast Asia improved in the sense that it reaffirmed its position as the leading regional power willing to endure-and inflict-casualties to achieve its stated strategic objectives. The war with Vietnam effectively served as a warning to other states to think twice before challenging China's place in Southeast Asia. In the immediate aftermath of the war, China achieved its goal of isolating Vietnam internationally, and even received assistance from the international community to further prod Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia. 
3
4
6
7
8
9
The war had a negative net effect on Sino-Asian regional relations. The Japanese, in particular, likely felt that China unfairly sullied Japan's international reputation by attacking Vietnam, since Deng's visit shortly before the war gave the appearance of Tokyo's acquiesce. Japan also feared that the Soviet Union ultimately benefitted in the region because of the war because it could shift the claim of hegemony from itself to China. Additionally, there was a renewed possibility of the Soviet Union expanding military bases in Vietnam to prevent future Chinese aggression, which could further destabilize the region. However, one positive result, according to the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the time, was that socialist political parties in Japan's anti-war environment were likely to suffer at the polls amidst the backdrop of communist countries warring with each other. 
10
11
China's actions led Asian countries to more fear, than respect, China, and encouraged many to strengthen ties with the U.S.-led international system founded on international laws to hedge against future Chinese threats.
Following the war, Vietnam saw itself as victorious, as well. It repelled the eleven Chinese armies hurled into its sovereign territory, and forced the PLA to withdraw without having to divert forces from defense of Hanoi or occupation of Cambodia.
However, Vietnam did sustain significant losses, and remained antagonistic to China throughout the next two decades. A stalemate continued along the border with sporadic artillery and infantry skirmishes occurring throughout the 1980s-the most notable actions being the Vietnamese surprise capture of Long Shan Mountain in 1984, and the 1988 Spratly naval battle that resulted in close to eighty Vietnamese casualties. 
12
13
Ultimately, throughout the 1990s, the Sino-Vietnamese relations slowly returned to a new normalcy involving reciprocal recognition of sovereign territory, as well as new economic opportunities. 
14
Based on the historical record and evidence examined in this study, the main conclusion to draw about how the PRC uses war is that it is willing to use military force to protect its stated strategic interests, even beyond its own borders, and even when unprovoked by a direct military assault. The leaders of the PRC do not share America's aversion for high casualties to achieve ends, and China is capable of enduring significant troop and material losses in order to achieve its strategic interests. A key difference from an American, or western, way of war is that the Chinese leadership pride themselves on directing a coherent, political-military endstate before the start of hostilities. 
15
16
Transparent political signaling before taking unilateral action likely holds true for today's CCP, and China's potential adversaries ought not misinterpret signals for bluffs. 
17
However, China's current integration into the capitalist world market makes resolving inter-state issues through non-military means much more attractive and beneficial to maintaining the CCP's political primacy, and a secure environment for protecting its interests. The CCP's willingness to use military force before exhausting other options must be tempered by its present, objective reality. The striking difference between 1979 and today is China's economic power that is fundamentally tied to the global, capitalist market system. In 1979, China was not nearly as developed or wealthy as it is today, nor had the ideological clash of a Communist versus Capitalist world order reached resolution. The collapse of the Soviet Union and Deng's economic reforms charted a new course for the Chinese-one, which is still being realized today as millions rise out of abject poverty. By 2013, The World Bank statistics ranked China as second only to the United States in terms of its Gross Domestic Product. With such wealth came a corresponding increase to China's political position in the international community, far greater than it enjoyed in 1979. 
18
Another conclusion from this case study is that China's military rise over the last forty years can be directly tied to the 1979 war with Vietnam. As early as 1975, Deng began openly calling for a streamlining of the Army, adoption of a new education system, and an ushering out of the older generation in order to best prepare for modern war. 
19
20
Can our army fight? Can it deal with any emergency? I don't mean an emergency like the self-defense counterattack on Vietnam. That kind of incident is easy to cope with. What I mean is: If we should be confronted with a more powerful adversary than Vietnam, how reliable would our fighting be? Of course, we will still have many disadvantages. 
21
Gradually, investment in advanced technology and a downsize of its top-heavy cadre force structure resulted in a leaner force. The PLA managed to reduce its Mao-era "bloatedness" and increase the implementation of joint and combined arms warfare. 
22
23
24
25
26
27
A key question from this study of the Sino-Vietnamese war is that the CCP has not changed its centrist and uncompromising nature with regards to its ultimate authority. Domestically, recent crackdowns of political protests in Hong Kong and targeted anticorruption campaigns are ominous indications that the Party leaders will not tolerate challenges to their political power. Internationally, only in the last 175 years of their 2,000-year dynastical and modern history have the Chinese been anything but the central power in Asia. The Chinese offer cooperation and agree to international norms when they perceive their shi is comparatively weak. However, once in a position of equal or greater relative power, the CCP may be eager to change the environment with some disregard for international norms.
The assumption of skillful strategic patience often attributed to China's geopolitical strategists is misleading. Impulsiveness and displays of strength may be more likely traits if and when the CCP views its shi as relatively stronger than others'. In the next fifty years, the author assesses that China's holistic shi will grow. CCP leaders, in order to retain legitimacy and project confidence, will likely test the international system's status quo more often. Recent examples include the establishment of the Air Defense Identification Zone in 2013 as a military means, and the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in 2015 as an economic means to challenge the status quo. Unlike 1979, the CCP has learned to assert influence simultaneously through various elements of national power, instead of primarily pursuing its national interests with military force.
Historian Colin Gray states that the American way of war is characterized by twelve key factors. The first three he describes are its apolitical, astrategic, and ahistorical nature. 
28
29
The historical causes and the context of the Sino-Vietnamese War may be more similar to the wars that came before it-Korea, the Soviet Union, and India-than to the wars China may fight in the future. Deng's economic and societal reforms broke with the Cold War mentality that dominated the society prior to 1979. The focus on internal reforms made it necessary for both the Party and PLA to keep China out of conflicts that might divert attention or resources away from modernization. Studying the width and depth of instances where the CCP resorted to military means to achieve its strategic goals since 1949 may help American policymakers and military leaders make better judgments in their approach to East Asia. However, western students of Chinese military history must also take into account historian Michael Howard's rule of context to avoid abusing any potential lessons from past conflicts. 
30
In closing, elder statesman and former NSA to President Nixon, Henry Kissinger, advocates for a "Pacific Community" that challenges the notion that China and the United States are set on a collision course due to competing interests. 
31
32
33
Ultimately, America should encourage China's peaceful rise and acknowledge that China seeks greater regional leadership. Currently, China may feel vulnerable to U.S. military presence in the region, especially when it feels its own strategic interests threatened. If this is true, it will at most be a reluctant follower. America must be willing to advocate space in the international system in ways that China sees as win-win. The goal should be to influence China's role in the system, so that China feels it can increase its shi by contributing to the system, rather than breaking or gradually undermining it.
Going forward, the most difficult aspect for the Chinese to accept will be exercising restraint and adhering to the rule of law when their positional power outweighs others', and the use of force may achieve faster results.
Finally, it is recommended that the U.S. Government take a longer view of the shifting dynamics of leadership in Asia, and acknowledge that China's economy and defense spending will likely surpass America's in the next century. For the near future, America enjoys a stronger shi, and will undoubtedly dominate competitive areas, but in ways that respect international laws and norms. The introduction to the 2015 National Security Strategy explicitly states, "We [the U.S.] and our partners must make the reforms and investments needed to make sure we can work more effectively with each other while growing the ranks of responsible, capable states." 
34
1
2
3
4 Secretary Blumenthal to President Carter, Cable, 1 March 1979, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material Collection #7, "Backchannel Messages: Peking, 1-7/79," NLC-7-8-8, Carter Library. This cable shows that even during China's war with Vietnam, high-level talks on other topics continued such as the settlement of private claims. While fighting the war, China offered to pay the United States $80.5 million over five years, which, in the words of Secretary Blumenthal, "This is an unprecedented cash settlement. It represents a first-class deal, which far exceeds any previous agreement. The deal we have worked out . . . has very important advantages for the U.S."; National Security Advisor Brzezinski and Political Counselor, Embassy of the People's Republic of China Cao Guisheng, Memorandum of Conversation, 10 July 1979, Donated Historical  Material Zbigniew Brzezinski Collection, Geographic File, China, [People's Republic  of]-Alpha Channel: [February 1972-November 1978] through China [People's Republic of] Pres. Meeting with Deng, 3 October 1979, Folder 11, Box 9, Carter Library. This declassified "Top Secret" conversation in the summer after the war refers specifically to the prospect of a joint monitoring site to monitor Soviet activity.
5 Special Coordination Committee Meeting at the Situation Room in the White House. 
6
7 Carter to Brezhnev, Message, 17 February 1979
, Donated Historical Material Zbigniew Brzezinski Collection, Geographic File, China, (People's Republic of)-Sino-Vietnamese Conflict (November 1978
-16 February 1979)
8 Brezhnev to Carter, Message, 18 February 1979.
9
10
Folder 3,
Box 17,
Carter Library. 11
12 Retired PLA Officer, interview with author, Beijing, China, 26 March 2015. 
13
6
7
8
9
Nguyen Anh wrested control from the Tay Son, proclaimed himself emperor of the Nguyen Dynasty, took on the renowned title of Gia Long, and formally named the nation Vietnam. He also sought China's immediate formal investiture, and once granted, sent tribute to China throughout his rule. 
10
1 Anne Gilks, The Breakdown of the Sino-Vietnamese Alliance, 1970-1979  (Institute of East Asian Studies, 1992), 2. Gilks's book synthesizes several secondary sources that set the background for the regional conflict and driving distrust between China and Vietnam in the twentieth century. 
2
4
Starting in 1975, after Vietnam's reunification, China employed a strategy of strengthening relationships with Thailand and Cambodia to ensure the balance of regional power remained in its favor. In Thailand, China sought to strengthen relations with the non-Communist Khukrit government in order curb Vietnamese influence. Thailand, as a charter member of ASEAN, was in a unique position that China could see a buffer to Soviet influence in the region. Thailand, also eager to improve regional relations, while remaining neutral to the prospect of conflict, announced in March 1975 that it would establish diplomatic relations with China, while seeking closure of U.S. bases within a year. 5 At the time, Thailand had no interest in conflict with Vietnam, but it did see a convergence of interests with China to contain Vietnam's regional influence. A Xinhua News Agency official saw that the Vietnamese should be considered Thailand's main threat. 
6
7
China succeeded in identifying Vietnam as a common enemy with Thailand, the only ASEAN country with vulnerable land borders in Indochina, thus allowing China to concentrate its defensive efforts on the Vietnamese in Cambodia. Maintaining its supportive relationship with the Khmer Rouge came with international repercussions, but not to a level intolerable to China's grand strategy. At the time, China faced international criticism for its relationship with Pol Pot's Cambodia, as the latter carried out excesses tantamount to genocide of sectors of its own population despite international condemnation.
1 Ross, 123. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
34
1. Sino-Vietnamese Border Incidents, 1974-1979   
1. Sino-Vietnamese Border Incidents, 1974-1979   
43  
43  
National Foreign Assessment Center, "The Sino-Vietnamese Border Dispute," 3.
O'Dowd,[51][52][65][66][67]. O'Dowd claims that the PLA Navy (PLAN) was task
A PLA officer stands at the foot of a memorial located in Yunnan, China dedicated to the thousands of Chinese soldiers killed in the 1979 
Sino-Vietnamese War
Source: Photo courtesy of personal collection from anonymous veteran given to the author with permission to include in this report.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Jimmy Carter
Dwight D. Eisenhower
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
By 1965, Deng's star burned so bright that Mao feared it would eclipse his own. In 1966, Chairman Mao launched the Cultural Revolution, during which he purged Deng and stripped him of all his titles. Deng was relegated to work in a tractor repair factory in order to undergo political "rehabilitation." 
6
4
Simultaneously, on the eastern front, eight PLA armies would attack south from Guangxi Province in China to seize the provincial capital cities Cao Bang and Lang Son in Vietnam's northeast (see figure 
2
6
15
16
17
18
Vietnam's military leadership reorganized its units as they fell back and rapidly established the 5th Corps, consisting of five divisions, for future operations to retake Lang Son. 
19
Ping-Pong Diplomacy. An exchange of professional ping-pong players from the U.S. Table 
Tennis
Union and the United States that can be broken down further into SALT I (1969-1972) and SALT II (1972-1979). The subject of these talks revolved around nuclear arms limitations for the two Cold War superpowers, resulting in treaties that limited nuclear development and capabilities on both sides. 