# ID: 6f26b33163704673a340d25a458cae11
# Title: Volume 3. Information Age Anthology: The Information Age Military
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2001.0
# Fulltext:
France pushed for war, but every military move their ancien regime (Louis Napoleon's Second Empire) made ended in embarrassment; piecemeal transport, haphazard mobilization, divided command, and poor intelligence before battle was topped by army lethargy and skittishness in the field.
The Germans, in contrast, greased their rail network to concentrate superior forces; they had the French order of battle down cold; and, in the field, everyone knew what to do.
Attack, attack, from meeting engagement to meeting engagement, until the French imperial armies were each surrounded, at Sudan and Metz, and so forced not just to surrender, but to pass under the yoke of defeat as public theater.
The French even got their high-tech wrong.
New war had been enabled, but not enacted.
France's elites were free for a time yet to pursue old wars with modern cosmetics, wars still won by quick offensive maneuver and long-service veterans, without apprehension that this way of war was already dead.
The French were used to fighting their counterparts: the grizzled professional corps of other monarchslike the Austrians they met at Magenta and Solferino, or the Russians at the Redan-or tough tribesmen in the world outback-like Mexican guerrillas or Algerian Tuaregs.
In imperial France, as in Austria, Russia, and Britain, war was not "politics by other means," but policy by other means.
It was the finely calibrated tool of Europe's top ruling regimes.