# ID: 6f4922b048c24f21b0bedaee6dd31cec
# Title: National Security Challenges for the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
The Nuclear Threat Initiative proposal argues that if weapons of mass destruction are in fact the number one threat facing U.S. national security, then the United States should immediately appropriate funds sufficient to reduce the vulnerability-sooner, rather than later.
The events of September 11 make it clear that no nation, regardless of geography, economic power, or military might, is secure from or immune to this threat.
It is a shared threat and requires a shared solution.
Further, since the United States and Russia created the majority of weapons of mass destruction during the Cold War arms race, they should lead what the Nuclear Threat Initiative calls the "Global Coalition Against Catastrophic Terrorism.
"^s In looking for concepts which have worked in the past.
Senator Nunn had to look no further than the Cooperative Threat Reduction program.
Funded by legislation sponsored by himself and Dick Lugar in November 1991, the Cooperative Threat Reduction program had been a radical experiment for reducing threats in a cooperative way.
In essence, the program tied financial assistance to treaty limited reductions of weapons and infrastructure.
It included everything from biological weapons labs, nuclear reactors, and storage facilities to missiles, export controls, and emergency response equipment.
It successfully bridged relations between Russia and the United States even when the political winds shifted during Operation ALLIED FORCE.
However, more remains to be done.
If expanded and shared with other nations, the program could complete the task in Russia and beyond in relatively short order.
Thus, the Nuclear Threat Initiative's Global Coalition Against Terrorism poses six urgent tasks for U.S. leadership: