# ID: 6f4922b048c24f21b0bedaee6dd31cec
# Title: National Security Challenges for the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
The terrorist attacks of 2001 on the United States fundamentally altered America's conceptions of security in the 21st century.
In the new environment, NATO must contribute to the war on terrorism, or Americans will increasingly see it as irrelevant to their security.
In the wake of the attacks of 9/11, the North Atlantic Council invoked Article V of the Washington Treaty to underline that the terrorist assault was an attack on all alliance members.
Nevertheless, in the resulting campaign against the Taliban in Afghanistan, NATO (somewhat reluctantly) stood on the sidelines.
This was America's choice, since the operations envisioned in that distant country were hardly conducive to the participation of NATO allies that had done little to modernize their forces in the aftermath of the Soviet Union's collapse.
Moreover, turning the campaign in Afghanistan over to NATO would have required the achievement of consensus among 18 disparate allies, a process that might have required months to resolve-as was the case with the intense discussions before the start of the recent war with Iraq.
These decisions have called into question NATO's enduring role and, barring steps by leaders on both sides of the Atlantic to transform the alliance, raised serious concerns about its future.^ America's preeminent role in the world provides it the choice of either acting unilaterally or with coalitions of the "willing and able," as it has already done in the war on terrorism.'"
Although it currently has the political, military, and economic power to go it alone, alliances and coalitions greatly enhance America's ability to achieve its objectives by extending legitimacy, providing crucial resources such as basing and overflight rights, and sending the message that the free world remains united.
NATO is the most successful alhance in history, one that has kept the peace for over half-a-century in an area vital to America' national interest.
Only recently, it has brought stability to the turbulent Balkans and reached out to promote military cooperation with partners in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
Moreover, NATO provides the United States with the strongest voice in European security affairs.
Consequently, it would be unwise to allow the alliance to wither for a fleeting grasp at global hegemony.
Indeed, the United States has a vested interest in ensuring NATO retains its role as the preeminent security organization in Europe, while taking care not to unnecessarily antagonize Russia.
Yet the relationship with Russia, though delicate, is manageable, as the Prague summit and the mutual cooperation in the war on terrorism have underscored."