# ID: 7048677071f440699d3c57487d0770d0
# Title: High Frontier, The Journal for Space & Missile Professionals. Volume 3, Number 2, March 2007.
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
Despite the "perfect storm" of negative public reaction abroad to the new US NSP, it remains unclear-and largely unpredictable-whether other space-faring powers will actively seek to respond in concrete political, economic or military ways.
It could be that even the Chinese ASAT test was an attention-getting device, rather than a signal of a full-court press to militarily challenge the US-much in the way North Korea seems to use threatening activities in order to focus world attention on Pyongyang.
First, questions loom about how (or even if) the new policy might result in changes in US behavior in space, in budget priorities, or in research and development of new "spacerelated" weaponry.
This fact is likely to result in largely "wait and see" approaches by others, since (as always) the true test will be not what Washington says, but what it does.
Second, it is not clear how important the issue of space will weigh in US relations with individual nations or regions, and that balance is certainly going to be different for each bilateral/regional relationship; with the Sino-US relationship obviously the most fraught.
Both US allies and competitors have other economic, political and military interests vis-à-vis the US that must be considered.
Third, space policies and strategies in Europe, Russia, China and India remain somewhat inchoate-torn between conflicting budgetary, political, and military priorities and approaches.
Interestingly, the release of the blunt new US space policy may spur some major space-faring powers, especially among US allies, toward more coherent strategic thinking-which could be a positive thing.
Finally, given that the UN institutions with responsibilities regarding space work by consensus, it is difficult to imagine those bodies taking strong collective action-though certainly they will continue to serve as political pulpits, and as venues for further isolation of the US.