# ID: 7136a7110627426e8ae1f25fff23f4ec
# Title: Eisenhower: Decision-making and Consensus in an Unfamiliar Context
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph examines the process by which Dwight D. Eisenhower developed his administration's national security policy, and the lessons that it presents for planners. Eisenhower's experiences provide examples of modern design theory in action, particularly managing the interests of multiple stakeholders, building consensus, and confronting complex problems. The study begins by establishing Eisenhower's experience with planning, and provides the context for his development of national security strategy. The creation of a National Security Council, provided many of the foundational materials for Eisenhower's national security strategy. Project Solarium, a planning exercise directed by Eisenhower during the creation of his administration's national security policy, illustrates an approach to systematically design solutions to complex problems, and gain commitment from all participants.
This acknowledgment really exists to say thank you to all of those who helped me put this thing together. There are those who formally participated in its development. There are others who helped occasionally and cheered from the sidelines. Lastly, there are still others who helped me with research, finding other sources, and digging through scrolls and dusty tombs for treasures about Eisenhower and the National Security Council.
To COL Christopher Prigge, my monograph advisor, thanks for going through this with me. To COL David McHenry and COL Andy Morgado, my two Seminar Leaders, thank you for keeping me on the right track. To my syndicate mates Don, Ed and Al, I will stop sending you drafts to edit.
To those who cheered from the sidelines, Sara and the kids, Jan and Marilyn Arny (my parents), Jose Fernandez and Janno Mark (running partners), Sean Skrmetta (Crossfit partner), and Jess King I couldn't have done it without you.
Finally, thanks to Dr. Mark Calhoun (official EndNote wizard) and Dr. Steven Bourque (SAMS Faculty who helped me find a topic), Mr. Bill Greenberg (Red Team Faculty who loaned me a book for the entire year), and Teresa (CARL Research Assistant) the guidance and resources to which you guided me contributed immeasurably to the final product.
"It is about how to use experience, whether remote or recent, in the process of deciding what to do today about the prospect for tomorrow" -Richard Neustadt and Ernest May, Thinking in Time   This monograph examines the process by which President Dwight D. Eisenhower developed his administration's national security policy and assesses the lessons that it presents for planners today. Eisenhower's actions provide examples of modern design theory in action, particularly confronting complex problems, managing the interests of multiple stakeholders, and building consensus. Eisenhower possessed several remarkable attributes, and many books exist that laud his military acumen and political skill. Time will be spent establishing Eisenhower's experience with planning; however, this is not a substitute for those other works, or a summary biography on Eisenhower. The period occupied by Eisenhower's Presidential Administration offers parallels with our time in that it exemplifies an era of dramatic change and uncertainty.
One notable effort by Eisenhower's predecessors, the creation of a National Security Council, provided the foundation for Eisenhower's national security strategy development. Project Solarium, a planning exercise directed by Eisenhower during the creation of his administration's national security policy, resulted in National Security Council memorandum 162/2. 
1
Modern scholars argue that Eisenhower's policy and decision-making mechanism produced comprehensive and successful strategy. Raymond Millen, a Security Sector Reform analyst and Army War College professor asserted, "[the] Eisenhower Presidency was unique in its approach to formulating national security policy and the only administration to publish a comprehensive basic national security policy." 
2
4
Design, an approach suited for solution development to novel and unconventional problems, provides the practicioner with the tools to discern the actual problem. The recognition of multiple stakeholders, and the encouragement of rigorous debate are among the advantages of using design when confronting one-of-a-kind problems. Eisenhower's process for the development of his national security policy in 1953 repeatedly illustrates the benefits of vigorous discourse using inclusive committees. The principles of design rest upon the insights of Bryan Lawson, Peter Senge, Horst Rittel and Melvin Webber. Lawson's experience as an architect adds a unique perspective and a dose of reality to an understanding of stakeholders. 
2
3
4
5
Peter Senge, author of The Fifth Discipline and lecturer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, recognizes the magnetism of confusion and proposes a method to overcome its attraction through dialog and discussion. One of his assumptions is that the collective mind can out think the individual mind, and that to harness collective cognitive power, individuals must interact. He calls this interaction discourse and divides it into two categories: dialog and discussion. Dialog encompasses the meandering, and brainstorming conversation that enables creative thinking. Senge describes dialog as "special conversations that begin to have a 'life of their own,' taking us in directions we could never have imagined or planned in advance." 
6
7
8
Horst Rittel and Melvin Webber, both professors at the University of California, Berkeley, published an article in 1973 that describes the types of problems that confront 7 Ibid., 165-66. 9 Complex, Dictionary.com, Online Etymology Dictionary, Douglas Harper, Historian, accessed February 05, 2015, http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/complex. planners. 
10
11
12
10
Planning," Policy Sciences 4, no. 2 (1973). 11
12
The sections that follow examine Eisenhower's past, the Cold War environment, the National Security Council system, and Project Solarium in greater depth. The study seeks guidance from history regarding the ideas of design theorists and its applicability for modern planning endeavors throughout each section. Section one analyzes Eisenhower's unique and unorthodox military career to establish his experience with international affairs and examples of his maturing approach to leadership and planning. The section focuses attention on his work at the Army's Industrial College, as the chief of staff for General Douglas MacArthur in the Philippines, as the Chief of War Plans Division for General George Marshall, and as the Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in Europe. Chronologically the last event brings the reader to the foundations of the Cold War, and the attempts of US policy makers to solidify the nation's new role as one of the two international superpowers. 
13
"The idea that war could be studied systematically by historical observation, by the selection of successful forms of organization, and by the imitation of stratagems emerged in antiquity." -Azar Gat, A History of Military Thought Dwight D. Eisenhower encountered wicked problems and developed solutions throughout his military career as a planner and a leader. Eisenhower's education, guided by Brigadier General Fox Connor, was irreplaceable, and enabled his understanding of planning challenges, and put him ahead of his peers. His preferred approach to planning emerged because of his success and failure in the Army. A style of systematic and inclusive leadership emerged during the Second World War where Eisenhower's approach sought consensus among allied partners before making decisions. Eisenhower's resulting leadership, decision-making, and organizational management methodologies distinguish him as an exceptionally useful subject of study. His first lessons about the complexity of international affairs occurred in the jungles of Panama.
During World War I General John J. Pershing led the US Armed Forces with the help of two talented officers, George Marshall and Fox Connor. After the war Pershing became the Chief of Staff of the Army and both Marshall and Connor rose to positions of prominence in the military. Both influenced the life of Eisenhower, but Connor's influence formed the foundation of Eisenhower's military success. Fox Connor tutored Eisenhower in the complex nature of international politics and war, and he ensured that Eisenhower received all the education necessary to be a future leader in the US military when conflict arose. 
14
14 Perret, Eisenhower, 83;
Ambrose, Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army, President-Elect, 1890
-1952, 1, 73
15
16
Connor taught Eisenhower to question his conclusions, and get to the root of problems.
When Eisenhower read a historical text, Connor forced him to "study it thoroughly and discuss with him the various alternatives available to a commander."
17
The Treaty of Versailles appeared as the culminating act of World War I, but Connor saw a future war in the making, and he helped his star pupil see it as well. Virginia Connor, Fox's wife, later wrote "Fox had always felt that the Versailles peace treaty had been the perfect breeder of a new war that would take place in about twenty years. Gradually Ike became convinced that Fox was right." 
18
19
23
24
Eisenhower spent his last several months at the industrial college preparing a response to the Congressional War Policies Commission chaired by the Secretary of War, Patrick J. Hurley.
Hurley requested that MacArthur, then Chief of Staff of the Army, present the Industrial Mobilization Plan to the commission. MacArthur tasked Moseley with the requirement, and Moseley selected his most capable assistant, Eisenhower, to lead the effort. 
27
Plan -1930. 28
25
27
Working with MacArthur changed the course of Eisenhower's career, as much as his mentorship from Connor and Pershing. MacArthur felt so pleased with Eisenhower's work on the mobilization plan that he arranged for Eisenhower to become his personal military assistant while he served in Washington, and later as chief of staff of his headquarters in the Philippines. 
29
32
33
34
32 Perret,
Eisenhower,
127,
31. 33
37
38
35
39
44
45
46
44
"War is probable-unless by positive and well-directed efforts we fend it off."
The polarization of the world following World War II pushed the US into a global leadership position that demanded an efficiently run and organized system of government policy creation to produce a coherent government national security policy. World War II's devestation of the powerful nations of England, France and Germany in Western Europe weakened their economies and limited their ability to project power, leaving the US as the world's most powerful democratic nation to confront communist expansion. 
48
49
48
49
penultimate Soviet expert. 
55
The ideas of George Kennan provided the foundation for Truman's initial strategy of containment. At the time Kennan firmly believed, based on his experience working in the US Embassy in Moscow, that the Soviets would not commit to a war that would endanger the internal security of Russia. He concluded that the threat of nuclear weapons would therefore be sufficient to prevent open hostilities between the US and the Soviet Union. 
56
57
58
59
55
56
57 Gregg Herken, "The Great Foreign Policy Debate," American Heritage 37, no. 3 (April/May 1986): 11.  
63
64
63
65
66
67
68
The Truman Administration abandoned its hopes of balancing the budget in its efforts to rebuild the Army and restrain communist advancement. The advent of the Korean War highlighted the vulnerabilities of a national security policy based solely on nuclear deterrence and a token conventional military force. The North Korean exploitation of this weakness convinced President Truman and his administration that the United States needed to increase atomic military capabilities to deter war and, "to provide reasonable assurance in the event of war, it could survive the initial blow and go on to the eventual attainment of its objectives." 
69
70
69
70
71
For the remainder of his time in the Oval Office, Truman directed the National Security Council to reassess the national security objectives two more times, resulting in NSC reports 135 and 141. NSC 135/3 dictated additional resources for US continental defense and larger allocations of resources for the non-communist countries in the Middle East and Far East. NSC 141, signed only a few days before Eisenhower's inauguration, concluded that areas outside of the US would not achieve adequate levels of defense against the Soviet threat through 1955, even with available US support. 
74
75
By late 1952, the power and control of the Democratic Party declined, due to scandals and issues with military leaders. Part of the Republican Party desired to pursue a national strategy of isolationism and only maintain a military retaliatory capacity. 
76
78
The sudden global dominance of the US and the Soviet Union after World War II forced the US into a leading role on the international stage. Truman, Marshall, Kennan, Nitze and others attempted to establish clear national security policy, but failed to produce a supported and unified approach. Truman's legacy to Eisenhower encompassed a number of policies about national 75 "FRUS, National Security Affairs 1952-1954," 126-27. 
76
79
79
82
83
84
The National Security Act of 1947 exhibited the ideas of the James Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy, and Ferdinand Eberstadt, former Chairman of the Army and Navy Munitions Board and an investment banker. 
85
82
86
87
88
89
87
88
Change, 1953
-1956: The White House Years, 114. 89
90
Security Council operations to organize the National Security Council process to function as one of his primary advisory instruments during his Presidency. 
91
92
93
95
96
97
Eisenhower used the National Security Council as an advisory body in accordance with his National Security Council system. Eisenhower approved the agenda for weekly National Security Council meetings, and Cutler directed the efforts of the National Security Council Planning Board in the preparation of reports regarding the agenda items for the upcoming meetings. The reports provided a summary of important issues, and highlighted the existing differences of opinion surrounding those issues. The Planning Board sent their reports to the 96 A summary of Forrestal's seven guidelines are: 1) The integration of the recommendations of qualified advisors is a priceless ingredient in policy formulation; 2) To prepare sound security policy recommendations, the National Security Council Planning Board must be made up of highly qualified representatives from the departments and agencies with the rank of Assistant Secretary, or its equivalent; 3) Continuous planning accustoms the planners to working together and thinking about hard problems, and enables them to arrive more surely at a reasonable plan or policy; 4) The Council should be a corporate body made up of officers advising the President in their own right and not simply as heads of the respective departments; 5) A uniform and customary procedure should set the pattern for Council meetings; 6) Eisenhower wished for wider representation of Government interests as the Council and Planning Board tables than was statutorily provided; 7) The President originally considered using a few nongovernmental consultants to participate regularly in Council meetings. For the fully detailed guidelines see Cutler, No Time for Rest, 296-98.  members of National Security Council in advance to ensure that the Council read them carefully.
Eisenhower told his National Security Council members, "You Council members … simply do not have enough time to do what needs to be done in thinking out the best decisions regarding the national security. Someone must therefore do much of this thinking for you." 
98
The meetings of the National Security Council brought about consensus among the members of the Eisenhower administration. In the meetings, the members of the National Security Council vigorously debated various approaches to these matters until reaching a consensus while Eisenhower assumed a presiding role, and Cutler directed the activities of the meeting. During each session, the National Security Council Executive Secretary or his Deputy recorded the main points of discussion and the consensus reached by the group. A the end of the meeting, the Executive Secretary read this notes to the group to ensure accuracy. After the meeting, Cutler, and the Executive Secretary drafted policy memoranda based on the notes from the meeting, which Eisenhower would approve, or suggest revisions and then approve. If the group could not reach a consensus, the issue moved to the agenda for a subsequent meeting, and the process started again. 
99
100
103
101
102
Eisenhower's National Security Council, its organization, its inclusive nature, its system, the careful selection of its members and staff, and its structure established an environment that enabled a fusion of the best policy ideas to achieve consensus among the administration thereby producing coherent national security policies.
In this manner, President Eisenhower founded an inclusive and systematic decisionmaking process as President to establish consensus among his administration regarding the unfamiliar and novel challenges that faced the nation in the 1950s. Truman's desire for institutional reform set the conditions for the addition of the National Security Council to the structure of the national government. The National Security Act of 1947 used the system proposed by the Navy's Eberstadt Report. Eisenhower, brought decades of experience leading high-level staffs to the White House and refined Truman's National Security Council structure to form a useful advisory and policy creating body. Once Eisenhower implemented his plan and his National Security Council began functioning in an efficient manner, the National Security Council started working through the necessary policy changes required to formulate a new basic national security policy.
"[D]on't talk about decisive action until all the facts are laid out cold and hard…Against such a background the NSC would be qualified to come to a decision." -Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953   Project Solarium represents the most remarkable part of Eisenhower's development of his basic national security policy. His use of the National Security Council mechanism demonstrates his systematic decision making process and his proclivity to establish consensus among competing stakeholders in unfamiliar contexts. The process to revise national security policy started before Eisenhower took office, but could make no headway until his administration examined and summarized existing policy. The "Great Equation" of balancing military strength and fiscal reality needed immediate attention, but the death of Joseph Stalin in March 1953   delayed development of that policy. 
104
105
106
107
108
Lawton Collins, and General Omar Bradley, presented the most stubborn opposition to reductions in defense spending. 
109
110
111
112
114
115
The new leadership in Russia, no matter how strong its links with the Stalin era, was not completely bound to blind obedience to the ways of a dead man. The future was theirs to make. Consequently, a major preoccupation of my mind through most of 1953 was the development of approaches to the Soviet leaders that might be at least a start toward the birth of mutual trust founded in cooperative effort. 
117
In April 1953, the views of the NSC regarding the best strategy to address communist expansion, particularly those of J. Foster Dulles, remained disparate. 
118
119
117 Eisenhower, Mandate for Change, 1953
-1956:
118
Eisenhower and Kennedy,
[21]
[22]
Soviets used covert or subversive means to spread communism. A policy of massive retaliation would constrain US action against such activities. Along this line he asked Dulles, What should we do if Soviet political aggression, as in Czechoslovakia, successively chips away exposed portions of the free world? So far as our reasoning in the economic situation is concerned, such an eventuality would be just as bad for us as if the area had been captured by force. To my mind, this is the case where the theory of "retaliation" falls down. 
120
121
124
125
123
124
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
George Kennan, the original architect of Truman's containment policy elaborated on Task Force A's research and conclusions. Kennan's major departure from the language of NSC 68 indicated that war with the Soviet Union was not inevitable or probable. In the contemporary circumstances, the US position remained more favorable than that of the Soviet Union and its satellite states. 
133
134
135
Project Solarium produced a summary report from all the task force presentations with features of each approach to restart NSC deliberation about a basic national security policy.
Goodpaster obtained records of each team's oral and written reports. He asserted that because of Project Solarium, Eisenhower "had the best work of these three groups on which he could draw, 
133
136
137
The Planning Board synthesized the reports from each Task Force, and drafted a recommended policy statement, Eisenhower's Basic National Security Policy, for the NSC to consider during the next few months. The Task Forces turned in the written products from Product Solarium by July 22, 1953, and Cutler presented the Planning Board synopsis on July 30, 1953. At the late July meeting, several of the NSC members presented questions regarding the conclusions of the report, and collectively decided that it should serve as a point of departure for the actual policy creation. 
138
137
Affairs 1952
-1954," 353. 138 Ibid., 435. 139 Ibid., 463-64, 514-34.
140
Project Solarium illustrates a systematic process that thoroughly examined the challenges surrounding national-level policy creation during a time of great uncertainty. Eisenhower used three task forces to present competing hypotheses, after providing them with the time, brainpower and informational resources to produce the very best arguments in favor of the assigned approach. The inclusive participant selection brought individuals with extensive diplomatic, military, and economic experience. None of the participants understood the implications of all their decisions, no one knew how Soviet leaders intended to use their growing nuclear stockpiles.
Uncertainty and novelty characterized the domestic and international environments during this period. Through this process, a coherent national security policy resulted, but more importantly, the disparate views of Eisenhower's administration coalesced into a single unified strategy. This exercise demonstrates the utility of design principles. Eisenhower proposed a solution to a complex problem by using dialog and discussion with various stakeholders. Not only was the group able to agree on the nature of the problem, but they were also able to agree on the recommended solution. The development of NSC 162/2 demonstrates Eisenhower's systematic decision-making process and its penchant for forming consensus among competing stakeholders Project Solarium and Eisenhower's National Security Council mechanism also contains propositions for staff planning and organization on a more general level.
here is a recurring temptation to feel that some spectacular and costly action could become the miraculous solution to all current difficulties." -Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1961   Eisenhower's efforts to develop a coherent national security strategy provide lessons applicable to military planners today. Examination of the process that Eisenhower used to develop his basic national security policy illustrates the benefits of an inclusive systematic decision making process, a planning methodology that establishes consensus among competing stakeholders, and the development of strategy in a novel and unfamiliar context. These same principles are espoused in the writings of Lawson, Senge, Rittel and Webber considered as design, team building and planning theorists. The creation of NSC 162/2 was remarkable in that it Cutler's National Security Council Planning Board began the process to revise Truman's policy by producing a memorandum to summarize Truman's policies, and then it supplied the Council with arguments for the reduction of defense spending before Project Solarium's conception. 
143
144
Creation of a new and coherent national security policy is exactly the kind of problem that Rittel and Webber described as "wicked." 
145
146
Competing views can aid in the problem-solving process. The National Security Council played an irreplaceable role in the production of NSC 162/2, and it sprang from controversy. David Rothkopf, Chief Executive Officer of an international advisory group based in Washington, DC, commented, "As is only fitting, the most significant effort to produce coordination and greater efficiency among major U.S. government agencies during the past sixty years itself was born of a bureaucratic rivalry, advanced through another, and created new ones." 
147
148
149
152
The National Security Council system that Eisenhower set up was remarkable. It enabled the Council members to attend each National Security Council meeting with informed views regarding a multitude of topics. The Planning Board used written reports, of unspecified length, to communicate with Council members with adequate detail to explain the points of contention between available policy approaches, not three to five PowerPoint slides. This contrasts significantly with sixteen line Executive Summaries and one-page White Papers.
An examination of Eisenhower's process for the development of his basic national security policy demonstrates the applicability of design theory in the planning processes, and provides a historical example of the iterations and changes that one should expect in such an endeavor. Developing a basic national security strategy, particularly among parochial government leaders, required all the considerable experience and skill that Eisenhower possessed. The National Security Council system, with the preparation of the Planning Board, played a vital role in the entire process. As tedious as deliberating over agenda items and pursuing consensus may seem, Eisenhower's involvement in the process proved decisive. Eisenhower's education, leadership style, and understanding of inclusive and systematic decision making, consensus building and the development of successful planning solutions occurred as a result.
152 Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for Decision-Makers (New York, NY: Free Press, 1986). In the study of historical decisions found in Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for Decision-Makers, Richard Neustadt and Ernest May, occasional Presidential political advisors and full-time professors at Harvard University, present anecdotes about the positive use of history for decision-making, one being, "a little thought can help." Their insights suggest that individuals and groups that achieve some degree of success spend time on the issue at hand among other things.
Hereafter referred to as NSC 162/2.
Bryan Lawson, How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified (Burlington,  MA: Architectural Press, 2007), 83-89.    
Peter M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization (New York, NY: Doubleday, 2006), 166.
David J. Rothkopf, Running the World: The Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power (New York, NY: Public Affairs, 2005), 33.
Geoffrey Perret, Eisenhower, 1st ed. (New York, NY: Random House, 1999), 83; Stephen E. Ambrose, Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army,President-Elect, 1890-1952, 2  vols., vol. 1 (New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 73.    
Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army, President-Elect, 1890-1952, 1, 77.    
Carlo D'Este, Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life (New York, NY: Henry Holt, 2002), 168.
Virginia Connor, What Father Forbad (Philadelphia, PA: Dorrance,  
1951), 120.
Cole C. Kingseed, "Eisenhower's Prewar Anonymity: Myth or Reality?" Parameters (Autumn, 1991): 90; Wukovits, John and Wesley K. Clark, Eisenhower, (New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillian,
2006), 39. Eisenhower ran afoul of the chief of infantry Major General Frank L. Sheets, Chief of Infantry, when he began publishing articles on the use of armored vehicles around 1919. Eisenhower needed to attend the Infantry Advanced School at Fort Benning before attending Command and General Staff School, and Sheets blocked his request after he returned from Panama.20  Stephen E. Ambrose, Eisenhower: Soldier and President, Signature Series (Newtown, CT: American Political Biography Press, 2007), 41.21  Perret, Eisenhower, 98; D'Este, Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life, 185. Pershing wanted to mark the battlefields where the US Soldiers participated in World War I, and to create a guidebook for US visitors to Europe so that they could easily visit the sites of past combat. Pershing personally approved Eisenhower's nomination to the commission. Eisenhower intensely studied the battles of World War I to produce this guidebook, and performed so well that after graduating from the War College Pershing sent him to Paris for a year to walk the terrain and personally visit the sites about which he wrote to produce a revised version of the guidebook.
Perret, Eisenhower, 98; D'Este, Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life, 
Ben Baack and Edward Ray, "The Political Economy of the Origins of the Military-Industrial Complex in the United States," The Journal of Economic History 45, no. 2 (1985): 396.
 24  Perret, Eisenhower, 106; Ambrose, Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army,President-Elect, 1890-1952, 1, 91.  Stephen Ambrose's two volume biography on Eisenhower is recognized as the most thorough and scholarly work on the life and career of Dwight Eisenhower.
Dwight D. Eisenhower, At Ease: Stories I Tell to Friends(Garden City, NY:  Doubleday, 1967), 213, 19.    
Ambrose, Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army, President-Elect, 1890-1952, 1,  101; Eisenhower, At Ease: Stories I Tell to Friends, 219.    
D'Este, Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life, 239.
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy, 13.   
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy, 3.   
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954,"  254.  ,"  254.   
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy,
91.
For the comprehensive list see Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954," 254-57.  ," 254-57.   
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy, vii.   
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy, 97.    
Ibid., 85; Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National Security Affairs  1952-1954," 236-37.    
In July 1948, the NSC produced a report, NSC 20 that addressed James Forrestal's request for a comprehensive statement of national security policy, and identified required levels of military preparedness for the contemporary world situation. The National Security Council produced NSC 68 in response to President Truman's request in January 1950 for a re-examination
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy, 97.   
Robert A. Divine, Eisenhower and the Cold War (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1981), 14.
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold  War Strategy, 55.    
Ibid.,  
Pickett, George F. Kennan and the Origins of Eisenhower's New Look: An Oral  History of Project Solarium, 18.   
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954,"  323-26;,"  323-26; Millen, "Eisenhower and US Grand Strategy," 38.    
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954,"  324.   ,"  324.    
Ibid., 323.   
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954,"  390.   ,"  390.    
Pickett, George F. Kennan and the Origins of Eisenhower's New Look: An Oral History of Project Solarium, 24.
Pickett, George F. Kennan and the Origins of Eisenhower's New Look: An Oral History of Project Solarium, 19.
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954,"  514-34.   ,"  514-34.    
Lawson, How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified, 124, 48.   
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National SecurityAffairs 1952Affairs  -1954,"  223-31, 307-16.   ,"  223-31, 307-16.    
Fred I.Greenstein, The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as Leader (New York,  NY: Basic Books, 1982), 246-47.    
Rittel and Webber, "Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning," 160.
S. Nelson Drew, NSC-68: Forging the Strategy of Containment (Washington, DC: National Defense University, 1994), 8.
Rothkopf, Running the World: The Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power, 52.
Foreign Relations of the United States, "FRUS, National Security Affairs 1950," 213.
Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold War Strategy, 71; Dulles, "A Policy of Boldness: The Republican's Foreign Affairs Expert Shows That Neither Arms nor Money Alone--but Only Wise, Patient Planning--Can Win Peace," 152.
-SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY CGSC U.S. Army Command and General Staff College
"The Council's statutory duties include a duty to assess and appraise the objectives, commitments, and risks of the United States in relation to its actual and potential power." -Robert Cutler, No Time for Rest President Eisenhower established an inclusive and systematic decision-making process to establish consensus among his administration regarding the unfamiliar and novel challenges that characterized the early Cold War. His system built upon the National Security Council structure formed under Truman. Unlike Truman, Eisenhower regularly used the National Security Council as his primary policy creating instrument to engender broad collective support for his policies throughout the government. Though Truman initiated defense reform, Eisenhower finished the restructuring and claimed the resulting dividend during his administration's policy formation activities by decreasing the percentage of defense expenditures compared to the US gross national product (GDP) from its high of 14.6% of GDP in 1953, when he took office, to 10.4% of GDP only three years later in 1956 with an actual $9.8 billion decrease in defense spending. 
80
81
151
151