# ID: 7154b80c03464c78a567ce3e0c70a973
# Title: German Mobilization Strategies: Research for an Appropriate Concept for Collective & National Defense in the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The importance of national defense and society's contribution are unpopular and often avoided topics in the German debate after two world wars in the 20th century. The achievements of 1989/90 and the expansion of a European community, supported by the security policy that Germany is surrounded by friends, leads to a perception of a security bubble in a fast-changing international environment and neglects the importance of military readiness to protect the heartland. Independent of NATO's concept for Collective Defense, the following monograph argues that Germany requires a training and mobilization concept, giving careful consideration of society's acceptance, to increase its readiness for national defense in times of increased global insecurity. Under investigation of the reconstruction of a mass army prior to World War II and with focus on the rearmament process in 1956, this thesis identifies Germany's strengths and weaknesses of reserve and mobilization models in the past and uses traditional pillars for a new concept in the 21st century. Driven by the main criteria, to create an asymmetric advantage over an enemy with a faster mobilization of resources, under consideration of the tradeoff between freedom and citizenry duty, it describes why Germany needs two types of armed forces: a professional army with its own reserve positions for NATO's Collective Defense, and the Home Defense forces as a militia concept with professional short-term training on a federal state level. This is a concept rooted in Scharnhorst's ideas from 1806 to awaken the spirit of a nation for the defense of fatherland and freedom.
Furthermore, we need to strengthen resilience throughout government and society in Germany and the European Union. Only in this way will we safeguard our open society and protect the freedom that is fundamental to our way of life.
-Dr. Angela Merkel, Federal Chancellor of Germany, White Paper 2016
Influenced by the Ukraine crisis, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) reemphasized the concept of Collective Defense and Deterrence in 2014. Based on the NATO 2020 strategy review, the Allies decided to establish a new command structure to counter Russian aggression and to increase the readiness of their forces as well as the capability to deploy first forces in divisional strength on the Eastern front within seventy-two hours. It was the birthplace of the Enhanced Forward Presence mission in the Baltic States and it has put strong pressure on the Western European Allies to reconsider their own security strategies for Collective and National Defense. Sweden, a non-NATO member, reintroduced military conscription in 2018 to adapt and meet their own requirements and concepts in a deteriorated security environment. In a renewed regional defense focus, Sweden's National Security Strategy underlined that national defense is a collective responsibility of Swedish society.1 Problems of manning the force, retention of appropriate capabilities, and shared responsibility supported the decision of conscription in the event of a total defense.2 Driven by these events, Germany also adjusted its strategic security document, the White Paper, in 2016. It re-emphasized the importance of conventional national and collective defense for Europe in the same manner as out-of-area operations across the globe. Therefore, it formulates that the secondary strategic priority is the establishment of an adaptive defense posture within the 1 Government Offices of Sweden -Prime Minister's Office, National Security Strategy (Stockholm: Gullers Grupp, January 2017), 26. framework of NATO and the European Union (EU). The need for a total change of Germany's command structures -after two changes within the last ten years -was not preferred and definitely not intended. Based on the current threat perception at a strategic level, it underlines that German armed forces have to be more flexible, agile, and suitable to counter regular and irregular risks. The scenarios of a hybrid warfare on the periphery of Europe, such as what took place in the Ukraine, formulated the need for a change in thinking and renewed concepts. The time of peace dividends after the Cold War era was over. The defense of Germany's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the worldwide protection of its citizens, is the primary mission for its armed forces.3 Following the strategic documents, the Ministry of Defense published new concepts for force development in 2018. Germany's military goal is to increase the personnel and material readiness of its armed forces by 2032. Aims of the new capability profile are, the modernization of existing abilities, the filling of "hollow structures", and the development of new abilities within the investment rates. Readiness target lines are the capabilities to employ three military divisions for ground operations, to establish four Air Task Forces, and to participate with twenty-five warships (frigates / corvets) and eight submarines in joint and combined missions with the United Nations (UN), NATO, and EU concurrently.4 However, this ambitious goal is based on a single set of forces for both out-of-area peacekeeping and classic defense operations, under the umbrella of NATO, European Union or United Nations.5
Strategic planners also identified that the operational environment for Collective and National Defense is not comparable to the Cold War era. Notwithstanding the traditional military 3 Federal Government of Germany, White Paper 2016 -On German Security Policy and the Future of the Bundeswehr (Berlin: Federal Ministry of Defense, 2016), 88 and 97.
4 Chief of Defense -Federal Ministry of Defense, Neues Fähigkeitsprofil komplettiert Konzept zur Modernisierung der Bundeswehr, September 2018, accessed 20 Sep 2019, https://www.bmvg.de/de/ aktuelles/neues-faehigkeitsprofil-der-bundeswehr-27550. threats to our territory by forces of other countries, the new type of warfare has already shown that diffuse and hybrid threats challenge German security across all domains. In addition, the identification of their origin and the assignment to a specific actor is more than difficult.6 Furthermore, Germany is no longer the front line for NATO's Collective Defense and the requirements for Germany with regards to NATO's defense planning are totally different.7 Based on the geostrategic situation, Germany is the logistics hub of NATO's Reception-Staging-Onward Movement phase with its seaports and airports, military camps and barracks, and power plants and IT infrastructure. Their destruction by external attacks would significantly inhibit NATO's effective response, making Germany's resilience a crucial factor in defending NATO's Eastern flank.
Another major problem for Germany is a "Clausewitzian" enmity within German society to support a higher readiness of forces or a possible war against an aggressive actor outside of Germany but inside the EU or NATO territory. The perception of threats, as well as the subjective reality for preemptive defensive preparations, is totally different between society and governmental organizations. A federal security and defense survey found in 2017 that more than fifty-seven percent of the German population considered the global security situation to be rather uncertain and unsafe but did not see a need for a bigger reserve force for national defense. The same survey conducted again in 2018 saw that percentage drop to forty-two percent.8 In order to counter this phenomenon, Germany's strategic documents are talking about " 
[…]
Regarding the Ministry of Defense, it is of central importance to establish relevant capacities for the early and preventive identification of vulnerabilities. This must be accompanied by a discussion on the limits of security and acceptable levels of risk for the state, the economy, and society throughout all levels. Beside the discussion, the new concept for force development will for a German mobilization concept. The framework of reference for the research, after the review of current strategic guidance, is to look at German roots of mobilization, existing theories, and concepts.
The first case study identifies methods and framework conditions utilized to restore a mass army within a short period of time, train it, and then deploy personnel during the interwar The framework for the current state in this research is the described threat environment of hybrid war, or in Russian terms "New Generation Warfare". Based on Hans Delbrück's work and his strategy of exhaustion, the nation or coalition that can mobilize its human and material resources for war faster and longer, while still having the support of its society, will win the competition in a large-scale combat environment.13 His theory delivers the main evaluation criteria for the research. Firstly, the appropriate structure for recruitment and training results in 13 Gordan A. Craig, "Delbrück: The Military Historian." in Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986), 351f.
the faster mobilization of the proper quality of reserve forces to create an asymmetric advantage in comparison to an opponent. The second criterion deals with societal acceptance of a national mobilization strategy, special emphasis will be on the perception of the tradeoff between freedom and citizenry duty, as well as on the circumstances for supporting an appropriate National Defense posture.
The regionally oriented approach of mobilization and replacement concepts is not only the overarching umbrella strategy of German history, but also pursues the approach of sensitizing citizens for their own defense. The roots of the first German citizenry army go back to the old Hessian Landwehr at the end of the sixteenth century. With an increase of external threats and emergent wars, like the Huguenot wars in France, the Dutch War of Independence, and the Turkish Wars in the southeast, the landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel decided to train local farmers and workers in military defense issues, the so called "Defensionswerk."14 Previous wars depended on mercenary groups led by external commanders, but they were very expensive, their loyalty was questionable, and they were too small to sustain upcoming wars.
The identity of the citizen and the soldier, of course, meant the unity of the ancient citizen of the city, who secured his property and his land against hostile threats. The military leaders of the local defense force ("Landesaufgebot") were professional captains of the landgrave and responsible for training in peacetime and commanding in war. With the beginning of the Thirty Years' War, the efficiency of these forces was not high enough to fight against a longstanding army. The main reasons for failure were concerns about the peasants' armament and military exercises in case of a possible uprising, as well as the nobility's unwillingness to provide the local 14 Helmut Schnitter, "Die überlieferte Landesdefension -Vorformen der allgemeinen Wehrpflicht in Deutschland," in Die Wehrpflicht. Entstehung, Erscheinungsformen und politisch-militarische 
Wirkung, ed. Roland G. Foerster (München: De Gruyter Verlag, 1994), 33.
[…]
In contrast to Prussia, Napoleon used the idea of conscription and citizen duty on a national level, based on the concepts of Levée en Masse from the French Revolutionary Wars beginning in 1792.17 The situation of insecurity and the need to protect the revolution's achievements against external monarchs mobilized the French citizenry in a mass army. From a theoretical perspective, the need for physical survival is a basic need with regard to Maslow's hierarchy of needs, where further growth and the next higher step of motivation is not possible without satisfying the first steps. Furthermore, the personal will and passion to fulfill these "deficiency needs" get stronger the longer they are denied.18 In order to cover the basic needs, societies created, objectivized, and legitimized the role of institutions to share the common good 15 Holger Th. Graf, "Landesdefension oder Fundamentalmilitarisierung? Das hessische Defensionswerk unter Landgraf Moritz (1592 -1627)," in Spießer, Patrioten, Revolutionäre, ed. Rüdiger Bergien and Ralf Prove (Göttingen: V&R-Press, 2010), 39f.
16 
Otto Büsch, System and
Social Life in Old-Regime Prussia, 1713-1807:
18 Abraham H. 
Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York: Harper & Row Publisher, 1954), 39f.
With this fundamental idea in place, there is still the question, what drives a society to invest and maintain in the institution of armed forces? In combination of Maslow's theory with the idea of Clausewitz Trinity, a society's perception of security in terms of external threats drives the will of the citizenry to invest its own resources. Clausewitz decried the resulting subjective nature of war as an interplay between enmity (e.g. primordial violence), chance (professional quality), and reason (instrument of policy).20 Consequentially, the Prussian military reforms under Scharnhorst and Gneissenau changed the old aristocratic character of officer corps, introduced the universal military obligation (Allgemeine Wehrpflicht), and created a new mobilization concept between 1807 and 1813, with the overall aim to increase the enmity along all social classes. All fit men over the age of eighteen had to serve several years in the infantry line, after which the conscripts were released for several years in the reserve. "Line" and Reserve together formed the standing army. After that, the compulsory military service belonged to the Landwehr for several years and then to the Landsturm until the age of forty-five, as a kind of local militia force. Untrained conscripts were either assigned as reservists to the replacement troops or incorporated into the Landsturm.21 It changed society's beliefs to fight for Prussia against the French occupation forces and implemented an idea of nationalism to make personal sacrifices for "king and fatherland".22 After Napoleon's defeat and the restoration process with the Congress of Vienna, the whole mobilization planning and universal military obligation stopped in Prussia. The failed German revolution in 1848/49 revitalized and modernized the Landwehr system that became law in Prussia from 1850 to 1918 to set the basis for the German Wars of Unification.23
The current concepts for recruitment and mobilization in Germany ties back to the Second German Empire. The recruitment regions of the armed forces, as well as their tactical training and organization in Germany, have changed in name and requirements over time, but the main idea goes back to Artikle 57 of the Reichsverfassung of 1871 and the Reichsmilitärgesetz of 1874.24 The field army (Feldheer), replacement army (Ersatzheer), and occupation army (Besatzungsheer) established the overall structure of the army. The field army was responsible for the mobile deployment and had a peace strength of forty percent. Soldiers from the reserve forces and Landwehr filled up the vacant ranks in the case of war. The replacement army consisted of the spare troop parts left behind by the field army in the barracks with the task to train reserve forces and replace losses in war or to create new formations on order. The occupation army consisted of fully inactive Landwehr, or if activated Landsturm, forces with the task to conduct security operations in the rear area after activation. The decisive yardstick, which Moltke the Elder applied to the usefulness of troops, was their ability to conduct offensive action. For Germany, the implementation of the shortest possible offensive war was crucial, but the Landsturm was rather unsuitable for it. Consequentially, the activation of the Landsturm was an expression of the effort to delay an invading enemy as long as possible under the principle of People in Arms in an emergency, but the final war would be under the control of the military.25 Based on the idea of the Kantonregelemt from 1733, Germany was divided into eight Army Inspections. Each of them was responsible to train and man three or four Army Corps within its geographical region (see Figure 
1
With regard to "Clausewitzian's" enmity, the society's middle class accepted the Prussian conscript army as the militarily superior form against external threats and opponents. It was even considered as the synthesis of the former antagonistic liberal and conservative ideals of war, based on the idea of the civil revolution in 1848/49, and interpreted as the nation's participation in political action against external aggression.28 Social democracy emerged as a new opposition against the existing military system of defense, but with the social laws of Bismarck, the objection to strengthening a militia system, rather than a standing army, disappeared into insignificance at the turn of the century.29
One flaw in the system was the extended amount of time required to mobilize the With the rearmament of Germany in 1955, the Bundeswehr re-used the regional approach for mobilization and distinguished between three main levels of the reserve after 1964: 1) Alarmreserve (reserve personnel with a part-time duty assignment for a fast response); 2) Personalreserve (former trained soldiers without an assignment); and, 3) Ersatz-und Territorialreserve (untrained personnel with the possibility to serve).32 At the end of the Cold War period, the German armed forces were able to mobilize up to 1,300,000 soldiers in the case of national defense. Immediately after reunification in 1990, the German government began to dissolve non-active troop units; however, the German Defense Policy Guidelines in 1992 underlined the need to maintain personnel, material replacement, and mobilization strategy.
Following the decreasing threat in Europe and the agenda of peace dividend, Germany again abandoned the entire mobilization concept more than 135 years after its first implementation in 1874. With the 2011 decision of the German parliament to suspend basic military service, the Ministry of Defense adjusted and cut its reserve forces to 61,000 soldiers (Territorial Reserve).
The Territorial Reserve is under the lead of the Joint Support Service and consists of a Territorial Headquarter (Kommando Territoriale Aufgaben der Bundeswehr) with small liaison staff sections at the federal and district level, like the Landwehrbezirkskommandos in 1874. It reflects the regional approach of that time, but their main task is the support of homeland security and civil-military cooperation. Therefore, the Bundeswehr established twenty-five regional support units (Regionale Sicherungs-und Unterstuẗzungskrafte -RSUKr), focusing on disaster relief and local security tasks.33 The organizational structures of the RSUKr take account of regional conditions and consist of available reservists on a voluntary basis, most have 300 to 400 soldiers. The activation of these forces is driven by a specific case and will be supported by regionally assigned active units. Their previous main task, to screen available men and women for military service, to prepare for possible mobilization, and to secure the rear area for home defense, is neither conceptually planned nor personnel or material feasible.
Based on the lack of personnel in the territorial reserve and the pressure for replacements in the case of Collective Defense, the German Ministry of Defense published a new reserve strategy in October 2019. The primary purpose is to support active military units with required personal to achieve the full status of personal readiness for deployment, as well as to protect key infrastructure for National Defense and provide Host Nation Support for NATO forces during their Reception, Staging, Onward Movement, and Integration (RSOI)-process in Germany. The objective is to create the necessary training, material, and infrastructural prerequisites in the normal planning process of the Bundeswehr by 2032.
There is no change in the voluntary service status of the territorial reserve; but there is a new basic reserve obligation to ensure full quantitative and qualitative coverage. It means that all military servicemen and women, honorably discharged from the Bundeswehr, must serve in reserve for a period of six years after their active duty time.34 Before soldiers leave the armed forces, they must decide whether they want to serve as a sort of replacement soldier in their active unit or in general duty for the territorial reserve. On a voluntary basis, each of the replacement soldiers should maintain previous military qualifications, otherwise he or she will be transferred to a general duty position in the regional support units after three years without training.
The approach to hold soldiers longer in reserve positions is not new in the German military organization, but it faces the same challenges in order to maintain their profession. After the war of 1870/71, many foreign countries adopted the Prussian mobilization system and a veritable mobilization race arose. In view of the looming two-front war, it was important for Germany to achieve a qualitative and quantitative mobilization advantage that would allow France to be defeated before Russia had ended its mobilization and employment of forces.35 On the recommendation of the General Staff, against the resistance of the Ministry, inactive Landwehr regiments were increasingly used for the establishment of reserve divisions with previous conscripts but without the requirement of mandatory training.36 This led to an inadequate maintenance of capabilities and to tragically collapsed replacement divisions at the beginning of the First World War.
As an intermediate conclusion, the traditional approach of the regional mobilization and replacement concept ties back to the idea of citizenry participation in national defense against an external opponent, but beyond the concept of People in Arm's -as a form of last resistance -in Clausewitzian terms.37 It allows a decentralized approach to manage the specific requirements of a region as well as the individual requirement for replacements of local units under a general directive. The following chapter will analyze how the Wehrmacht was able to recruit, train, and maintain its capabilities in a very short timeframe and under the conditions of modern warfare. It will help to understand the requirements and structure for a credible and functional reserve force.
The case study about the interwar period and the mobilization of German society in the beginning of the Second World War (WWII) will focus on the question: 'How did Germany manage to multiply its troops tenfold in just four years and adapt them to the new challenges of modern warfare?' The following study will look at the strategic and social framework, and then The challenging conditions of food shortages, a bad economic situation, and demoralized returning armed soldiers without a perspective formed the basis for political violence across a wide spectrum between the left-wing council movement and the right-wing putschists. The extremist movement also found support in a society with a history of using weapons and violence to fight for change. European social literature described the time between both world wars as Entgrenzung or Totalisierung, a dissolving of boundaries between the civilian and military spheres to win future wars under the impression of WWI and its use of an annihilation strategy.42
It described the total reorganization and mobilization of a society for the purpose of war, " 
[…]
The restrictions of the Versailles Treaty not only caused revolutions and inner unrest in Germany, it also formulated that Germany could not have more than 100,000 soldiers, no General seize the momentum by a higher tempo of operation in comparison to the enemy, later known as Auftragstaktik. 
57
Orders given from rearward commands will easily be made obsolete by the events. Timely action is often only possible upon independent decision. The lower command units have to observe that they are destined to solve the tactical problem as intended by the higher commander.58
Everyone, the highest leader as well as the youngest soldier has to constantly stay aware that forbearance and dereliction weigh heavier than mistakes in the selection of an action.59 Therefore, subordinates have to understand the purpose of the operation, and then work to realization even if it means working against the actual orders. This kind of thinking followed the understanding of Scharnhorst and Clausewitz for a well-educated and trained military genius that can overcome frictions in war through decentralized initiative.60 This basic idea in combination with Germany's need for a short and decisive victory formulated the new concept of a war of movement (Bewegungskrieg) to overcome the position or trench warfare of attrition during WWI.61
In addition to the tenants and requirements of Auftragstaktik, the professional army with only 100,000 soldiers must be able to extend to twenty-one Infantry Divisions in case of mobilization. Based on this planning, each soldier had to be able to think and lead formations and units one or two levels above his original function to generate the required leadership for all new formations.62 This formulated the requirements for a physically and intellectually intensive and Based on the regional recruiting system, every soldier got his future assignment for a specific branch of arms and unit by the Aushebung, assigned by the administration offices for 72 The annual order of the High Command of the Armed Forces (Oberkommando der Wehrmacht, OKW) regulated the necessary numbers for training and recruitment within the requirements of the Army. BAMA ZA 1/1778, Personnel and Administration (Project 2b), Teil I: Generalmajor Helmut Reinhardt, Das Rekrutierungssystem der deutschen Wehrmacht in Frieden und im 
Kriege (Königstein, 1948)
With the creation of the Bundeswehr in November 1955, the reactivated Lieutenant General Adolf Heusinger took the position of Chairman of the newly established Military Council on November 22. The council had served as an advisory body for informing the civilian leadership of the also new Federal Ministry of Defense, and is still the highest military committee in Germany.88 The first idea on national defense in the bi-polar world after WWII was obvious to the German generals -Germany should take all economic and military measures to remain an interested partner with the Western powers and create an unpredictable risk for a Soviet attack over the inner German border.89 Under the enveloped military capabilities of nuclear warfare and the increased speed in technology development, the new studies about future warfare saw the 86 A Brother War, or fratricidal war, describes the armed conflict against a state with the same national roots, but divided in two parts after WWII. Horst Afheldt, Verteidigung und Frieden: Politik mit militärischen 
Mitteln (Munich: Dtv Verlag, 1976)
87 Klaus Nauman, "Strategisches Denken," in Zeitschrift der Führungsakademie der Bundeswehr, Heft 14 (Hamburg: FüAkBw -Reflexin, 2011), 8-10.
thirty days (M-Day+30) in the central corridor of Europe.94 Eight additional divisions in a first wave, five divisions in a second wave, as well as five divisions as a strategic reserve, created the follow-on force package for SACEUR planning. The total estimate of enemy forces was eight comma eight million soldiers of the Warsaw Pact, forty-five Soviet divisions could be used for a possible attack on Germany. The American plan was to concentrate and guide the enemy into Germany's deep area by combined arms warfare, to destroy him with nuclear weapons in favorable areas and within a short period of time.95
The German military leadership didn't share this opinion and underlined the necessity for conventional forces, primarily to provide the political leadership different opportunities and options for decision making. Independent of nuclear or conventional defense, they understood that German's armed forces had to be able to integrate itself in the context of NATO's defense Communication and access to the North and Baltic Sea could be interrupted without any warning;
2) industrial and military hubs would be destroyed or occupied; 3) NATO's logistical support during the first phase of National Defense could be hampered.98 Under the Soviet's nuclear attack, command centers of civil administration would not be working any longer and Germany would disintegrate into organizational islands of different sizes, all of which must be able to act independently of each other.99 Consequentially, the Army's chief planners recommended a decentralized command and control structure, called Home Defense Districts (Landesverteidigungsregionen), for emergency support, force mobilization and deployment, as well as for all military engineering measures in home defense operations (see figure 
3
After WWII, Germany continued the old Territorial Command structure for recruiting and training in its six regional area commands (Wehrkreiskommandos). However, preparation and implementation of home defense in the new democratic system was the joint responsibility of the  As an intermediate summary of section three, the impossible bridge of Germany's rearmament would not have been possible without the Korean War and the increasing fear about total destruction within its citizenry. Furthermore, the militia concept for Home Defense was only used as long as insufficient military personal were available and they were to be replaced by professional trained reserve soldiers to "prevent the horrible mistakes of the Volkssturm." 111 Third, the German government continued to use a regional approach for recruiting, and created local centers of reserve forces to benefit from the habitus and cohesion within a district for Home Defense.
Conclusion: Decentralized Militia Forces and Replacement Planning by Active Forces -Concept for Future Collective and National Defense?
With the changed requirement for National Security, the German government adapted its strategy, but did not shape the information environment to garner public support, as mentioned in section two of this thesis. The unanswered question for a possible internal European conflict and war is, how can Germany prepare its mobilization and gain citizenry's support for two efforts at the same time? First, Germany must be able to fight along its Allies against external aggression outside of its own country and, second, protect its critical infrastructure to maintain the fighting armed forces and prevent internal civil unrest as well as deep strikes of possible opponents. In the following conclusion, I will explain a possible concept for Germany's current dilemma using the successful elements of the nation's past concepts, as explained in both case studies.
As mentioned in section two, the current coordination concept for reserve and national defense is based on a central coordination approach under the lead of the Territorial Command in Berlin and decentralized organization offices as an interface to the regional and federal state civil disaster authorities in separate districts. Each federal state has its coordination offices with active soldiers in separate districts and its own regional support units (RSUKr) with reserve soldiers.112
The new reserve concept also includes the requirement that each soldier has a 6-year commitment in the reserve forces after he or she left the armed forces to provide the required replacement body for a large-scale combat environment ('six-year stand-by reserve' concept). 113
In combination with the results of both case studies, four main elements shaped Germany's approach to national defense in the past, 1) the regional mobilization with local reserve forces, 2) the commander's responsibility for recruiting and training, 3) the combined understanding of warfare with training for a higher command position (two levels up), and 4) society's fear about a basic need for security forces to contribute to national security and protection concepts.
Firstly, the main elements for German's success in mobilization and replacement was the regional decentralized organization, based on the idea of the Kantonreglement of 1733. As mentioned in section three and regarding the protection of domestic infrastructure, civil responsibility for home defense denied the military lead in a region, as it was in WWII. Its coordination is still the responsibility of the different federal state administrations or, if more than one federal state is involved in the crisis, under the lead of the Ministry of Interior.114
Independently, in any situation, the Ministry of Defense is always in a supporting role for Home Defense and Security. Therefore, the existing regional support units need the ability to expand to the required number for local security and support measures, since it is no longer efficient in its current function as a coordinating element.
In the old concept for Home Defense Districts of 1957, it was envisaged that 10,000 soldiers would take over the security for every one million inhabitants, divided into divisions with subordinate battalions.115 It was the requirement in numbers for Germany as a front state, but under the new strategic conditions and as a part of NATO's consolidation area for RSOI, it only needs twenty percent of them for rear area security. Consequentially, for the new home defense approach, Germany's seventy-nine million inhabitants need 158,000 soldiers in home defense tasks, and only 25,000 are available presently (deficit of more than eighty-four percent). The current construct of the home defense organization, with the Territorial Command and its subordinated liaison offices to the different German districts, must be transformed into regional area commands with subordinated district area commands and its own home defense units. Each Additionally, equipment and infantry weapon systems for Home Defense must meet the same requirements as for active forces to allow interdependency and enable mutual exchange.
Secondly, the responsibility of the commander in WWII was to train and plan replacements in the field army to ensure high quality replacements on the eastern and western front. Today, the smaller number of forces, as well as the increased amount of specialized training on complicated weapon systems in a professional army, denied the approach of a local replacement system connected to the home location of the different units.117 In Germany, most soldiers apply for a specific position or unit, regardless of where they were born or grew up, and more than sixty percent do not live in the region in which they serve.118 But with regard to the strategic requirements and current concepts, the conventional forces have the task to plan their own temporary reserve positions to replace soldiers in the case of a deployment or long-term sickness of an active duty soldier.
During the Cold War, the German Ministry of Defense planned to replace thirty percent of the entire army as a substitution for killed or wounded soldiers in NATO defense operations over a period of three months.119 In combination of these facts, the new concept requires that the local brigade headquarters must plan the necessary replacements from its own six-year stand-by reserve. It means that a Brigade is responsible to track and train their own replacement cadre; all soldiers who are not attached to the replacement cadre of a brigade after his or her retirement from the army, form the basis of the district defense cadre.
Thirdly, each soldier's training to understand the requirements and procedures two levels higher than their own position allowed the armed forces to be expanded in a very short time, as mentioned in section three. Germany's traditional concept of mission command required a welleducated and independently acting military leader across all levels of command. The current command doctrine and training concepts of the professional army set the basis to maintain this advantage, but it also requires the appropriate leadership culture within the Bundeswehr to enforce it. Deployments to Afghanistan or Mali, as well as enhanced information technology in 117 
Stephen Biddle, Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in Modern Battle (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004), 28, 64, and 190.
The mentioned concept of militia forces doesn't have the time to educate and train its soldiers in the mission command skills and behavior. Therefore, it is more important to implement an experienced military leadership level in Home Defense units, and the main body in the headquarters and battalions should be active duty positions. For units on the ground, retired military leaders, or educated reserve officers with two years of active training, should fill these positions at the officer-and NCO-level during their six-year stand-by reserve period. It assumes that they are not double-headed and also intended for the replacement reserve in their previous brigades.
Fourthly, a national security concept that interferes with the freedom of its citizens requires their support in a democratic society. Based on Clausewitz's trinity, the enmity of the people must support a protracted war to provide the necessary resources for the chosen strategy of war.121 The case study of Germany's rearmament has also shown that personal fear for one's own basic security is one of the best motivators to contribute to public security concepts. Therefore, Germany's current discussion about one year of compulsory duty, which would be a building block for an active civil society, could be used to provide a realistic picture for internal and external security in the current strategic environment.122 The current debate about adapting 120 
Eitan Shamir, Transforming Command: The Pursuit Of Mission Command In The U.S., British, and Israeli Armies (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2011), 165-168.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NY: Princeton University Press, 1989), 89.
In final summary and as a recommendation, Germany's future concept for military mobilization and replacement includes two types of armed forces, the professional army with its own reserve positions for NATO's Collective Defense, and the Home Defense forces as a militia concept with professional short-term training for local security in the different districts at the federal state level.
Einführung einer allgemeinen Dienstpflicht -Initiativen und Standpunkte in den letzten 15 Jahren (Berlin: Bundestag Wissenschaftlicher Dienst, 2016), 5-8.
Swedish Ministry of Defense, A Robust Manning System of the Military Defense, April 2017, accessed 12 September 2019, https://www.government.se/articles/2017/03/re-activation-of-enrolment-andthe-conscription/.
German Ministry of Defense, Konzeption der Bundeswehr (Berlin: Bundesdruckerei, 2018), 28.
Federal Government of Germany, White Paper 2016 -On German Security Policy and the Future of the Bundeswehr (Berlin: Federal Ministry of Defense, 2016), 49.
Department of the German Army, THESENPAPIER I -Wie kämpfen Landstreitkräfte künftig? (Berlin/Strausberg: Presse-und Informationszentrum des Heeres, 2018), 18.
Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge (New York: Random House, 1966), 87 and 94.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton,  NY: Princeton University Press, 1989), 89. With enmity being an integral tendency of war, it often leads to escalation and total destruction based on the political will of a nation.
Burkhart Franck, "Mobilmachung seit 1815," in Truppenpraxis Bundeswehr -Die Zeitschrift für denOffizier, 31. Jahrgang 1987 (Bonn: Herford Verlag, 1987), 286.   
Volker Schobeß, Das Kriegshandwerk der Deutschen -Preußen und Potsdam 1717-1945  (Berlin, Germany: trafo Wissenschaftsverlag, 2017), 266-269.    
Robert M. Citino, The German Way of War (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), 130 and 151f.
Graf Robert Hue de Grais, Handbuch der Gesetzgebung in Preussen und dem Deutschen Reiche,Heer und Kriegsflotte (Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1904), 12 and 31.   
Oliver Stein, "Ein ganzes Volk in Waffen ist nicht zu unterschaẗzen. Das deutsche Militar und die Frage von Volksbewaffnung, Miliz und vormilitarischer Ausbildung, 1871 -1914," in Spießer, Patrioten, Revolutionäre, ed. by Rüdiger Bergien and Ralf Prove (Göttingen: V&R-Press, 2010), 82.
Burkhart Franck, "Mobilmachung seit 1815," in Truppenpraxis Bundeswehr -Die Zeitschrift für denOffizier, 31. Jahrgang 1987 (Bonn: Herford Verlag, 1987), 286.   
James S. Corum, The Roots of Blitzkrieg: Hans von Seeckt and German Military Reform (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 1992), 29.
German Parlament, Zur Aufwuchsfaḧigkeit der Bundeswehr im Kalten Krieg, in der Nachwendezeit und nach Aussetzung der Wehrpflicht (Berlin: Wissenschaftliche Dienste des Bundestages, 2018), 4-6.
German Ministry of Defense, Konzeption der Reserve (Berlin/Bonn: Kollen Druck+Verlag GmbH, 2012), 21.
German Ministry of Defense, Konzeption der Reserve (Berlin/Bonn: Zentraldruckerei BAIUDBw, 2019), 25.
Richard F. Hamilton, War Planning, 1914, ed.  Holger H. Herwig (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 56.
Burkhart Franck, "Mobilmachung seit 1815," in Truppenpraxis Bundeswehr -Die Zeitschrift  für den Offizier, 31. Jahrgang 1987 (Bonn: Herford Verlag, 1987), 288.    
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NY:  Princeton University Press, 1989), 479-483.   
Burkhart Franck, "Mobilmachung seit 1815," in: Truppenpraxis Bundeswehr -Die Zeitschrift  für den Offizier, 31. Jahrgang 1987 (Bonn: Herford Verlag, 1987), 290.   
Martin Rink, Die Bundeswehr 1950/55-1989, (Potsdam:  Zentrum für Militärgeschichte und Sozialwissenschaften der Bundeswehr und Walter de Gruyter Verlag, 2015), 27-29.
BAMA BW 2/1818, Militärischer Führungsrat, Studie Nr. 1: Gedanken zur deutschen Verteidigung, Organisation, Ausbildung und Führung des Heeres (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1956), 2.
BAMA BH 1/593, Grundprinzipien der zukünftigen Verteidigung (Bonn: Department of the Army, 1956),
104-106. 104 BAMA BW 17/70, Persönliche Dokumente von General Heusinger, Notwendigkeit und Dauer einer Allgemeinen Wehrpflicht (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1956), 12. 105 BAMA BW 2/4868, Erfahrungsbericht zur Übung des Jägerbataillons 211 und 617 -Abschrift von 1963 (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1964), 105; and, BAMA BH1/593, Grundprinzipien der zukünftigen Verteidigung (Bonn: Department of the Army, 1956), 144. 106 BAMA BW 2/4858, Führungsstab der Streitkräfte, Aufstellung von Grenzsicherungsbataillonen auf milizartiger Grundlage (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1962), 26.
BAMA BH1/593, Grundprinzipien der zukünftigen Verteidigung (Bonn: Department of the Army, 1956), 151.
BAMA BW 2/4868, Erfahrungsbericht zur Übung des Jägerbataillons 211 und 617 -Abschrift von 1963 (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1964), 105.
BAMA BW 2/3349, Führungsstab der Streitkräfte, Lagebild zur Mobilisierung der Streitkräfte im Mobilmachungsfall (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1963), 13-19.
German Parlament, Zur Aufwuchsfaḧigkeit der Bundeswehr im Kalten Krieg, in der Nachwendezeit und nach Aussetzung der Wehrpflicht (Berlin: Wissenschaftliche Dienste des Bundestages, 2018), 4-6.
Martin Rink, "Das Ungeheuer von Loch Ness und andere Wiedergänger -Milizkonzeptionen und Bundeswehr," in Spießer, Patrioten, Revolutionäre, ed. Rüdiger Bergien and Ralf Prove (Göttingen: V&R-Press, 2010), 396.
Each federal state has one or two company seize elements for object security or disaster relieve support in case of emergency; each unit has 350 -450 local reserve soldiers.
German Ministry of Defense, "Konzeption der Reserve" (Berlin/Bonn: Zentraldruckerei BAIUDBw, 2019), 22-28.
German Ministry of the Interior (Bundesministerium des Inneren), Rahmenrichtlinien für die Gesamtverteidigung (Berlin: Neue Presse Coburg, Dezember 1989), 5-6.
BAMA BH1/593, Grundprinzipien der zukünftigen Verteidigung (Bonn: Department of the Army, 1956), 103.
BAMA BW 2/4858, Führungsstab der Streitkräfte, Aufstellung von Grenzsicherungsbataillonen auf milizartiger Grundlage (Bonn: Ministry of Defense, 1962), 26.
German Parlament, Zahlen zu Bundeswehrrekrutinnen und Bundeswehrrekruten und Angehörigen der Bundeswehr nach Bundesländern (Berlin: Bundestag Drucksache 19/4253, 2018), 8.
Burkhart Franck, "Mobilmachung seit 1815," in Truppenpraxis Bundeswehr -Die Zeitschrift  für den Offizier, 31. Jahrgang 1987 (Bonn: Herford Verlag, 1987), 293.   
Jana Puglierin, "Rolle rückwärts -Deutschland droht ein sicherheitspolitischer Ansehens-und Vertrauensverlust," in IP -Die Zeitschrift für Internationale Politik No.5, September -October (Berlin: DGAP, 2018),8-13.   
First and foremost, I thank my dear wife, 
Dr. Elke Becker
Anna and Felix
Dr. Evelyn-Christina
Wilfried Becker
Secondly, I really want to thank my monograph director, 
Dr. G. Stephen Lauer
German Liaison Officer
U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, Colonel (GS) Carsten Döding
Dr. Lauer about Germany
COL Döding
Last but not least, I really appreciated the support of the both military research offices in Germany, the library of the 
Führungsakademie in Hamburg and the archive in Freiburg im Breisgau
Ms. Rhonda Quillin
SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-2301
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or