# ID: 7256e60f455a494e9338fa00045d6628
# Title: Hybrid warfare: Preparing for future conflict
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Hybrid warfare will be the most likely type of conflict the US and its allies will face in the future. Hybrid warfare is the use of conventional and unconventional ways and means???by any combination of state and non-state actors???within the same battlespace. Conventional and unconventional ways and means include forces, weapons and tactics, and are characterized by the use of modern technology and a high degree of unity of effort between regular and irregular forces.
15.
The dispute between pro-Russian and pro-Western factions in Ukraine led to revolution and civil war in 2014. Russia's annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and military intervention in eastern Ukraine provoked international condemnation. 1 Though Russian President Vladimir Putin denied any military involvement, it became clear as the conflict continued, that the pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine were not fighting alone.
In August 2014, a concerned NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen summarized the extent of Russian involvement: "We have seen artillery firing across the border and also inside Ukraine. We have seen Russian military buildup along the border. Quite clearly, Russia is involved in destabilizing eastern Ukraine . . . You see a sophisticated combination of traditional conventional warfare mixed up with information and primarily disinformation operations. It will take more than NATO to counter such hybrid warfare effectively." 2 Russia's use of hybrid warfare in Ukraine represents a threat to state sovereignty in Eastern Europe, where, like Ukraine, many states have large Russian minority populations.
Moreover, Russia's methods are sure to be emulated by other adversaries who seek to offset western conventional military superiority. For these reasons, hybrid warfare is a topic of strategic importance.
In the future, hybrid warfare will be the most likely type of conflict the US and its allies will face as a result of the convergence of several geopolitical drivers. These include, the transformation of traditional governing structures, disputes over political power caused by longstanding cultural differences, and state sponsorship of insurgencies. In this paper, I define hybrid warfare in detail, argue why it will be the most likely type of conflict the US and its allies will encounter, and lay out a strategic framework for deterring and defeating these hybrid threats.
The concept of hybrid war is closely related to military theorist William Lind's concept of Fourth Generation Warfare. 
3
4
5
Retired US Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel Frank Hoffman was among the first military theorists to use the term hybrid war. Though several different modifications have been put forth, 6 his definition remains the most routinely cited because it captures the unique aspects of hybrid warfare. Hoffman writes:
The blurring of modes of war, the blurring of who fights, and what technologies are brought to bear, produces a wide range of variety and complexity that we call Hybrid Warfare. Hybrid Wars can be conducted by both states and a variety of non-state actors. Hybrid Wars incorporate a range of different modes of warfare, including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts including indiscriminate violence and coercion, and criminal disorder. These multi-modal activities can be conducted by separate units, or even by the same unit, but are generally operationally and tactically directed and coordinated within the main battlespace to achieve synergistic effects. 
7
Clausewitz, On War, pg. 88 The current war in Ukraine meets Hoffman's criteria for a hybrid war. There is a level of between conventional and unconventional forces. The modern battlespace may include geographic zones outside the physical borders of the conflict. For example, surface to air missile batteries operating within the borders of one state may be used to restrict freedom movement in the conflict region. The modern battlespace has also expanded to include space and cyber space, and includes its exploitation for informational, financial and kinetic effects.
Hybrid warfare is more complicated, nuanced and expansive than the unconventional wars we have fought in the past. Hybrid warfare can take place between any combination of state and non-state actors. In many cases, non-state actors or insurgent groups will have some degree of state sponsorship. This is the case in Ukraine. The state will most likely provide the non-state actor with the financial support, advanced weaponry and covert forces necessary to wage hybrid war. We might also encounter a situation where irregular forces support the state. This is the case with the Shi'a and Kurdish militias in Iraq.
The political role of non-state actors may also be more prominent in hybrid war than in previous wars that featured the combination of conventional and unconventional forces. In hybrid wars, it will be difficult to discern the organization, command and control structure, and political goals of the adversary. This characteristic will have a major impact on strategy. For example, the Viet Cong augmented the North Vietnamese Army for much of the Vietnam War, but there was no doubt that Ho Chi Minh was the political leader of the effort. On the other hand, Hezbollah plays a much more dominant political role in Lebanon, as does Hamas in Gaza.
Discerning who is leading those organizations, and the degree of influence of their state sponsors is challenging. This characteristic is critical, because ending a hybrid war will involve negotiating the terms of surrender or peace with both the non-state actor and the state sponsor.
In summary, hybrid warfare represents the synthesis of all the ways and means available in modern warfare. As Russia's actions in Ukraine have made clear, our future adversaries will exploit those ways and means for their military and political advantage.
Our own security interests and the interests of our allies will draw us into these wars, as we seek to maintain international order and prevent the spillover effects of war, such as international terrorism and the mass flow of refugees. Several prominent scholars have written about the influence culture plays in initiating conflict. William Lind identified the shift from state on state conflict back to a more ancient form of warfare driven by cultural differences. 
13
15
16
The conflict in Ukraine is partially explained by the centuries-old struggle between Russia and the west.
In addition to cultural drivers such as historical grievances, religion and ideology, traditional state security interests will also lead to the outbreak of hybrid wars. Putin's intervention in Ukraine is driven by a confluence of cultural factors and his desire for a security buffer zone between Russia and NATO. 17 Security interests and culture also intersect in the ongoing wars in Syria and Iraq. All of the major regional actors-Iran, Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Jordan and Saudi Arabia-have complex security and cultural reasons that influence their participation in the conflict.
As states provide non-state actors with financial backing, modern weapons and welltrained forces, hybrid wars will become increasingly complex. As a result, hybrid war will take on the characteristics of a low-level insurgency and a modern conventional war. In Ukraine, the rebel use of radar guided surface-to-air missiles, MANPADs (man-portable air-defense systems)
and anti-aircraft artillery-presumably supplied by Russia 
18
Flight  Hybrid warfare will also use modern information technology-such as cell phones and social media-for the purposes of connecting and organizing large groups to support a political cause and for battlefield command and control. The Arab Spring is one example. In the future, we will most likely witness the increasingly sophisticated use of cyber warfare in order to disrupt or destroy state industrial, financial and military networks. We have already seen the Russians conduct cyber attacks in Georgia and Estonia. 
20
dominant drivers of each particular conflict, and they should be applied simultaneously.
Furthermore, these actions must also continue to be applied once hybrid conflict breaks out.
The second pillar consists of actions directed toward the hybrid adversary, which will most likely be a combination of a non-state actor and an internationally recognized state actor.
These actions will focus on deterring state sponsors from fueling hybrid conflict, or defeating the hybrid adversary once a war has begun. They include: collecting and analyzing intelligence about the forces driving the hybrid war and the actors who are participating in it-to include their motives, strategy and tactics; conducting diplomatic negotiations with all parties and building international support for our objectives; conducting information operations on a strategic scale to expose the state's sponsorship of insurgent, terrorist or revolutionary groups and any war crimes or atrocities being committed by the hybrid opponents and building support for the US/coalition cause; imposing economic and financial sanctions on state sponsors and freezing the funds of non-state actors; and building a military force to deter-and if necessary decisively defeat-the hybrid adversary within the hybrid battlespace. These actions fall more in line with traditional strategic and operational planning; however, they will need to be modified to address hybrid war.
One of the lessons observed from the study of hybrid conflicts is the requirement to be able to simultaneously counter conventional and unconventional threats. We should re-address the current method of operational planning that divides conflicts into shaping, seizing the initiative, decisive action, and transition to civil authority phases. Because hybrid wars concurrently take on characteristics of both conventional and unconventional conflict, our plans will have to adjust as well. Conventional and unconventional military actions, such as targeting military supply routes and protecting the population, must occur at the same time. They will not particularly critical in the areas of the globe that our political leaders believe represent a threat to our vital interests or to the international order. Analysis will identify which drivers are most important and the likelihood of political conflict becoming violent. The fact we were caught offguard by the Arab Spring and the rapid rise of the Islamic State supports this claim. We should rely not only on US analysis, but also on the analysis of other states and non-governmental organizations. Approaching the analysis from different paradigms is likely to lead to a more accurate perspective.
As we identify areas of potential or ongoing conflict, we will need to use our diplomatic, The ongoing conflict in Ukraine offers a good model for demonstrating how the above framework should be employed. The US and its allies should take the following actions toward Ukraine: intelligence collection and analysis in order to understand the dynamics of the internal security situation in Ukraine; diplomacy to enact cease-fires; information operations to build support internally for just government; economic assistance to help the Ukrainian people and stabilize the government; and security cooperation-to include arms sales-to ensure the Ukrainians can properly defend their borders and maintain internal security.
Additionally, the US and its allies should take the following actions toward Russia and the hybrid rebel force fighting inside Ukraine: intelligence collection and analysis to ascertain Russia's strategy and desired end state; diplomacy to shore up international support for Russian sanctions and bring about a diplomatic solution to the crisis; informational power-through the use of all media-to reveal the truth behind Russia's furtive involvement; economic sanctions to pressure the Russian economy; 
23
In December 2014, NATO announced the decision to create a brigade-size "interim spearhead force" comprised of German, Dutch and Norwegian troops and capable of rapidly deploying to potentially troubled regions by January 2015. 
24
25
As it designs its reaction force, NATO should heed the lessons of previous hybrid wars. to adjust their strategy and operational planning accordingly.
Johnson's description of what took place on the battlefield highlights danger for states that believe airpower can win a war by itself. There is equal warning for states that believe all future land warfare will resemble low-intensity conflict, and consequently choose to focus on unconventional threats at the exclusion of conventional ones. 
30
Another consideration for the response force is determining the political will of all the nations who plan to contribute to it. Some scholars have warned about the potential political shortcomings of the NATO force. Heidi Hardt writes, "Time and again, policymakers have debated the idea of rapid-reaction forces. Practitioners recognize that delays cost lives. Yet of those international organizations that have invested in rapid-reaction forces, none have followed through with deployment. Political will has both prevented the deployment of rapid-reaction forces and slowed the establishment of broader peacekeeping operations. After decades of attempts, the United Nations failed to establish a rapid-reaction force." 
32
Given the state of current European military forces, the reaction force will need to be augmented by a sizeable US force in order to deter future aggression in Eastern Europe. This will most likely require forward deploying a division size force of approximately 10,000 troops to Eastern Europe, while diplomatically signaling to Russia the defensive nature of the movement.
In December 2014, the Army announced plans to rotate approximately 100 Abrams tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles and an unspecified number of ground troops to Poland as a deterrent force. 
33
34
Hybrid war will be the most likely conflict the US will face in the future. The transformation of traditional governing structures will reveal deep-rooted cultural and ideological differences, and subsequently lead to violent struggles for political power in weak and failing states. Additionally, traditional security interests will lead to the state sponsorship of insurgencies through financial backing and the proliferation of modern weapons of war. The wars that result will be characterized by both conventional and unconventional ways and means.
The US must remember the historical and cultural lessons it learned from its counterinsurgency campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan, and at the same time prepare to face a far more technologically and operationally sophisticated enemy. Future conflicts may deny US forces the freedom of movement they have enjoyed in the last two conflicts. The potential combination of Improvised Explosive Devices, electronic and cyber warfare, anti-armor weapons, long-range rockets, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and sophisticated anti-aircraft weapons will make a future hybrid conflict extremely challenging.
In the past, terms like Full Spectrum Operations implied the US must be prepared to conduct all types of operations-from peacekeeping missions and low-intensity conflict on one end of the spectrum, to conventional war on the other. In hybrid war, all of the characteristics of Full Spectrum Operations may appear in the same battlespace and at the same time.
The framework I propose for deterring and defeating hybrid conflicts relies heavily on intelligence collection and analysis in order to understand the actors involved in hybrid conflict and the forces driving them toward violence. Moreover, it makes coordinated and parallel use of Today's conflicts clearly combine new actors with new technology and new or transfigured ways of war, but the old threats also remain and have to be dealt with at the same time and in the same space, stressing the resources and overloading the systems of western militaries.
David Kilcullen, The Accidental Guerilla, pgs. 5-6.   the diplomatic, informational and economic instruments of national power in order prevent hybrid conflicts from occurring, deter state sponsors and resolve these conflicts after they begin.
The military component of both pillars of my framework must occur in parallel with the other instruments of power, whether being used to deter aggression, dissuade insurgent activities, or defeat a hybrid adversary in a full-scale hybrid war.
Potential hybrid threats will require us to re-evaluate the debate over future US force structure, which currently pits the proponents of a low-tech-and manpower intensive-counterinsurgency force against the proponents of a force built to wage modern conventional war. An enemy who possesses the mixture of high-tech weaponry and unconventional ways and means will present a dangerous challenge to US planners as they seek to develop a military strategy to counter such threats. We should continue to modernize our forces for both conventional and unconventional wars with the appropriate mix of sophistication, quality, quantity, and flexibility.
Finally, we need to build a flexible, adaptable and mobile force that can rapidly respond to crises around the globe. The French summed it up as "the artillery conquers, the infantry occupies." In this type of warfare, "obedience" is the most important aspect of military culture. Lind argues this type of war is the "American way of war," with aviation replacing artillery as the primary source of "firepower."
The Third Generation of Modern Warfare, developed by the Germans, is most commonly known as "Blitzkrieg" or "maneuver warfare." Its defining characteristics are "speed," "surprise," and "mental and physical dislocation." Consequently, it demands that its practitioners possess "initiative" rather than unquestioned "obedience." 5 Ibid., 12-14. 6 See Mansoor, "Hybrid Warfare in History," 1-17. Although Frank Hoffman's definition of hybrid war remains the most frequently cited, other scholars take a broader view. Retired US Army Colonel and Ohio State University Professor of History Dr. Pete Mansoor writes, "although there is little new in hybrid war as a concept, it is a useful means of thinking about war's past, present, and future." For Mansoor, hybrid war has more to do with the way "forces engage" in war, than the "nature" of war itself. Mansoor argues that a hybrid war involves "a combination of conventional military forces and irregulars (guerillas, insurgents, and terrorists), which could include both state and non-state actors, aimed at achieving a common political purpose." When viewed from this broader perspective, a multitude of conflicts-from the Peloponnesian Wars, to the Boer War, to the French and American wars in Vietnam-become hybrid. In order to be successful in hybrid warfare, Mansoor argues political and military leaders must: (1) "understand the nature of their opponent," (2) "adjust existing doctrine to take into account the kind of war in which their forces engage," and (3) "create viable operational concepts that link strategy to tactical actions." Hoffman would refer to the type of conflict Mansoor describes as "compound war." See Hoffman's "Hybrid vs. compound war-The Janus choice -Defining today's multifaceted conflict." I believe the increasingly dominant role of nonstate actors, combined with the powerful effects of modern weapons and information technology, support Hoffman's assertion that hybrid warfare is distinct from the compound wars we have seen in the past, although it is truly by a matter of degree. Nonetheless, both definitions have substantial merit-the focus for leaders and strategists should be on understanding the unique nature of each conflict rather than arguing over semantics. Given what passes for serious intellectual discourse in Washington, this response to the challenge of hybrid war is not surprising." For Murray (like Mansoor), the defining characteristic of hybrid war is the ability of an adversary to pose a "two-fold threat" to their opponent-"conventional forces" that dictate a concentration of firepower, and "disrupting forces" that dictate dispersal. 
reflect the official policy or position of the 
US government
Department of Defense
Air University
United States Air Force Academy