# ID: 72dd1df1aca84b3fb97f7b2cb05d4753
# Title: The Operational Environment (2021-2030)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The same focus on high-tech/online communications and collaboration tools will be in effect here as the American populace becomes more attuned to the virtual world.
Internal divisions will continue, placing further stresses on the DOD budget as politicians grapple with the need to jump-start the economy.
Although this does not represent a worst-case scenario, many segments of the population-based on region, class, and industry-will face very real challenges.
These in turn could present opportunities for Army recruiting.
The Army will, however, face challenges in terms of competing for talent with emerging or newly popular lines of work, including the medical field, biotechnological research, first responders, and information technology.
The nation rallies together in a newfound wave of cooperation not seen since the early days after 9/11 or even in the dark days of the Second World War.
The common good prevails and the nation takes off, leaving behind in the distance our Pacing Threats, who become reliant on the United States and the West for the medical capabilities to combat the disease and its successors.
As a result, DOD budgets are not impacted in any meaningful way and in some cases may even advance (particularly in terms of military medicine, CBRN defense, biotechnology, and information technology).
Our adversaries' military modernization efforts lag; the United States is therefore able to remain comfortably ahead through 2028.
China and Russia will only be able to get back on track toward the end of the period (2025 at the earliest, 2028 or later more likely).