# ID: 72dd1df1aca84b3fb97f7b2cb05d4753
# Title: The Operational Environment (2021-2030)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Russia is a capable, nuclear-armed nearpeer adversary that seeks a return to Great Power status after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
It effectively employs a whole-ofgovernment approach to Competition and excels at the use of cyber capabilities and information.
Russia's military has significant combat experience, fighting in Chechnya, Georgia, the Crimea, Ukraine, and Syria.
Although capable, Russia likely is technologically inferior to China today, and almost certainly either has been surpassed, or will soon be surpassed by China as a global power.
China is a rapidly modernizing nuclear-armed near-peer, and is on a trajectory to become a peer power to the United States.
It harbors global ambitions and is increasingly confident in terms of the Competition space, using its economic clout and information operations to bolster its position and undermine its adversaries.
China's People's Liberation Army lacks combat experience but is a formidable force that is working diligently to not only introduce new capabilities, but also to improve its training and leader development.
In terms of their ways of war, both Russia and China have roughly similar approaches, but with some key differences.
As noted earlier, both wish to prevail in the Competition or Crisis phase through an integrated use of their national power across the DIME.
If it comes to Conflict, Russia generally prefers a rapid military operation designed to quickly achieve a result and then seek a diplomatic resolution before the United States can generate combat power and move to the affected theater.
It essentially creates facts on the ground over an issue that it judges likely is more relevant to Moscow than it is to Washington, Both Pacing Threats will contest us in all domains in Competition, Crisis, Conflict, and Change, and their nuclear deterrents provide a factor that U.S. defense planning has not had to truly consider since the Cold War.