# ID: 72dd1df1aca84b3fb97f7b2cb05d4753
# Title: The Operational Environment (2021-2030)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Among the key differences between Russia and China are geography, capacity, and experience.
The distances involved in moving a CONUS-based U.S. force to deal with a Russian advance in Europe are formidable; they are more formidable by a factor of three when moving from CONUS to the Chinese First Island Chain.
Because of its economic strength, China has an edge in capacity over Russia, both in terms of its COVID-19 Pandemic + Its Potential Impact on the OE COVID-19 pandemic arrived as the OE already was moving in a direction in which our adversaries were making gains in terms of their systems, capabilities, and approaches to warfare.
The effects of the pandemic will have implications for the Army's ability to address these areas moving forward, particularly if difficult resource decisions need to be made between military modernization and enabling a broader domestic recovery.
Under such circumstances, COVID-19 could be considered gasoline thrown on an already smoldering OE.
This first driver of the pandemic's impact on the OE is represented by the horizontal axis in the figure on the right.
On its left end is the OE that existed before pandemic, with its slowly evolving new states restrained by the normal resistance of organizations to dramatic change.
On the right end is an OE with rapid adjustments to continue necessary functions and operations resulting from the pandemic.
These demands cause changes to the interactions and linkages among the OE variables at a dizzying pace, either by accelerating trends or implications for the OE or potentially even by slowing down progress and creating bottlenecks or brakes that disrupt the current OE.
They impact organizations like the U.S. Army, whose processes and structure are built around a definitive culture and age-old traditions.