# ID: 72dd1df1aca84b3fb97f7b2cb05d4753
# Title: The Operational Environment (2021-2030)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Two years have passed since the publication of TRADOC Pamphlet 525-92, The Operational Environment and the Changing Character of Warfare, which presented the Operational Environment (OE) in terms of an increasingly contested battlespace dominated by new technologies and new approaches to warfare.
It highlighted the need for a multi-domain approach to a developing threat, and allowed us to examine our own assumptions about warfare, force design, and capabilities requirements.
In many ways, this OE was a guidepost for the Army's historic modernization efforts that have been underway for the past several years.
But the OE is not static.
Dramatic discontinuities, particularly the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects, are fundamentally reshaping the OE in ways we did not foresee two years ago.
The need to contain and recover from the pandemic has strained military budgets, complicated established ties between nations, as well as altered perceptions of the role of governments and the viability of the existing international order.
More predictably, our key potential adversaries have embarked on their own modernization efforts designed specifically to overcome the United States.
As we often are reminded, our adversaries have a vote.
Focusing on the two main pacing threats, it is clear that both China and Russia are revolutionizing their approaches to warfare and have been working to create the forces they need to carry them out.
First, they seek to "win without fighting" by dominating the Competition and Crisis spaces using whole-of-government approaches and the ability to control the information space.
Second, they intend to use stand-off capabilities to prevent the Army and its Joint and Combined Partners from effectively maneuvering.
This effort will be broad, starting in the Homeland, which is no longer a sanctuary, and will stretch across the global commons to the theater of operations.