# ID: 7339b32268c64e08aeab2db5b9f193a1
# Title: Deterrence in the Human Domain: A COIN Framework to Deterring Unconventional Warfare in Shaping Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Current adversaries of the United States are typically not willing to engage in a conventional conflict against a US partner nation without first shaping the environment by unconventional military action. This monograph examines how to deter such anticipated unconventional warfare threats, and argues that military activities involving operations to increase the popular will, such as information operations, positioning of forces and resources, and limited conflict, will have a deterrent effect within the human domain. Using the counterinsurgency framework of shape, clear, hold, build, and transition to conduct deterrence during shaping operations, this monograph provides an operational approach for friendly deterrence of an adversary's unconventional threat. To test this framework, this monograph analyzes a case study of how Russia will likely use unconventional forces and information operations to attempt to shape the human domain and legitimize a limited conventional action in Eastern Europe before the United States can react. This study of the contemporary Eastern European situation shows that the shape, clear, hold, build, and transition framework provides a better understanding of how the United States can organize operations to deter unconventional warfare. These operations can include the forward positioning of forces and resources, using IO to build the national will of a partner nation, and enabling limited conflict within the partner nation in the form of policing actions. The monograph concludes by analyzing the benefits and risks to applying the shape, clear, hold, build, and transition framework to UW deterrence.
As typically defined, deterrence implies or directly threatens the use of force on an adversary to prevent conflict. This concept of deterrence may be adequate when facing a conventional threat in a conventional form of warfare. However, the current adversaries of the United States are typically not willing to face off in a conventional showdown without first shaping the environment by means other than conventional military action. In particular, as a potential adversary, Russia will likely use unconventional forces and information operations to shape the human domain in ways that would let it wage a limited conventional action in Eastern Europe before the United States has time to react. Adversaries such as Russia may also seek to legitimize any conventional actions through the use of unconventional and information shaping operations, further restricting US counteractions. In order to protect the nation's global interests and norms, the US military must reevaluate the concept of deterrence. It must be brought out of the Cold War concept defined by nuclear deterrence, and go beyond the limited conflict concept defined by the threat of conventional force, in order to better counter the threats faced today.
The United States currently conducts conventional military deterrence activities in Europe to prevent Russian actions. By conducting exercises and demonstrations of conventional capabilities in Europe with European partners, the United States hopes to deter Russian aggression in Eastern Europe and in the NATO Baltic States. 
1
2
2 Andrew E. Kramer, "Spooked by Russia, Tiny Estonia Trains a Nation of Insurgents," New York Times, October 31, 2016, accessed December 13, 2016, https://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/world/europe/spooked-by-russia-tiny-estonia-trains-a-nation-ofinsurgents.html?smprod=nytcore-ipad&smid=nytcore-ipad-share&referer=https%3A%2F%2Ft.co%2FyzULt1iDzO. of maintaining such a force in Europe as a conventional deterrent to a Russian conventional military threat by beginning a continual rotation of Armored Brigade Combat Teams to the continent. 
3
Potential adversaries today understand the threat or possibility of counteractions to conventional approaches, and thus are more likely to adopt an unconventional approach that precedes their conventional operations, or if possible, achieve their objectives outright. How to deter this unconventional approach is the subject of this monograph. This monograph argues that there are ways to deter the unconventional threat preceding conventional conflict, both through actions that the US military is currently undertaking, and actions that it could take in the future. An analysis of contemporary conflicts offers possible activities for both influencing and countering the unconventional threat. These options include: operations to increase the popular will such as information operations (IO), positioning of forces and resources, and limited conflict. Integrating these practices into current US military and allied operations may help to better deter future adversarial unconventional shaping against US national interests.
In order to understand how such deterrence could work, this monograph studies the adversary's unconventional warfare (UW) actions that occur before an outbreak of conventional or hybrid war; in other words, the adversary's shaping operations. Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations, describes shaping operations as missions, tasks, and actions that "help identify, deter, counter, or mitigate competitor and adversary actions that challenge country and regional stability" and "improve perceptions and influence adversaries' and allies' behavior,… and positively affect conditions that could lead to a crisis." 
4
In the following sections, this monograph orients the reader to the origins and development of the contemporary understanding of deterrence and its necessary assumptions. Next, it offers an explanation of unconventional warfare, and its goals for fracturing a state in order to allow conquest. This monograph then describes the human domain, and connects deterrence theory's decision making processes to the human domain, where unconventional deterrence is applied and achieved. This new application of deterrence theory in the human domain focuses on targeting a population within a state, and not an adversary state or its leaders. This leads into a discussion of US military doctrine regarding shaping and deterrence planning, and where and how the deterrence of unconventional warfare can fit into current planning models. Next, this monograph discusses ways of deterring unconventional warfare, and proposes that deterrence can be achieved using a "shape, clear, hold, build, and transition" framework. The monograph then reviews Russian UW and applies the SCHBT framework against Russian influence and potential UW as a deterrence framework in the Baltic States.
Deterrence is intended to display or communicate the capability of an immediate credible response or threat to an expected adversary's actions, forcing the adversary to weigh the costs and benefits of those actions. JP 3-0 defines deterrence as "the prevention of adversary action through the presentation of credible threat of unacceptable counteraction and belief that the cost of the action outweighs the perceived benefits." 
5
Throughout history deterrence was known as coercive diplomacy, and characterized by latent violence, or the possession of power to hurt your adversary in order to influence their choices. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
In addition to the assumptions described above, four critical assumptions for deterrence theory that remain true for unconventional deterrence are:
1. The actions to be deterred result from deliberate decisions to act, not from automatic responses, or unintended or accidental events. 3. Adversary values and perceptions relevant to decision making can be sufficiently identified, assessed, and influenced through action (or inaction) by others. 4. Adversary decision makers are rational; that is, they calculate and develop and implement strategies to reach objectives, though they often take actions that seem unreasonable to observers viewing them from their own value structure. 
12
Conventional deterrence in recent history has limited large-scale war between superpowers, and led states who wish to undermine classic forms of deterrence into using unconventional warfare. Such UW, conducted before declared conventional conflict, influences the population for the purpose of shaping the operational environment (OE) for later exploitation. In order to understand how UW is used to combat deterrence, this section first defines UW, and then discusses the implications of using it.
Unconventional warfare is an activity within irregular warfare (IW). 13 JP 1-02 defines IW as "a violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the 12 Jonathan Trexel, "Concepts for Deterrence Operations," in NATO and 21st Century Deterrence, ed. Karl-Heinz Kamp and David S. Yost (Rome: NATO Defense College, 2009), 200-1. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
14
Military and Associated Terms (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2001;
amended 2010), 486. 15 FM 3-05.130, 1-5.
Non-state organizations include violent extremist organizations and transnational criminal organizations that a state adversary utilizes or capitalizes on. State-sponsored unconventional activities require military actors-though they may be acting covertly-and implies a more immediate follow-on action by political or conventional armed forces. Non-state unconventional actors, on the other hand, may be perceived as criminal activity or an interested non-state organization that has ties with or history of cooperation with the adversarial state sponsor. They offer a level of ambiguity or deniability and longer timeline for intervention. It may also be a nonstate organization or movement unprovoked by the antagonist that is taken advantage of. 
19
20
21
Whether using state or non-state forces, an antagonist seeks to achieve objectives within an OE that circumvents and undermines conventional deterrence prior to committing to conventional conflict. UW achieves these objectives by fracturing state control, or alliances, through the exploitation of local opposition groups. UW's use of the population places it in a domain that affects all others-one that makes deterrence more than the credible use of force, but requires the development of national will.
Traditionally, deterrence is not considered or initiated until after identifying the adversary's shaping efforts or a crisis is defined. 
22
23
23 Keir Giles, Russia's "New" Tools for Confronting the West: Continuity and Innovation in Moscow's Exercise of Power (London: Chatham House, March 2016), 30-31; Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan collection of unconventional forces took control of government institutions and key infrastructure, but failed to rally the popular support seen in Crimea, escalating the situation to conventional conflict and Russian intervention. 
24
To deter adversarial shaping operations is to deny adversarial influence on target populations by influencing the decision making of the population prior to the onset of UW. This monograph defines such a population-centered focus as deterrence in the human domain. The human domain focuses on people (individuals, groups, and populations) in terms of their perceptions, decisionmaking, and behavior and is therefore tied to the other domains: land, sea, air, space and cyber. 
25
Identifying and measuring successful deterrence by proving a negative is difficult. In the height of the cold war, deterrence became a national strategy of communist containment and relied on anticipating aggression and guarding against being surprised, and success resulted in sustainment of the status quo. 
26
resolve further into components of stakes, credible capabilities, and risk tolerance in order to explain motivations that drive escalation decisions. 
27
This monograph identifies successful deterrence of UW in two ways: first, the retention or increase in popular support to a friendly nation despite adversary information operations and unconventional attempts, and second, through the anticipated escalation decisions the adversary makes regarding their military and the resolve of their foreign policy. Adversarial information operations are one indicator of popular support; if those operations are reactionary to friendly IO, this implies that friendly forces have the initiative in this area and may be successfully influencing the human domain. Another measure of popular support is the probability that a certain event or class of events, such as PN opposition groups seeking adversarial UW support, will not occur within a defined area in a given period of time. 
28
Additionally, it better allows the US military to transition stability operations to the PN following conflict resolution.
When attempting to deter unconventional state and non-state actions, the central ideas of conventional deterrence apply: deny benefits, impose costs, and encourage adversary restraint. 
29
Deterrence in shaping operations prior to armed conflict not only influences national leaders, but takes place in the human domain. The human domain then becomes the area of focus to influence decision making of a population and the measure of its will indicates the ability to deter adversary UW. The human domain consists of the physical, cultural, and social environmental factors influenced by the other domains, and contains objectives to defeat an opponent's will to resist. 
30
31
32
33
34
In sum, the human domain plays an essential role in deterring an adversary's UW.
Conducting information operations and, if necessary, limited conflict operations, as well as advantageous positioning of forces represent deterrence measures aimed directly at the adversary 34 Ibid., 37-38. "Functional value is defined by the benefits and costs directly related to an offering's performance. Monetary value is defined by the monetary benefits and costs associated with the offering. Psychological value is defined by the psychological benefits and costs associated with the offering." decision maker. Shaping the population's decision making in favor of the PN deters the adversary's use of UW. Deterrence in the human domain denies the adversarial unconventional forces the ability to undermine conventional deterrence and legitimize future hostilities.
Shaping and deterring have a symbiotic relationship, and both are proactive and reactive. JP 3-0 divides the two activities into separate phases of operational planning (Phase-0 Shape and Phase-I Deter), but acknowledges that deterrence activities occur in both. The recently updated JP 3-0 addresses the common misconception that shaping activities assume peace, a lack of conflict, and a failure to address root problems of conflicts that impact the human domain, focusing largely on government-to-government relations or shaping military operational conditions. 
35
As defined in doctrine, the shape phase is proactive in that its intent is to deter or dissuade adversaries and influence their behavior prior to conflict, and the deter phase is reactionary and only implemented once crisis is identified and defined. 
36
37
35
36 JP 3-0, V-9, V-10. 
37
The recently updated JP 3-0 recognizes deterrence as an effect of shaping activities to maintain stability that becomes focused on operational shaping and deterrence when the threat or crisis is defined. 
38
1
38
Figure 
2
3
US fears of conventional escalation typically dictate the manner in which these low level operations are executed. However, they may be pertinent in deterring subversive efforts as part of adversarial contemporary shaping operations. If executed, considerations must include what may trigger conventional armed conflict. Therefore, the shaping operations to deter UW require a framework for execution that establishes legitimacy, removes opposition or unconventional forces, and builds national will. Figure 
4
39
40
40
41 SOCOM J9, "Gray Zone," Journal of Asymmetric Warfare 1, no. 2 (August 2016): 47.   
Little to no literature exists regarding the deterrence of the unconventional approach to warfare. However, deterrence, countering non-state actors, counterinsurgency, and unconventional warfare literature each separately contain elements and ideas that this monograph draws from in order to build an approach to the deterrence of UW. Research into these subjects reveals that a forward military presence, limited conflict, and the building of will or resiliency of the HN population through the positioning forces, and IO present credible actions for deterring the unconventional threat.
To defeat and even prevent an irregular threat from growing among a target population, the military interaction with the populace is critical. In addition to being a conventional deterrent, forward positioned forces (US or PN) among the people can create a stronger bond to a nation and do more for the legitimacy of a government than national government programs targeted at the people. 
42
43
44
Forward forces provide the opportunity to act quickly to interdict or influence adversary unconventional forces through direct military action outside of conventional operations before they can achieve a foothold. A US Army Special Operations Command white paper states that Counter-42 Christian Jeppson, Sampsa Heilala, Jan Weuts, and Giovanni Santo Arrigo, "NATO's Approach to Irregular Warfare: Protecting the Achilles' Heel," Military Review 95, no. 5 (September-October 2015): 30-31.
43 R. Reed Anderson et al., Strategic Landpower and a Resurgent Russia: An Operational Approach to Deterrence (Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College Press, 2016), 55. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
It is from among these concepts that this monograph recommends positioning of forces, limited conflict, and operations to build will or partner resiliency in order to deny the unconventional threat of the human domain thus deterring the adversary unconventional warfare. 
50
51
52
53 Trexel,
208.
As noted above, an adversary uses UW in their shaping operations in an attempt to undermine conventional deterrence and create conditions that legitimize later conventional actions.
In order to do this, first they either create or align with a disenfranchised group or population with similar or tangential values in their target location. Then, they begin an insurgency or resistance movement in order to fracture state control, either to achieve their UW objectives or justify their conventional actions. Since, prior to conventional conflict, the adversary seeks to incite an insurgency that friendly forces wish to stop and ideally deny, COIN doctrine provides a useful framework to approach the deterrence of UW as a shaping operation. This monograph proposes an application of the COIN framework that will deny adversary UW physical objectives and target populations by maintaining a PN's control over and support from the population with a competitive advantage to the populace that exceeds any adversary's value propositions. The COIN approach of "shape, clear, hold, build, and transition" (SCHBT) provides a framework for deterrence of UW that encompasses many current shaping and deterrence efforts of conventional forces, as well as providing an overarching UW deterrence methodology, which does not currently exist in US military doctrine. Key points of effective SCHBT that enable it as a viable framework for deterrence of UW are:
• Safeguards the population and infrastructure [from unconventional forces]
• Provides opportunity for host nation police and other institutions and agencies to gain and maintain rule of law [where it could be challenged by UW]
• Provides essential services and addresses the root causes of an insurgency [before it starts]
• Denies [UW] active and passive support
• Gains the support of the populace [through the increased will of the people increasing the resiliency of the nation] 
54
Insurgencies, is largely, but not exclusively, written with failing nations, nations in post-conflict situations, or PNs with ungoverned spaces in mind. When the environmental context of shaping activities (pre-insurgency) and root causes are similar to that in COIN, the framework becomes a viable option for application to deter UW. Applying the COIN framework to vulnerable populations and areas within partner nations pre-conflict differs from traditional COIN in that traditional COIN is applied against an active insurgency, and pre-insurgency application intends to deny the adversary unconventional forces from starting an insurgency. In traditional COIN situations, the counterinsurgent attempts to build HN capacity at the expense of an active insurgency over time, but in deterring UW, the PN seeks to maintain and build capacity, resiliency, and will at the expense of potential or future support for an opposition group over time.
Shaping operations, the first step of SCHBT, involve identifying root causes of potential insurgency, and isolating opposition groups from the population and UW support through IO. 
55
56
57
55
56
For the clear phase, the second step in SCHBT, the term "clear" signifies the desired effect of eliminating opposition within a vulnerable or dangerous population, or UW forces from areas of national interest. This phase denies UW objectives within the PN populace before opposition groups gain outside support by interdicting such groups, and making further unrest within the population untenable. This phase may not be necessary if no such threat or vulnerability exists, but an organization in the PN manipulated by or possessing the potential for influence by UW must be confronted or the PN risks allowing adversary UW a foothold in the human domain.
Limited conflict in this phase takes the form of military or policing actions internal to the PN against organizations or populations that publicly act against the state in order to fracture it or seek adversary support. US military activities may include FID, security cooperation, IO, or intelligence support. Clearly communicated legal justification of any arrests or strikes, established by IO efforts, stunt the growth of opposition and deny further exploitation of perceived PN injustice within the population by UW. 
58
59
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
60
61
Kalyvas,
111. 62
63 FM 3-24, 9-7.
64 JP 3-0, VI-4.  adversary are convinced that their behavior is monitored and sanctioned with reasonable accuracy. 
65
In deterring UW, step 4, the build phase, occurs simultaneously with the hold phase, as both utilize the same resources. These resources increase popular will for PN through troop and police partnerships among the people. Similar to COIN, "the phase comprises carrying out programs designed to remove the conditions that allow an insurgency to exist, specifically addressing the root causes, tying inhabitants to the host-nation security institutions, governing and rule of law, and strengthening the HNs ability to provide legitimate and effective governance." 66 Deterrence of UW differs from COIN because, in deterrence, it is easier to build the capabilities that increases the capacity of the PN and isolate opposition groups from the population and adversary. The difficulty in COIN lies in the fact that an insurgent in the PN, backed by UW forces, has already gained control of the population. 
67
68
65 Kalyvas,
190.
67
68
70
The final step, transition, occurs not only at the end of the framework but in between each phase. Transitions within the framework occur primarily to and from the clear phase and are largely dependent on conditions. If using US military assets, as the PN builds resource capability or increases their capacity in areas of US military support, transition to PN entities occurs. However, transitioning UW deterrence efforts does not necessarily mean US forces can or should withdraw; if a conventional threat remains and requires conventional deterrence, forces may simply shift focus.
The decisions of the adversary will determine when deterrence of UW is complete, and reflected in their foreign policy or changes to their conventional force positioning. 
69
70
A study of the contemporary Eastern European situation shows that an application of SCHBT provides a framework for better understanding US efforts regarding deterrence of UW. It will show how an application of limited conflict and strike operations, positioning of resources, and IO to build will, can shape the environment and deter UW by denying its objectives. In Eastern Europe, the principal threats of unconventional operations against national interests in the current operational environment come from Russia. The ongoing situation offers a recent lesson in UW and conditions for deterrence of UW. This section reviews Russian concepts and actions, strategic and operational needs, and methods and doctrine. It will then turn to what the US and allies are currently doing in the Baltic States, and identify how using a SCHBT framework can help to better understand these current actions as efforts to deter UW. This case study provides an understanding of the contemporary challenges regarding UW deterrence, and will uncover gaps and opportunities for building popular will, positioning of forces and resources, and possibly limited.
Russia looks to extend its power and gain international recognition as a global leader in the face of what it sees as an aggressive Western world order in decline. Using unconventional warfare to create instability and a narrative of protecting ethnic Russians abroad, Russia seeks to expand its control one area at a time by undermining conventional NATO deterrence and protective measures.
The actions taken in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine serve as an example of Russia's unconventional approach and manipulation of the Human Domain.
Russia's foreign policy goals are to overturn the pro-West world order, provide national security, and gain recognition as a global great power. In his address at the 53rd Munich Security Conference in February 2017, Russia's Foreign Minister, Sergey Lavrov stated, "the post-Cold War era has come to an end," and it is time for "a post-West world order." 
71
72
73
74
To do this, Russia has developed a way of war that undermines US conventional military advantages, and creates situations where it can argue that it is legally right to intervene. Figure 
5
75
76
77
75 Ibid.,
15,
20. 76
78
79
80
The use of Russian unconventional forces follows regular lines of operation once committed; unconventional forces and militias seize key infrastructure such as government buildings and airports for follow on conventional forces that are poised along the border, and mobilize local opposition groups in order to build support and legitimacy. Recent Russian unconventional actions that both preceded and occurred concurrently with armed conflict in Ukraine are not a novel approach to warfare, though the term "hybrid warfare" has been newly coined to describe such an approach. The concept is not new; it is more an adaptation of traditional Russian methods to their contemporary political, economic, informational, and technological changes. 
82
79
80 "Little Green Men," 59. 
81
Czuperski et al.,
[4]
[5]
83
84
Another important aspect of Russian UW is its IO capability. As it has rebuilt its military and influence since the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia has learned through its recent international actions how to best utilize its information operations in modern technology for subversive purposes.
Following the Second Chechen War of 1999, Russia recognized the power of the internet and the impact it would have on their traditional information operations. This impact was reinforced in Georgia in 2008, when Russia won militarily but again did not fare well in the information war.
This spurred the creation of the Information Troops, dedicated to manage the information war from within the military. The 2011 protests in Moscow provided the opportunity to practice denying social media as a means for organizing resistance, and was a significant time of learning to use online mass communication for the military. By 2014, Russian information campaigns displayed close coordination of messaging with centralized direction along multiple outlets to target 
83 JOE 2035, 6. 84
85
86
Russia uses information and influence operations to mobilize target populations, specifically those of Russian ethnicity. Russia overtly engages these populations through institutions such as the Government Commission of the Affairs of Compatriots Abroad, or Rossotrudnichestvo, the Federal Agency for Commonwealth of Independent States Affairs, Compatriots Living Abroad, and International Humanitarian Cooperation. More indirectly, information operations waged through social media or government news agencies such as Russia Today also target Russian populations outside the nation. Additionally, the Russian Orthodox Church maintains close ties with compatriots abroad, and through government associations or public declarations of faith by Russian leaders such as Vladimir Putin, offers another medium by which to communicate with them. Finally, Russia manipulates target populations in neighboring states when it uses its economic power over those states to maintain stability or create chaos as needed. 
87
85 Giles,
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
87
Each of the Baltic States has a Russian minority concentrated in specific regions, as well as some that live in their major cities. Estonia has a large population of ethnic Russians at about 24.8 percent of the total population. 
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
US and NATO militaries currently conduct activities to deter future Russian aggression in the Baltic States following the situation in Ukraine. These activities primarily focus on the conventional threat but do acknowledge the efforts required to shape the environment against UW. the European Reassurance Initiative (ERI). 
97
Year 2017
Summary, 114th Cong., 2016, HR 4909, 14. 100
United States conducts military operations to shape the environment through military interactions with the people.
US operations in Eastern Europe aim to deter Russia from further aggression. Applying the SCHBT framework to this area of operations explains the actions of the US military in terms of deterring Russian UW in the Baltic States, and also identifies strengths and opportunities to improve efforts to deter UW. Due to initiation of conventional conflict prior to US and NATO military support in Ukraine, the SCHBT framework for the purposes of deterring UW will not be applied to Ukraine, but instead to the Baltic States where the threat exists but has not crossed the conventional threshold.
In the shape phase, efforts focus on laying the groundwork for future legitimate overt actions, and identifying the potential for future insurgency within the PN population. These efforts include identifying internal opposition (infiltrating if possible) and directing communications to that group as well as to the general population and Russia. IO campaigns directed internally to opposition groups within the Baltic nations has not been researched, but it can be assumed that normal policing provides the consequences of interference in national security. The partnerships and military operations intended to deter Russian conventional conflict communicates a strategic message to the general population as well as Russia, one that reinforces PN military security and alliances and therefore the population's trust in the nation. These actions encourage Russian UW and IO in an attempt to fracture the alliance and the Baltic nations' internal security, but requires more time to counter the allied military presence. Identifying and monitoring the communication of opposition groups, such as those identified in Latvia on social media, allows the Baltic nations to monitor, subvert, contain, and potentially act on these groups. Additional strategic messages to Russia intended to deter conventional conflict include Estonia's district patrol competitions, intended to build and train a resistance force to occupation, communicates national will that doubly exploit in order to fracture each states' security psychological value proposition to the target population and to build discontent or insurgency until Russian intervention is justified.
Eliminating illegal or dangerous opposition within a population, or identified unconventional force make up the activities within the clear phase by denying UW objectives and increase military capacity, it also enables the Baltic nations' military to deter UW by increasing their movement, presence, and interaction among their population.
In the build phase, each state builds popular will internally by maintaining or presenting a superior value proposition among the three lines of effort, functionality, monetarily, and psychologically. Externally, the US military actions in Eastern Europe currently build goodwill between the states and reinforce the trust in the alliance. Enabled by the US military through conventional military resources and additional enablers, the value proposition lines of effort discussed above builds the internal popular will internal to each Baltic State. The Baltic nations currently possess a superior monetary value to the overall domestic population, as the standard of living is higher than what Russia offers. For example, although ethnic Russians in Narva, Estonia, may have legal and other discriminatory grievances against Estonia, they have a higher standard of living than Russians on the other side of the border, and do not want a change in their economic living and options. 
110
111
112
Transitions regarding the situation in the Baltics are internal to US military rotations and the conventional deterrence efforts. At this time no transitions need occur between the United States and the Baltic nations regarding capabilities required to deter UW.
The conventional actions of the US military and Baltic nations display a readiness to deter the conventional threat which enables deterrence of the unconventional threat, but there are many areas for improvement regarding deterrence of UW. For instance, there is a lack of IO that directly addresses Russian UW and the consequences to any opposition group identified as working with UW forces. All US assistance and IO messaging that directly address UW must be made through or by the Baltic nation in order to reduce Russian ability to counter US involvement in these areas. This IO, in combination with a legal framework for the Baltic States to act on such groups or perceived Russian meddling, needs further attention. Although police or national investigations into such opposition groups supported by Russian UW would not be made public until after completion, efforts in these areas can be bolstered by whole of government support from the United States with security assistance programs. US military support of Baltic nations in clearing operations should be based within FID direct and indirect support operations and enabled through cyber, IO, and intelligence. Supporting Baltic nations with enablers such as legal prosecution and intelligence gathering on Russian UW agents, or opposition groups and their exposure in the news deters the population from engaging in further UW actions. ERI verbiage is limited in that it seeks to build partner capacity to defend itself in response to crisis in the region, but not partner capacity to prosecute internal security actions to deny UW objectives, opposition groups and infrastructure, that ultimately deter UW. 
113
Capitalizing on IO internal in each nation by broadcasting the corrections of the perceived wrongs among these populations should sway the sentiment for each population's values in favor of the PN over Russia. Once the will to resist Russia's competing IO efforts is bolstered, the threat of UW in the Baltic States will be deterred.
The unconventional activities of peer nuclear states, such as Russia, operating within thirdparty partner nations, grants Russia ambiguity and legitimacy for escalation to conventional conflict or direct intervention. Russia's shaping of the operational environment in this manner can be deterred by US shaping activities within the human domain. The SCHBT framework presents a better understanding of the factors that enable UW and an operational approach to deterring UW that precedes conventional conflict. Using the framework of SCHBT in the US military's theater shaping operations will allow the US to coerce and influence the internal population and deny the adversary's UW objectives.
Using the SCHBT framework offers many benefits for operational planning and advantages for deterring UW. This framework provides a way to synchronize subordinate actions, prioritize efforts, allocate resources, and direct specific effects to achieve the endstate of UW deterrence. 
114
The SCHBT framework also has many disadvantages and points that can be exploited by the adversary. This approach relies heavily on intelligence and special operations forces and capabilities. In the contemporary Baltic environment, three states would require a spread of limited assets. The adversary or internal opposition groups would counter with accusations of spying on one's own people and thus shaping the national narrative is important. As described above, even successful deterrence wouldn't be able to legally clear all opposition or potential opposition population groups that UW forces could exploit, but that is why the hold and build portions of the framework are critical. Additionally, it may be difficult to focus efforts on targeting vulnerable populations when those populations are typically not consolidated, but dispersed among the entire nation. This dispersion may require more resources. Most critically, this framework could be viewed as discriminatory, thus promoting or inviting adversarial UW forces to create fractures in the PN capacity to control the environment, and is again why shaping and controlling the narrative is critical.
In order to deter UW in future OEs, this monograph recommends adopting a SCHBT framework, with a focus on targeted IO on the external threat and to build the national will among the internal population, limited conflict or strikes, and forward positioning of forces and resources in order to enable the partnered nation to accomplish such actions and IO. Internal IO is not limited to propaganda, but includes the display of consequences, legal and lethal, of opposition to the PN, and enables the building of will to refuse future UW attempts. Limited conflict includes a range of policing actions and border enforcement actions executed by the PN, which the US military can support through FID, cyber, and intelligence and surveillance. To support these actions, the US military needs to forward position necessary resources and forces alongside its conventional deterrence forces. These actions prevent opposition groups from having an opportunity to manifest into insurgencies supported by UW, and allow the PN to accommodate their concerns before those concerns are exploited by adversarial UW forces. Investing in the deterrence of UW may prevent a crisis or fully entrenched insurgency and the future need for costlier conventional response measures. 
115
US European Command, "Operation Atlantic Resolve," 2.
Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), V-9.
Freedman, Deterrence, 84; Jeffrey W. Knopf, The Fourth Wave in Deterrence Research (Monterey, CA: Calhoun Institutional Archive of the Naval Post Graduate School, 2010), 3.
Freedman, Deterrence,  
Joint Publication (JP) 3-05, Special Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), GL-12.
Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-05.1C1, Unconventional Warfare (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 1-2.
Ibid., 1-2 -1-3.
This body of work aims to address the actions of both non-state and state actors in unconventional roles used as shaping efforts by an adversary prior to armed conflict, and will not discuss revolutionary movements and state formation that are insulated from outside support.
Carl Schmitt, Theory of the Partisan (New York: Telos Press Publishing, 1975), 74.
ATP 3-05.1C1, 1-1.
Connell and Evans, 10.    
US Army Special Operations Command, "SOF Support to Political Warfare," white paper,March  10, 2015, 25.    
Freedman, Deterrence, 11.   
Douglas R. Ducharme, "Measuring Strategic Deterrence: A Wargaming Approach," Joint Forces Quarterly 82 (3rd Quarter, 2016): 45.
Stathis N. Kalyvas, The Logic of Violence in Civil War (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 210.
US Department of Defense, "Deterrence Operations," Joint Operating Concept, Version 2.0, December 2006, 5.
Joint Publication (JP) 3-24, Counterinsurgency (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013), V-16.
"Security Cooperation Programs through Fiscal Year 2016," Defense Security Cooperation Agency, accessed December 19, 2016, 153, http://www.disam.dsca.mil/documents/pubs/security_cooperation_programs_160127.pdf.
Ibid., 172.   
Paul Goble, "Beyond Two Percent: How Estonia is Strengthening Its Security and NATO's," Eurasia Daily Monitor 14, no. 21 (February 21, 2017), accessed March 9, 2017, https://jamestown.org/program/beyond-two-percent-estonia-strengthening-security-natos/.
Paul Goble, "Lithuanian Popular Militia Expands to Defend Against Russian Threat," Eurasia Daily Monitor 14, no. 30(March 7, 2017), accessed March 9, 2017, https://jamestown.org/program/lithuanian-popular-militia-expands-defend-russian-threat/; Kramer, "Spooked by Russia."
Goble, "Beyond Two Percent."   
US European Command, "Operation Atlantic Resolve," 2.
 
Watts et al., 2.   
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
deters UW. 
103
Another effort of the shape phase is identifying root causes of existing or possible future opposition for the framework to address. Root problems identified in each of the Baltic nations differ from one to the next, but each contain a population vulnerable to UW, primarily the ethnic Russians and their legal rights. Estonia's concentration of ethnic Russians in the east and loss of jobs in that area allows the potential for inciting the population by UW agents already acting in the area. 
104
105
106
107
106 Barbara F. Walter, "Introduction," in Civil Wars, Insecurity, and Intervention, ed. Barbara F.  Walter and Jack Snyder (New York: Columbia University Press, 1999) 