# ID: 737a8ef5343549ec8a2b369f05e320f0
# Title: Poland: Lone Eagle over Europe
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
The fundamental root cause behind the military defeat of Poland in 1939 is not the result of fighting the combined armies of Germany and the Soviet Union. Rather, the failure is attributed to Poland's political hubris of pursuing its strategic imperatives of independence from Russia and regional dominance with primarily military means. This monograph demonstrates how Poland attempted to achieve its strategic imperatives between 1764 and 1939. By using the diplomacy, information, military, and the economy (DIME) methodology as an instrument of analysis, the historical record reveals that Poland was a militaristic state that followed French military theory and doctrine. However, for a brief period in a war with the Russians, a unique Polish theory and doctrine emerged. There is evidence that Poland used operational art as an approach to defeat the Russians in an unexpected fashion. Unfortunately, due to insufficient means to support the military, the Poles endeared themselves to the French during the interwar period and abandoned their emergent operational art in favor of an obsolete and ineffective French tradition. The implications for readers are clear. Strategic imperatives shaped by the political authority of a nation directly impact the development and use of a nation's military. Further, military forces must remain prepared to conduct operations with limited resources within an environment of complex political aims.
"There is an aspect of military science which needs to be studied above all others in the Armed Forces: the capacity to adapt oneself to the utterly unpredictable, the entirely unknown."
-Sir Michael Howard
1
The military defeat of Poland in 1939 was a miscalculated tragedy that led to Poland's demise as a sovereign nation. The cause of the tragedy spans back three centuries to the reign of King Stanislaw Augustus Poniatowski in 1764. 
2
The model used to analyze the historical development and use of Poland's military to achieve Poland's strategic imperative is diplomacy, information, military, and economic (DIME).
The model serves as the instrument for analyzing the linkage between the military and the strategic imperatives across four time-periods in Poland's history from 1764 to 1939. The specific time-periods are: (1) 1764-1918, The partitions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth to the Second Polish Republic, (2) 1918-1926, The Treaty of Riga to Jozef Pilsudski's coup, (3) Pilsudski's coup to Pilsudski's death, (4) The rise of the Nazi war machine to Poland's military failure.
The analysis of each time-period begins with an introduction of the Polish strategic environment, vis-à-vis Europe, and then systematically highlights the diplomatic, information, military, and economic means available to Poland. Each time-period concludes that Poland never abandoned its strategic imperatives, despite limited resources and allies. The approach of introducing the strategic environment and highlighting means during each time-period provides a cohesive and logical structure in tracing the development and use of the Polish military across three centuries.
The last section, or conclusion, sums up the analysis from each time-period, provides additional points to ponder in understanding Poland's military defeat in 1939, and ultimately explains how strategic imperatives shape a military and affect its use. The DIME model also served as the criteria for selecting the literary sources used in writing this monograph.
The selected literature contained a broad array of primary, secondary, internet, journal, and scholarly sources. Drawing from such a broad pool of sources ensured a holistic understanding of how the military served to pursue Poland's strategic imperatives across three centuries. The literary sources were grouped into Polish diplomatic, information, military, and economic categories. Contained within each category are purely Polish historical sources and narratives that describe Poland's relationship with its European neighbors. The principal historical sources provided context for applying the DIME model.
The sources within the diplomatic category established the Polish strategic imperatives and described the Polish internal and external political environment between 1764 and 1939. Of the multitude of diplomatic sources, Norman Davies, Oscar Halecki, Richard Overy, Richard   Watt, and Adam Zamoyski definitively articulated the Polish strategic imperatives and provided continuity of the pursuit of those imperatives. 
3
The literary material bounding the information category argued the internal and external Polish political situation throughout history and how the strategic imperatives resonated with the Polish people and their European neighbors. Specifically, works by Bohdan Budurowycz, Todd Fisher, Grace Humphrey, Lonnie Johnson, and Ferdynand Zweig gave a comprehensive overview of the arguments related to the Polish political situation and its relationship with diplomacy, the development and use of military force, and economics. 
4
5
The approximately one hundred and fifty years of Polish history from the partition of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth to the end of the First World War illustrated some of the darkest days in the nation's history. 
7
Moreover, it demonstrates Poland's inability to leverage diplomatic, information, and economic means in order to complement military force in achieving its strategic imperatives. As a consequence of the Polish passion for independence and regional dominance, the strategic imperative never waned and is pursued with military force, regardless if the means existed.
Consequently, when Poland emerged as a new nation after the First World War, the Poles found themselves in border conflicts with Germany and at war with Russia.
6 Robert Machray, Poland 1914-1931    Despite existing between two powerful empires, Poniatowski planned to place the Commonwealth at the center of power within Eastern Europe. As a template for the future, he examined the Jagiellon dynasty of the sixteenth century, known as a period referred to as the Commonwealth's Golden Age, and found military dominance allowed the Jagiellon monarchs to amass territory and control one-third of the European mainland (see Figure 
2
10
11
In contrast, Russia and Prussia possessed mutually supporting incentives to maintain a long-standing partnership against Poland. Unknown to Poniatowski, Frederick and Catherine had designs on ensuring a weakened Commonwealth existed between their two empires. In the pursuit of their strategic imperatives, Frederick desired consolidation of West and East Prussia and Catherine's attention focused on expelling the Turks from Russia. 
16
Poniatowski's diplomatic failure coincided within his shortcomings within the information realm. His inability to shape the discourse of his strategic message throughout Europe proved equally flawed within the Commonwealth's political body. Within Poland, the practice of forming political factions within a patronage system formed the basis for political power and Poniatowski threated to change that framework. Moreover, nobles dominated the Parliament and maintained private armies to secure their private estates and economic holdings.
17
The mere thought of creating an Army of the Republic posed an unnecessary risk to the nobility's resources. Additionally, an army capable of challenging Russia would sever connections between the Commonwealth's nobility and Russian patrons.
Poniatowski engaged in an information campaign that sought sweeping constitutional reforms aimed at curtailing corruption and instituting social change that his opponents resisted.
By the late 1760s, the Parliament became paralyzed and inundated with Russian bribes.
Poniatowski persisted and engaged the nobility and the Polish people on a strategic message aimed at demonstrating that Russian influence and corruption were eroding the Commonwealth.
In response to Poniatowski's narrative, Catherine the Great sought to assume greater control over the Commonwealth by conducting a counter-information campaign.  As the academies focused on developing cavalry tactics, there was an effort to defend the Commonwealth by constructing fortresses. Specifically, Jan Bakatowicz's defensive military theory and doctrine, borrowed from French theorist Sebastian le Prestre de Vauban, emphasized the construction or improvement a fortifications along key terrain within the realm. Consequently, the capital city of Warsaw, the Commonwealth's shared border with Russia, and major river systems received significant upgrades to their defensive posture. 
29
30
3
35
48
Only after Pilsudski surrendered political authority to a successor did Poland begin a path toward rapid social and economic decline. This decline prompted Pilsudski to stage a coup. In what later evolved into the Polish-Russian War, The Poles and Russians engaged in a conflict Winston Churchill described as a struggle to prevent the spread of communism.  In order to seize Vilna, Pilsudski incorporated surprise and deception into his tactics.
Surprise and deception are highlighted within Jomini's Art of War as effective tactics for cavalry, but the effects the Poles achieved with these tactics are more akin to 
Clausewitz. 63
5
Pilsudski's decision to use an indirect approach fits neatly with Clausewitz's discussion of the destruction of enemy forces. In seeking to destroy enemy forces, Clausewitz pointed out that one might choose a direct or indirect approach. 
72
73
71
72
73
indirect approach of seizing the Ukraine for political and military reasons supported Clausewitz's assertions.
On May 8, the Poles besieged Kiev and drove Yegorov's Army from the city within days and back to the Dnieper River. 
74
After Kiev, both armies reorganized and resupplied until June. Pilsudski went back to Warsaw in order to reconsider the strategic and operational problem to develop additional political and military options. There were concerns that the Russians in the Ukraine were not destroyed and too much of the Polish Army was dedicated toward defending the South and no longer available to fight Tukhachevsky. 
76
77
As feared, the Russians were far from defeated and took the initiative by conducting a counter-attack. In early June, the Polish Air Service spotted the First Cavalry Army under the    By 1924, it appeared the national budget was balanced and developing into a surplus.
However, these estimates were based on projections of a positive farming season that turned disastrous by the end of the year. In November 1925, amid ongoing trade disputes with Germany 85 
Roman Debicki, Foreign Policy of Poland, 1919
-1939 (New York: Praeger), 38, 260-262;
and
, Richard M. Watt, Bitter Glory, Poland and
its Fate 1918 to 1939 (New York: Simon and
Schuster), 197. 86
The Polish strategic imperative in the mid 1920s maintained the focus on establishing regional dominance, but those in Pilsudski's inner circle understood such an imperative required a holistic approach using all aspects of DIME. The specific tasks for Poland were to repair its fractured political framework, shift its reputation from an individualistic militarist state to one willing to participate in the broader interests of Europe, and to build the economy. Meanwhile, The use of DIME between 1926-1935: Pilsudski's Coup to Pilsudski's Death
In the diplomatic and information realm, Pilsudski projected a narrative of being surrounded by enemies and Western Europe was responsible for Poland's fragile security situation by not clearly defining its borders after the First World War. 
94
Moreover, despite French sponsorship, Poland was not a major power in dictating the course of broader European security affairs because of its isolation in Europe, weak economy, and militaristic reputation. Therefore, when the League of Nations advocated for a softening of economic constraints toward Germany in 1925, Poland had no choice but to support measures, such as the Locarno Pact, in order to keep investments and military assistance flowing. 
95
The Locarno Pact's purpose was to thwart communist expansion, normalize relations with Germany, and achieve post-war territorial settlements with new nations created after the First World War. 
96
94
As mentioned, the Locarno Pact also attempted to achieve post-war territorial settlements with new nations after the First World War. With respect to the question of the German-Polish border and access to the sea and port city of Danzig, the Pact required Germany and Poland to allow a League of Nations tribunal to arbitrate disputes. 
97
98
106
As the Poles trained in the French tradition, they believed that while Germany was contained under the constraints of the Treaty of Versailles, and the Rhineland occupied, most of the war planning should focus on repelling a Soviet invasion. Military planners realized fighting the communists proved a difficult operational and tactical problem to solve due to limited logistics, mechanization, and the presence of restricted terrain across the Eastern frontier. To repel the Soviets, the Poles developed the East Plan, or referred to as Plan Wschod.
The East Plan's operational approach was to initially delay or disrupt the committed within a month of hostilities. Moreover, the plan assumed the Soviets would attempt to converge on Warsaw, the operational center of gravity, as demonstrated in 1920. 
107
108
109
Lack of mobility led to a semi-fixed defensive force that that tried to hold a long defensive perimeter, concentrated in regions, while it relied on cavalry to conduct offensive operations. 110 However, cavalry proved unable to strike at the Soviet operational reserve conceptualized under their emerging deep operations theory. In deep operations theory, the communists realized their source of military strength was dependent on a second wave of operational forces that could exploit a breakthrough in the Polish defensive lines and continue a swift attack to Warsaw via mobility and offensive firepower. 
111
112
The disparity between the rail systems in the eastern half of Poland and the time it took to push supplies from the ports and Warsaw contributed to the logistical shortfall. Lack of improved rail and roads also negatively affected the ability to command and control multiple divisions across hundreds of miles. Since very few rail networks and roads existed to support the resupply of an army exceeding twenty divisions in Eastern Poland, the Army relied on horse-drawn logistics. Without access to timely resupply and in the amounts required, Plan East risked early culmination by military forces. 
113
France. Thus, Poland turned to its neighbors in Central and Eastern Europe and forged separate non-aggression pacts with Germany and Russia. Poland also gained Romania as a military ally.
The non-aggression pacts led to temporary peace that would have granted time to build a stronger military and industrial economy, but the Great Depression shattered Poland's ability to achieve its strategic imperative during Pilsudski's final years. With a ravaged economy and an obsolete military, Poland began to perceive Germany as the existential threat to its sovereignty.
Thus, the country hastily attempted to strengthen its military forces using an obsolete defensive theory and doctrine and would do so without its military leader. In 1935, Jozef Pilsudski died and his successors struggled to govern in the wake of his legacy.  Diplomatically, Poland stated they would stand up to Hitler alone, if necessary, and appealed to Western Europe to aid in their struggle against a perceived infringement upon their sovereignty. 
125
According to Sir Edmond Ironside, a British general visiting Poland, he remarked that Poland had full confidence in its military to defeat the Germans. In fact, with the victory over the Russians in 1920 still fresh in their minds, the Ironside remarked that the Poles possessed a mad spirit of optimism and harbored no thoughts of diplomatically resolving their problems with the Germans. 
126
127
Outside of some early planning efforts against the Germans in the 1920s, the Poles never considered war with Germany a real possibility. Most of their war planning efforts had focused on the Russians. However, rather than consider simply the Russians, or the Germans, the Polish High Command needed to develop a plan to fight a two-front war against both nations. While the benefit of historical hindsight makes this assertion seem an obvious statement, and perhaps an unfair judgment, a two-front war always represented the worse case scenario and had occurred at least three times in Poland's relatively recent history. Each infantry division was organized under regional armies and consisted of separate artillery and cavalry units. The army continued to employ the French 75mm artillery cannon as its mainstay defensive firepower weapon. The cavalry battalions functioned as dismounted infantry units and were equipped with anti-tank weapons. For armor, the Poles had replaced many of the outdated Renault FT-17s with the Polish built TK-3 and TKS tankettes, and the 7TP light tank.
However, none of the armor was utilized for separate offensive maneuvers. In addition to ground forces, Plan West contained air force and naval capabilities. 
134
135
134
144
The events that unfolded between September 1 and October 6, 1939, formed the opening chapter of the Second World War. In a brilliant display of maneuver warfare and combined arms,  
This monograph made the assertion that Poland's demise in 1939 was a result of pursuing centuries-old strategic imperatives of independence from Russia and regional dominance. 
150
By understanding the militant nature of the Poles, the answer to the primary research question became apparent. Poland's enduring strategic imperatives shaped its military and determined its use in1939 by requiring the military to adopt French military theory and doctrine while constantly being placed in a position of reacting to Poland's political authority without allies, control of the international discourse, or economic means to sustain modern forces. With this insight, readers have a better understanding of how strategic imperatives may shape and determine a nation's ways and means.
Analysis of the military and its role between the eighteenth and twentieth centuries revealed an interesting and unexpected finding. The author assumed that the lack of Ultimately, Poland's military failure to defend the nation in 1939 is not attributed to a single military campaign, but more to a consistent historical miscalculation of the strategic environment and an enduring unwillingness to abstain from seeking regional dominance without sufficient means. Yet, this understanding does not detract from the commendable Polish plight.
After a brief examination of the current Polish State, it appears pursuing strategic imperatives with mostly a military approach is over.
With respect to recommendations for further research, many potential opportunities exist.
Perhaps the most advantageous is to continue the story of the evolution of the Polish military in the context of the Polish strategic imperatives from 1939 until the fall of communism. Examining this period will provide answers into how Poland managed to change and adopt a more holistic approach of using all of its instruments of national power.
Currently, Poland is a member of the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, a major military contributor to the former Global War on Terror, and boasts an industrial-based economy. Unlike the Great Depression, its economy survived the global economic crisis in 2009 and its economy continues to expand. With a more holistic approach toward its strategic imperatives, Poland is now considered a valuable European ally by its neighbors and the United States. More importantly, it offers many strategic incentives for gaining and maintaining partnerships with other nations. For the first time in centuries, Poland has the means to pursue its strategic imperatives.
monarch and other nobles supporting the exclusiveness of Catholic civil liberties, anti-Russian sentiments, and a desire to undo Catherine's influence on the constitution. 21 Concerned over Poniatowski's kowtowing to Catherine's demands, the disenfranchised formed the Confederation of Radom, or Bar Confederation, in 1767.
monarch and other nobles supporting the exclusiveness of Catholic civil liberties, anti-Russian sentiments, and a desire to undo Catherine's influence on the constitution. 21 Concerned over Poniatowski's kowtowing to Catherine's demands, the disenfranchised formed the Confederation of Radom, or Bar Confederation, in 1767.
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 204. 34 Ibid., 204-206. 35 Ibid., 126-129. 36 U.S. Library of Congress, "The Third Partition of Poland, 1795" http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/poland/pl01_03c.pdf (accessed January 5, 2012).
46 David. G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon (New York: MacMillan Publishing Company), 1009.
46 David. G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon (New York: MacMillan Publishing Company), 1009.
57  
57  
62  
62  
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2491662
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2491662
74  
74  
91  
91  
135  
135  
Lacquement, Richard. "In the Army Now." The American Interest, http://www.the-americaninterest.com/article.cfm?piece=860 (accessed September 12
, 2011). 2 W. Alison Phillips, Poland (New York: Henry Hold and Company), 66.
Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, 1795 to the Present (New York: Columbia University Press), 268; Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 193; Richard
W.Alison Phillips, Poland (New York: Henry Hold and Company), 66-70; and, Adam Zamoyski, The Polish Way, A Thousand Year History of the Poles and their Culture (New York: Hippocrene Books), 225.
U.S. Library of Congress, "The First Partition of Poland, 1772" http://memory.loc.gov/frd/cs/poland/pl01_03a.pdf (accessed January 5, 2012).
Adam Zamoyski, The Polish Way, A Thousand Year History of the Poles and their Culture (New York: Hippocrene Books), 50.
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 193.
U.S. Library of Congress, "The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth from the Union of Lublin, 1569 to 1667" http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?frd/cstdy:@field (DOCID+pl0019 (accessed March 5, 2012).
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 193.   
Lonnie Johnson, Central Europe: Enemies, Neighbors, and Friends (Oxford:  Oxford University Press), 128.
Norman Davies, Heart of Europe: A Short History of Poland (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 251.
W.Alison Phillips, Poland (New York: Henry Hold and Company), 65.   
Norman Davies, Heart of Europe: A Short History of Poland (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 307.
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers),
196-205.   
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland, 196, 254; W. Alison Phillips, Poland (New York: Henry Hold and  Company),[64][65][66][67][68][69] Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland, 196.   
Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, 1795  to the Present (New York: Columbia University Press), 268.
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 193.   
Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, 1795  to the Present (New York: Columbia University Press), 268.
Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, 1795  to the Present (New York: Columbia University Press), 267-270.
Lonnie Johnson, Central Europe: Enemies, Neighbors, and Friends (Oxford:  Oxford University Press), 128.
Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, 1795  to the Present (New York: Columbia University Press), 269.
James Fletcher, The History of Poland from the Earliest Period to the Present Time (New York: Harper and Brothers), 256.
David. G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon (New York: MacMillan Publishing Company), 514,1092; and, Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 739.
U.S. Library of Congress, "Duchy of Warsaw, 1807-13, and Congress Poland, 1815" http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/poland/pl01_04a.pdf (accessed January 5, 2012).
Roman Debicki, Foreign Policy of Poland, 1919-1939 (New York: Praeger), 6.   
Michael Krupinsky, "The Polish Army in France, World War I." Haller's Army. http://www.hallersarmy.com/ (accessed January 12, 2012).
Yale Law School, "The Versailles Treaty, June 28, 1919," (Yale Law School Website, 2011), http://avalon.law.yale.edu/imt/partiii.asp (accessed November 13, 2011).
Roman Debicki, Foreign Policy of Poland, 1919-1939 (New York: Praeger), 18.   
Richard M.Watt, Bitter Glory, Poland and its Fate 1918 to 1939 (New York: Simon and Schuster), 116; and, Viscount D'Abernon, The Eighteenth Decisive Battle of the World (London: Hodder and Stoughton),
Ferdynand Zweig, Poland Between Two Wars (London: Secker and Warburg), 47.   
Grace Humphrey, Pilsudski: Builder of Poland (New York, Scott and More), 250   
Ferdynand Zweig, Poland Between Two Wars (London: Secker and Warburg),[47][48] 
Ibid., 47.   
Joseph Miranda, "The Rhineland War: What if World War II Started in 1936?" World at War, January 2011, 6-8; John Keegan, The Second World War (New York: Penguin Books), 36-41.
Joseph Miranda, "The Rhineland War: What is World War II Started in 1936?" World at War, January 2011, 7.
Mathew Cooper, The German Army, 1933-1945 (Lanham: Scarborough House Publishers), 107.
The Avalon Project, Munich Pact, September 29, 1938, http://avalon.law.yale.edu/imt/munich1.asp (accessed January 10, 2012).
Richard Overy, 1939, Countdown to War (New York: Viking), 15.   
Ibid.,[12][13][14][15][16] 
Samuel L.Sharp, Poland. White Eagle on a Red Field (Cambridge: Harvard University Press), 148; and,  David Williamson, Poland Betrayed, The Nazi-Soviet Invasions of 1939 (Mechanicsburg, Stackpole  Books), 48; and, Grace Humphrey, Pilsudski (New York: Scott and More), 264; Gaynor Johnson, Locarno  Revisited, European Diplomacy, 1920-1929 (New York: Routledge), 90.
Joseph Miranda, "The Rhineland War: What if World War II Started in 1936?," World at War,  December 2011, 6.   
David Williamson, Poland Betrayed. The Nazi-Soviet Invasions of 1939 (Mechanicsburg: Stackpole  Books), 48.
Norman Davis, God's Playground, a History of Poland. 1795  to the Present (New York: Columbia University Press), 430.
Ibid.,[430][431][432][433] 
Richard Overy, 1939.
Steven Zaloga, The Polish Army, 1939-1945 (Oxford: Osprey Publishing), 8.
Ibid., 10.   
Oscar Halecki, A History of Poland (New York: Roy Publishers), 320-322.
Chancellery in 1933, Hitler withdrew Germany from the League of Nations and announced the re-armament of the military. 
101
Sensing war-weariness and lacking the diplomatic and economic means to oppose him, Hitler tested Europe's resolve in upholding German obligations under the Treaty of Versailles. In a counterblow to the Locarno Pact, Hitler sought to build a Central and Eastern Europe alliance to challenge Western Europe. Moreover, like Napoleon, Hitler viewed an alliance with Poland as a matter of convenience. Pacifying Poland in the short term allowed Hitler to obtain political concessions from Western Europe without the fear of an attack. Thus, Germany's political discourse in Poland culminated in the signing of a German-Polish Non-Aggression Pact in 1934. 
102
103
After defeating the Russians in the early 1920s, Poland's military embraced the principles established by Ferdinand Foch's victorious French army from the First World War. 
104
101 Peter Paret, Makers of Modern Strategy, from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton, Princeton University Press), 491-493. 102 Adam Zamoyski, The Polish Way, a Thousand Year History of the Poles and their Culture (New York: Hippocrene Books), 354. 103 Roman Debicki, Foreign Policy of Poland, 1919-1939 (New York: Frederick A. Praeger) counter air against the Messerschmitt Bf-110 fighter-bomber and fielded German forces. 
136
The Navy also operated as a separate force with separate tactical objectives.
The Polish Navy had two major components. The first, the Riverine Flotilla, was a river force composed of gunboats that protected major river systems and the Pripyet Marsh region along the Eastern Frontier. The principle utility behind the gunboats was to augment the infantry against the Soviets and to provide logistical supplies to areas deemed impassable by rail or road.
The second component, based in Gdynia, was the blue-water navy. The main force consisted of destroyers, submarines, and several minesweepers supported by coastal defense batteries.
Unfortunately, the navy provided no operational or tactical advantage. Its close proximity to Danzig by a mere 20 miles kept it under constant fire by the Germans and easily within range of the Luftwaffe. Hence, the Navy was more suited toward operating in the Baltic in order to protect shipping, but operating in the open water put the Navy at risk from the combined fleets of Germany and the Soviet Union. 
137
Therefore, the High Command preferred a defense concentrated in Central Poland that arrayed 136 David Stone, Hitler's Army, the Men, Machines, and Organization 1939-1945 (Minneapolis: Zenith  Press), 272. 137 Polish Navy Portal, 1939-1947, Polish Navy Homepage, http://www.polishnavy.pl/PMW/history/index_03.html (accessed November 14, 2011); Michael 
Peszke, Poland's Navy, 1918
-1945, (New York: Hippocrene Books), 33,202. 138
forces along a series of defensive regions that were designed to absorb the opening German offensive thrusts, protect Warsaw, and provide time for mobilization. 
139
The Polish government preferred delivering a decisive military blow to the Germans and denying them Danzig and the Polish Corridor. However, the military lacked the means to fully mobilize and maneuver to meet the opposition before Germany seized key terrain. 
140
141
In addition to organizing the army within regions, the High Command assumed the cavalry could achieve operational reach and tempo in order to achieve limited objectives related to disrupting German lines of communication. 
142
143