# ID: 73a8c8fc98d948dcb20df0243708e489
# Title: Russia's Active Measures in an Era of Great Power Competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
Over the last three decades, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), now Russian Federation, has transitioned from a communist totalitarian regime to an anocracy with an authoritarian ruler unencumbered by ideology. Russia's modern authoritarian regime has successfully managed the elements of national power to become a peer competitor of the United
States. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia has been cautious about entering into direct conflict with great powers such as the United States. Therefore, Russia sought other means to gain asymmetric advantages during their rise in status to a great power competitor. Russia's approach to gaining an asymmetric advantage is heavily reliant on a critical capability that has roots within Soviet history, with the distinguishing characteristics relating to ideology, technology, and the ability to more succinctly orchestrate activity across the elements of national power. The modern Russian authoritarian regime has been more successful than the communist regime of the Soviet Union at managing the elements of national power within the great power competition by increasing its emphasis on active measures as a critical capability.
Active Measures are a doctrinal concept of managing information to gain an advantage by surprise or deception. This information can be verbal, written, oral, or even physical movements in which the visual action supports deceptive information, such as troop movements or concentrations to deceive the enemy from the meaningful strategic maneuvering. Russia has maintained a focus on surprise, deception, and manipulation in order to identify and capitalize on enemy vulnerabilities. These concepts of managing perceptions to gain an advantage by surprise or deception were known to them doctrinally as active measures and 'Maskirovka'.
Active measures throughout Russia's history have been a critical capability employed from the tactical through the strategic level. The used of active measures within the KGB demonstrates how critical and widely this strategy has been to Russia. Active measures, according to Major General Oleg Kalugin, former KGB, were "the heart and soul of soviet intelligence." 
1
2
3
4
While this paper is intended to highlight the continuation of active measures in modern Russia, it is significant to highlight that the comparisons do not perfectly mirror the past.
Distinctions between historic and modern active measure include the obvious modernization of technology that Russia can leverage, but more significantly the changes in the global climate that has been led by China and Russia. The Soviet Union was often competing internally and internationally with the ideology of Communism. This ideology would restrict the maneuverability of active measures for fear of being hypocritical to the communist image.
One of Vladimir Putin's top aides and political advisor developed a Russian version of "guided democracy" known as "sovereign democracy." 5 By claiming to be a sovereign democracy, Putin proclaimed to the world that his sovereign country was in fact democratic and that any attempt by an outside sovereign to validate the Russian democracy would be an offense taken upon Russia's domestic affairs. 
6
7
9
The United States has been unable to maintain a position of advantage over the USSR following World War II, or Russia following the collapse of the USSR, when considering DIME as the principle metrics for analyzing national power.  
Despite the alliance between the Soviet Union and the United States during World War II, the events that unfolded after the allied victory reignited a distrust between the two powers creating a significant long-term diplomatic impact. The post war negotiations created the greatest distrust and tension between the Soviet Union and Western aligned powers. After the Allies, to include the Soviet Union, won World War II, the United States was left with the strongest economy and military. The United States used its position of economic, military, and nuclear strength as leverage throughout the diplomatic negotiations post World War II.
11
The aftermath of World War II found the Soviet Union in a juxtaposed position of strength and weakness. Diplomatically speaking, across the globe if not amongst the waring allies, the Soviet Union found itself with broader legitimacy in that the "Stalinist System survived the test" and gave the Communist regime broader legitimacy. 
12
13
and extend its influence into northern Iran, the Turkish Straits, and the Mediterranean. 
14
15
16
17
18
An 'active measure' employed by the Soviets in response to challenging negotiations during post-war negotiations was a renewed effort of Stalin's 'popular front strategy' that facilitated communist influence masked by a front of democracy and free market. 
19
29
Ambassador said the number one question received was "What about America's treatment of the Negro." 
30
31
34
Following the fall of the Soviet Union the first active measures in Russia were failures that took place at the onset of The First Chechen War, under the leadership of Boris Yeltsin.
What led to the war was Boris Yeltsin's efforts to prevent Chechnya from becoming an independent country. Yeltsin's attempts at diplomacy were proving ineffective, so fifteen days before the main invasion, dozens of tanks and armored personnel carriers poured into Chechnya, in what was presented as a push by Chechen opposition groups to topple Mr. Dudayev. The attack fit into a Russian narrativerepeated today in eastern Ukrainethat Moscow was simply a bystander in a local conflict." 35 Russia's active measure was quickly countered "when Chechen fighters halted the advance, captured tank crews, revealed them to be Russian, and paraded them before Russian and foreign journalists," 
36
The failures of the First Chechen War, were a key factor that led to the political fall of Boris Yeltsin and the rise of Vladimir Putin 37 , whom vowed to avenge the embarrassment brought on by war the and liberal alignment of the 1990s. 
38
40
Authoritarian governments have a significant advantage over the United States, in the sense that their leadership can implement a long-term, whole of government strategy supervised by lifelong leaders, whereas the United States' geo-political and domestic strategies can change with every election. This authoritarian government coupled with authoritarian managed capitalism has enabled Russia to pull itself out of the trenches of Soviet collapse, and rise to the status of a peer competitor with the ability to influence the United States in all aspects of national power. 
41
Today, active measures are interwoven across all elements of national power, but what is most important to underscore is how they are orchestrated by the authoritarian regime to be mutually supporting. The authoritarian regime's emphasis and ability to orchestrate the critical 
39
40
48
51
52
weaknesses through the use of diplomacy in modern times, to limit or negate the influence of the United States.
One of Russia's greatest strengths and greatest weaknesses impacting its diplomacy is the country's geographical location. Russia's geographic location is diplomatically significant because "Russia's unique geopolitical position links it with most of the important regions of the eastern hemisphere, including Western, Central, Eastern and Southern Europe, the oil-rich Middle East, resource-rich central Asia and the Vast Asia-Pacific markets." 53 Russia's geographic location and the way in which that location impacts its management of DIME is significant when understanding Russia's waring past and historic threats. These threats range from Western Europe, Northeast Asia, and NATO as well as their recent engagements in Afghanistan, Ukraine, Crimea, and Syria. These geographic and geopolitical relationships are also significant in that Russia is essentially a "bridge-state" 54 that may now serve as a medium for trade, cultures, and diplomacy. Russia has recognized its geopolitical position and climbed to a position of power and leverage through its geographical location and geopolitical partnerships.
Recognizing the countries within the European Union and NATO as its most immediate threat, considering location, and most reoccurring threat considering history, Russia began forging partnerships with the most powerful among the EU. Toward the end of the twentiethcentury Russia developed "privileged relations with Germany and France as a way of integrating into the EU and eventually creating a new balance of power," and at the turn of the century under President Putin's leadership, "Britain was added to Russia's privileged partners." 55 Much of these privileged partnerships stem from the trade of Russia's natural gas and resources, which 
53
54
55
provide Russia with significant economic influence, thereby diplomatic influence. These strategic diplomatic relationships have given Russia leverage through diplomacy, as seen through its survival through economic sanctions and involvement in NATO at the turn of the century.
Despite the fact that NATO was not publicly supported in Russia, "Russian interests in cooperation with NATO was and is based on economic, political, and military considerations. States is by giving in areas that cost them little, such as supporting the fight against terrorism specific to Afghanistan, while still aligning with U.S. adversaries for geopolitical and geoeconomic advantages with countries such as China, North Korea, Cuba, Venezuela, Iran, Iraq, or Syria. 
56
57
These perplexing relationships that are ongoing with Russia today, should not be a surprise when considering how the U.S.-Russia relationship was strengthening in September 2001, only to have the "Russian Duma express full support for the decision of Russia's militarypolitical leadership to renew military-technical cooperation with Iran," despite the United States recently "criticizing Iran and calling it a country of terrorist." 58 Much of these complex Russian relationships are orchestrated by Russia's ability to fully integrate DIME and make declarations that gain their people's support while limiting the impact of foreign powers through the Duma's political statements, diplomatic relationships, or information operations that support their longterm strategy.
Russia understands that gaining an asymmetric advantage through information operations is not always a predictable endeavor. Distinguishing factors in the way Russia attempts to approach this domain is the way they attempt to gain asymmetric advantage by leveraging significant technology, infrastructure, and manpower, to developing and manipulating information and disinformation. One cannot predict how an adversary will respond to information. However, as there are actions and reactions, there are position changes in the operational environment, and sometimes these changes are occurring without the opponent understanding that they have entered into the conflict. Once the information operations have positioned the opponent in such a manner that Russia has the asymmetric advantage, the enemy may have found themselves in such a vulnerable state they cannot contest. The use of active measures within the information domain allows Russia to maneuver its opponent without force, and "the player on the losing end knows that he or she will lose, perhaps in a finite number of 58 H. moves. That is the essence of having the most advantageous position and winning without fighting." 
59
60
61
62
63
Russia has increasingly leveraged organized crime and individuals with pending criminal charges that Russia would blackmail, in exchange for their participation as tacticians within Russia's information operations. This increase is exemplified by the fact that "Putin's Russia appears to have put substantial effort into developing cadres of state hackers, often co-opted from the ranks of the criminal underground," and according to "Fireye cyber threat analyst What is more significant than the use of non-government actors was the unified messaging throughout the authoritarian regime, and the managing of all elements of power that enabled the tacticians to meet their cyber-information objectives. These objectives were achieved due to the tailored disinformation messages that the political elites effectively communicated to a diverse demographic of interested listeners. While Russia provided disinformation regarding its involvement of the attacks on Estonia, and "although the attacks on Estonia cannot be positively attributed to Russian state actors, their timing, and the effects they generated, suggested they were part of a larger, coordinated information operations campaign by the Kremlin employing multiple tools of influence." 67 Russia's future endeavors will show a significant pattern of political deniability for the sake of achieving foreign and domestic support or providing disinformation until achieving a position of asymmetric advantage.
Estonia should be viewed as a proof-of-concept that is seen employed upon other border states when considering "the context of the Federation's long-term objectives of preserving its influence in its near abroad and safeguarding the interests of Russian minority populations along its borders." 68 Although the cyber-attacks did not result in tangible gains for Russia, it did highlight the advantage of leveraging technology for the employment of active measures in that it allowed Russia to maneuver in multiple domains, without physical presence until creating an exploitable gap. Information Operations through technology and diplomacy, have allowed 
66
67
68
Russia to gain leverage and conduct maneuver warfare, without the violence typically associated with the nature of war.
Russian information and disinformation campaigns serve the purpose of support In 2014, Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 was downed, and the world speculated that Russia was responsible. 69 However, numerous researchers indicate that Russia's ability to conduct timely and targeted messaging through cyber and diplomatic channels, as well as its use of intimidation methods from associate groups connected with the government, allowed it to convince 97% of its population it was not involved. Russia produced enough illegitimate reporting or disinformation that outside authorities were unwilling to pursue holding Russia accountable. 
70
71
72
77
78
When the UN urged Russia to remove forces from the Crimea in 2018, 
79
The advantage of Russian active measures in the technology age is that Russia can maneuver within all domains with more rapidity, creating more gaps to exploit, in order to achieve an endstate without the conventional employment of military forces. However, Russia has been very successful at integrating diplomacy and information operations to support its military forces, even while denying its activity, which is why it has subscribed to Non-Linear Warfare and the conduct of non-military operations with a ratio of 4:1. 80
Russia's support of its military through information operations may appear to be a new tactic developed to support the actions in Crimea, Ukraine, and Syria; however, it directly correlates to Soviet active measures used in the past. This has been an incredibly effective approach to sustaining power and influence for a country that has undergone massive swings in political influence and reform, economic status, and military strength and status. Special Report expanded and has even incorporated the rival countries of India and Pakistan in their large scale military exercises that are aimed at "protecting the strategic Central Asia region." 
83
84
Russia's invasion of Georgia, a pro-western state that provided troop support to the United States post 9/11 and was seeking NATO membership, was a direct representation of an active measure taken by Russia to maintain buffer space and discredit NATO along with the United States. 
86
Although they had the clear military advantage, it was the political and diplomatic environment that Russia capitalized on. Russia insisted that had Georgia had not attacked South Ossetia, that Russia would not have invaded Georgia, and that Moscow was not preparing for such an invasion; however, according to Russian military sources, "for months or longer, Moscow was mobilizing forces as well as moving heavy equipment and munitions into forward position." 87
The invasion of Georgia served multiple purposes for Russia. For one, it allowed the conventional forces to exercise their forces and gain pride and confidence after they were an organization of such little expectation less than a decade earlier. It also prevented Georgia from becoming a NATO member. Ten years after the 2008 war, Russia continues to emphasize that "NATO is encroaching on and surrounding Russia; and if Georgia becomes a member, this could provoke a terrible conflict." 88 Arguably the most significant result of the invasion is that it highlighted concerns of the legitimacy of partnerships with western powers, and as Mark Galeotti highlights, "no one was willing to go to war for Georgia." 89 In today's diplomatic environment, the lack of western response to Russia's actions discredits the United States and the legitimacy of their partnership. These military actions create significant messaging for Russia and their allies, to maintain their status within great power competition. Putin's use of these privatized contractors, in conjunction with information operations and diplomacy, are consistent with an active measures strategy.
Russia's involvement in Crimea and Ukraine are modern day examples of Russian active measures. Russia has learned from its cyber and diplomatic efforts in Estonia, as well as Russia's military efforts and shortfalls in Georgia. Russia successfully utilized all elements of national power with a more apparent emphasis on leveraging special operations and privatized military contractors to gain further advantage in the information realm, and to balance their military weaknesses. Russia denied their actions in Crimea and Ukraine early on; however, "in both cases, Russia's state-sponsored information outlets purposefully called the anti-Kyiv and pro-Russia militants "volunteers" (dobrovotsi) or a "People's Militia" (Narodnoye Opolcheniye) 
90
91
to conceal the real actors Moscow was using in the theater as proxy forces." 92 Russia is the first country to combine cyberattacks and military force, and their ability to "deny and deflect accusations of involvement" has been crucial to their success. 
93
103
Beyond the domestic propaganda oriented active measures, Vladimir Putin receives high domestic support for confidence in his handling of international affairs 105 , which he has used to hedge his economic influence. Russia has managed to incorporate their authoritarian led elements of national power into business partnerships in volatile regions, while stabilizing or hedging with regional financial powers such as China, Iran, India, and Brazil. The three critical means by which Russia has integrated risk with stability, and their economy with other elements of power can be explained by examining partnerships relating to military arms trades, the Belt Road Initiative, and taking active measures to create a new globalized banking system that has created a de-dollarization effort to counter the risk of sanctions.
As Russia has modernized their military, they have risen to become the second largest arms producer in the world, and according to Stockholm International Peace Research Institute their top 10 companies arms sales were valued at over $37 billion. 
106
It can be concluded that the guided democracy led by Vladimir Putin has implemented active measures over a long duration, resulting in the success and legitimacy of Russia within the competition for power. The Soviet Union was committed to employing active measures as a critical capability within its competition for power, and modern Russia has been able to improve upon on a legacy approach. Russia has leveraged technology, disregarded moral truths and ideologies, and shown that Russia is willing to create and develop environments that allow the twenty-first century authoritarian system to synchronize the approach of active measures throughout the DIME.
Today's terminology of Phase 0 operations, New Generation Warfare, and Non-Linear War, to name a few, are not new concepts. While the previous terms may better incorporate operational phasing constructs, technology, or a continuum of war and peace, active measures are at the core of each concept, because active measures are reflective of the political warfare approach that great power competitors face today.
The principle takeaways are that Russia does not seek global dominance and Russia does not necessarily believe it could achieve that status. However, Russia does desire a multipolar system in which it is considered a legitimate stake holder, responsible for Eurasia. Russia will continue to expand its borders, to include the near-border states that once comprised the Soviet Union. Russia will continue to use active measures across the DIME, with emphasis on information in order to identify an asymmetric advantage. Vladimir Putin and Russian diplomats will publicly state disinformation in support of other elements of national power. Russian leadership's integration of technology in the information domain appears to have outpaced the globe; however, they have leveraged unsustainable resources in this field such as criminal organizations. While the Russian military has modernized, it has been very dependent on active measures and privatized military, in order to achieve decisive victories before declarative violence. Most concerning is that Russia has gained significant traction in circumventing the economic sanctions which are the most significant deterrent in the U.S. arsenal short of force.
Russia is likely to recognize that it has a vulnerable economy, so Russia has taken active measures to ensure equal economic risk for the U.S. by developing a banking system that is not tied to the U.S. dollar.
Russia is using the same doctrinal concept of 'active measures' that it used prior to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Through an analysis of Soviet history, Russia's current active measures are not surprising. Until Russia is offensively confronted, Russia will continue to increase the acceptable and or tolerable level of competition, further changing the parameters of war. The strategy of active measure and the purpose of the approach is all about political warfare, but countering political warfare requires more than diplomacy and military. Offensive confrontation must be taken across all elements of national power and must be a collaborative international effort. A logical starting point would be a historical approach used by the United States to counter active measures that would collect, counter, and synchronize information, similar to the responsibilities of the decommissioned United States Information Agency.
Russia's successful continuation of the active measures strategy under Vladimir Putin can be given more validity with a brief understanding of the Soviet Union's history of mistrust with the United States and Russia's employment of active measures. To further explain the life cycle of Russia and in order to provide context into Russia's current strategy and national power interests, this paper will examine Russia's history with special interest in how that history intersects with the United States' and Russian interests.
32    
32    
Lipman, Putin's Sovereign Democracy. Carnegie Moscow Center. 41 Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of The United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C. 2018, p. 4.
Lipman, Putin's Sovereign Democracy. Carnegie Moscow Center. 41 Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of The United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C. 2018, p. 4.
63  
63  
69  
69  
73  
73  
81 "Soviet 'Active Measures' Forgery, Disinformation, Political Operations," Special Report 88, United States Department of Public Affairs, October, 1981. 82 Felix K. Chang, "Organization of Rivals: Limits of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization," Foreign Policy Research Institute, Asia Program, September 27, 2018. https://www.fpri.org/article/2018/09/organization-of-rivalslimits-of-the-shanghai-cooperation-organization/
87 Pavel Felgenhauer, "Russia Threatens a Renewed War in Georgia to Prevent NATO Enlargement."
87 Pavel Felgenhauer, "Russia Threatens a Renewed War in Georgia to Prevent NATO Enlargement."
96 100 "Russian Federation: 2015 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; And Staff Report." International Monetary Fund, August 2015: 5. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2015/cr15211. 101 E. Gurvich and I. Prilepskiy, "The Impact of Financial Sanctions On The Russian Economy," Russian Journal of Economics (November 30, 2015): 359-385. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ruje.2016.02.002 102 Rebecca Nelson, "U.S. Sanctions and Russia's Economy," Congressional Research Service, Feb 17, 2017: 3-4.
Vladamir Pechatnov, Melvyn Leffler, Westad Odd Arne, "The Soviet Union and The World, 1944-1953,"  In The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Cambridge UniversityPress, 2011, 96-98.   
Pechatnov, "The Soviet Union and The World," 90.
Pechatnov, "The Soviet Union and The World," 90.
Pechatnov, "The Soviet Union and The World," 92.
Pechatnov, "The Soviet Union and The World," 91.
Melvyn Leffler, and Westad  Odd Arne Westad, Cambridge: "The Emergence of an American GrandStrategy,  1945-1952," in The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Cambridge University Press, 2010, 68.   
Leffler and Odd, The Emergence of An American Grand Strategy,
77.
Leffler and Odd, The Emergence of An American Grand Strategy,
77.
Pechatnov, The Soviet Union and The World, 94   
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica, "Popular Front," Encyclopedia Britannica, Encyclopedia Britannica, inc., January 9, 2018. https://www.britannica.com/topic/popular-front-European-coalition.
Hammond-Errey, "Understanding and Assessing Information Influence and Foreign Interference," 3.
Chim, "Russia's Digital Awakening,[7][8] 
Chim, "Russia's Digital Awakening," 8.   
The following people have been instrumental in providing mentorship and support and have
OMB No. 
0704-0188
Dr. Paul D. Gelpi__ Approved
__//SIGNED//______21
2020________________________________
Dr. Eric Y. Shibuya__________
the industry one of the leading sectors through which Russia is integrated with the global economy." 
107
108
Russia is making a concerted effort to neutralize U.S. economic power and is having success through partnerships and alliances. The primary weapon that the U.S. has employed against Russia are economic sanctions. Many comparisons can be made between Russia and China, in regard to how the United States has employed sanctions against the two countries. The sanctions employed upon Russia and China have realigned the two powers, in an effort to 107 Richard Connolly and Cecilie Sendstad, "Russia's Role as an Arms Exporter The Strategic and Economic Importance of Arms Exports for Russia," Russia and Eurasia Programme, March, 2017. https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/publications/research/2017-03-20-russia-arms-exporter-connollysendstad.pdf 
108