# ID: 73c3ce686f7041d58edf6788b36a8c02
# Title: Resurrecting NSC-68 for the Global War on Terror
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Although the threat to today's U.S. national interests is a form of terrorism being waged by Radical Islam there are distinct similarities to the threat of communism posed after World War II. For the defeat of communism, one single document formed the foundation for the long term strategy to prosecute the Cold War. Today's threat posed by Radical Islam has proved to be ideological and existential much like the communist threat, however, the strategies being developed within the U.S. Government for defeating the threat do not appear as effective as those during the cold war. The hypothesis this monograph proposes is that the organization of the National Security Council and the processes it used for advising the President on foreign policy are no longer working due to the bureaucratic growth in the U.S. Government. A proliferation of strategies by separate departments and agencies spurred by a "lead agency" approach of the current administration will prevent the U.S. from maintaining a long war focus on the threat facing our vital interests.
The components of the threats faced during the Cold War and the Global War on Terror are ideology and the existential nature of the threat. Writings by then Secretary of State George Kennan describe communism as defined by Lenin in 1916 as an ideological threat with not only the capability to harm the U.S. but also with the intended capacity to threaten our interests. For the discussion of the threat of Radical Islam, recent authors Mahmood Mamdani, "Good Muslim, Bad Muslim" Richard Mitchelle's, "Muslim Brotherhood" and Efriam Karsh's "Imperial Islam" are used to define the nature of the current threat.
The strategy developed by the NSC under President Truman and the current National Security Strategy are examined with respect to: Unity of effort, feasibility and enduring nature. Unity of effort is the desired effect when unity of command cannot be achieved. The feasibility criterion focuses on allocating resources to the effort. For this monograph, the resource of information operations supporting both strategies is explored. The final criterion, enduring nature, examines how the Cold War strategy was maintained for almost fifty years while the current GWOT strategy is experiencing shifts of support by the populace, and our nation's lawmakers.
Several recommendations for improving the potential success of the GWOT are presented in this monograph. Interaction of departments and agencies in the government must be more closely coordinated through a centralized body much like the NSC of Truman and Eisenhower's presidency. Our foreign policy should also expand to engage more than militarily those regions or countries that can help facilitate containment and eventual defeat of terrorist organizations fueled by Radical Islam.
The attacks on the World Trade Center on 9-11 provided a tremendous potential catalyst for our national leadership to demonstrate the capacity of the American Government. Our president declared a "Global War on Terror" (GWOT) and with those words began the "Long War" that is still being waged after five plus years. Today, campaigns subordinate to the GWOT are being executed in Iraq, Afghanistan, Horn of Africa and within the borders of the United States of America. The conduct of these campaigns is and will continue to be instrumental in the overall success of the U.S. government in the "Long War." Although each campaign plays an important role in the overall War on Terror, they will not be the focus of this monograph. Rather, the national strategy directing their objectives will be the focus. The GWOT is not the nation's first long war. World War II arguably began for America as early as 1939 as we were involved diplomatically and economically with the U.K and Russia with the famous "Lend Lease Program." The end of United States involvement in both Europe and Japan did not occur with the signing of an instrument of surrender, but included lengthy occupation duty by U.S. military forces in both countries. Post conflict reconstruction and posturing military forces for a potential threat from communist Russia kept the U.S. government engaged overseas for many more years.
World War II, however, was not our longest conflict. The Cold War with its origins in the post World War II aftermath lasted over forty years and ended symbolically with the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet Union. The Cold War was waged on a global scale by the U.S. and its allies against a communist threat that prior to World War II appeared to be confined to the Soviet Union.
The conclusion of World War II saw the U.S. in an unfamiliar position in world politics.
For the first time in its short history the United States was identified internally as well as externally as one of the two most powerful nations on earth. This power status stemmed not only from a robust economic base, but also due to its demonstrated ability to wage nuclear war. In its new found role as a world leader, the U.S. was faced with leading a newly formed coalition to thwart the communist threat with its base of power residing in the Kremlin. Stalin, in a speech delivered in February of 1946, outwardly expressed the impossibility of cooperation between the warlike imperialists and the peace-loving socialists of the Soviet Union. 
1
Within two months of the Stalin speech, the "Long Telegram" produced by George Kennan was cabled to the U.S. The Long Telegram was the first major attempt to codify the designs of a Stalinist Kremlin. Sent as a cable to Secretary of State Marshall in February of 1946, this document provided an initial assessment of the threat as well as foreign policy recommendations for the Truman administration. 
2
3
4
5
First, the current identified threat of Radical Islam must prove to be of a similar nature to that of Communism. The threat must be existential and ideologically based. For defining the concept of an ideological threat I will use the description provided by Lee Harris in his 2002 essay titled "Al Qadea's Fantasy Ideology"
6
As for the threat being existential, it must simply be of a nature that is more than just perception but viable in terms of threatening the integrity and vitality of the American people and their society. 
7
Coincidentally, the threat posed by Islam in general was compared to communism by one of the key members of Truman's cabinet over fifty years ago. Dean Acheson stated, "The threat to Western Europe seemed to me singularly like that which Islam had posed centuries before, with its combination of ideological zeal and fighting power". 10 President Bush, in the September 2006 National Strategy for Combating Terrorism stated, "Today, we face a global terrorist movement and must confront the radical ideology that justifies the use of violence against innocents in the name of religion." 
11
The second aspect that must be addressed is the target or focus of our instruments of national power. During the Cold War, the bipolar nature of the world left little doubt as to where the threat was and where the potential locations for the spread of communism would take place.
Nation states fit neatly into categories of democratic capitalistic nations, Soviet satellites or those capable of going either way. The current alignment of nations is not so clear. No nation is willing to stand up in the international community and claim responsibility for terrorism. Rather, we see state sponsors that possibly harbor terrorist and act as terrorist facilitators. We also find super empowered individuals who can operate globally from no known address. 12 How will the U.S. government influence these terrorist targets without an address? Is it possible for the U.S. government to craft an integrated strategy relying on full interagency cooperation to contain or possibly defeat a terrorist threat? Throughout the Cold War, the U.S executed foreign policy in specific countries and in general regions to stem the spread and eventually turn back communist encroachment on noncommunist countries. In many cases, the U.S. design was not to establish a democratic country but to allow for good governance that may or may not be in the form of a democratic ruler. The "good governance" will be defined using elements stated in the current National Security Strategy. Although written in 2006, the components found in the goals of statecraft are similar to those spelled out in the NSC-68 paper. These components of good governance are: states that can meet the needs of their citizens, and conduct themselves responsibly in the international community. 
13
Although NSC-68 does not equate directly to the National Security Strategy, the comparison of the two documents is helpful. NSC-68 was, at the time of drafting, a classified document. As stated earlier it was the result of President Truman's inquiries on capabilities of the Soviet Union and possible direction for the U.S. in relation to communism. The current National Security Strategy is a mandated document produced by the President and is an unclassified document meant to communicate a "way ahead" for the country. The important similarity in the two documents is the drafting agency of the government. A key component of the NSS is the organization responsible for drafting and maintaining oversight of the strategy. The National Security Council (NSC) is that key organization. As part of the legislation to unify the military in Jan of 1947, the National Security Council became a formal, Statute based organization. 
14
14
15 Ibid, 30.
Throughout subsequent administrations the Security Council remained as a body of policy advisors representing the numerous departments and agencies of the government. Even towards the end of Truman's presidency the NSC became plagued with the growing bureaucracy of all of the participating government departments and agencies. The result of the increasing capability of individual departments led to a migration of policy forming leadership away from the NSC and into each respective agency or department. Although policy recommendations were developed within one lead agency, the expectation was for collaboration between all involved agencies and departments. The NSC was still considered the final coordinating echelon prior to submission of any policy advice to the president. Although the bureaucratic evolution tended to dissolve the role of the NSC, the basic structure and process remained and was resurrected under The current Bush administration continues to adhere to a "lead agency" methodology for policy issues. This lead agency approach to policy formulation is intended to allow the most capable department to take the forefront in making recommendations to the president while coordinating with other concerned departments. With the GWOT, this lead agency approach has continued. The newly formed National Counter Terrorism Center is tasked as the lead agency 
16
18
The analysis of the current strategy for countering terrorism as it compares with the strategy presented in NSC-68 will be conducted using three criteria, unity of effort, feasibility and the enduring nature of the strategy. Unity of effort is the first criterion for evaluation. Using "Joint Publication 1-02," unity of effort is defined as "coordination through cooperation and common interests". 
19
17 NSCs during the Cold War. I do not intend to prove that the NSC under Truman was the "Gold Standard" for measuring effectiveness of an NSC, but rather the use and process of the NSC during the early stages of the Cold War allowed for a more coherent policy development and direction of U.S. instruments of national power.
A second criterion for evaluation is the feasibility of the strategy. Feasibility is defined as the determination as to whether the assigned tasks could be accomplished by using available resources. More specifically, could the U.S. achieve the end state defined in NSC-68 and can it now achieve the end state as described in the current NSS? Determining the feasibility of the current strategy will be conducted in a subjective manner. Using NSC-68 as a base line, the ends and means described in our current strategies will be analyzed for potential feasibility. An example of the feasibility of a strategy can be taken from the Truman Doctrine speech of 1949.
In his address to a joint session of Congress the president provided guidance on a specific amount of financial aid marked for Greece and Turkey. This aid was feasible based on the U.S. economy and budget. In a similar venue in January 2007, President Bush gave a state of the union address.
Where Truman espoused a policy of economic and political aid to threatened countries, Bush described a new strategy for fighting the GWOT in Iraq and Afghanistan: a significant increase in forces deployed to these two countries as well as an increase in Army and Marine active duty strength. Additionally, the president requested one point two billion dollars for combating malaria in Africa. 
20
Enduring nature will be defined as the ability to withstand changing administrations. The actual strategy may continue to evolve, but the objectives and purpose remain constant. In evaluating the current NSS, it will be more difficult to predict the enduring nature. The current administration changeover will not occur for two more years, although a recent change in the 
19
In Keeper of the Keys, John Prados details the role of the NSC throughout its inception up through President H.W. Bush. Through the administrations the role of the NSC was primarily as policy advisors on military and foreign policy. Depending on the strength of character of the key members the NSC would move between long term policy and short term operations as a focus.
Under President Regan, the NSC saw seven National Security advisors and several changes in the NSC's role as policy advisors. 
21
Prados concludes his chronology of the NSC with a chapter titled, "The President's Lieutenants."
In this chapter, Prados argues that the structure of the NSC is an enduring and functioning system.
The change in its role from strategy and policy advice to a current operations focused committee is a result of thee Johnson and Kennedy administrations development of a "situation room" and Oval Office Meetings to replace the formal NSC sessions of previous presidents. 
22
21
As a conclusion, the final chapter of this monograph will identify the potential gaps and seams in the overall strategy for the GWOT as a result of the compartmented type approach that "lead agency" produces. Possible recommendations will be presented in terms of collaboration between echelons and unity of effort in the development of a strategy that is required for a long war. The GWOT will require continuous interaction by numerous government agencies to not only contain the spread of Radical Islam as a threat, but also for success in the campaigns currently being waged.
The concept of describing the threat to the U.S. post WWII in the form of communism and more recently through Radical Islam is essential in terms of comparing the national security strategies of the two periods. In the introduction, the threat was defined by using the terms ideological and existential. These two aspects of both communism and Radical Islam will be further defined in order to establish the existence of a valid threat to U.S. national interests and the requisite need for a comprehensive strategy to defeat the threat.
Although primarily confined to Russia beginning in 1916, communism as a form of government was not completely alien to the U.S. The communists under Lenin conducted their revolution and established their government and proceeded to focus on their own security until threatened by the German Army invasion of WWII. Prior to the Cold War, America and its the NSC, he brings to light the flexibility of the NSC and its ability to endure changes between administrations as well as changes during and administration. 
22
23
Kennan's telegram not only offered a thorough analysis of the threat, but also the objectives and potential courses of action the U.S. might have with respect to engagement and containment of communism. America was faced with an ideological threat that controlled its own governmental process.
How does the communist threat fit the definition of an ideology? Again, going back to Lee Harris' definition of an ideology, the communist regime in the Kremlin had to change the reality of a Cold War bi-polar world into the fantasy of a communist dominated world totally incapable of existing with a democratic and capitalistic competitor. 
24
25
The coercion of militant leaders trying to gain control of these two countries was compared to that of the leaders of Japan and Germany prior to WWII. 
26
27
28
29
Communism itself as a form of government may not present a direct threat, but the actions of governments under communist rule provided several examples of threats to our integrity and vitality. Integrity of the U.S. is self explanatory, while vitality is a term that allows for some debate. As described earlier, the NSC-68 memorandum was written in response to President
Truman's concerns about Soviet Nuclear capability. U.S. and Soviet nuclear conflict, possible but not probable, steeled both countries in the advancement of nuclear arms and the theories of mutual assured destruction. The capacity for the Kremlin to threaten U.S. integrity through nuclear proliferation was arguably proved by the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. Although, the threat of nuclear conflict was possible throughout the cold war period, Prados, in Keepers of the Keys, describes that the threat of a nuclear showdown, even during the Cuban Missile Crisis was unlikely. 30
28 Ibid, The Sources of Soviet Conduct, Foreign Affairs, July 1947, .60. Kennan noted that although the Kremlin was experiencing internal decay, the ideals of communism resident in satellite states were firmly grounded. 
29
30
The more delicate aspect of the existential nature of the communist threat was the protection of our vitality. NSC-68 does not clearly define U.S. vitality. However, in NSC-68, the discussion of the fundamental design of the Kremlin focuses on the "machinery of government and structure of society" as the vital requirement for U.S. power and influence. 
31
32
34
Engagements between U.S. backed governments with communist backed regimes occurred throughout the cold war without direct military action between the two super powers.
These engagements took place in Korea, Vietnam, Central America the Middle East, North Africa and East Asia. The actual winner of these engagements is not up for debate in this monograph; the important point is that U.S. foreign policy was executed in direct support and in a regional manner to stop the spread of communist influence in areas that the U.S. saw as being vital to our national interest. As the Regan administration applied foreign policy in the form of military aid and economic assistance to Afghanistan in the 1980s, the Russian led communist influence in the 31 NSC-68, "Section III: Fundamental Design of the Kremlin" 32 NSC-68, "Section IV: The underlying Conflict in the Realm of ideas and Values between the U.S. Purpose and the Kremlin Design". 
33
Although referred to by several different names, the threat as described in our National Security Qtub referenced the prophet Muhammad when he reiterated, "The establishment of Allah's kingdom on earth, the elimination of the reign of man, the wresting of sovereignty from its usurpers and its restoration to Allah, and the abolition of human laws and implementation of the divine law [shari'a]cannot be only achieved through sermons and preaching." 41 Qtub's use of 
37
Mamdani,
56. 38
39
40
41 Efraim Karsh,. Islamic Imperialism, A History (New York: Yale University Press, 2006), 212.
Muhammad's words proved to be an important catalyst for fueling the idea of Jihad that would later be perpetuated by Usama bin Laden.
The existential nature of the threat of Radical Islam is much easier to identify than the threat from communism. Again, using the terms integrity and vitality to describe those aspects of Thomas Friedman, in his book, "The World is Flat" dedicates a chapter to the discussion of the importance of a free trade world economy as it applies to the U.S. economy. He cites an English economist, David Ricardo, who theorized that any nations engaged in free trade agreements will ultimately benefit their own economies. 
43
Application of U.S. foreign policy is designed to bring about some change in behavior in a target nation or region. The instruments of national power are used to improve relations bilaterally or amongst a coalition, as a means of punishment against states who are in violation of international standards or for forcing some type of change within that nation's governmental process.  (April 14, 1950). The following portion of the document begins the description of possible course of action and how the instruments of national power can be used in each case. 
47
48 Henry Kissinger, "Central Issues of American Foreign Policy" in American Foreign Policy, (New York: WW Norton & Company Inc. 1969), 
49
Identifying the Soviet Union as a viable target for our instruments of national power is only the beginning of the application of the U.S. foreign policy. U.S. foreign policy had to extend beyond the Soviet Union and encompass nation state actors who required our protection and those who were susceptible to Soviet influence and coercion. As described in NSC-68, the recommended course of action was for the U.S. to execute a rapid build up of political, economic and military strength in the free world. 
50
51
For purposes of understanding the direction U.S. foreign policy took with respect to defeating communism it is appropriate to summarize the recommended course of action presented in NSC-68. The three categories addressed by the course of action were: military, political and economics. Within the military instrument there was an identified need to protect our allies, maintain protection for mobilization bases, protection of lines of communication and a requirement for developing a greater offensive capability. Within the political instrument the 50 NSC 68: United States Objectives and Programs for National Security (April 14, 1950). 
51
52
NSC-68 did provide several other options to President Truman: become isolationist, maintain the status quo and declare war on the USSR. All were feasible options, however, the disadvantages 
52
53 NSC-68 Section IX D. The remaining Course of Action--A Rapid Build-up of Political, Economic and Military Strength in the Free World. of these three options with respect to long term objectives rendered them less than optimal. An additional point to address is the composition of the staff that drafted the NSC-68 paper. There was a ten-member panel formed primarily from the Department of State and Department of Defense. The lead policy writer was Paul Nitze, former investment banker and member of several wartime economic management programs. Other members of the team for State and Defense included individuals with background in State Policy planning as well as retired military officers. A key piece of guidance President Truman gave to the team was to consider actual and potential U.S. resources in order to maintain a longer term view of the policy. 
54
The U.S. and its coalition executed military operations, brought in economic aid and helped establish a new democratic government. However, Usama bin Laden, the identified leader of al Qaida remained at large. As Thomas Friedman pointed out, bin Laden personifies a new character in the international community. He is a super empowered individual. 
55
56
57
55 Thomas L Friedman. The Lexus and the Olive Tree. (New York: Anchor Books. 2000), 14. 56 President Bush, National Security Strategy 2006, 12. This statement comes from one of the four short term steps, "Deny terrorist groups the support and sanctuary of rouge states". The examples of the rouge states given in the NSS document are Syria and Iran.
57 Lorraine Besser-Jones,. "Just War Theory, Legitimate Authority, and the War on Terror". Found in Philosophy 9/11 ed. Shanahan Timothy. (Chicago: Open Court, 2005), 129-130. The author of do not necessarily represent the government of the nation state from which they are operating from. Prosecuting war on a nation as a preemptive measure against a nation suspected of harboring terrorist or possibly facilitating terrorist activities is also counter to the theory of legitimate war. The theory of legitimate war as defined by Besser-Jones is predicated on two sovereign nations acting in their own best interest and the best interest of the international community. Violence emanating from a state in the form of terrorism is not grounds for attack, but at best should be considered criminal activity. 
58
The counter to Besser-Jones' argument, one should refer to the interview with Usama bin Laden from May of 1998. In the interview, bin Laden espouses the responsibility of all Muslims, regardless of their country of origin, to fight against the U.S., Zionist and those with them. 
60
58
59
61
Our current NSS provides an ultimate goal of ending tyranny with a specified goal in statecraft of helping to create a world of democratic, well-governed states that can meet the needs of their citizens and conduct themselves responsibly. 
62
63
64
What NSC-68 delivered was a coherent unifying strategy that discussed all elements of national power and their role in the defeat of communism. NSC-68, as addressed earlier, provided several courses of action to President Truman, each referring to the elements of national power and each one having advantages and disadvantages. Most importantly, there was a comprehensive recommendation on which course of action should be implemented with respect to the long term best interests of the U.S. Unfortunately, there was no statute directing a NSS during the Truman administration so a direct comparison of like documents cannot be accomplished. However, both NSC-68 and the current NSS focus on a particular aspect of our national strategy; that being a defined threat; Communism for NSC-68 and radical Islamic terrorism for the 2006 NSS. In comparing the two documents, three aspects will be examined. Unity of effort, feasibility and the enduring nature of the strategy will all be considered. 
63
64 President Bush, NSS 2006, ii. Recently USSOCOM was tasked with developing an overarching plan for DOD that would include integrating all other departments and agencies in the U.S. Government. The National Counter Terrorism Center is also developing a classified plan to integrate all departments and agencies in their "lead agency" role.
The National Security Strategy is an overarching document that is designed as a foundation for subordinate strategies. With respect to the GWOT the NSS lists strengthening alliances to defeat global terrorism as the second of seven key tasks. 
65
In theory, our national military strategy, produced by the Department of Defense (DOD), is developed as an amplification of the military element of national power as it relates to the objectives established in the NSS. Strategies from other departments or agencies should follow the same logical line of application. Five plus years into the GWOT, the defeat of terrorism remains a predominant theme within the NSS. This section of the monograph will look for how overarching guidance and intent in the NSS has been translated and expounded upon in subordinate agency or department strategies.
In military lexicon, the process of promulgating the commander's intent to lower levels ensures a nesting of plans and helps ensure a unity of effort. Each section of the 2006 NSS begins with a recap of the 2002 strategy, describes current success and then lists areas that are still considered a challenge. A majority of the verbiage is spent defining the threats to U.S. national interests as well as what constitutes democracy. In several instances, the strategy for success is defined by a goal or objective or more commonly known as an end without the ways and means being identified. It is only in the section titled "The Way Ahead" that the term strategy is even used in the context of providing direction to the U.S. government. The NSS identifies several regions and the challenges associated with them but falls short of providing a unifying plan of action or strategy to guide the foreign policy instruments. Within our government architecture there are 65 President Bush, NSS 2006, 1.  too many agencies and departments to track collaboration in each. This section will limit the scope of comparison to the Department of State (DOS), Department of Defense (DOD), Department of Justice (DOJ) and the National Center for Countering Terrorism (NCTC). These organizations by mission should have the greatest impact and represent the basis of our instruments of national power with respect to the GWOT.
The U.S. government relies heavily on the DOS to develop and expand our political interaction on a global scale. On its homepage, the DOS identifies itself as the lead foreign affairs agency. 
66
66
68
As an example of how poorly this cross cutting approach in the GWOT works, the DOS, tasked by the National Security Council was directed to work with the DOJ, Department of Treasury, Homeland Defense and DOD in efforts to identify and defeat terrorist financing. Based on the directive a Terrorist Financing Working Group (TFWG) was established which included the aforementioned departments and agencies. This is the same grouping of departments identified in the DOS Strategy and provides a vehicle to identify collaboration and interagency cooperation.
In October 2005 the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report that focused exclusively on the TFWG. 
70
In the several pages that expound upon each military strategic objective, not one single reference is made to other governmental agencies. Although DOD recognizes that it is not a lead agency in several instances, there is no mention of which agency is in the lead or how the military would support an identified lead agency. Nor are there any references to prioritizing resources, tasks or focusing geographically the military actions required for the GWOT. 
76
2
In executing the Cold War many of the resources available to the nation were similar to those required for the GWOT. The Instruments of National Power provide the means or resources for the U.S. to achieve its desired end state. As important as the resources, are the ways in which those resources are applied. At a strategic level, many different resources can be looked at to determine the feasibility of the nation's strategic direction. This monograph will not discuss in any detail how many forces are available to prosecute the GWOT compared to post WWII or how much money is or was allocated as a percentage of GNP to execute the two wars. These items are not directly comparable and do not provide an example of a resources that must be applied and managed by several different agencies. One of the more unique resources applied during the Cold War was "information." The drafters of NSC-68 clearly saw a need to influence through information in order for the strategy to be successful. As a result, NSC-68 called for a psychological component in its recommended course of action in 1950.
"Having achieved a comprehension of the issues now confronting this Republic, it will then be possible for the American people and the American Government to arrive at a consensus. Out of this common view will develop a determination of the national will and a solid resolute expression of that will." 
78
77 NSC-68, 47.
operations." 79 According to Edward P. Lilly, the PSB's historian, the Board's basic function was to prevent interagency rivalries from developing among the agencies involved in psychological operations 
80
The objectives of the PSB and the Information Agency established under Truman were twofold.
First, the American people had to be kept informed on the direction of the country with respect to communism. A stated in NSC-68, "Keep the U.S. public fully informed and cognizant of the threats to our national security so that it will be prepared to support the measures which we must accordingly adopt. 81 " Those measures could include shifting production capabilities to support war efforts, possible implementation of a draft, rationing or preparation for a nuclear conflict.
This list is not all inclusive but does provide an idea of the scope of information operations directed at the U.S. public.
The second objective was the leadership in the Kremlin. A continuous effort in the form of radio broadcasts in the vicinity of communist or "Iron Curtain" countries and diplomatic engagement with states bordering the USSR were designed to insight the Soviet populace to overthrow their own government. The PSB was eventually abolished and replaced with the Operations Coordinating Board which remained in effect until President Kennedy was elected. 
82
The last criteria to be used in evaluating the NSS with respect to the GWOT is the enduring nature of the strategy. Is the strategy capable of withstanding the transfer of administrations?
The transfer can be viewed as a new president or a change in the composition of the congress.
78 NSC-68, 16. 
79
86
Afghanistan represented a definitive location for Usama bin Laden and his support base provided by the Taliban regime. In the immediate aftermath of 9-11 the nature of the enemy was clearly ingrained in the eyes of Americans, as well as our allies. Iraq, on the other hand, presented a threat of a different nature. Saddam Hussein had a history with the American people but up to 2003 had provided no direct threat to U.S. vitality or our National Interests sine the first Persian Gulf War. The American military launched a successful attack, removing Saddam and his regime from power and then began the insurgency that was not anticipated in its intensity or scope.
Since the end of "major combat operations in Iraq, Americans have listened to numerous reports on the causes of the insurgency and whether or not a civil war is taking place along sectarian lines. Are we involved in an insurgency and is the so called civil war something the United States should be involved with are two questions that are providing a great deal of debate in our government. Regardless of the answer to either of these two questions, the fact remains that the lawmakers do not show the same support for Operation Iraqi Freedom as they have for Operation 
86
Enduring freedom in Afghanistan. The nature of the threat seen in Iraq may not be as clearly defined for many Americans or the lawmakers in congress.
Usama bin Laden and the existential nature of the threat Al Qaeda poses to Americans may be the contributing factor for the continued support for our current strategy for operations in Afghanistan. NATO's involvement as a major player in a region that is not contiguous with the European continent reflects an international enduring nature and support for the GWOT strategy with respect to OEF that is much greater than support for the strategy with respect to OIF.
The U.S. is involved in a long war. Radical Islam poses a threat to the U.S. not unlike that of communism during the cold war. In both cases, with radical Islam and with communism, the threat is both ideological and existential. The ideological foundations of radical Islam are perpetuated by a totalitarian leader in Usama bin Laden much like Joseph Stalin drove the expansion of communism from the Kremlin after WWII. The United States has attempted to embark on a long term campaign to defeat the threat that has on several occasions inflicted physical damage on our interests and Americans at home. In our efforts against communism a succession of presidents and their staffs formulated and executed a long term strategy that arguably led to the defeat of communism as a threat to the United States. Communist regimes still exist around the world but do not currently pose a viable or existential threat to our vital interests. Fidel Castro, in Cuba is an example of a communist regime in close proximity to the U.S. but does not poses the capacity to threaten our existence. Radical Islam on the other hand is a globally based threat with almost limitless resources in terms of followers, funds and communications infrastructure. In the development of a strategy to defeat communism, President
Truman assembled an organization with the cultural savvy, fundamental economic knowledge and political expertise to craft a long term course for America as a world leader in the advancement of democracy and defeat of communist authoritarian regimes.
The NSC, and their resultant memorandum for President Truman titled "NSC-68" was the bedrock foundation for a process and a plan that would endure eight presidents. Each administration maintained the NSC as an advisory organization, but not all used the NSC in a centralized role. In Prados' "Keeper of the Keys" the legacy of the NSC is traced through each administration up through President George H. Bush. With the increased bureaucracy in the U.S.
government it became increasingly difficult to centrally manage the cold war through the NSC, however, the plan presented in NSC-68 provided the unifying quality required for a long term strategy.
The U.S. is now involved with executing its current version of the Cold War in the form of the GWOT. The bureaucracy of the governmental departments and agencies has only grown since the end of the cold war. Furthermore, the current administration is relying on a "lead agency" approach to the GWOT. This approach has proved to be extremely difficult to bring about a unity of effort in the absence of unity of command. In spite of this perceived lack of unity of effort in the previous examples, the National Counterterrorism Center may possibly be a step in the right direction. "Beyond Gold Water-Nichols: Phase II Report" presents numerous recommendations for the restructuring and accountability of the departments and agencies executing their own pieces of the GWOT. Taken in total, the changes may lead to a more unified effort. In the executive summary, the report surmises that the NSC be formally tasked with an active role in ensuring Presidential intent is realized as opposed to its current traditional role of preparing decisions for the President. 
87
88
Of significance, is that most of these proposals would rely on empowering the NSC as an organization requiring revised statutes for authority to coordinate the activities of all U.S. government agencies as they execute missions related to foreign policy and the GWOT.
The availability of resources and the actual employment of those resources are essential for executing any plan. One of the major strengths of NSC-68 was the identification and inclusion of an information management practice as a part of the overall strategy. President Truman established a board specifically for the purpose of presenting a consistent theme to the international community. Partners in our alliances as well as the Kremlin received a consistent message on the democratic goals of the United States and our desire to thwart communist expansion while building democratic capacity in terms of economic growth and diplomatic credibility in those countries willing to side with us. More importantly, the American people were a target audience for the themes and messages coming out of the administration. President Truman believed that the only way to call on the American people to make sacrifices, if necessary, was if they were kept informed of the progress and objectives of our foreign policy. Ironically, information is considered one of the four main components of our national power along with diplomacy, economics and the military, yet information as a resource is completely 88 Ibid, 17. under used and not even discussed in the current NSS. According to LTC David Kilcullen, of the Australian Army, the U.S. is losing the information war in the GWOT. Kilcullen, recognized by our senior civilian and military leaders as a counter-insurgency expert stated, "In the information war, America and its allies are barely competing. America's information operations, far from being the primary strategy, simply support military actions, and often badly." 89 This single statement also highlights a perception that America is not at war; only the military is fully engaged in the GWOT.
A presidential decree concerning the "Axis of Evil" is insufficient to send the proper message to would be terrorist organizations, government facilitators and super empowered individuals.
Guidance to the American public has not been much beyond encouragement to enjoy economic success. In visiting several higher level headquarters, it is obvious that at least within the Department of Defense we lack the ability to communicate our successes in the GWOT. 
90
91
The enduring nature of our current strategy has yet to be fully identified. Limited success on the front lines of the GWOT in Afghanistan and a perception of losing in Iraq are already being 89 George Packer, "Knowing the Enemy", The New Yorker, December 18, 2006. 64. 
90
91
An additional aspect of the long term strategy that should be addressed is the engagement of nations and regions vice an isolation mentality towards countries who by location or regime present a threat. One of the strengths of NSC-68 was the discussion of building capacity in and maintaining engagements with other nations. NSC specifically identifies the role of the U.S.
Government in building military and economic capability in Western Europe as well as assisting the U.K. with efforts in Asia and SE Asia. 
92
93
Central to the enduring success will be an organization with the appropriate process and authorities to formulate and direct the President's intent especially in the GWOT. This organization exists today as it has for over fifty years. The NSC will require the same transformation being experienced by the military today in order to make it as effective in the bureaucratic leviathan that is the U.S. government. The NSC must be resurrected, empowered and put to task if our GWOT is to be successful. 
92
93 President Bush, National Security Strategy, 2006. 21.  
9  
9  
In a period of history following closely behind the communist revolution in Russia, a group of Muslim political activists led by Hassan al-Banna created a movement whose intent was to reform the perceived political corruption in Egypt that was brought about by British/Western colonialism.
In a period of history following closely behind the communist revolution in Russia, a group of Muslim political activists led by Hassan al-Banna created a movement whose intent was to reform the perceived political corruption in Egypt that was brought about by British/Western colonialism.
45    
45    
43  
43  
in commencing military operations. Rather, assume that intelligence was correct and President Bush's stated policy of the right of preemptive military action; the U.S. was justified in initiating Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF). Will we find the same level of support, both internally and external to the U.S. for our operations in Iraq? The President and a Republican Party controlled congress survived the 2004 election. This is not an amazing feat given our history with presidents during war. As stated in a recent article in the San Francisco Chronicle "History reveals that Congress is loath to challenge a president no matter how unpopular a war. Major U.S.
NSC 68: United States Objectives and Programs for National Security(April 14, 1950)   
United States, Joint Chiefs of Staff. Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. (Washington, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 12 April 2001. As Amended Through 16 October 2006).
Lee Harris, "Al Qaeda's Fantasy" in Policy Review Online. Aug 2002.  This article provides a very logical framework for describing an ideology. Central to his theme is that the leaders of an ideology must be as strong or even stronger believers in the goals.
 Within the text of the memorandum, this definition is used as a paraphrase from the United States' Constitution.
George Kennan, "LongTelegram", February 22, 1946. Harry S. Truman Administration File,  Elsey Papers, 14.   
Lee Harris, "Al Qaeda's Fantasy" in Policy Review Online. Aug 2002.   
Harry S Truman. Address Before a Joint Session of Congress, March 12, 1947. Truman's   speech not only gives justification for American support to Greece and Turkey, in it, he defines the limitations of our allies (UK) and the overall support we owe as a leading nation in the United Nations.
Harry S. Truman, Address Before a Joint Session of Congress, March 12, 1947. The description of the militant minority threatening the existing government of Greece eluded to the communist designs on control of yet another satellite state for the Kremlin.
George Kennan writing as "X".. The Sources of Soviet Conduct, Foreign Affairs, July 1947, 50.
Usama bin Laden Interview with CNN'S Peter Arnett. March 1997.
Prados,[36][37]. Nitche had also recently replaced George Kennan as director of the State's Policy Planning Staff. In addition to his background on Wall Street and Military economic programs,
Carolyn Lochhead, San Francisco Chronicle, Congress' Iraq move may yet constrain Bush , (Chronicle Washington Bureau 15 February, 2007) Accessed on line 16 February 2007 at http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/02/15/MNGOUO55AN1.DTL.
who was the "lead", the Treasury Department disagreeing with the TFWG on procedures and DOJ disagreeing on priority countries are all examples of a lack of successful collaboration.
What is even more alarming is a specific statement in the report as to who was responsible for the overall coordination of this aspect of the GWOT. The report authors, Senators Grassley, Collins and Durbin stated, "Although we requested a meeting, we did not obtain access to the National Security Council (NSC), which is responsible for the overall coordination of the interagency framework for combating terrorism including the financing of terrorist operations." 
71
As the current NSS states, the front lines of the GWOT are Iraq and Afghanistan. If we accept that these two regions provide a microcosm view of the overall GWOT then both operations provide a view into the enduring nature of the current administration's strategy. Afghanistan, or Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) began in October of 2001 with overwhelming international and internal U.S. public support the GWOT formally started with a major emphasis on the use of America's military power. Up through Jan 2006, the U.S. provided over fourteen point two billion dollars to Afghanistan. This money, a reflection of the U.S. economic and political instruments of national power, also supported the development of Afghanistan's internal security mechanisms. 
83