# ID: 757751dab4c3464dbbdd09bf15c8965d
# Title: Building Military Coalitions: Lessons from US Experience
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
These findings have implications for the planning of future interventions-and the future of coalitions, specifically.
As the United States shifts to a focus on competing with and defeating near-peer adversaries, defense planners and policymakers must also consider what these conflicts might look like and how the United States will prepare for them.
There are at least two possible directions, and each suggests something different about future trends in coalitions.
First, if future conflicts are likely to be larger-scale confrontations with such adversaries as Russia and China, then the United States will likely be forced to rely more heavily on coalitions to help meet the operational demands of a major-power war.
In such situations, the United States might wish to operate unilaterally because it faces a direct threat to national interests but be required to rely on partners because of operational requirements that exceed capacity.
However, our analysis also showed that, during the Cold War (a period when the United States faced a major power adversary), conflicts tended to be fought through proxies, coalitions were used less often (with exceptions), and the United States more often intervened unilaterally (though carefully to avoid directly engaging with the Soviet Union).
In the post-Cold War environment, political legitimacy has been paramount in driving the trend toward coalitions, but will this trend continue in a more severe threat environment?
Importantly, one way that legitimacy might continue to matter is through questions of access: Having regional partners and support can ease access and logistical challenges that are manifold in both U.S. Indo-Pacific Command and U.S. European Command.
Still, a changed threat environment might alter the way the United States uses coalitions.