# ID: 757751dab4c3464dbbdd09bf15c8965d
# Title: Building Military Coalitions: Lessons from US Experience
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Overall, there is strong support in the quantitative analysis and across the five case studies that a desire for burden-sharing is one of the main reasons that the United States chooses to operate through coalitions.
Notably, these coalitions often reflect the balance of capabilities, with the United States shouldering the majority of the burden and partners and allies filling in niche capabilities and logistical support.
This does not diminish the importance of those partners or the role of burden-sharing in coalition formation, especially if we expand the aperture to consider interventions that occurred prior to 1946 and those that the United States might face going forward in an era of great-power competition.
For example, in both of the World Wars, burden-sharing was essential.
There is no way that the United States could have singlehandedly defeated the powerful adversaries in either of those conflicts without support from allies.
The Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the allied airlift of Berlin are other examples where U.S. resources were stretched to capacity, and the support and burden-sharing of allies was absolutely required.
Thinking to the future, a conflict with a near-peer adversary, such as Russia or China, would also be likely to require support from allies.
It is hard 7 Timo Noetzel and Benjamin Schreer, "NATO's Vietnam?
Afghanistan and the Future of the Atlantic Alliance," Contemporary Security