# ID: 757751dab4c3464dbbdd09bf15c8965d
# Title: Building Military Coalitions: Lessons from US Experience
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
coalitions.
First, if we expect that future conflicts are likely to be larger-scale confrontations with such adversaries as Russia and China, then the United States will likely be forced to rely more heavily on coalitions to help meet the operational demands of a major-power war.
These will be situations in which, despite the severe threat, operational demands and geography will force the United States to build coalitions and rely on partners.
However, our analysis also showed that during the Cold War, a period when the United States faced a major-power adversary, conflicts tended to operate through proxies, coalitions were used less often, and the United States more often intervened unilaterally (though carefully to avoid directly engaging with the Soviet Union).
In this model, the relevance of coalitions would depend on trends in norms.
In the Cold War, preventing the spread of communism far outstripped any demand for legitimacy.
In the post-Cold War environment, legitimacy has been paramount, but will this trend continue in a threat environment that is more severe?
If yes, then coalitions might continue to increase as a proportion of interventions.
If no, then dependence on coalitions might depend on U.S. willingness and ability to shoulder the operational demands and the more general interest in engaging coalition forces.
Importantly, one way in which legitimacy might continue to matter (even in the face of changing norms) involves questions of access-having regional partners and support can ease access and logistical challenges that are manifold in both U.S. Indo-Pacific Command and U.S. European Command.
Still, a changed threat environment might change the way in which the United States uses coalitions.