# ID: 75a5211ef1904e46995527af6da2f3c0
# Title: Sof's Task During Peacetime: Operationalizing a Legal Resistance Force
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
In a 2005 address to his country, Russian President Vladimir Putin stated: "The collapse of the Soviet Union was the biggest geopolitical catastrophe of the century." 1 Since 2005, increasingly aggressive Russian military and hybrid activities have been used to maintain Moscow's influence over neighboring nations, compelling small European countries to seek proper defensive strategies against more demanding Russian threats. When threatened by a vastly larger Russian force capable of projecting power in the near abroad with a great focus on hybrid tools in support of its military actions, Romania, a small European country with a very complex geopolitical role and position, must explore all available options to defend against a possible invasion by allegedly one of the Great Powers.
This thesis investigates the role the Romanian Special Operations Forces (ROU SOF) should play in operationalizing the Asymmetric Defense Component (ADC) by establishing an organized and controlled resistance capability to deter or repel possible Russian aggression. The thesis examines the most recent case studies in which Russia engaged in hybrid warfare to explain why, in the 2008 Georgian-Russian and 2014 Russo-Ukrainian wars, the defenders' lack of a strong resistance force favored the Russian invading forces. By contrast, it also seeks to explain why the capable Chechen resistance force repelled the Russian forces during the First Russian-Chechen War and how Ukraine's asymmetric strategic approach prevented Moscow from achieving a quick victory in the ongoing 2022 conflict.
The case studies analyses provide five important findings that might increase the defender's prospects of success. First, an organized, properly equipped, and well-trained pre-conflict ADC has a higher chance of success than if these actions and activities are prepared in peacetime ahead of wartime conditions. Given its force multiplier attribute and Second, the weak defending nation has to choose or adapt its defense strategy taking into account the opposite strategic interactions during the conflict. Third, the superiority of psychological and information capabilities may significantly improve the success of military operations. Fourth, the amount of outside military support that the defender's forces receive improves their odds of defeating the invading forces, since the defender might have access to more resources, intelligence, or advanced training, all of which will increase the defender's capacity to resist and fight. Finally, high morale and strong popular support can serve as balancing factors in the relative power difference and improve troops' combat performance and their sense of winning chances.
It is recommended that Romanian political and military decision makers as well as ROU SOF leaders choose "asymmetry" as the appropriate strategy for enhancing territorial defense capabilities, which should only complement the conventional capabilities. This moment might be critical for taking the right decisions to operationalize an ADC to support Romania's aspiration to become a regional hub security provider. Specific recommendations are:
• Legislation needs updating to recognize and designate ROU SOF as the leading actor in operationalizing a competent ADC.
• By shifting toward a national defense mindset in which hybrid and conventional threats are employed by a technologically superior opponent, ROU SOF should specialize in conducting unconventional operations and implement CDH and Resistance Operating Concept (ROC) principles in order to increase Romania's national resistance and resilience capabilities.
• ROU SOF should change its previous fighting mindset, properly educate all the other organizations that comprise the national defense layer, and constantly exercise and evaluate the performance of all components, especially that of the ADC. My deepest gratitude goes to the teachers and professionals of the Defense Analysis Department at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California, for their time, efforts, exceptional teaching abilities, and patience in assisting me with my academic endeavors. Throughout our studies, their enormous expertise and breadth of knowledge have inspired me and all of my classmates. In particular, my master's degree would not have been achievable without the extraordinary advice and assistance received from my advisers, Drs. Douglas Anthony Borer and Kalev Imants Sepp. I also want to extend my appreciation to the researchers, scholars, military analysts, and commanders on whose great works I built my thesis research, even if I did not get to meet them in person. Their previous outstanding work was extremely beneficial and inspiring in the completion of my thesis.
I will continue to recognize and appreciate the Graduate Writing Center specialists whose dedication and writing coaching sessions will be missed. Special gratitude goes to George Lober and Kate Egerton for their knowledgeable insights into the writing process, which made completing academic assignments, especially this thesis, less painful for me as an international student. In addition, I would want to thank all of the administrative professionals from both Romania and the United States who made this educational opportunity possible for me. Their distinct contribution enabled me to devote more time and effort to research. Special thanks also go to all of the U.S. and foreign SOF brothersin-arms with whom I engaged throughout my time at NPS, whose distinctive contributions and friendship demonstrated the SOF family's quiet professional qualities.
Especially important, I want to thank my exceptional wife, Roxana, who stood by me through my time at NPS and unconditionally supported me in all aspects, being the one _________________________________________________________ NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL | MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA | WWW.NPS.EDU xvi who turned my limited free time into unforgettable moments and experiences on American soil. Also, I am grateful to my family back home whose sacrifices were even bigger during my absence. My family is fantastic! Finally, this thesis is dedicated to all the ROU SOF Fallen Heroes, who made the ultimate sacrifice in the service of our nation's values and principles. Hope this thesis will help our number one resource, the future ROU SOF brothers, in their journey and endeavors! 1
"The supreme art of war is to subdue the enemy without fighting."
-Sun Tzu, The Art of War
1
Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008 warned the international community that the Kremlin had started applying a new strategy. This alert about Moscow's new strategy was followed by other indicators, including multiple exercises on its western border, which involved many capabilities, numerous troops, and different types of equipment. Then, in 2014, Russia culminated its campaign with the invasion of Ukraine's eastern territory and the annexation of Crimea. This illegal annexation of Crimea symbolizes "hybrid warfare," a term that has been overused for almost every state or non-state actor's action that can be complex, different, unusual, or new in relation to other actors. This moment created lots of concerns among NATO countries from the eastern flank and forced NATO and its allies to develop an effective strategy to deter Russia. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) responded with the Comprehensive Defense Handbook (CDH) as a possible strategy that can be implemented by small countries to resist Russian hybrid aggression and maintain their territorial integrity. 
2
This thesis explores the idea of operationalizing the Asymmetric Defense Component (ADC) before a conflict or a crisis as an important layer of the whole-ofsociety national defense layer. A legal and government-led ADC can enhance the nation's capacity to resist in the event of armed aggression and contribute to the preservation of its independence and autonomy by supporting the whole-of-society resistance efforts and leveraging the resistance force's elements (leadership, combat forces, support elements, and political component). 
3
Although Russian hybrid actions are expected to be countered by NATO, policymakers in general and Romanian decision makers in particular designate SOF as the most affordable tool to counter the potential Russian hybrid actions. The reason for this view is that SOF are trained to employ unconventional tactics and procedures within gray zone areas where hybrid warfare is expected. Even though existing studies have clearly established different strategies to increase states' societal resilience levels and a wholegovernment approach to effectively counter hybrid actions, 
5
strong deterrent message against a potential adversary. Instead of weapons or technology, the source of national resistance's deterrent power is based on people and civil society.
This when two nations of different strengths are engaged in an asymmetric conflict, the weaker actor can defeat the stronger opponent by using an opposing strategic interaction (directindirect, indirect-direct), whereas the same strategic interactions (direct-direct, indirectindirect) always favor the strong actor. 
6
7
Third, the thesis tries to explain why a strong resistance force might be an effective approach against a stronger Russian invader. To support this, the thesis explains why a fierce Chechen resistance effort in Grozny during almost two years of heavy fighting throughout the First Russian-Chechen war (December 9, 1994-August 31, 1996)  This approach requires more critical thinking skills and conceptually expands the traditional deterrence of denial and punishment strategies to the irregular deterrence field, which is seen as a part of the integrated deterrence concept. The irregular deterrence field is where ROU SOF can be effectively employed, while SOF's utility can be optimized to support a strong and legal resistance capability during peacetime. Moreover, this approach poses a great challenge for the legislative apparatus which needs to establish irregular warfare as a legal tool for deterring an opponent acting within a gray zone environment.
Therefore, by juxtaposing the Russian hybrid characteristics with the reasons and capabilities of successful resistance movements against different Russian invasions, and the ROU SOF capabilities and authorities needed to counter the threats, this thesis examines the common points where the effective employment of ROU SOF could signal a capable and credible deterrent message or repel a possible Russian invasion.
In conclusion, the thesis presents steps and recommendations for Romanian 
1.
Drawing on the strategic interactions paradigm established by Professor Arreguin-Toft, this section of the thesis endeavors to contextualize and explicate the phenomenon of Russian hybrid warfare, which has emerged as Moscow's prevailing contemporary strategy. In his study, Professor Arreguin-Toft was able to condense the range of possible actor-initiated strategies to just two major categories: direct and indirect. 
9
Looking through the strategic interactions lens, it is possible to see the Russian hybrid warfare strategy as a mixture of both indirect and direct approaches, where the former is predominantly emphasized prior to the commencement of any conflict, while the latter gains prominence during actual combat. While in the early stages of a conflict, an indirect strategy might be supported by threats to use conventional military force as a form of coercion, the blurring shift to the following stages where non-military means are supporting conventional troop efforts creates significant difficulties in determining precisely when a conflict began.
The properties of hybrid warfare are still not clearly and completely understood; consequently, some countries, including Romania, do not effectively employ the right countermeasures. To better understand what hybrid actions are, it is necessary to define 9 Arreguín-Toft, "How the Weak Win Wars," 105. some specific concepts that will be used in this thesis. Clearly understanding these terms is important to avoid confusing the main concepts used for our future analysis.
Consequently, this conceptual delimitation sets clear conditions for the research methodology and prevents possible misinterpretation of the results. Even if hybrid warfare, unconventional warfare, and gray-zone conflicts are somehow acknowledged as being part of the same domain, there are significant differences among these terms.
The first comprehensive and probably the most widely accepted definition of hybrid while the multi-domain irregular activities can be performed by either the same conventional force or by a separate entity, these activities are coordinated by a centralized command. While there is no rule saying that an irregular domain has to be the objective of a totally different entity, the most important aspect is the synchronization between the entities.
Diverse actors choose hybrid warfare as their primary strategy, attempting to win by using a mix of political warfare and military actions blended with economic, social, and informational methods in different ways where conventional tactics meet irregular tools and terrorist behaviors. Thus, we may concede that both state actors and non-state actors use hybrid warfare as the primary method to achieve their goals, which can be either maximizing their strategic options within international relations or creating nondemocratic regimes within their area of interest.
There is a need to disambiguate between two common concepts: hybrid warfare and unconventional warfare. 
Besides the critics of the hybrid warfare concept and the continuous debate among scholars and academics regarding the uniqueness of the term, NATO has understood the growing threat from this concept and has adopted it within its strategic and operational documents. Immediately after Crimea's annexation, NATO began to develop specific tools to deter and defend against any possible adversary waging hybrid warfare. However, after evaluations of their internal vulnerabilities, NATO countries realized that this development process would be burdensome because the "centre of gravity" in hybrid warfare is a target population. 
25
29
The exceptional adaptability and flexibility of SOF, as evidenced by their proficiency in executing special operations, unique combat tactics, and overwhelming superiority in cost-benefit analyses for achieving strategic and operational objectives, make SOF the best national asset for defending against potential Russian aggression. Applying the strategic interactions analytical framework, SOF can be employed in the early stages of a conflict to counter the Russian indirect approach by launching potential direct preemptive attacks against Russian armed forces positioned across the international border while still maintaining plausible deniability. In addition, SOF can be employed to counter the Russian direct approach by conducting guerrilla warfare-style attacks, accompanied by previously trained resistance elements aimed at Russian conventional forces deployed throughout the subsequent stages of the conflict.
When analyzing SOF through the lens of hybrid warfare, it is recognized that SOF's employment can expand the range of options for waging both military and non-military elements that can be creatively engaged during conflicts. Within this extended range of options, SOF may contribute to enhancing the national resilience, increasing the power of irregular deterrence, or integrating asymmetric approaches into a defensive modus operandi. 31 Furthermore, by employing SOF within a realm where the usage of conventional military forces may be escalatory or inappropriate, a significant force 29 Jim Garamone, "NATO Moves to Combat Russian Hybrid Warfare," Defense Media Activity, Joint Chiefs of Staff, September 30, 2018, https://www.jcs.mil/Media/News/News-Display/Article/1649683/ nato-moves-to-combat-russian-hybrid-warfare/.
30 Garamone.
31 NATO Special Operations Headquarters, Comprehensive Defense Handbook.
_________________________________________________________
economy can be attained along with greater results. All of these are possible because precision, discretion, and well-mitigated risk distinguish the activities in which SOF are directly involved. While these forces operate with a small footprint, they employ robust features like creativity, maturity, experience, flexibility, and unique technical expertise, and their employment within a gray zone environment may decrease political risk and offer a greater return on investment.
Thus, in this case, it is important to first recognize the force multiplier contribution that is unique to SOF. While the MA mission has been strongly tested and exercised with local security forces throughout GWOT theatres of operations, SOF as a force multiplier can also effectively achieve great effects by, with, and through the civilian population. SOF are able to work with the civilian population because they operate within a small footprint, are a highly adaptable force, and possess a great appreciation for local culture. These unique traits qualify SOF to be the viable solution for recruiting, assessing, and training the ADC elements during peacetime while accompanying or leading them in non-violent and violent operations after an enemy occupation has started. 
32
32 NATO Special Operations Headquarters.
Once Russia invaded Ukraine at the beginning of 2022, the security environment dramatically changed with significant consequences for the regional and world security order. This invasion has also impacted the economic sector. The negative effects of the invasion on European COVID-19 economic recovery and the security situation have introduced more challenges for all neighboring countries as well. Beyond the significant negative effects on the food, gas, and energy markets, Romania is also impacted by the Ukrainian refugee crisis, which intensified at a rapid rate immediately after the Russian invasion. Moreover, this entire situation has created reasonable concerns among the Romanian population. This is why Romanian political and military leaders have to make the right decisions and employ the right tools to mitigate this crisis's effects. Therefore, this is the critical moment when ROU SOF should be tasked to operationalize the ADC forces to effectively increase the national resilience level and the ROU irregular deterrent power. If this decision is not taken promptly, this skilled ROU SOF generation will retire, and this important opportunity to completely exploit its experience will be missed.
At the same time, ROU SOF must continue to grow its current capabilities and also A resilient population involved in national defense pushes a possible aggressor to recalculate its cost-benefit plans. An actor is less likely to spend a lot of resources against a state in which the population is highly perceptive, which is likely to have a neutralizing effect on various hybrid actions. As stated by the CDH, this is why political leaders should create favorable conditions and initiatives to "educate, inform and enable the population to defend against malicious attacks."
34
The Romanian National Defense Strategy for 2020-2024 mentions the need for a resilient population, 35 but national resilience starts with the individual. If more and more individuals are well organized and trained to resist, they will most likely become eager to be part of the whole-of-society efforts to defend their country. This proves the criticality of the starting process for a resilient population and explains why this is needed for increasing the deterrence power against any potential aggressor.
35 Presidential Administration, National Defence Strategy 2020-2024 (Bucharest, Romania: Romania Presidential Administration, 2020), https://www.presidency.ro/files/userfiles/ National_Defence_Strategy_2020_2024.pdf.
During the First Chechen War (1994-1996), why was Chechen resistance successful against a more powerful Russian armed force? What factors can be exploited by a resident resistance force to prove a significant advantage over a technically and numerically superior foreign aggressor?
The First Chechen War can illuminate some important aspects that explain how a weak actor, such as a national resistance force, can survive and win against a stronger and militarized invader, such as the traditional Russian Army. the Russian invasion. 
36
Knowing the Russian tactics and the operational environment, Chechens were able to make important preparations that assured them tactical and operational advantages.
According to some Russian sources, Chechen forces had been preparing to defend their capital for at least three to four months before the Russian invasion. These combat preparations included planning and developing battle plans, subdividing zones of responsibility, training the fighting militia forces, and establishing effective means of communication. 
37
38
39
40
The Chechen resistance forces' non-military organization, their tactics that involved a high level of mobility, and the weapon systems and communication methods 42 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars, 1994-2000.   43 Thomas, "The Battle of Grozny." communication systems were inefficient in such an environment. 
44
Deception, electronic warfare, and perception management were fruitfully employed by Chechen forces as part of their psychological line of effort. As a deceptive action, Chechen fighters wearing Russian uniforms succeeded in easily infiltrating and conducting attacks behind Russian enemy lines. In addition, Chechens used Russian wounded soldiers as human shields in front of their fortified positions, forcing Russian soldiers to shoot their fellows in order to engage Chechen resistance forces. 
45
External support for the Chechen resistance during the First Chechen War was minimal. There were only some Islamic countries whose few volunteers helped the Chechen fighters by providing knowledge or weapons during the conflict. Few difficultto-credit reports mentioned Afghan volunteers who supported the Chechen cause and even provided some portable anti-aircraft missiles, including U.S.-manufactured Stinger missile systems. This Chechen capability was not confirmed and was not proven by an increased hitting ratio of Russian air assets. However, some "unintentional support" was provided before the conflict when a few countries like Pakistan, Azerbaijan, and Turkey provided specific training in their countries for a good number of inexperienced Chechen soldiers. 
49
48 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars, 1994-2000, 22.   49 Oliker, 17.  of success." 
50
51
The Chechens had high morale and a strong will to fight while the Russian Army had low morale during the First Chechen War. 
52
53
There was a great difference between the Chechen cause to defend their soil and the Russian troops who were not fully convinced about the justification for the war.
Additionally, the status of equipment and the level of training are elements that can bolster or weaken the morale of troops, by increasing or decreasing the perception of the chances for success. Not only were most Russian weapons and equipment unsuitable for urban warfare, but their troops' urban training was non-existent. On the other side, the small-unit tactics and efficient guerrilla attacks against Russian capabilities were definitely bolstering the Chechens' morale. This aspect is also related to the cohesion of small units which can increase the effectiveness of their combat performance. The Russian troops' cohesion was relatively low because of the influx of fresh recruits into the armed forces as a consequence of the conscription law.
The physical needs for food, shelter, and rest can also influence the fighters' motivations and morale. Whereas there were situations when Russian soldiers were entering local houses to ask for food, the Chechen fighters were receiving a lot of support from the local populace, including Russian ethnics. 
54
55
In conclusion, a pre-conflict well-trained and prepared resistance force that has a strong will to defend, chooses the right strategy, tactics, and weapons, and employs a superior information operation campaign can stand against a more powerful invader. The battlefield was known very well by the Chechens who exhibited a strong will to defend their cities. The Chechen forces successfully leveraged their knowledge of enemy weapons and tactics, as well as their prior combat experience, to achieve a strategic advantage.
Specifically, they adopted an indirect approach by implementing small-unit organizing 
After the First and Second Chechen Wars, Russia learned important lessons and decided to update its approach to handling future conflicts. Georgia, a bordering country, lacked the capabilities and capacities to stand up to a stronger state like Russia. Why did Georgia's army not effectively resist the Russian military force? What circumstances were successfully exploited by Russian forces in August 2008 to enable them to easily win the "Five-Day War"? The analysis in this chapter reveals that not employing important aspects like a pre-conflict trained asymmetric force, failing to choose an indirect approach (irregular tactics) against a powerful conventional force, and lacking a good psychological and information operations strategy that correlate with high morale and the will to defend diminished the weaker actor's chances to win against a stronger opponent.
Although few at the time realized it, this five-day conflict marked a significant change in global politics when Moscow demonstrated its willingness and capacity to oppose NATO expansion in its neighborhood, exercise its veto over U.S. plans related to European security, and keep the small country's affairs under the influence of Russia.
A better understanding of the events that occurred during the August 2008 War will be made easier by taking a close look at Georgia's road to war. After the Soviet Union's dissolution in 1991, the newly established state of Georgia was engaged in an armed conflict against the ethnic minority groups in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, two territories in the Caucasus region. After several ethnic clashes when Abkhazian militants forcibly displaced Georgian nationals, the fighting concluded with the peace agreement signed on June 24, 1992 in Sochi. 
56
Shortly after the start of the GWOT, the U.S. Army Special Forces started a two-year training program in response to the Government of Georgia's request for assistance to help the Georgian Army deal with the potential presence of Al-Qaeda militants in the Pankisi Gorge area. 
62
63
66
The Georgian strategy was composed of a purely conventional approach that included a Russian deterrent component, whereas Moscow used its conventional military strength in support of the irregular warfare element represented by Russian proxy and militia forces from the Georgian territories. Although it is difficult to determine the degree to which Ossetian decision makers were tactically controlled by Moscow, the militia forces' actions were crucial in intensifying the violence prior to the start of the conflict.
Poor planning, insufficient intelligence support, weak leadership, inexperience in combat, and inadequate troop mobility in comparison to Russian forces were all contributing factors to the overall low-level performance of the Georgian Armed Forces.
A short review of the orders of battle of the two belligerents is also instructive. On one hand, the Georgian troops included a part of the 1st and the 4th Infantry Brigades without the 1st Brigade's premiere elements, which were deployed in Iraq. These brigades were located at bases in central and eastern Georgia, being focused on South Ossetia. The 2nd and 3rd Infantry Brigades were located in western Georgia and were responsible for Abkhazia area. 
67
68
69
70
71
The Georgian Ministry of the Interior's inexperienced forces supported by artillery units were easily slowed down by the South Ossetian militia forces just enough for the 67 Robert E. Hamilton, "A Resolute Strategy on Georgia," CSIS, September 4, 2008, https://www.csis.org/analysis/resolute-strategy-georgia.
68 Heidi Tagliavini, Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia, vol. II (Council of the European Union, 2009), https://www.mpil.de/files/pdf4/IIFFMCG_Volume_II1.pdf.
69 Ariel Cohen, James Carafano, and Lajos F. Szaszdi, "Russian Forces in the Georgian War: Preliminary Assessment and Recommendations," The Heritage Foundation, August 20, 2008, https://www.heritage.org/europe/report/russian-forces-the-georgian-war-preliminary-assessment-andrecommendations.
70 Cohen, Carafano, and Szaszdi.
71 Michael Kofman, "Russian Performance in the Russo-Georgian War Revisited," War on the Rocks, September 4, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/09/russian-performance-in-the-russo-georgian-warrevisited/.
Russian conventional forces to arrive on the battlefield. Moreover, the Russian combat experience from the previous Chechen wars immediately provided a huge difference in the high-intensity conflict's front line. In combat, Georgian forces destroyed only three Russian tanks, approximately 20 armored vehicles of various types, and a larger number of utility vehicles. 
72
Moreover, Russia was not deterred by these technologies. The Russian air force was able to conduct air raids against airfields and military bases deep inside Georgian territory because Georgian air defenses were unable to stop them. As noted by American military analyst Michael Kofman in a 2018 article, "despite Georgian investments in air defense, radar, and battle space management, the Russian air force had a generally free operating environment." 73 Only two of the six Russian aircraft lost in Georgia appeared to be losses to Georgian air defense systems. 
74
75
The rapidity with which Moscow deployed its forces on two different fronts psychologically overwhelmed the Georgian forces, especially since the South Ossetian attack was not anticipated at all. On one hand, the quick development of operations during the five days of conflict did not allow Georgian leaders time to develop a sustainable PSYOP campaign against the invading forces. On the other hand, the Georgian leadership was having difficulty explaining their view of the conflict to the international community due to effective Russian cyberattacks against Georgia's external communication capabilities. Furthermore, the Russian forces were able to exploit all components of the information environment to their advantage, particularly those Georgian atrocities that supported and justified the invasion.
The main drawback for the Georgian defender forces was the lack of media coverage of the events from the Georgian perspective, whereas Moscow's media extensively covered all details. This information superiority was made possible by the surprise arrival in Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia, of roughly 50 Russian reporters just two days before the conflict broke out. 
76
Additionally, Russian journalists were moving in the convoys alongside Russian soldiers. While on one hand, they were reporting on the Russian troops' successful operations, on the other hand, they were exploiting the Georgian forces' supposed atrocities for propaganda effects, such as a particular ambush against a Russian convoy which resulted in wounding the 58th Russian Army's commander Gen. Khrulev. 77
Outside of diplomatic efforts and humanitarian relief, the international community made minimal attempts to end the conflict or to support the Georgians. The possibility of escalating into a future direct conflict between Washington and Moscow made a U.S. deployment of 2,000 Georgian troops from Iraq to their home country. 
78
military presence and particular support in the form of cutting-edge weapons (such as Stinger weapon systems), the United States did not desire a unilateral intervention and opted to encourage international condemnation of Russian actions in Georgia. 
79
A general explanation for the absence of external support could be that Western nations were unwilling to fund Georgia's defense efforts because their general foreign policy was to avoid any provocation against Moscow. Nevertheless, the Georgian leadership did not consider this factor at the outset of the conflict.
The low morale of Georgian active and reserve forces had an impact on both their combat effectiveness and performance. First, when reserve forces were mobilized to counter the larger number of Russian forces, their morale was strongly impacted by their poor training level and the lack of experienced commanders to lead them. Second, a lack of accurate information, the propagation of numerous rumors, and successful Russian fire strikes against civilians and Georgian military bases were all factors contributing to the low morale.
Due to Russian cyber capabilities, the local populace and Georgian military forces were unable to acquire accurate information. The severe, sophisticated, and well- coordinated denial-of-service Russian cyberattacks that were successful in taking down crucial Georgian websites had a significant impact on Tbilisi's internal and external communication capabilities. 
80
81
82
To summarize, several aspects of the August 2008 War in Georgia are relevant to the ADC of a weak defender against a strong opponent. Unfortunately, Georgia, as the weaker actor did not have a trained and prepared resistance force that could have been employed once the conflict began. In fact, it was Russia, the stronger opponent, that used an unconventional approach in the beginning to justify the use of the larger number of conventional forces. The superior information operation of the stronger actor eroded the Georgian soldiers' morale and their will to fight. Because of this, the president of Georgia decided to reach a peace agreement rather than risk the lives of his people by fighting a war that they had little chance of winning. The Georgian leadership's failure to run a competent media campaign contributed to the lack of international military support for the weaker actor's cause against the stronger opponent. All the previously mentioned aspects were consistent with Georgian forces choosing the wrong fighting strategy. Even if Georgia's leaders were trapped at the beginning of the conflict into choosing a conventional approach, their continued use of the same direct approach against a stronger actor had no chance to win. As professor and U.S.
Army veteran Arreguín-Toft has concluded, the same strategic interactions approach (in this case a direct-direct one) will always favor the strong actor. 
83
84
When Ukraine opted to pursue a Western orientation, Russian officials waged war to reassert Moscow's influence over its neighbor and maintain control over Ukraine's strategic orientation. Why was Ukraine not able to defend its territorial integrity and provide a solid response to Russia's hybrid warfare approach in 2014? Why were both the Ukrainian security forces' lack of resistance in Crimea and their ineffectiveness in the Eastern separatist areas significant factors for the outcome of the first Russo-Ukrainian war? The analysis in this chapter reveals that the weaker actor's chances of prevailing over a more powerful foe are significantly reduced by the following: the absence of a preconflict asymmetric-capable force, poor leadership, a weak strategy, the absence of popular support that directly relates to a low level of morale, the inability to effectively counter the adversary's strong psychological and informational campaign, and limited external military support.
Since Ukraine's declaration of independence in 1991, the country's society had become increasingly divided into two main groups: a pro-Russian group and another one consisting of those supporting the West. Through peaceful mass demonstrations, the "Orange Revolution" of 2004 was successful in overthrowing the pro-Russian the Ukrainian Armed Forces were under increased strain as a result of the global financial crisis in 2008, and their strength fell from 295,000 personnel in 2003 to just 200,000 in 2010, of whom 41,000 were civilian employees. 
88
89
Meanwhile, Ukraine's economic problems forced its Minister of Defense to plan for and try to maintain its combined-arms brigades at 70% of their full strength during peacetime. According to military experts and war correspondents Alexey Ramm and Alexey Nikolsky, at the beginning of the fighting in the East, only a few Ukrainian army units were manned to more than 50% of their nominal strength, with an even lower percentage for combat support and supply units. 
90
First, Ukraine's interim administration created on February 27, 2014, in the wake of the Maidan Revolution was shocked to discover how powerless it was to prevent any 88 Mark Galeotti, Armies of Russia's War in Ukraine, Illustrated edition (New York: Osprey Publishing, 2019), 44-45.
89 United Press International, "Ukraine to End Military Conscription after Autumn Call-Ups," UPI, October 3, 2013, https://www.upi.com/Top_News/Special/2013/10/03/Ukraine-to-end-militaryconscription-after-autumn-call-ups/95521380772920/.
90 Alexey Ramm and Alexey Nikolsky, "Reorganization Under Crisis: Development of Ukraine's Defense and Security Agencies" in Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, 2nd edition (Minneapolis, Minnesota: East View Press, 2015), 315-20.
Russian reinforcements from arriving in Crimea. According to researchers of the European Council on Foreign Relations think tank, the impossibility to amend the transit agreement between Ukraine and Russia was an effect of the Kharkov Accords, a pact signed on April 21, 2010, "whereby the Russian lease on naval facilities in Crimea would be extended beyond 2017 by 25 years, with an additional five year renewal option." 91 As a result of the Kharkov Accords, Moscow had the tactical and strategic edge to first send its special forces into Crimea without arousing suspicion, and then to send in all the capabilities required to carry out the invasion of the peninsula.
The second mistake was made on February 23, 2014, when the inexperienced Rada, the Ukrainian Parliament, revoked a law that had protected and given official status to the Russian language, which significantly contributed to Russian-speaking Crimeans supporting Moscow's side against the country's administration. The third mistake was the Ukrainian government's inability to keep post-revolutionary forces under control and to properly respond when, on February 24, 2014, the leader of a far-right political party publicly threatened to send his paramilitary troops to Crimea to restore public order. As stated by American military expert Kofman, because of the Ukrainian government's poor reaction, Moscow was able to convince its home audience through propaganda that Russian-speaking residents of Crimea were in serious danger and that Russian intervention in Crimea was necessary and justified. 
92
93
According to independent military analysts, Anton Lavrov and Alexey Nikolsky, an important factor enabling the annexation of Crimea with minimal bloodshed was the overall weakness of the Ukrainian Armed Forces and especially their inability to react quickly to emerging military threats. 
94
95
96
97
98
The Russian forces immediately exploited Ukraine's lack of reaction and, with the help of recently deployed reinforcements and newly established local self-defense squads, were able to blockade Ukrainian military units and critical infrastructure facilities, including TV broadcasting stations and communication service providers. 
99
of Rear Adm. Denis Berezovsky, commander of the Ukrainian Navy to the "Autonomous Republic of Crimea." 100
According to historian Galeotti, the bloodless seizure of Crimea boosted Moscow's appetite for a limited and deniable military operation in the ethnically Russian East of Ukraine, aiming to convince Kyiv that Moscow could and would punish it for any moves towards closer integration with the West and force Ukraine to accept that it will remain part of Russia's sphere of influence. 
101
The Ukrainian government initially launched a counterterrorism operation to isolate and then retake the rebel-held regions after the leaders of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic (DNR, Donetskaya Narodnaya Respublika) and Lugansk People's Republic (LNR, Luganskaya Narodnaya Respublika) declared their independence from Ukraine. Since the first partial mobilization of reservists was triggered by events in Crimea rather than the Eastern regions, as part of a larger counterinsurgency operation in the East, Kyiv reintroduced conscription starting on May 1, 2014, and launched the second wave of partial mobilization of reservists, with more than 80% of them being assigned to the MOD's territorial defense battalions (TDB) which were immediately deployed to reinforce regular fighting units. 103 population that they were not hostile by leading them to believe that they might be local police or self-defense forces. 107
As a result of Kyiv's inability to defend against Moscow's employment of a wide variety of tools and techniques supporting the kinetic, cyber, and informational realms in Even though Russia strongly denied having any control over the pro-Russian separatists and hacker groups responsible for the attacks, the lessons learned from the 2008 conflict in Georgia and the exact timing between kinetic operations and cyberattacks show, at the very least, some level of coordination and oversight from Russian agencies. Strong Russian propaganda combined with quick blockades of Ukrainian military bases and ships as a consequence of the rapid deployment by air and sea of Russian reinforcements and resources created severe psychological pressure on Ukraine's troops whose combat readiness level was low. After Ukraine's highest ranking military member defected, many Ukrainian forces were unable to resist the huge psychological pressure and joined the Russians, who were willing to acknowledge the defectors' current ranks. As historian Galeotti noted in 2022, probably the best example is the 501st Independent Battalion from Kerch, which surrendered on March 20, 2014, with two-thirds of its soldiers accepting this deal and joining the other side. 110
In response to Russia's actions, many Western countries offered support to Ukraine in order to help them defend against the aggression. Overall, the nature and extent of the external assistance provided to Ukraine during the conflict were limited, and the military support did not give Ukrainian forces a strategic advantage that may have changed the conflict's direction. To ensure that external support is provided in a way that is both effective and does not put either party at risk, substantial negotiations, agreements, and coordination between the two parties are necessary. All of these activities take time, and ideally, they need to be done before a conflict breaks out. Completing these activities before a potential conflict breaks out allows for more flexibility in how the military support is provided by allowing the parties involved to tailor the support to the specific needs of the country receiving it and to adapt to changing circumstances or overcome potential obstacles that may arise.
The international condemnation of Russia's actions were largely joined by supportive declarations of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as encouragement for peace talks designed to conclude with a political solution to the crisis.
Furthermore, the several rounds of tough economic sanctions that the West imposed on 110 Galeotti, Putin's Wars, 176.  Russia were also designed to put pressure on Moscow to stop supporting the separatists, but they were insufficient to compel Moscow to remove all of its soldiers from and around Ukraine. 
To summarize, while a vulnerable Ukraine may be viewed more as a target of opportunity, the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War may provide significant features and characteristics related to the asymmetrical defensive component from the perspective of a weaker defender. Unfortunately, Ukraine, as the weaker actor, lacked a prepared and trained asymmetrical defensive force that might have been used in support of its conventional defense forces throughout the conflict. In reality, Russia, the stronger opponent, chose an asymmetric strategic approach, first deploying its well-trained special forces to achieve operational and strategic goals against the defense forces of a relatively weak and vulnerable nation followed by significant military support and threats of a fullscale conventional invasion.
Analyzing the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War through the lens of strategic interactions theory developed by Brown University professor and U.S. Army veteran Ivan Arreguín-Toft, it is evident that both actors chose the same direct approach, even if Russia asymmetrically employed its forces. In such a case, Arreguín-Toft argues that because power implies victory in war, relative power should explain the outcome of the conflict where the strong actor with a greater military capability will almost always win. 
115
Furthermore, poor Ukrainian leadership decisions and Ukraine's inability to effectively counter the adversary's strong psychological and informational campaign resulted in a lack of popular support for both Ukrainian security forces and trust in their politico-military leaders. Additionally, under some unfavorable geopolitical conditions, the Ukrainian leadership's poor decisions and lack of credibility resulted in minimal military assistance from the international community. As a result of the lack of access to advanced technologies, Ukrainian forces did not instantly receive any lethal weapons that might have altered the course of the conflict.
Later Ukrainian attempts to reclaim control of separatist-held territories failed, resulting in a protracted war in the Donbas region, while additional peace agreements between Ukraine and Russia were never fully implemented. This "limited war" type of conflict saw a major escalation in February 2022 when Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
A preliminary assessment of the ongoing conflict in Ukraine suggests that Ukraine has learned and applied critical lessons from the 2014 conflict, revealing that allegedly more powerful Russian forces are confronted by a better-prepared Ukrainian asymmetric defense and conventional security forces employing asymmetric military tactics as part of their strong indirect approach to defending national territorial integrity. Ukraine's asymmetric strategic approach characterized by a mixture of insurgency tactics, civil resistance, diverse military operations carried out by its security forces, and strong external support received from the international community might explain Moscow's failure to achieve a quick victory.
After 2014, a consensus among some military analysts and planners developed that small nations do not have a realistic chance of defending themselves against more powerful invaders in conventional fighting and that their only viable alternative is, in fact, the indirect approach of becoming an indigestible nation by building a modern resistance force.
This consensus emerged when a full-scale invasion by a powerful Russian force against a weaker Ukrainian defender occurred in February 2022, a moment in time when most leaders believed that such an action was unthinkable in the 21st century. Although the indirect approach of building a strong government-organized resistance force demands a lot of time and resources even before the conflict arises, it may also have a deterrent effect by increasing the calculated costs of the invading army's force.
The assessments of the most current case studies that investigate Russia's use of hybrid warfare are summarized in Table 
1
Foremost among the conclusions drawn from the case studies analyses are the following.
First, an organized, properly equipped, and well-trained pre-conflict resistance force has a higher chance of success than if these actions and activities are carried out under wartime conditions. Pre-conflict preparations of the defender's ADC can provide both tactical and operational advantages over the invading forces.
This conclusion is strongly supported by the analysis of the First Russian-Chechen War (1994-1996), where, based on the invader's well-known capabilities, tactics, Georgian-Russian War and the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War case studies show that there were limited to no pre-conflict preparations of any territorial defense force because defenders were mainly focused on different capabilities like counterterrorism or peacekeeping and acquisition of modern weapon systems for their conventional forces. In these two cases, there were no plans for any asymmetric defense force, which may have been crucial during the conflicts and might have altered both outcomes. The second conclusion drawn from this research emphasizes that the defender's strategic approach is crucial, since it might increase the defender's prospects of success.
As mentioned by professor and U.S. Army veteran Ivan Arreguín-Toft, opposite strategic interactions (indirect-direct and direct-indirect) will favor the weaker actor regardless of the attacker's material preponderance. 
120
A preliminary analysis of the ongoing combat in Ukraine, which began in February 2022, indicates that Ukraine decided to use an indirect strategic approach against Russian forces from the outset. The Ukrainian troops were able to achieve outstanding successes by utilizing small, mobile units equipped with anti-tank missiles and hit-and-run tactics to slow Russia's armored forces, forcing Moscow to substantially downgrade its initial objectives. 
121
122
Preliminary analysis of the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, which began in 2022,
indicates that Ukraine has successfully applied important lessons learned from the 2014 conflict, countering Russian propaganda and successfully gaining strong domestic and international support because of its leaders' ability to communicate the defender's perspective on the war. According to Moran Yarchi, an expert in political communication, media coverage of conflicts, and public diplomacy, after the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian leadership, most notably President Volodymyr Zelensky, successfully used Imagefare (the use of images through the media) as their main tactic in the conflict to rally Ukrainian fighters and win the support of the international community.
123
124
125
In a 2019 monograph, former U.S. SOF officer, defense analyst, and historian, Will
Irwin found that, of all the case studies of the U.S. government's support for resistance throughout history, in just over a third the external support was performed in support of a military campaign, with around two out of three of these cases being successful. 
126
The initial evaluation of the external assistance Kyiv received before and during the 2022 conflict reveals both extensive military support from NATO, the United States, 125 Jeff Stein, "Democracy Defenders and Rambo Wannabes: Ukraine's Volunteer Foreign Fighters," Washington Post, January 18, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/01/18/foreign-fighterswar-ukraine-volunteers/.
126 Will Irwin, Support to Resistance: Strategic Purpose and Effectiveness (Tampa, Florida: Joint Special Operations University Press (JSOU), 2019), 182.
the European Union, and other Western nations, as well as the imposition of draconian political and economic sanctions intended to weaken Moscow's fighting capabilities. 
127
128
In 2022, Moscow's invading forces faced Ukrainian fighters who possessed high morale, a strong will to defend, and huge support from the local populace. While Russian forces received significant support from the local populace during the 2014 conflict, including a significant number of defectors possessing high military ranks, 129 the preliminary assessment of the 2022 conflict shows a high degree of civil resistance against the invader's forces and a surprisingly low number of Ukrainian collaborators. 
130
Ukraine's pre-conflict preparation of its resistance force, the asymmetric strategic approach characterized by a mixture of insurgency tactics, civil resistance, and military operations, combined with great PSYOP and IO results, consistent external support, and high morale and popular support might explain Moscow's failure to achieve a quick victory in the 2022 Ukrainian conflict. Although a preliminary analysis of the factors just mentioned may provide some insights into the 2022 Russo-Ukrainian war, a more thorough analysis will be needed after the war's completion because significant information and details of a crisis that is still ongoing at the time of this thesis's publication may be available.
While some small Nordic nations, such as Sweden and Estonia, have already embraced this total-defense strategy with a strong emphasis on the ADC, for others, this moment might be critical since appropriate decisions made too late might not produce the desired results. This is also the situation for Romania when it comes to making the right decisions during these critical moments. Second, embracing this asymmetric strategy should not replace or deemphasize the importance of conventional defense capabilities, but rather be used as a complement to them. By complementing conventional defense capabilities with a competent ADC, Romania should be able to counter both hybrid and conventional threats by employing both ADC forces and military means while sending strong deterrent signals of an "indigestible" nation.
Third, Romanian decision makers should recognize and designate ROU SOF as the leading actor in operationalizing a competent ADC, due to their unconventional mindset and capabilities as well as cross-cultural skills developed through more than a decade of combat deployments to counter multiple extremist organizations as part of GWOT efforts.
The irregular deterrence field is where ROU SOF can be effectively employed, while SOF's unique utility can be optimized to operationalize and support a competent and legal ADC during peacetime.
Finally, Romanian political and military leaders should amend the current doctrinal and normative legislation to ensure ROU SOF are adequately supported with specialized equipment, appropriate acquisition protocols, and necessary funds to achieve the ADC operationalizing task.
First, both the ROU SOF action arm and the command-and-control structure must shift from an Afghanistan direct-action mindset, in which a coalition effort and a technologically inferior opponent dominated the fighting environment, to a national defense mindset in which hybrid threats, cyber and IO operations, and a technologically superior opponent must be countered. This shift in thinking implies a greater emphasis on decentralized operations in which low-level commanders are given more decision-making authority, allowing them to adapt more swiftly to changing battlefield situations.
Furthermore, this approach also implies a significant ROU SOF specialization in conducting unconventional operations, which should not jeopardize Romania's previous international and regional commitments wherein ROU SOF are mainly part of various NATO force packages. This approach should only complement ROU SOF's main capabilities in conducting special reconnaissance (SR), direct action (DA), and military assistance (MA).
Second, after assuming the leading role in selecting, training, and organizing a capable and credible ADC, ROU SOF should effectively educate all the other organizations that comprise the national defense layer, since strong inter-agency cooperation is paramount for achieving great results on the battlefield.
Third, ROU SOF should develop and implement a national exercise to review, evaluate, and constantly update the approach for operationalizing a capable ADC in which all actors and organizations should actively engage, even if the exercise is designed and led by ROU SOF. Since all aspects of operationalizing a capable ADC during peacetime should remain classified, a classified platform at the national level should be established to allow the national exercise to efficiently take place.
Since deterrence effects are difficult to evaluate and measure, further research may focus on explaining how strategic communication and signaling capabilities of a competent ADC during peacetime should be combined to maximize the deterrent outcomes without serving as triggers for the potential aggressor to initiate hostilities. Furthermore, this aspect might be directly linked to the negative impact that comes from signaling a prepared ADC that might backfire on the civilian population, such as when deterrence has failed and invading forces commit atrocities against any civilians they treat as potential ADC members.
For a small nation defender to make the most of choosing the resistance approach for defense, the capable government-organized resistance force must also be able to carry out specific operations within the invader's own territory. Additional research should go into the SOF's role in the planning phase regarding the development of specific plans to either connect resistance forces with anti-government groups within the invader's nation or infiltrate well-trained resistance fighters-possibly from a third-party nation-into the invader's territory to harm the invader within its own borders and increase the cost of the invasion. When and how should SOF be able to create or extend the ADC capabilities in order for them to be able to operate within the invader's borders and hit strategic and operational objectives? As the integrator of comprehensive defense and military resistance layer, should SOF start thinking about training potential resistance fighters able to infiltrate into the invader's territory just before the invasion, or should this become a later phase within the overall defense strategy?
conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts including indiscriminate violence and coercion, and criminal disorder." 10 Most broadly, hybrid warfare implies an inventive combination of both military and civilian ways and means that are synchronously employed within the same battlespace. Hoffman argues that, within a decisive confrontation, the regular forces' ability to fight is highly facilitated by the support offered by the irregular component. 11 In his perspective, within hybrid warfare,
Moreover, rumors and reports circulated mentioning U.S. Stingers coming from Afghanistan, which were more likely an efficient Chechen deception to affect Russian air operations. From the technical perspective, by having access to the Russian communication systems, Chechens were able to transmit multiple disinformation messages. Some of the messages were meant to send Russian troops directly into designated kill zones while others were intended merely to create confusion among the Russian forces. Furthermore, mobile and small television platforms with television and radio equipment were efficiently used by Chechens to override the Russian TV programs and send short messages over the entire battlefield 45 Karasik, "Chechen Clan Military Tactics and Russian Warfare." 46 Karasik.
Moreover, rumors and reports circulated mentioning U.S. Stingers coming from Afghanistan, which were more likely an efficient Chechen deception to affect Russian air operations. From the technical perspective, by having access to the Russian communication systems, Chechens were able to transmit multiple disinformation messages. Some of the messages were meant to send Russian troops directly into designated kill zones while others were intended merely to create confusion among the Russian forces. Furthermore, mobile and small television platforms with television and radio equipment were efficiently used by Chechens to override the Russian TV programs and send short messages over the entire battlefield 45 Karasik, "Chechen Clan Military Tactics and Russian Warfare." 46 Karasik.
assisting the National Guard, National Police, or military forces in their tasks, guarding traffic checkpoints, or even being first engaged in combat hostilities defending critical _________________________________________________________ NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL | MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA | WWW.NPS.EDU
Popular quote from Sun Tzu, The Art of War. See, for example, http://www.goodreads.com/author/ quotes/1771.
NATO Special Operations Headquarters, Comprehensive Defense Handbook (Shape, Belgium:  Quartier General, 2020), vol. 1.   
Ivan Arreguín-Toft, "How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflict," International Security 26, no. 1 (2001): 93-128, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3092079.
[100][101][102][103][104] 
Fiala, Resistance Operating Concept.   
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL | MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA | WWW.NPS.EDU
United States Special Operations Command, "SOF Core Activities," accessed February 16, 2022, https://www.socom.mil/about/core-activities.
NATO Standardization Office (NSO), Allied Joint Doctrine for Special Operations, AJP 3.5, Edition B Version 1 (Brussels, Belgium, 2019), 1.
Mark Galeotti, "Hybrid, Ambiguous, and  Non-Linear? How New Is Russia's 'New Way of War'?," Small Wars & Insurgencies 27, no. 2 (March 21, 2016): 282-301, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 09592318.2015.1129170.
Murat Caliskan and Michel Liégeois, "The Concept of 'Hybrid Warfare' Undermines NATO's Strategic Thinking: Insights from Interviews with NATO Officials," Small Wars & Insurgencies 32, no. 2 (February 17, 2021): 295-319, https://doi.org/10.1080/09592318.2020.1860374.
Stoker and Whiteside, "Blurred  Lines: Gray-Zone Conflict and Hybrid War-Two Failures of American Strategic Thinking."
Williamson Murray and Peter R. Mansoor, Hybrid Warfare: Fighting Complex Opponents from the Ancient World to the Present (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 2.
Sam Jones, "Ukraine: Russia's New Art of War," Financial Times, August 28, 2014, https://www.ft.com/content/ea5e82fa-2e0c-11e4-b760-00144feabdc0.
Mark Galeotti, "The 'Gerasimov Doctrine' and Russian Non-Linear War," In Moscow's Shadows  (blog), July 6, 2014, https://inmoscowsshadows.wordpress.com/2014/07/06/the-gerasimov-doctrine-andrussian-non-linear-war/.
23 Valery Gerasimov, "Value of Science in Anticipation: New Challenges Require Rethinking of the Forms and Methods of Warfare," Military Industrial Courier, February 27, 2013, https://vpk-news.ru/ articles/
14632. 24 Christopher Chivvis, Understanding Russian "Hybrid Warfare": And What Can Be Done About It (Santa Monica, California: Rand Corporation, 2017), https://doi.org/10.7249/CT468.
Romanian General Staff, "Rezerviști Voluntari," [Volunteer reservists] accessed March 12, 2022, https://www.defense.ro/rezervisti.
NATO Special Operations Headquarters, Comprehensive Defense Handbook.   
World Bank, "Military Expenditure (% of GDP) -Georgia," Data, accessed August 18, 2022, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/MS.MIL.XPND.GD.ZS?locations=GE.
Jeffrey Sparshott and Philip Shishkin, "Ukraine to Get More U.S. Aid, but Not Weapons," Wall Street Journal, September 18, 2014, sec. Europe, http://online.wsj.com/articles/ukraine-leader-calls-formore-western-military-aid-1411055160.
112 Michael Lee, "The U.S. Army's Green Berets Quietly Helped Tilt the Battlefield a Little Bit More toward Ukraine," Text, Article, Fox News (Fox News, March 21, 2022), https://www.foxnews.com/ politics/us-armys-green-berets-have-lasting-impact-on-fight-in-ukraine.
Ivan Arreguín-Toft, How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflict, Illustrated edition (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 18.
Moran Yarchi, "The Image War as a Significant Fighting Arena -Evidence from the Ukrainian Battle over Perceptions during the 2022 Russian Invasion," Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, April 26, 2022, 10, https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610X.2022.2066525.
Yarchi,
[5]
through specific policies like passportization, 
57
Following the 2003 bloody "Rose Revolution" and immediately after Mikheil Saakashvili assumed office as the president in January 2004, he made regaining the sovereignty of Abkhazia and South Ossetia separatist areas one of his priorities. 
58
59
60
61
In order to meet the requirements for NATO membership, at the beginning of 2002 the Georgian Armed Forces began deemphasizing territorial defense and instead focused their training on counterterrorism and peacekeeping tactics, techniques, and procedures.
to unify Ukrainian society and solve its underlying issues, it just served as a prologue to the "Maidan Revolution" in 2013-2014, 86 when violent and bloody clashes occurred between government forces and people protesting against then-president Viktor Yanukovych's refusal to sign the Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
In the end, prolonged demonstrations and violent confrontations led to the president's ouster, resulting in a pro-Western interim government being installed in charge of the nation's capital and Western regions while the country's South-Eastern regions continued to support Viktor Yanukovich's policies.
These circumstances were immediately exploited by Russia, which seized the opportunity to regain influence and control over Ukraine and prevent a geopolitical disaster brought on by one of Russia's most important neighbors' inclinations towards the West.
Therefore, according to American military analyst and researcher Michael Kofman, the Russian reaction took the form of two distinct and concomitant military operations: the invasion and annexation of Crimea (February-March 2014) and the instigation of a political protest movement that swiftly evolved into a violent insurgency in Eastern Ukraine (February-May 2014). 
87
104
The Ukrainian interim government was not able to successfully counter the operational and tactical Russian maskirovka, broadly understood as the Russian deception built into every level of their military art. At the operational level, as military analyst Kofman noted in 2017, the Ukrainian leaders were unsure of what Russia's actual goals were in Crimea and postponed taking any decisive military action out of caution for fear of further escalation. 
106