# ID: 75e2b52a62ff410680a577c13a5606f3
# Title: Utilization of Private Military Companies in the Contemporary International Security Environment
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions
States utilize Private Military Companies (PMCs) as a convenient augmentation of their foreign policy toolbox to achieve specific effects on the International Security Environment (ISE). The differences in application of PMCs depends on the state's political system, rules of law, and the state's leader's perspectives. In the last forty years, PMCs are attributed in almost every military conflict. In some cases, states made a deliberate choice to utilize PMCs. In others, states developed a dependency on the private military and can no longer pursue foreign endeavors without PMCs. After the end of the Cold War, the expectation of peace caused total sequestration of armed forces worldwide, creating a situation where there were more security challenges than uniformed soldiers to respond. States unwilling to mobilize the national armed forces turned to PMCs as a solution. PMCs provide a low-cost, low-risk, and flexible option to expand the state's influence in the ISE while enabling plausible deniability in politically risky affairs and avoiding democratic processes. The United States and Russia are examined to compare and contrast utilization of PMCs in the contemporary ISE.
I dedicate this thesis to the fallen Ukrainian soldiers and officers, who sacrificed everything to protect our beloved motherland. Glory to Ukraine, Glory to Heroes! 
In the current international security environment, nation-states find it harder and harder to deploy national militaries abroad to pursue their political and strategic aims. In Corporate Warriors, P.W. Singer identifies three main reasons major industrial powers hesitate to employ national military might: 1) most of the potential military conflicts don't have a direct relation to the state's survival; 2) states' armed forces are created for large-scale state-on-state conventional conflict and seem inappropriate for limited engagements; and, 3) a casualty-averse mentality about conflicts that do not threaten the nation itself.
1
The term "Private Military Company" is a relatively new name for one of the oldest professions. History knows private warriors under many names -mercenaries, condottieri, privateers, and contractors. As Sean McFate suggested "most of military history is privatized, and mercenaries are as old as war itself." 2 From the time of Hannibal to the end of the French Revolution, anyone who could afford to hire an army could wage war for self-interest. Even the Papacy used mercenaries to eliminate threats to the church. However, the horrific destructiveness of the Thirty Years War solidified agreement by all sides that the use of armed violence would be legitimized and governed.
The private market was, thus, monopolized by the new entities that emerged from the Peace at Westphalia -states. 
3
4
The United States and the United Kingdom are considered the countries where modern PMCs originated. The first modern PMC is considered the British company Watch Guard International founded in 1965. In the late 1980s, U.S. companies Vinnell and Military Professional Resources, Inc. followed the developing trend. Nowadays, many others are imitating the Western model and, in some cases, revolutionizing the employment of PMCs. Countries like Russia, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Colombia produce PMCs that provide robust military capabilities for the highest bidder -typically with little regard to human rights, international law, or ethical behaviors. 
5
However, the old definition is obsolete to apply to the modern style PMCs, because private military activities are not currently regulated by the international legal norms. 
7
8
In The End of the Global?, Aanchal Mann notes that " the state has played a vital role in this [the legitimization of PMC practices] in order, to gain advantages in geopolitical strategy and foreign policy." 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
In the last fifty years, the phenomenon of private military force has reinvented itself and grown into a multi-billion industry. PMCs operate in virtually all contemporary conflicts. Some suggest that private military force gained so much influence in the ISE that they should be considered as "secondary international actors."
17
1) contemporary conflicts are not about state survival; 2) nation-states' armed forces are inappropriate for limited conflicts; and, 3) a casualty-averse mentality pervades modern state logic. 
18
19
Through the analysis of case studies, this paper will demonstrate: 1) that PMCs are tools for foreign policy and can assist in the pursuit of national interests by other means; 2) that PMCs have strategic and operational effects, roles and impacts; and 3) that states differ in the way they utilize and promote PMCs.
Scholars debate the phenomenon of private military and security companies and their possible impact on the future of war and warfare, but most consider legality, nature, the roots of the phenomena, and to a lesser degree the analyses of how states are using the PMCs to pursue their interests. This paper also aims to understand the options and scope that PMCs present for nation-states, and to identify differences in application and contributing factors. The United States and Russia will be analyzed and compared to demonstrate different applications of PMCs in their pursuit of foreign policy objectives in the ISE.
Chapter 2: The Old Tool with the New Name Historically, national armed forces consisting of citizen-soldiers is the exception rather than the rule. "Most of the military history is privatized, and mercenaries as old as war itself." 1 States' monopoly on violence is roughly 200 years old, but the phenomena of private warriors that fight for profit dates as far back as King Shulgi of Ur's army in Mesopotamia (2094-2047 BC). 2 Depending on the point in history, these private warriors operated as individual foreign fighters -mercenaries or highly organized groups, much like as the Xenophon's "Ten Thousand," a group of Greek soldiers, fought in the Persian civil war (401-400 BC). 
3
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a historical overview of the different entities that provided warfighting capabilities for monetary reward. Three historical phases of privatized warfare categorize the historical overview: dominance, decline, and resurgence. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
During the seventeenth century, major battles usually involved upwards of 50,000 combatants consisting primarily of private military forces. 
15
16
17
Mercenaries never had it so good, or civilians so bad." 
18
19
20
21
22
23
The French Revolution signified the decline of mercenarism because it finalized the state's control over violence implemented through nationalism aroused from patriotism. 
24
26
27
28
24
25
26
28
29 David A. Latzko, "Market for Mercenaries," Wilkes University, 1998.Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.
Improvements in the administration of governments completely erased mercenaries from warfare. Larger armies required a centralized state apparatus and improved taxation system.
30
31
32
33
34
35
All political disputes were solved either diplomatically or by waging war with national armies. For nearly 150 years, citizen armies dominated warfare, but changes in the Strategic Environment signified a new phase in the use of mercenaries -resurgence.
The end of Cold War, globalization, and the rise of neoliberalism prompted nation-states to reconsider their approach to international relations and conflict, which thereby created conditions for the reintroduction of mercenaries in the ISE. 
36
38
39
At the same time, Western nation-states saw an absence of a clear direct threat and no strategic competition. Accordingly, defense budgets were significantly reduced, which created opportunities for the PMC phenomenon. 
40
41
36
37
42
43
Historian Alan Axelrod offers that PMCs grew in prominence not simply due to the end of Cold War and the resultant emergence of failing states. 
44
45
The collapse of the ISE, rising asymmetric threats, demobilization, and the decommissioning of entire functional areas of national militaries created security gaps that facilitated promotion of PMCs. Most scholars suggest that nation-states benefitted from the lack of oversight and control of the growing PMC phenomena, thereby, did not support the development of such legal system that would regulate it. High demand on private military services made PMCs acceptable in the ISE as a developing norm. 46 
42
43
44
5
6
7
8
9
10
In The Utility of Force, General Rupert Smith argues that inter-state industrial war no longer exists, replaced by a new type of war -war amongst people, where there are no clear battlefields and armies. 11 Mary Kaldor offers her interpretation of modern armed violent conflicts, where 'new wars' are conflicts that blur the distinction between war, organized crime and large-scale violations of human rights. 12 Wars amongst people and new wars also have other names that support war's ambiguous nature, such as hybrid war, asymmetric war, and grey zone conflict. The conventional national military forces are usually not fit for these types of wars and conflicts. Thereby, political leaders are unable to provide their military leaders with clear objectives and aims, which leads to prolonged conflict, and incurs extra expenses and more casualties. Casualties and expenses lead to the public outcry and demands for extraction. This in turn, usually compels the particular government to withdraw some of the troops, which is more politically acceptable. In these situations, nation-states turn their attention towards other means available to support national interests. PMCs are a luring option due to cost, risk, flexibility, and plausible deniability.
Because nation-states prefer to invest in the welfare of the state rather than security, they are monetarily challenged to meet the new security demands. 
13
14
First, the PMC option allows states to reallocate precious funding required to retain and maintain standing military units. According to the U.S. Congressional Budget Office, the cost to maintain an infantry unit in Iraq was approximately $110 million while 12 Mary Kaldor, New & Old Wars: Organized Violence in a Global Era, Third edition (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 2012), 2. 
13
15
16
War and conflict pose inherent political risk, especially if the nation itself is not threatened. With the increasing complexity in the ISE, states may either reconsider their foreign ambitions or seek more efficient options to security challenges. PMCs allow states to keep the same level of involvement in geopolitics while decreasing risk associated with introducing armed forces. In the aftermath of WWII, Korea, and Vietnam, states, especially western states, developed an intolerance to casualties in missions abroad. 17 However, PMCs are not considered in official casualty reports because their employees do not count as 'boots on the ground'. 
18
19
20
21
22
Despite the fact that today, most states prefer to spend their resources on improvement of social welfare, PMCs create an ability to purchase required capability on demand. Private military and security enterprises offer a range of services in all warfighting domains -land, air, sea, cyber, and space, and PMCs provide flexibility across the spectrum of joint functions: intelligence, information, command and control, fires, movement and maneuver, protection, and sustainment. 
23
Modern warfare is technology driven; there is no need for large standing armies to annihilate the enemy of the state. 
24
25
During long campaigns, outsourcing to the private sector also facilitates flexibility in mobilization and recruitment measures for states' militaries. PMCs decrease associated risks and can be an alternative source of manpower that can assist with mobilization and mitigate the recruitment gap. 
26
Plausible deniability is the ability to disavow participation in illegal or unethical events due to absence of clear evidence. 
27
29
When the response materialized, it was too late; the Russians had already facilitated the referendum. Plausible deniability is a key characteristic of PMC usage, and a handy tool in the foreign policy toolbox because it allows states to deny involvement and delays the reaction of external international players.
The historical overview and discussion of the factors that make PMCs appealing are imperative for understanding the PMC phenomenon, with the factors justifying why nation-states choose to delegate some of their monopoly over the employment of military force to private actors. This paper now presents two case studies to determine the differences in ways they utilize PMCs and facilitates the discussion of considerations for contemporary use of PMCs. Russia traditionally treasured the Weberian model, where the state had a complete monopoly on the use of violence. 5 However, the fall of the Soviet Union naturally led to a reduction in the size of Russian military and intelligence services (the KGB and/or GRU), leaving former soldiers and officers in search of employment at home and abroad. 
6
3 Ibid. 
4
RAPPORT, September 11, 2018, 53, 13. 6
7
The Soviet military machine transitioned as well. Some elite units with marketable skillsets reconstituted themselves as 'readymade' PMCs. 
8
9
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
33
35
36
In the last ten years, involvement of Russian PMCs in the disruption of the ISE is well documented in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, Central African Republic (CAR), Sudan, and Venezuela. These cases represent the variety of missions that Russian PMCs facilitate on behalf of and in cooperation with the Russian government. In Ukraine, PMCs played a crucial role in the Russian invasion of Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, taking part in direct combat operations. They trained, consulted with, and oversaw the separatist movement, acting under the guidance and oversight of the GRU (the Main Military Intelligence Directorate) and the FSB (Internal Security Service, the heir of KGB). When some of the 33 Ibid. 34 "PMC RUSH: RUSSIAN PRIVATE ARMIES," International Volunteer Community, Inform Napalm, 2018, http://informnapalm.rocks/pmc_rush. 
35
36
separatist leaders became uncontrolled, there is evidence of PMCs involved in elimination and subsequent staging to place the blame on the Ukrainian secret services. 
37
40
The complexity of describing the case of the U.S. PMC industry lies in the perception that not all U.S. military-related contractors are PMCs. Most U.S. contractors are associated with the concept of Operational Contract Support (OCS). According to JP 4-10, OCS is the process that ensures support of combatant commander operations through the arrangement of commercial resources. 
41
Americans were first introduced to PMCs during the Revolutionary War in 1776.
The Continental Army employed PMCs for training and advising missions. 
42
43
44
45
46
47
The Cold War opened new opportunities for the development of American PMCs.
During the 1950s and 1960s, federally funded research and development centers (FFRDC) were created, and the Pentagon committed to delegate more military capabilities to private actors. The Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University and RAND started as consulting and think tank corporations that worked for the Department of Defense. 
48
During the unpopular war in Vietnam, the U.S. Government relied heavily on PMCs for essential services that traditionally belonged to the uniformed personnel. PMCs like Brown and Root and J.A. Johns Corporation were contracted for construction, base
The terrorist attacks on September 11 th , 2001 and the ensuing Global War on Terrorism stimulated the PMC industry to unseen proportion. 
54
55
56
57
58
Avant suggests that in 2004 the United States utilized 150,000 to 170,000 private employees in the theater. 
60
65
77
Unlike Russian PMCs that are semi-private and officially illegal, U.S. PMCs are legally registered and openly advertise their services. PMC personnel in United States are officially employed under a defined corporate structure, and work under established terms and conditions with a sense of accountability to the company. 
79
80
81
82
86
In the United States, PMCs are legal corporations, many of which are on the world stock markets. However, it is hard to get data about private military contractors, mainly because of proprietary information. Despite the fact that those companies act as proxies of the state, they are not legally obliged to share information with the public on their actions, organization or labor force. At the same time, the utility of PMCs has allowed the Executive Branch of the United States to exercise advantage over Congress in decisions to employ force and influence foreign policy. Since the U.S. government does not count PMC employees as part of their official numbers on the ground, it can deploy more people than its official reports portray.
3
The United States promotes PMCs by developing a dependency on their services.
PMCs follow and support U.S. troops and agencies around the world. America simply cannot go to war without PMCs anymore.
Both cases are unique in their own way. Russia is using its semi-private military companies to proceed with actions that otherwise could not be conducted by official Russian armed forces due to political sensitivity or illegal nature. Russian PMCs are willing to participate in the direct actions and risk heavy casualties. On the contrary, U.S.
PMCs are private corporations that are contracted by the state. Usually, the U.S.
government employs PMCs to augment existing capabilities or, in some cases, substitute lack of capacity. U.S. PMCs are defensive in nature and there are no known instances where private contractors conducted offensive actions on behalf of the U.S. government.
The United States values PMCs as a way to augment the national armed forces or facilitate training of partnering military forces. Russia perceives PMCs as a fighting party to conceal official military involvement. So, the prominent difference between the two states is either 'with' or 'instead' of the national armed forces.
States utilize private military companies as a convenient augmentation to their foreign policy toolbox, thereby, PMCs have a specific impact on the international security environment. The difference in application of PMCs depends on factors such as political systems, rules of law, and state's leader's perspectives. This research sought to test this thesis by first understanding and explaining the history and logic of privatized warfare through the evolution of the phenomenon, highlighted in its three phasesdominance, decline, and resurgence. History reveals an interesting pattern, that citizen armies are more of an aberration rather than rule.
PMCs were then analyzed in relation to the nation-state in order to understand why this phenomenon has an evolving role in the International Security Environment.
The benefits that PMCs provide to the state (low cost, low risk, flexible and plausible deniability) expand the state's strategic and operational reach in the ISE. Unregulated by international law, the private military industry is rapidly growing fast globally. Nationstates, which have previously been consumers of PMCs' services, have now started to develop the industry regionally with a willingness to compete in the world market, offering more services and capabilities or better prices and conditions.
The analysis of the case studies reveals differences in history, policies, doctrine, and nature of two diametrical states -Russia and the United States. As the findings demonstrate, utilization of PMCs for the Russian government is a conscious and deliberate choice. While PMCs are absent in official Russian doctrine, they are very much incorporated in hybrid warfare as non-state actors. PMCs allow the Kremlin to operate in the gray zone while avoiding attribution to avoid political risk. PMCs in Russia are illegal, and the Kremlin uses this fact to ensure additional control over their activity.
Russian PMCs are prone to and specialized in direct combat actions, serving as organized mercenaries working for and controlled by the state.
Conversely, the United States depends on PMCs to such an extent that it can be considered "a strategic vulnerability."
1
In most cases, PMCs generate operational level effects on the ISE, but because there are other actors and variables in the same environment, it is hard to measure the exact effect PMCs generate in any particular situation. There are, however, clear examples where the employment of PMCs produced strategic effects. For instance, Russia's use of PMCs in Venezuela facilitated Maduro's grip on power which had a strategic impact and prevented a power shift in South America. The United States utilized PMCs to assist Bosnia and Croatia in building their own armed forces, which led to the fall of Yugoslavia and dissuaded Iranian influence in the Balkans.
In both states, the use of PMCs skirts democratic channels and simplifies the utility of force. PMCs are complimentary tools for foreign policy to pursue national objectives by other means. Russia is more aggressive in this matter due to the manpower availability in post-Soviet states and the shadowy nature of the industry. The United
38  
38  
Alan Axelrod, Mercenaries: A Guide to Private Armies and Private Military Companies (Thousand Oaks, California: CQ Press, 2014), 192. 45 Alan Axelrod, Mercenaries: A Guide to Private Armies and Private Military Companies, 193. 46 Ibid.
Alan Axelrod, Mercenaries: A Guide to Private Armies and Private Military Companies (Thousand Oaks, California: CQ Press, 2014), 192. 45 Alan Axelrod, Mercenaries: A Guide to Private Armies and Private Military Companies, 193. 46 Ibid.
14
13
11    
11    
Stanley
94  
94  
P. W. Singer, Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
2008), 58. 2 Sean McFate, Mercenaries and War: Understanding Private Armies Today (National Defense University, 2019), 10. 3 McFate, Mercenaries and War, 13.
P. W. Singer, "Outsourcing War," Foreign Affairs, January 28, 2009, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2005-03-01/outsourcing-war.
Marcus Mohlin, "Commercialisation of Warfare and Shadow Wars: Private Military Companies as Strategic Tools," St Antony's International Review 9, no. 2 (2014), 24.
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 25.   
Trew Bel and Bourhan Rajaai, "Inside the Murky World of Libya's Mercenaries," Independent, June 16, 2020, https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/libya-war-haftar-gna-syria-russiawagner-uae-tripoli-a9566736.html.
  15  Singer, Corporate Warriors,
 8.  16  Ibid.
Anna Leander, "The Power to Construct International Security: On the Significance of Private Military Companies," 2005, https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/03058298050330030601.
Singer, Corporate Warriors, 58.   
Mann, 196   
Anna Leander, The Power to Construct International Security: On the Significance of Private Military Companies (Millennium 33, no. 3 June 2005), 804.
Peterson, "The Future of Privatized Warfare", 6.
Singer, Corporate Warriors,
22
Sarah Percy, "The Changing Character of Private Force," in The Changing Character of War, ed. HewStrachan and Sibylle Scheipers (Oxford University Press, 2011), 267.   
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 11.   
John A. Lynn, "The Evolution of Army Style in the Modern West, 800-2000," The International HistoryReview 18, no. 3 (1996): 518.
Hew Strachan, European Armies and the Conduct of War (London: Routledge, 1983), https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&AuthType=ip,shib&db=nlebk&AN=136654&site=eh ost-live&scope=site&custid=s1123049, 9.
Peterson, "The Future of Privatized Warfare", 17.
Singer, Corporate Warriors,
22.
Peterson, "The Future of Privatized Warfare",
7.
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 12.   
Ibid.   
Ibid.,
13.
McFate, Mercenaries and War,
13.
Bruce E. Stanley, Outsourcing Security: Private Military Contractors and U.S. Foreign Policy. (Potomac Books, an imprint of the University of Nebraska Press,
2015), 5.20  Joseph M Tribble, "The Mercenary Tradition and Conflict Privatization: A Revolutionary Shift in the Cyclical Nature of Mercenary Use," n.d.,22.  21  McFate, The Modern Mercenary: Private Armies and What They Mean for World Order, 32.
22
23
Singer, Corporate Warriors, 30.   
Eckert, Outsourcing War,
65.
Ibid., 31.   
Peterson, "The Future of Privatized Warfare", 10.
McFate, The Modern Mercenary, 34.   
Ibid., 35.   
Peterson, "The Future of Privatized Warfare."
Eckert, Outsourcing War, 62.   
P. W. Singer, Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry, updated, Cornell Studies in Security Affairs (Cornell University Press, 2008), 56.
Mann, 2018, 196   
McFate, The Modern Mercenary,
[46]
[48]
McFate, Mercenaries and War,[24][25] 
Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World, 1st Vintage Books ed (New York: Vintage Books, 2008), 3-5.
McFate, The Modern Mercenary,
[46]
Deborah C. Kidwell, Public War, Private Fight? The United States and Private Military  Companies, Third printing edition (S.l.: lulu.com, 2011), 28.   
Singer, Corporate Warriors, 58.   
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 24.   
Aanchal Mann, "Hired Guns," 196.   
Elke Krahmann, States, Citizens and the Privatisation of Security (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 239.
John A. Lynn, "The Evolution of Army Style in the Modern West,800-2000," The International  History Review 18, no. 3 (1996): 505-45, 537.   
Singer, Corporate Warriors, 63.   
David Perry, "Purchasing Power", 15.   
Political Dictionary, March 27, 2013, https://politicaldictionary.com/words/plausibledeniability/.
28 Marcus Mohlin, "Commercialization of Warfare and Shadow Wars: Private Military Companies as Strategic Tools," St Antony's InternationalReview 9, no. 2 (2014): 24-38, 34.   
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 25.   
Carl von Clausewitz, Michael Howard, and Peter Paret, On War (New York, N.Y. [etc.: Knopf,  1993), 99.
Bowen, "Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs)."
Ibid.
Bukkvoll and Østensen, "The Emergence of Russian Private Military Companies."
Bowen, "Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs).
Østensen and Bukkvoll, "Russian Use of Private Military and Security Companies", 28.
Bowen, "Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs).
Ibid.   
Ibid.
Ibid.   
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 1.   
Ibid.   
Bukkvoll and Østensen, "The Emergence of Russian Private Military Companies."
McFate, Mercenaries and War, 3.   
Bowen, "Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs).
Ibid.   
Bowen, "Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs).
Ibid.   
Andrew S Bowen, "Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs)," Congressional Research Service (CRS), September 16,
2020, 3.   
Mohlin, "Commercialisation of Warfare and Shadow Wars."   
McFate, "America's Addiction to Mercenaries."
McFate, Mercenaries and War.   
I want to thank the 
Joint Advanced Warfighting School
Captain James E. Jacobs
Finally, and most importantly, a huge thank you to my wife, 
Kohana
Almighty God
NDU-JFSC
n/a 12. DISTRIBUTION/
This research concentrated on the PMCs that provide 'boots on the ground' services, fully acknowledging that the industry is capable of providing services in all warfighting domains. Cyber and space services provided by private military enterprises are growing in number and accessibility. The private military industry denounces borders and follows profit as it has historically, and soon will act as a separate actor in the ISE.
When PMCs go borderless, they potentially become a threat even for host countries. As noted, "War, in short, has once more been denationalized. It has become, as it was the eighteenth century, an affair of states and no longer of peoples." 2 2 Michael Howard, "War and the Nation-State," The MIT Press on Behalf of American Academy of Arts & Sciences Stable 108, no. 4 (1979): 101-10, 106.  