# ID: 777ba4a7e0564e6c88177b43068fc23c
# Title: Integrating Defense, Diplomacy, and Development (3 D) in the Naval Special Warfare Operator
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour
The U.S. Ambassador (Chief of Mission) to Nigeria sat at the head of a long mahogany table. To her left sat the Deputy Chief of Mission-often referred to as "Chargé d'Affaires" or simply Chargé. The U.S. Embassy Abuja broadcast a live video feed to telecommunicate with the consulate in Lagos. Around the table sat the lead public affairs, regional affairs, and regional security officers, the general service, financial service, and political-military officers, the defense attaché, a U.S. Agency for International Development representative, the office of security cooperation chief and the special operations command and control element (SOCCE) officer. The individuals around this table were seasoned professionals in their 40s and 50s, each fulfilling a multiyear tour in Nigeria-all except for the SOCCE Commander, who sat at the table for the first time since entering the country. Filling in as the Embassy's Country Team's Special
Operations representative, the young officer on temporary orders was approximately five pay grades below and 15 years younger than his peers, with limited training and knowledge on the diplomatic processes and interagency environment. This was not a typical SEAL mission.
Prior to his deployment to Nigeria, the SOCCE Commander completed an 18month work-up cycle, which prepared his SEAL Troop to prosecute missions ranging from combat diving, jungle warfare, long range reconnaissance patrols, ambushing enemy forces, boarding ships seized by pirates in rough seas, and urban combat. 
1
The conversation went from the ambassador's next ribbon cutting for a newly tapped water well by the civil affairs teams; then it moved to the Public Affairs office's progress on the draft of her address at a new school in a remote village. It segued in to security threats against the embassy, to upcoming congressional delegation visits, to systemic problems with country visa authorizations, and then to the details on the next President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) project. The discussion was out of the normal working context to the SEAL, who had spent his career training for war and had multiple combat tours in Iraq and Afghanistan in recent years. The conversation never diverted to ISR asset allocation windows or a target's "pattern of life." 2 No intelligence officers stood up to give PowerPoint presentations on the location of a highvalue terrorist to aid the planning of a capture/kill mission. The SOCCE quickly learned that language discussing kinetic operations was not to be used around the embassy. It had no application and, in fact, it was he, not the discussion, which was out of context.
This case illustrates the disparity in the job a SEAL is trained for and what he is expected to do in irregular warfare (IW). 
3
In November 2009, the U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) released its first ever long-range strategy and implementation plan. Although it does address 2 Information surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) is commonly used in referencing the assets used for tracking terrorists and understanding their pattern of life (daily routines). 
3
resources and the need to continually improve Special Operations Force's (SOF) fighting position in the war against Al Qaeda and other terrorist networks, the primary focus centers on the operator: the human. 
4
5
6
1
Graphical Portrayal of 3-D Construct
The following sections describe how the 2010 USSOCOM strategy defines each "D" and how we associate them to Naval Special Warfare (NSW). Below, we unpack each of the three D concepts to understand them clearly before using them to guide our search for the NSW 3-D operator.
"In the realm of Defense, the 3-D operator understands regional and local interests, and builds long term trust in support of diplomatic efforts." 7 Post 9-11 operations in Afghanistan and Iraq illustrate a robust NSW capacity to perform within the parameters of the "defense" dimension of USSOCOM's 3-D operator concept. For example, missions during Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) eventually transitioned from unilateral to bilateral through the inclusion of Iraqi security forces. This transition forced SEAL Special Operation Task Forces (SOTFs) to achieve success "by, with, and through" host nations units, successes largely predicated on NSW's ability to understand sensitive, non-secular disparities at the regional level as well as political lobbies for power at the local level. Results from NSW "defensive" efforts were largely evident in Al Anbar, Iraq during "The Awakening," a period from 2006 to 2007 when local citizens and Iraqi Defense Forces collaborated in order to successfully reclaim their neighborhoods from a growing insurgency. Coalition victories during the Awakening showcased NSW's "defensive" aptitude, but as the conflict seasoned, so did the requirements for victory. "Defensive" efforts alone would not be enough.
According to the USSOCOM Strategic Plan, "In the realm of Diplomacy, the 3-D
Operator integrates assistance activities with broader interagency and international efforts." 8 As the battlefields in Afghanistan and Iraq matured, NSW units became increasingly interwoven with the interagency and adjacent combat partners to achieve greater efficacy in the full range of military operations (ROMO). This focus centered on 7 USSOCOM Strategic Plan, 5.
8 Ibid.
engendering relationships, which is the "diplomatic" dimension of the 3-D operator.
These operations, which included rebuilding Iraqi security forces (vice unilaterally engaging the enemy), were also conducted successfully. However, unlike defense and diplomacy, "development," remains an area of expertise that NSW must focus on to build a greater capacity and more completely fulfill all three conditions of the 3-D operator.
In the realm of Development, the 3-D operator brings unique skill sets addressing both direct and indirect means. Direct means include those capabilities that aggressively counter adversaries. Indirect means include those capabilities for building partner capacity and establishing long term relationships. 
9
under the Special Activity Teams (SA-1/SA-2) are NSW's partner capacity builders.
Their training provides a force that understands and utilizes the indirect tools necessary to achieve victory in irregular warfare. The NSWADs are discussed at greater length in the fourth chapter of this thesis.
The 3-Ds embody the current way of war for the United States government (USG). The so-called long war, also commonly referred to as "Overseas Contingency Operations," is not like the World Wars on which our military is based, where victory is achieved by subjugating the enemy with overwhelming firepower. 10
The Strategic Plan's Focus Area 1: The Operator, Implementation Task 1.1 is the section that pertains to this thesis. It guides NSW to, "Build mechanisms to effectively mesh DOD irregular warfare activities with the diplomatic and development efforts of interagency partners, especially at country team level." 
11
10 The Obama Administration has replaced the "global war on terror" (GWOT) terminology with the term long war, sometimes called "overseas contingency operations," to describe the ongoing war against Al Qaeda and violent extremist groups.
11 USSOCOM Strategic Plan, 8.
United States and its allies today are predominantly groups or networks of individuals rather than nation states or conventional militaries. Given the irregular nature of this conflict, U.S. and allied forces have to step outside the construct of conventional military wisdom on how to prosecute war. Combined bombing offensives, mechanized infantry battalions, and nuclear powered aircraft carriers that rely on a systematic approach to optimize overwhelming force (i.e., the Napoleonic style of warfare) are not appropriate means in the struggle against Al Qaeda and global extremists. The effort is now focused on the social intercourse of war-the gray area-in which the causal pathway to victory is uncertain.
Training a lethal force, such as Navy SEALs (Sea, Air, Land Operators), to be more effective at diplomacy and development will come with a cost: the trade-off between bolstering irregular capability at the expense of surgical lethality. Adjustments in training will need to be made to prepare the operator with, most importantly, the mindset of being able to conduct surgical raids in urban terrain as well as briefing a U.S.
ambassador on building a host nation SOF capability while wearing a suit and tie. Our goal is to determine how to improve training to better prepare Naval Special Warfare (NSW) operators for positions that require competence in dealing with the interagency process. The intent of this thesis is to assist NSW leadership in defining what the 3-D team, training, and mission looks like for an operator. In short, how does NSW answer USSOCOM's call to operationalize the "3-D" operator?
After defining the 3-Ds and the irregular warfare mission, the next section gives the reader the theoretical framework we use to deconstruct NSW as an organization.
NSW has a rich history of adapting to the environment in order to stay relevant.
It undoubtedly will have to change again to prepare its operators to stay relevant in the irregular warfare mission of meeting the needs of the 3-D Construct. The idea of an organization that is adapted to its environment in order to survive and accomplish its missions is addressed by organizational contingency theory. We apply it to analyze NSW and discern how it needs to change. "The essence of the contingency theory paradigm is that organizational effectiveness results from fitting characteristics of the organization… to contingencies that reflect the situation of the organization." 
13
When an organization's internal characteristics are aligned with each other environmental influences (e.g., stakeholders, the market, types of conflict) the organization is said to be in "fit." If NSW is to fight an irregular enemy and espouse the 3-D operator initiative, contingency theory dictates that it will have to adapt its structure, training, people and culture to fight in an irregular environment.
USSOCOM's 3-D construct calls for an eclectic mix of skills to effectively combat enemies within the irregular warfare arena. Again, the goal of this thesis is to provide NSW leadership with potential solutions to accurately define the team, training and mission of the 3-D operator. In Chapter I, we described the environment of an Embassy Country Team in Nigeria to illustrate why operators from traditional SEAL Troops-who train predominantly for the kinetic mission set-will have a difficult time adapting to the risk averse culture of an Embassy. This sets the stage for why NSW is faced with the tremendous organizational challenge of filling this non-traditional mission with properly trained personnel. We introduced USSOCOM's 3-D initiative, defined the 3-Ds in how they pertain to NSW, and presented our research question. We then introduced organizational contingency theory as a means to deconstruct NSW and offer solutions to the leadership on how to be better prepared for irregular warfare.
In Chapter II, we diagnose the current state of NSW by using organizational In Chapter III, we analyze a former Special Operations Command and Control Element (SOCCE) on the U.S. Embassy Country Team in Nigeria. We use this case to demonstrate the notion of the 3-D Construct, SOF/interagency integration, and how current SEAL team training mentioned in Chapter II is inadequate to prepare operators to take on these types of 3-D roles. The SOCCE is one of the key models for developing and institutionalizing NSW 3-D capabilities in order to be effective in conducting the irregular warfare mission. The chapter illustrates how this small SOF team was an anomaly. Despite being under-prepared for this type of 3-D mission, the team was able to establish a Nigerian counterterrorism unit and overcome significant diplomatic obstacles. The case shows how a small SOF team inserted into a key country embassy can have a positive impact on countering the growing threat of transnational terrorism through host nation capacity building. However, the mission lacks continuity due to the frequent turnover of SOF teams cycling through short duration deployments, and essential relationships with permanent country team members become fragmented. The U.S. Africa Command (AFRICOM) and the Special Operations Command Africa (SOCAFRICA) strategies place a heavy emphasis on "by, with and through" with interagency and partner nations to promote regional stability, combat terrorism and advance U.S. strategic objectives. A change will need to come in how these missions are resourced with SOF personnel in order to achieve long-term results.
Chapter IV provides an overview and analysis of NSW's "Anchor Detachments,"
or NSWADs, which are regionally-focused SOF units. They are NSW's solution to operating in the irregular warfare paradigm by integrating with the interagency to meet national objectives. We argue that the NSWAD operators, and not traditional SEAL team operators, are a better fit for staffing missions such as SOCCE Nigeria because they have the appropriate interagency and regional training. Specifically we argue that NSWADs are the long-term solution to USSOCOM's 3-D operator.
However, short-term success will be difficult given the cultural gap that exists Organizational contingency theory is again used to point out that, until recently, NSW generally formulated metrics of success based on kinetic environmental inputs.
However, the NSWAD initiative is based on irregular contingencies from the environment and is the reason for one of the shifts in both structure and focus for NSW.
Finally, it discusses NSW people and culture, which the SEAL operator embodies. NSW has spent years cultivating a culture steeped in a direct and aggressive mindset in its approach to combating the enemy. Successful implementation of NSWADs indirect culture via NSW will require a severe shift. Over the long term, that shift will require cultivation time in order to produce the kind of success NSW is used to seeing in its mission sets. In the short term, it will be very difficult to build an indirect culture with operators from the kinetic based culture.
Finally, in Chapter V, we summarize the thesis with the main conclusions of each chapter and offer recommendations to improve NSW training in order to carry out USSOCOM's 3-D vision. We look at implementing 3-D capabilities from a training, organizational and human resources/personnel standpoint. Ultimately, we found that NSWADs were the best fit for the 3-D environment and recommended NSWAD manning and incentives to be improved. Despite the many successes SEALs enjoyed during Vietnam as an inland and riverine guerrilla force, they nearly became extinct as U.S. national security strategy shifted focus to "World War III and the cold war conflict." 
16
14 Susan Marquis, Unconventional Warfare: Rebuilding U.S. Special Operations Forces (Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1997), 21.
15 Ibid., 25. 
16
17
Organizational contingency theory is used to frame our analysis and show how the NSW organization is currently not designed for the irregular warfare mission because its structures and processes train the operator almost exclusively for the kinetic mission set. By viewing the organization through the lens of "fitness," NSW can more effectively adjust its internal processes to the security challenges in today's environment. 
18
One of the key insights underpinning organizational theory and design is that organizations are open systems. Hannah describes open systems as those that "are dependent on their external environment in order to survive and are, therefore, open to influences and transactions with the outside world as long as they exist." 
19
2
20
18 David P. Hanna, "Understanding how Organizations Function," in Designing Organizations for High Performance 
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1988), 3. 19
20
The Geographic Combatant Commands (GCCs) are unified commands that have a responsibility to a specific area in the world. The document that explains the GCCs and their responsibilities is the unified command plan (UCP). The UCP "establishes the missions and responsibilities for commanders of combatant commands and establishes their general geographic areas of responsibility (AORs) and functions." 22 Out of the 10 combatant commands delineated by the UCP, the Geographic Combatant Commanders (GCCs) and U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) exert the greatest amount of influence on NSW. 
23
AORs to conduct a range of military operations in support of regional efforts. These
GCCs are able to mandate the receipt of NSW assets via the deployment orders that are directed by the National Command Authority. 
24
4
USSOCOM is a functional command charged with the responsibility of providing specially trained and equipped Special Operations Forces (SOF) ready to conduct Special Operations (SO) in support of GCC objectives in the region. NSW is the Navy SOF component under USSOCOM's chain of command; it receives all of its funding for training, equipping, and deploying Operators from USSOCOM to support the GCC objectives.
USSOCOM is a force provider, which means it must meet the needs of the environment (requirements of GCCs) by supplying operators who are ready to confront the challenges posed by environments overseas. In order to successfully meet the needs of the environment, USSOCOM publishes a strategy, which is a "plan for interacting with the competitive environment to achieve organizational goals." 
26
27
A tactical force with strategic impact, NSW mission areas include unconventional warfare, direct action, combating terrorism, special reconnaissance, foreign internal defense, information warfare, security assistance, counter-drug operations, personnel recovery and hydrographic reconnaissance. Although NSW personnel comprise less than one percent of U.S. Navy personnel, they offer big dividends on a small investment. 
28
Training These sectors in the NSW environment, however, are only part of the larger environment that affects NSW.
The larger environment consists of sectors that are outside the control of NSW's chain of command and the U.S. military in general but still affect NSW, often indirectly.
Contingency theory describes environments in terms of stability, which is the "rate of change of elements over time," and complexity, which is "the number and dissimilarity of external elements relevant to an organization's operation." We argue that the NSW organization exists within a highly complex and highly unstable environment. 
29
30
5
Globalization is a vast topic that we can only briefly introduce as it pertains to our topic. Thomas Friedman defines globalization as "connecting all the knowledge centers on the planet into a single global network." 31 Globalization has both beneficial and damaging effects on the NSW organization. NSW's ability to exploit technology to improve its global reach in combating irregular enemies is an effect that benefits NSW.
However, enemies of the United States are also able to leverage technology as a medium to flatten the playing field. Friedman elaborates on globalization:
…if politics and terrorism do not get in the way-[globalization] could usher in an amazing era of prosperity, innovation, and collaboration, by companies, communities, and individuals. But contemplating the flat world also left me filled with dread, professional and personal. My personal dread derived from the obvious fact that it's not only the software writers and computer geeks who get empowered to collaborate on work in a flat world. It's also al-Qaeda and other terrorist networks. The playing field is not being leveled only in ways that draw in and superempower a whole new group of innovators. It's being leveled in a way that draws in and superempowers a whole new group of angry, frustrated, and humiliated men and women. 32
The military also recognizes globalization's potential benefits and pitfalls.
According to the National Defense Strategy, globalization can "create a web of interrelated vulnerabilities and spread risks even further, increasing sensitivity to crises and shocks around the globe and generating more uncertainty regarding their speed and effect." 
33
The 2008 National Defense Strategy and 2010 USSOCOM strategy reference a capability requirement to combat traditional adversaries in case future security challenges present a conventional warfare environment. 
34
35
The National Defense Strategy notes, "…for the foreseeable future, this environment will be defined by a global struggle against a violent extremist ideology that seeks to overturn the international state system." 36 Specifically, the violent extremist ideologies of non-state actors are a verifiable threat because they are empowered by modern technology to achieve global effects as seen by the World Trade Center attacks on September 11, 2001. The 9/11 attacks initiated one of the greatest struggles against violent extremism, which continues that after ten years.
The landscape portraying the types of societies, cultures, demographics, and politics from one area of the world is vastly different from another. This presents a very 
34
35 Joint Chiefs of Staff, "Strategic Context," in Joint Operations, Joint Publication 3-0 (Change 2) 1-6. Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2001. Joint Electronic Library. http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/ (accessed June 14, 2010).
36 U.S. Department of Defense, National Defense Strategy, 2.
difficult problem set for military units because it is difficult to become a regional expert while maintaining core military skill sets. As the White House promulgated, "Profound cultural and demographic tensions, rising demand for resources, and rapid urbanization could reshape single countries and entire regions." 
37
Current U.S. maritime strategy acknowledges the existence of instability; however, it is
unclear to what degree the U.S. military, in general, realizes the significant implications in terms of organizational challenges that instability presents. 38
As world economies develop and populations grow, competition increases for resources. This competition in a world dependent on resources (e.g., fossil fuels) creates a situation ripe with conflict. 
39
The international environment encompasses nation-states, variance in government types, and interaction between governments and non-government entities. The U.S. military will always be concerned with powerful nation-states (e.g., Russia, China, Iran)
and their conventional military might, but now various types of governments and nongovernment organizations must be given equal consideration. As stated in the current and the private sector will form partnerships of common interest to counter these emerging threats." 
41
Human resources, as they pertain to NSW, are the inputs it receives from the larger environment. Specifically, these inputs are individual human beings. Civilians enlisting to pursue careers as SEALs have a direct effect on the health of the NSW organization. NSW dependence on people raises two significant issues. The first issue is recruiting and selecting the appropriate people. The second issue is the number of people needed to become SEALs and populate the force. 42 USSOCOM Strategic Plan, 3.
A basic description that states how Naval Special Warfare Command (NAVSPECWARCOM) is generally organized and structured is provided by the NSW homepage:
The   The major components highlighted in Figure 
6
Within each NSWG, four SEAL teams exist that consist of three SEAL troops.  45 See Appendix B of this thesis for more detail.
Table 
1
• Sniper School: Thirteen week course designed to teach long range photography, digital manipulation of photographs (Adobe Photoshop), transmit photos via satellite with field radio; how to stalk a target (Urban, Mountain/Desert, Jungle), isolate and contain, send back reports to Command and Control element; and become an expert in long-range target interdiction-500meters and beyond with high powered, multi-caliber rifles.
• Breacher: Operators becomes experts in demolition with plastic explosives, chainsaws, "quickie-saws," opening tools.
• Advanced Special Operations: Preparation of the environment.
• Languages: Operators go through language immersion programs. They are provided all the material to maintain proficiency when deployed.
• Outboard Motors (OBM): Learn how to fix outboard motors that power small rubber boats, or Combat Rubber Raiding Craft, used as an infiltration platform.
• Hazardous Material (HAZMAT): Transport all hazard material (demo, ordnance, fluids) over land/air.
• Static Line Jump Master/Free Fall Jump Master: Army schools that qualify personnel to be in charge of static or free fall jump evolutions.
• Load Master: Learn rules/regulations to package all cargo/equipment on military aircraft.
• High Speed and Off Road 4x4 Driving: Specialized training designed to give driving experience in hazardous terrain and 4x4 vehicle capability.
In the second phase, unit level training, the entire troop physically works and trains together. This phase gives troops the opportunity to train as a unit in various kinetically focused mission profiles in both land and water environments. This is also the first time troop leaders are able to evaluate personnel and assess any equipment shortfalls that need to be addressed prior to deployment. A brief outline of a generic ULT schedule is in Table 
2
Table 
2
• Rifle/Marksmanship: One week of troop sighting in weapons at ranges • Land Warfare: Five weeks of two man-squad-platoon-troop size Immediate Action Drills (IADs)-breaking contact or assaulting the enemy in a firefight, Land Navigation, Ambush training (Demo intensive), and finishing with full mission profiles using rotary wing and close air support.
• Combat Diving: Three weeks of two-man, four-man, eight-man dive profiles: penetrating harbors undetected and planting inert mines/charges underneath ships to disable/sink them; three days of troop full mission profiles (FMPs) on the last week.
• Maritime Operations (MarOps): Two weeks of navigating inter-coastal waterways and seas with Combat Raiding Rubber Craft (CRRC).
• Visit Board Search and Seizure (VBSS): Two weeks of interdicting ships with high speed assault crafts in different sea states (calm/high), and gaining control of their movement. FMPs are the last few days and usually consist of "terrorists" or "pirate" scenarios getting control of a ship and our mission is to neutralize the threat and/or rescue the hostages.
• Mobility in Desert Warfare: Two weeks at Hawthorne, Nevada conducting long-range patrols in off-road vehicles (HMMWVs) and executing vehicle IADs to assault or break enemy contact.
• Admin Weeks: Three to four weeks mixed in the training cycle one week at a time that give operators the chance to take care of personal business (pay bills, see family, decompress) after being on the road for months at a time.
The third and final phase, Squadron Integration Training (SIT), is designed to make final preparations for the upcoming deployment. Additional personnel and specialties, such as explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) technicians, logisticians, and administrative support are attached to the troop. This phase is also designed to refine and tailor combat skills by introducing maritime and air assets. Rather than operating solely as operators on the ground, SEALs are given the chance to incorporate the dynamics of maneuver assets. Full mission profiles (FMPs) are conducted by the troop and graded by senior enlisted and officers from the SEAL team chain of command. This exercise forces the troop to perform as it would when faced with the greater complexity and realities of combat. Lastly, this phase is designed to allow for SEALs and their families to spend ample time together prior to a six-month deployment.
Given the framework of the IDTC, its tasks, and the troop structure, NSW as an organization resembles a hybrid form of a professional-machine bureaucracy. 
47
Standardized means of execution, uniforms, a focus on how one executes work processes through standard training cycles, forms, and templates are all mechanistic parts of the NSW organization. However, NSW is not an archetypal mechanistic organization, especially at the operating core. The extensive training that SEALs endure also includes education to make complex judgments. SEALs are trained to be "thinking shooters," to use judgment that is more akin to the judgments required of operators in professional
bureaucracies. An NSW troop is a hybrid between a mechanistic and professional organization, both of which flourish in stable environments or environments where
SEALs know generally what to expect. 
48
8
47 Henry Mintzberg, "Organization Design: Fashion or Fit?," Boston Harvard Business Review 59, no 1, (1981): 103. 
48
In times of war or uncertainty there is a special breed of warrior ready to answer our Nation's call. A common man with uncommon desire to succeed. Forged by adversity, he stands alongside America's finest special operations forces to serve his country, the American people, and protect their way of life. I am that man.
My Trident is a symbol of honor and heritage. Bestowed upon me by the heroes that have gone before, it embodies the trust of those I have sworn to protect. By wearing the Trident, I accept the responsibility of my chosen profession and way of life. It is a privilege that I must earn every day.
My loyalty to Country and Team is beyond reproach. I humbly serve as a guardian to my fellow Americans always ready to defend those who are unable to defend themselves. I do not advertise the nature of my work, nor seek recognition for my actions. I voluntarily accept the inherent hazards of my profession, placing the welfare and security of others before my own.
I serve with honor on and off the battlefield. The ability to control my emotions and my actions, regardless of circumstance, sets me apart from other men. Uncompromising integrity is my standard. My character and honor are steadfast. My word is my bond.
We expect to lead and be led. In the absence of orders I will take charge, lead my teammates and accomplish the mission. I lead by example in all situations.
I will never quit. I persevere and thrive on adversity. My Nation expects me to be physically harder and mentally stronger than my enemies. If knocked down, I will get back up, every time. I will draw on every remaining ounce of strength to protect my teammates and to accomplish our mission. I am never out of the fight.
We demand discipline. We expect innovation. The lives of my teammates and the success of our mission depend on me -my technical skill, tactical proficiency, and attention to detail. My training is never complete.
We train for war and fight to win. I stand ready to bring the full spectrum of combat power to bear in order to achieve my mission and the goals established by my country. The execution of my duties will be swift and violent when required yet guided by the very principles that I serve to defend.
Brave men have fought and died building the proud tradition and feared reputation that I am bound to uphold. In the worst of conditions, the legacy of my teammates steadies my resolve and silently guides my every deed. I will not fail." 
53
To reiterate, organizational contingency theory states that organizational effectiveness is a result of an organization's ability to match internal processes with the environmental contingencies and factors influencing the organization. 
55
SEALs are professionals who want to be effective. NSW is effective in conducting direct action and special reconnaissance missions overseas because the NSW culture and people are a fit to meet these kinetically focused mission sets. However, do the internal processes of the traditional NSW Troop meet an environment shaped by irregular warfare? We argue that the NSW Troop does not effectively meet the needs of today's irregular environment. The next chapter uses the SOCCE on the Embassy Country Team in Nigeria to analyze a how a traditionally trained NSW unit is not adequately prepared to operate within the context of irregular warfare. 
55
We promote the SOCCE as one organizational model for NSW to develop and institutionalize its 3-D capabilities to fashion its effectiveness in the long term, irregular warfare mission. The current Special Operations Command Africa's (SOCAFRICA)
strategy places a heavy emphasis on "by, with and through" to collaborate with the interagency and partner nations in order to promote regional stability, combat terrorism and advance U.S. strategic objectives. This chapter examines our personal experience on a previous SOCCE attached to the U.S. Embassy Country Team in Abuja, Nigeria.
Nigeria is one of SOCAFRICA's identified key partner nations (KPNs) where NSW has current strategic interests. 
56
Development"-and how it pertains to SOF in countries like Nigeria. 
57
Construct with civil affairs, information operations and building a counterterrorism capacity. It highlights the KPN's growing radical Islamic movement to set the stage for how NSW is a primary agent in the current effort to counter violent extremism.
Second, it describes the embassy environment and its challenges through a NSW lens with insight into the field of low intensity missions-the SOF and interagency differences in ways of doing business. Third, it describes the importance of the irregular warfare mission and the challenges for NSW to bring continuity to the mission. A frequent turnover of NSW personnel with temporary duty assignments fragments critical relationships with country team members, which are imperative for success in the longterm mission. The chapter illustrates how a small SOF team was an anomaly. Despite being under prepared for this type of 3-D mission, the team was able to establish a Nigerian counterterrorism unit and overcome significant diplomatic obstacles. However, 56 SOF-Theater Strategic Objectives (S-TSOs) and Key Partner Nations (KPNs) are terms derived from SOCAFRICA's Country Action Plan (CAP).
57 USSOCOM Strategic Plan.
even though the SOCCE was successful in the end, the mission lacked continuity due to the frequent turnover of SOF teams cycling through short duration deployments. The purpose of this chapter is to show how current SEAL team training discussed in Chapter II is inadequate to prepare operators to take on these types of 3-D roles. To achieve greater long-term results, proper resourcing of regionally focused SOF personnel will be needed to have a greater impact on countering the growing threat of transnational terrorism with host nation capacity building.
It is also necessary to remember that the DoS serves as the lead USG department for combating terrorism overseas, which brings the interagency process immediately into play. It is not a DoD 'show' alone. 58 JSOU CT Reference Manual.
A primary role for the SOCCE in Nigeria was to establish rapport and integrate with all personnel in the embassy country team. Success in the embassy mission can be distilled into one ingredient: relationships. Once again, this emphasizes the critical importance of human resources to the NSW organization. The SOCCE Commander routinely met with country team department heads and Nigerian executive service officials to develop relationships in order to set up special operations training and exercises. This was the diplomacy dimension of the job, which Hocevar, Thomas, and Jansen refer to as using social capital as a lateral mechanism and establishing a network.
They write, "Collaboration is attained through a personal touch, a handshake and a smile." 
59
60
Within the ambassador's MSP for the U.S. campaign in Nigeria, the SOCCE was responsible for building the infrastructure to assist the Nigerian government with developing a counterterrorism capacity. In October 2008, the Nigerian Ministry of Defense officially requested that the U.S. Embassy assist them with developing a national joint counterterrorism force. The SOCCE Commander was tasked with establishing this unit from the ground up, because nothing existed in the way of Nigerian Special 60 Matrix bureaucracies are structures where two or more bosses exist. These structures rely heavily on the judgment and interpersonal skills of the employee, which in this case is the SOCCE.
Operations. Ultimately, he provided the framework for doctrine, task organization and force disposition for the strategic CT unit. However, because the SOCCE was not a large enough unit to independently accomplish this task, it had to use USSOCOM's episodic Joint Combined Exercise and Training (JCET) events with SEAL/Special Forces teams. 
One of the daily challenges for the SOCCE was staying above the always-present DoS-DoD working rivalries and not committing any blunders that would adversely affect 63 "The Tightening Ties between Nigerian Boko Haram and Al Qaeda," The Jihad and Terrorism Threat Monitor, posted October 3, 2010, http://www.memrijttm.org/content/en/blog_personal.htm?id=3866&param=IDTA (accessed June 14, 2010).
64 Joe Boyle, "Nigeria's 'Taliban' Enigma," BBC News, July 31 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8172270.stm (accessed June 24, 2010); Evan Kohlmann. "A Beacon for Extremists: The Ansar al-Mujahideen Web Forum," CTC Sentinel 3, no. 2 (February 2010): 1.
According to the February 2010 edition of the CTC Sentinel published by West Point, Evan Kohlmann Ansar-al-Mujahideen's is a "contemporary jihadist discussion forum website. The website began in 2008 as a rather low-frills, Arabic-language clone forum with questionable credibility, and a membership of mostly silent observers. Today, however, the Ansar al-Mujahideen forum has blossomed into a prolific, multilanguage enterprise with an enviable following of skilled and highly-motivated English-speaking members." Kohlmann. "A Beacon for Extremists." subsequent SOCCEs. SOF personnel rotating every few months made it difficult to maintain trust with the country team, which takes many years to establish. The calculated risk-taking and assertive personalities that are common with SOF personnel often clash with the cautious personalities of individuals comfortable in professional bureaucracies, such as Foreign Service Officers. This personality conflict is exacerbated when a liberty incident occurs and military personnel are at fault. One SOCCE in particular ran into this problem. The blunder involved SOCCE personnel under the influence of alcohol in a rental vehicle with unauthorized diplomatic plates; they crashed through the compound wall of the Belgium Embassy.
Although no personnel were seriously hurt and the wall was immediately fixed (official apologies followed promptly), the incident caused public embarrassment for the embassy on a multi-nation front and was out of line with the low profile and good order and discipline that SOF holds itself to. Prior to the accident the ambassador had learned about the rental vehicle with diplomatic plates and admonished the SOCCE Commander to remove them. He failed to carry out her order and was declared persona non grata (PNG)-officially banned from country-by the ambassador after the accident for demonstrating leadership incompetence and not enforcing proper liberty discipline among his troops. The ambassador subsequently shut down all SOCCE operations for six months, extinguishing all momentum in advancing SOCCE capital in country. Follow on SOCCEs had to start at ground zero to re-establish trust with the front office and make reparations to the SOF's professional reputation. 
65
66
65
66
At the time, the U.S. Chief of Mission for Nigeria was not comfortable with the SOCCE pursuing low visibility operations. A lack of trust still remained with the ambassador over the SOCCE team. She was reluctant to reinstate its full operational status because of the incident that happened many months prior and resulted in the PNG of the SOCCE Commander. Other than digging wells, refurbishing schools, supporting local media distribution and helping the Nigerians create a CT capability through JCETs, the SOCCE was restricted in fulfilling its operational outreach potential.
(MLE)-were out of the question. 67 HUMINT missions were for the CIA, as far as the 67 Joint Publication 3-13 defines OPE as "non-intelligence activities conducted to plan and prepare for potential follow-on military operations" conducted under Title 10 authority. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-13: Joint Doctrine for Information Operations (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff,  1998), www.c4i.org/jp3_13.pdf (accessed June 14, 2010). Michael T. Kenney, "Leveraging Operational Preparation of the Environment in the GWOT," A Monograph. School of Advanced Military Studies (Fort  Leavenworth, KA: United States Army Command and General Staff College, 2005-2006). Kenney adds, "Through predictive analysis and preemptive action, the United States can identify potential terrorist support areas, enhance situational understanding of these regions, and set the conditions to find, fix, and finish terrorists in these locations as or even before they take root." ambassador was concerned, and the Theater Special Operation Command (TSOC) could not adequately convince her how their missions differed. Regardless of the fact that the Special Operations Forces fell under the command and control of the TSOC (by regulation in the National Security Decision Directive-38) all SOCCE missions still had to be passed up in a memorandum through the front office and receive signature approval by the COM. 
68
The TSOC did not want to relinquish control of its forces by permanently assigning them to the embassy, because if the mission in Nigeria went away the forces would have to be reassigned to another country. However, the ambassador did not like having a unit that she could not control or ensure would work toward her strategic plan on her country team. From her perspective this made sense. As it is stated in the SOF/Interagency CT Reference Manual produced by JSOU: "The Chief of Mission is head of the country team and must translate the interagency policies, strategies and plans into productive action on the ground. The COM has the discretionary authority to organize their country team in whatever fashion they see fit." 69 If the SOCCE had made the decision to conduct its operations without the COM's approval, she could have 68 U.S. Department of State, "NSDD-38: Staffing at Diplomatic Missions and Their Overseas Constituent Posts," April 26, 2002, U.S. Department of State, http://www.state.gov/m/pri/nsdd/45148.htm (accessed June 14, 2010). The National Security Decision Directive dated June 2, 1982, gives the Chief of Mission (COM) control of the size, composition, and mandate of overseas full-time mission staffing for all U.S. government agencies. However, military forces temporary active duty or not permanently assigned (PCS) to the embassy, fall under the operational control of the commanding general of that theater. This is to ensure that special operations troops can easily be reassigned to another area if the mission in that country goes away. U.S. Department of State, "NSDD-38."
69 Joint Special Operations University, Special Operations Forces, Chapter 2-1.
countered by eliminating the unit's position on the country team. Each department in the embassy lived by the rule of "choosing battles" with the ambassador.
A lack of discretion can instantly dissolve key relationships with the country team and front office despite the years it took to develop them-as the SOCCE liberty incident illustrated. If the ambassador deems that unit is no longer an asset to the country team, she may terminate its embassy access at her discretion. Without an embassy's protection and resources a small group of special operations personnel cannot be expected to accomplish its goals.
The open format in which a U.S. embassy operates is another unfamiliar environment for NSW operators. In the world of special operations, which relies heavily on secrecy, transparency is not intuitive; the operator is accustomed to compartmentalization and special access programs and usually lives in the shadows during overseas operations. Being forthcoming about the intricacies of a mission to multiple individuals on the country team-even though those with comparable security clearances-carries a risk to the operator because of the open embassy culture about dayto-day operations. From the embassy's perspective, openness facilitated dialogue, which allowed department heads to synthesize efforts in favor of their common mission. From the SOCCE's perspective, compartmentalization and limited visibility protected the mission by minimizing exposure. While the SOCCE believed not everyone on the country team had a "need to know" about their missions, the ambassador ultimately mandated that most of the department heads did, noting that what the SOCCE did in the field had the potential to affect the missions of other country team departments.
Synthesizing all efforts would to contribute to the overarching mission strategic plan.
A department on the country team that was outside the normal inclusion scope of SOCCE operations sometimes needed access to that information in order to provide the Special Operations team with adequate support for its mission. For example, the Public Affairs Officer (PAO) did not usually have a need to know about SOCCE missions. As sensible as it may sound, this model was not typically how special operations personnel conducted business, and it was often a point of friction between the SOCCE and the front office.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, a typical tour for a SEAL is spent either with his troop prosecuting terrorist capture/kill missions in a combat theater or executing joint combined exercise and training (JCETs) events in non-combat theaters. However, the job profile of a SEAL today is more comprehensive than it was in the past because of increased deployments, with higher operational tempo, to different theaters of operations performing a multitude of roles. The role and task complexity is especially increasing as NSW and the interagency are becoming more interwoven in order to meet today's complex challenges. The transnational nature of radical Islamic organizations and their proliferation in countries with weakened or failing states-such as Nigeria, which lists as number fourteen on the 2010 failed states index-requires SOF personnel to have a position on embassy teams in countries where there is no dominant U.S. military presence and where the host nation lacks the resources to effectively counter radical groups. 
71
72
Christmas "underwear bomber" was also a Nigerian who received training in Yemen, although he failed in his attempt to detonate his explosive briefs on an airline inbound for Detroit. These examples illustrate the importance and immediacy of the issue, which necessitates enhancing information sharing between all SOF and interagency assets and to take alternative measures to interdict AQIM lines of communication and outreach programs where direct military action is not an option. In Afghanistan and Iraq, CT forces would target these threats through direct action, but that option does not exist in Nigeria, which is not a declared war zone where U.S. forces can prosecute kinetic capture/kill operations. The political environment requires an indirect approach by SOF and the interagency in order to get to the root of the problem. Nigeria is just one example of an African country with a growing domestic and international terrorist threat that needs USG support to reinforce its CT apparatus. In his article in the 2010 May/June edition of Foreign Affairs, Defense Secretary Robert Gates comments:
In the decades to come, the most lethal threats to the United States' safety and security-a city poisoned or reduced to rubble by a terrorist attackare likely to emanate from states that cannot adequately govern themselves or secure their own territory. Dealing with such fractured or failing states is, in many ways, the main security challenge of our time. 
73
With Al Qaeda developing franchise networks and affiliates around the world (e.g., Arabian Peninsula, AQIM-Trans-Sahara) the battlefield is becoming more complex for SOF, which has a heightened role in irregular warfare across a wide spectrum of different cultures. The overarching theme in USSOCOM's Strategic Plan's "Implementation Tasks of Focus Area 1: The Operator" is developing SOF to understand the differences in cultures-traditional languages and customs of a people-of a country and operate more effectively in the disparate working environments where they are deployed. Implementation Tasks 1.2 to 1.5 have overtones of the actions of T.E.
Lawrence ("Lawrence of Arabia"), the British liaison officer who played an influential role in orchestrating the Arab Revolt of 1916-18. The Tasks state, "Build long-term trust with populations, local/regional officials, and foreign security forces; understand how to create local development programs and integrate them with broader interagency efforts;
73 Robert M. Gates, Defense Secretary, Foreign Affairs, May/June 2010.
74 Joint Special Operations University, Special Operations Forces, 1-1. and develop regional/local expertise and diplomacy skills." 75 USSOCOM's viewpoint is that the geostrategic perspective is not about the specific nature of the threat so much as it is about the people and their environment.
USSOCOM's strategy recognizes that today's challenges are much more complex and entrenched than can be addressed through pure direct action, and, as such, success
"requires an understanding of the root causes of global problems as well as the systemic relationships that connect these issues across regions." 76 USSOCOM argues that shifting the focus from the threat to the population is the key to this approach; however, the majority of NSW training does not prepare an operator with this type of mindset.
The traditional six-month SEAL team and Special Activity Team deployments do not lend continuity to the long-term mission that is required for an operator to gain regional expertise and develop relationships with the host nation. It also is difficult for new Special Operations teams to establish credibility and trust with the permanent embassy country team members because of their frequent turnover. SEAL teams typically rotate their personnel in and out of the AFRICOM Theater every six months, as was the case for SOCCE Nigeria; the individuals are there to execute a specific mission, and they usually never see the country again. By the time the team gets the mission off the ground and makes a few tangible strides, they are ready to redeploy; continuity becomes an issue because the new team has to establish a new relationship with the country team. Foreign Service Officers who deploy to an embassy for three years regarded the SOCCE's high turnover rate as damaging to the overall mission because relationships become fragmented and only a few tangible results are achieved. As Hocevar, Thomas, and Jansen argue, continuity at the mid-management level is a key ingredient for success in building collaborative capacity. It is the difference of being forced to do something (external incentive) and wanting to do something (internal incentive). They hypothesize that "interagency interactions that are based solely on 75 USSOCOM Strategic Plan, 8. 
76
77
The SOCCE Nigeria was filled with traditional SEAL team members who were not adequately trained for the mission; however, 180 days after the official Nigerian the current irregular warfare paradigm. The intent is to convey to the reader how the current NSW inter-deployment training cycle of preparing SEALs for war (threat focused) is not adequate for preparing them with the necessary skills to excel in an embassy working environment (population focused). The chapter then gives an overview of the SOCCE and the disparate types of missions they carried out in country and segued into the cultural differences, command and control issues over mission approval authority that stem from NSDD-38, and how Nigeria is part of the epidemic of transnational terrorism influencing weakened or failed states. To achieve greater continuity with the country team and success in the long-term mission, NSW will have to dedicate regionally focused operators to resource this type of 3-D mission.
The environment in which we find ourselves has changed.  79 Anonymous SEALs, Special Activities Team 1, interview with author, August 2010. 
80
embrace a new culture. 
81
A 
According to the NSWAD tasking order (TASKORD), 84 the long-term strategy for NSWADs is as follows: "…persistent presence and focus will have the effect of convincing counterparts that NSW is partnered for 'the long haul' while also reducing knowledge disconnects that occur as main force units deploy into and out of respective areas of responsibility (AOR)." 
85
Ideally, as we begin to have personnel go out on successful deployments to the same locations, refine their language and cultural skills, and fully understand the problem sets particular to their country, the NSWADs will create a pool of regional experts embedded with partner units in key locations. They will provide persistent capacity building and situational awareness and over time will be able to share information and influence host nation operations in favor of U.S. objectives. NSWADs will also serve as early warning for potential crisis and will provide continuous situational awareness to the Theater Special Operation Commands (TSOCs). 
86
The next section outlines the strategic, operational, and tactical environmental contingencies that NSW must address in order to remain relevant. 
84
85
USSOCOM Commander, Admiral Eric Olson, wrote the following regarding the new environment within which NSW must operate successfully: "The complexity of the current strategic environment requires that SOF Operators maintain not only the highest levels of warfighting expertise but also regional knowledge and diplomacy skills." 
87
Environmental contingencies and their affects on NSW are presented in Table 
3
3
If the operator does not contribute input to alterations in task, structure, or culture to embrace the 3-D Construct, then NSWADs chances for success will be limited.
NSW has reprioritized its mission sets in order to achieve a more appropriate balance between direct and indirect means. The result is a NSWADs mission list that seeks to accomplish different goals than those traditionally affiliated with NSW troops tasked with utilizing direct methods. The following concept from NAVSPECWARCOM drives the task list that follows. The last sentence explains NAVSPECWARCOM's intention.
The ability to conduct direct action operations of operational and strategic importance has and will continue to remain a core NSW capability. However, being the best at direct action (DA) does not and will not come at the expense of also being exceptional at irregular warfare (IW). NAVSPECWARCOM is directing the reinvestment and expansion of NSW indirect capabilities that have always been part of our primary mission. 
89
89
and deploy NSWADs are accompanied by the difficult task of altering internal processes, specifically culture. A look at NSWADs human resources will reveal the personnel, configuration, and training associated with this new unit. 
From a human resources perspective, the larger environment introduced three key issues. The first issue for NSW is recruiting and selecting individuals who fit the 3-D environment. The second is introducing enough individuals to qualify as SEALs in order to populate NSW and maintain its health as a force. A third issue is developing an indirect mindset within the NSW community. According to Commander Havloc of NSW, "We are looking for a guy who has deployed to that area. They have to be adaptable, mature and professionally seasoned with an affinity for this kind of work…"
90
All selectees, regardless of their military specialty, experience level, or level of affinity for the work, come from the same NSW community. Below is an excerpt from the TASKORD that discusses this further:
Each NSWAD shall initially consist of approximately six personnel comprised of [NSW workforce] from the rank of E-5 to O-5, and qualified civilians with previous military experience. Each NSWAT (smaller team with the NSWAD that deploys to partner nation) will typically consist of one officer and two enlisted personnel. Manning for NSWADs was pulled from across NSW to include SEAL Teams, Naval Special Warfare Center (NSWCEN), Special Boat Teams, and Naval Special Warfare Groups. Several nomination boards were conducted which identified personnel who fit the requirements and eventually earmarked over 30 personnel ranging in rank from lieutenant to E-5 to fill the initial four deployment phases. Members will possess a minimum experience of one (6 month) deployment to the region to which the NSWAD will be assigned. 
91
NSWADs will accomplish mission sets by "forming teams to embed with select partner nations forces and deploy for an initial twelve months. Follow-on deployments will occur to the same specific location until a four year tour of duty is complete."
92
The time allotted for IDTC schedules of traditional NSW troops and NSWADs are similar; however, the training focus is different between the two. NSWAD IDTC will be 10-12 months long just prior to deployment. Members must complete initial qualification training (IQT) to include, but not limited to language, instructor, SFA, regional and cultural familiarizations, and interagency training. An individual's initial deployment will be followed by a training cycle consisting of professional development, and assignment as a trainer for relevant positions or short augments overseas. 
93
Additional training foci are primarily language capabilities, instructor qualifications, and understanding different regional sensitivities 
We feel that the following sentiment from an individual within the NSW community indicates NSW's past metrics of success were based on targeted killing. "…I joined the SEAL Teams to kill terrorists." 96 These metrics of success were based on tangible items such as the number of enemy targets prosecuted or the number of enemy personnel neutralized. Perhaps even the number of DA operations conducted might be added to this list. These refer to "feedback." 97 Until recently, NSW has been using what cybernetics and systems theorists call negative or corrective feedback. That is, feedback that assesses whether or not the output fits the purpose and goals of the organization.
NSW was producing an effective product via training commensurate with DA style outputs. However, when USSOCOM began to ask the question of whether it was meeting the environmental needs, NSW began to utilize "positive feedback" which, "…measures whether or not the purpose and goals align with environmental needs." 
98
NSW culture, until now, used direct means as the preferable way to operate. As previously stated, NSW culture begins at BUD/S and is reinforced everyday an individual remains within NSW. Regardless of the tasks for which NSW has claimed responsibility, 
96
97
98
99 Anonymous SEAL, Special Activities Team 1, interview with author, August 2010.
the focus or daily effort since Vietnam has been direct means. Drawing on personal experience as SEALs, we make the case that little time has been devoted to indirect means in training. This has resulted in a lack of understanding of the term "indirect."
Three inferences can be drawn from this common lack of understanding within NSW.
The first is that NSW has created and devoted itself to a single-mindset culture that required a significant number of years and effort to establish. The second is that when culture is instilled with institutions such as BUD/S, developed over time, and enabled further by combat experience, it facilitates a high degree of operational success: in this case, direct action mission successes as seen in Iraq and Afghanistan. The final inference is that culture is cyclical, and its perpetuation hinges on the individual operator. If the operator does not internalize an indirect culture, he can never mentor or hope to instill an indirect culture. Therefore, it is incumbent on NSW to "instill," "develop," and "enable"
an indirect culture that co-exists with the traditional direct culture, and thereby achieves relevance in the long war.
Based on these inferences, USSOCOM states accurately that the "Operator is the central focus of its efforts…" It understands that without the operator, changes within USSOF cannot take place. As a result, NSWAD personnel are left with an immense charge, which is to embrace a new culture based on instruction and not destruction, on regional familiarization and not unilateral missions. Consequently, we feel that ordering the operator's acceptance of a new culture without the "instilling," "developing," and "enabling" is, at best, difficult in the long term and virtually impossible in the short. As
NSWADs are new and virtually untested, the culture they require has been mapped out by a TASKORD but time will uncover NSWADs acceptance or deviation from that path as evident by its successes or failures.
First, this chapter introduces NSWADs as a long-term solution to the irregular warfare problem. Second, it justifies the creation of NSWADs by emphasizing the importance of capacity building and regional security. Third, it illustrates how current environmental contingencies affect NSWAD's internal processes: structure, task, and culture. Fourth, it diagnoses NSWADs through the lens of human resources to distinguish the disparity between what training is currently providing to the operator vice what it needs to provide: an IW focus. We then looked at metrics of success and the IDTC to highlight, once again, the gap between a traditional and irregular focus. Finally, this chapter discussed culture and established that ample time is necessary to effectively change an organizational culture from one that is focused on the "direct" approach to the "indirect" approach because the operator, as the embodiment of NSW culture, cannot change over night. This reinforces the key takeaway from this chapter: NSWADs is a 3-D operator "fit" over the long term because as an open system NSW reacts to environmental contingencies and embraces indirect means. It will be problematic however for this community to overcome the traditional culture of direct means, and this will ultimately make it extremely difficult for NSW to rapidly embrace a new culture.
due to the frequent turnover of SOF teams cycling through short duration deployments.
A change will need to come in how these missions are resourced with SOF personnel in order to achieve long-term results.
Chapter IV provides an overview and analysis of NSWADs as the solution to operating in the irregular warfare paradigm by integrating with the interagency to meet national objectives. We specifically argue that NSWADs offer a long-term solution to  Currently the SEAL team operator is not equipped with the skill sets required to be adept in the diplomacy and development dimensions of the 3-D construct. Figure 
10
NSW has a limited number of regionally trained operators with diplomatic and development skill sets. Currently NSW does not have the 3-D depth to fill every SOFLE or other 3-D mission with an operator who fits that environment. Rather, these positions are filled with kinetically trained SEAL team operators. USSOCOM emphasizes core capability; thus, it is important for SEAL team operators to train to the kinetic missions and not be forced to compromise kinetic skill sets.
NSW should bolster its IW capacity by growing NSWAD operators.
NSWAD operators need to grow in numbers because staffing 3-D positions with SEAL team operators degrades core capability and damages diplomatic and development efforts.
In order to grow the NSWAD force an incentive structure needs to be in place that effectively encourages SEALs to break away from the traditional mission set.
Current incentives fail to bridge the cultural gap created by the NSWADs initiative. In other words, what can NSWADs offer the SEAL team operator that entices him to depart from a kinetic mindset? For example, the first incentive listed in the NSWADs TASKORD is that the individual assigned to NSWADs will receive extensive language and cultural training. We feel it is fair to assume that most SEAL operators did not join to become language or cultural experts. Therefore, this really is not an incentive and, in some cases, may be perceived as a punishment. The second incentive listed in the NSWAD TASKORD is that the service member will be allowed to maintain the same home duty station for four years. 
101
Make NSWADs a more attractive billet. For example, diminish the (1) Figure B-2 [Figure 
11
(2) Figure B-2 [Figure 
11
3
U.S. maritime strategy titled, A Cooperative Strategy for 21 st Century Seapower, "Increasingly, governments, non-governmental organizations, international organizations, 37 White House, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: White House, 2010), 8. 38 U.S. Marine Corps, U.S. 39 White House, National Security Strategy, 8. 40 U.S. Marine Corps, U.S. Department of the Navy, U.S. Coast Guard, A Cooperative Strategy.
With approximately 5,400 total active-duty personnel--including 2,450 SEALs and 600 Special Warfare Combatant-craft Crewmen (SWCC)--NSW forces are busier than ever answering "911 calls" from around the globe. NSW also calls on a 1,200-person reserve of approximately 325 SEALs, 125 SWCC and 775 support personnel.
With approximately 5,400 total active-duty personnel--including 2,450 SEALs and 600 Special Warfare Combatant-craft Crewmen (SWCC)--NSW forces are busier than ever answering "911 calls" from around the globe. NSW also calls on a 1,200-person reserve of approximately 325 SEALs, 125 SWCC and 775 support personnel.
schools. This phase is first because the troop depends on individual specialties as it progresses toward the next phase. This high degree of specialization serves the troop's best interest as individuals can focus on single skill sets and become the platoon's subject matter expert in a given field (e.g., radio communication or sniper operations). This portion of training is the genesis for standardization of skills and the decentralization that the SEAL community prides itself on.
schools. This phase is first because the troop depends on individual specialties as it progresses toward the next phase. This high degree of specialization serves the troop's best interest as individuals can focus on single skill sets and become the platoon's subject matter expert in a given field (e.g., radio communication or sniper operations). This portion of training is the genesis for standardization of skills and the decentralization that the SEAL community prides itself on.
49  
49  
54  
54  
Combat diving: placing limpet mines under ships using stealth infiltration. Jungle warfare: surviving in a jungle. Urban combat: managing information surveillance reconnaissance (ISR) and close air support assets while leading troops to an assault at a village compound.
The general term "operator" will be used in this thesis to identify the special operations operator: the individual on the ground executing the mission.
U.S. Special Operations Command Strategy 2010 (USSOCOM Strategy) (Tampa, FL: USSOCOM, 2009), 8.
USSOCOM Strategic Plan,
5,
The plan is separate document and is the "plan" on how to implement the strategy. USSOCOM Strategic Plan, 7.
Lex Donaldson, The Contingency Theory of Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,  2001), 1.
Modified framework using the Galbraith, McCaskey, Leavett, and Roberts systems model.
Richard L. Daft, Essentials of Organization Theory and Design (Oklahoma City, OK: South-Western Publishing Co, 2003), 20.
27 USSOCOM Strategic Plan.
Naval Special Warfare Command, "Official U.S. Navy SEAL Home Page," Naval Special Warfare Command, http://www.navsoc.navy.mil/missions.htm (accessed June 14, 2010).
Naval Special Warfare Command, "Naval Special Warfare Small Investment, Big Real-World Dividends. Committed to Combating Global Terrorist Threats," Naval Special Warfare Command, http://www.navsoc.navy.mil/default.htm (accessed June 14, 2010).
Hanna, Understanding how Organizations Function, 198.   
Anonymous SEAL during the week long evolution where BUD/S candidates go through endless training exercises/physical evolutions and receive little to no sleep.
Marcoulides and Heck, "Organizational Culture and Performance," 209.   
U.S. Energy Information Administration, "U.S. Imports by Country of Origin," U.S. Energy Information Administration http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_move_impcus_a2_nus_ep00_im0_mbbl_m.htm, (accessed June 14, 2010).
The United States consumes 27 percent of global oil each year, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). Wang Yuheng, "China's Pipelineistan 'War,'" October 12, 2010, Mother Jones, http://motherjones.com/politics/2010/10/china-natural-gas-pipeline-central-asia (accessed June 14, 2010).
This was a discussion between the SOCCE and Embassy Public Affairs Office on the importance of staying on ahead of news releases to report accuracy and limit potentially damaging stories.
Anonymous SEAL Special Activities Team 1, interview with author, August 2010.
Scott Williams, "A Long-Term Human Investment," Navy SEAL ETHOS Magazine, no. 8 (2010):6, SEALSWCC. (2010), 6, http://www.sealswcc.com/navy-seal-ethos-magazine/issue/8/navy-seal-ethosmagazine-issue-8.aspx (accessed October 19, 2010).
Commander Naval Special Warfare Command, Tasking Order for Naval Special Warfare Anchor Detachments, 4.
Ibid., 2.
Ibid.,
6.
Commander Naval Special Warfare Command, Tasking Order for Naval Special Warfare Anchor Detachments, 4.
Anonymous SEAL, Special Activities Team 1, interview with author, August 2010.
Winters, III, Commander Naval Special Warfare Command, Tasking Order for Naval Special  Warfare Anchor Detachments, Coronado, CA, December 2009.   
We profoundly thank our advisor 
Dr. Erik Jansen
Dr. Jansen
We would also like to thank the personnel from 
Naval Special Warfare Groups One and Two
OMB No. 
0704-0188
Diplomacy, Defense, Development
Column three represents NSW culture at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of the larger environment. At the strategic level, NSW operational units must move away from a culture that deploys large numbers of personnel to a single AOR. A more self-reliant unit that does not require administration/logistics personnel for example must be adopted to alleviate the need for a larger U. 
NSW will need to adapt in order to practice the 3-D operator initiative and effectively combat an irregular enemy. Our thesis emerged from discussions concerning the frustration of NSW operators continually tasked to conduct recurring missions that they are ill prepared to execute. Our intent was to start a conversation to entice and perhaps provoke NSW leadership to consider who it recruits and how it trains those recruits to conduct a range of military operations in a 3-D environment.
Chapter I began with an anecdote to develop a vivid context for the reader and to illustrate the immediate sense of misfit where the SEAL operator was not prepared for the 3-D environment because his training did not match the mission. Next, this chapter defined USSOCOM's 3-D construct. Finally, it introduced organizational contingency theory to illustrate the importance of fit between an organization and its environment. To accomplish our research goals, we took a systematic approach.
Chapter II gave an organizational overview of NSW. This chapter described the relevant factors of the NSW, its structure, tasks, people and culture and its larger environments; this allowed us to analyze the misfit between the current system and the challenges posed by a highly complex and unstable environment. From a human resources point of view, the majority of the NSW force is considered to be a fit for operating in kinetic environments; however, it is a misfit for today's non-kinetic environments.
In Chapter III, we analyze a former Special Operations Command and Control Element (SOCCE) on the U.S. Embassy Country Team in Nigeria. The SOCCE is one of the key models for developing and institutionalizing NSW 3-D capabilities to effectively conduct irregular warfare missions. The disparity between the NSW operator's direct focused approach and the embassy's indirect focused approach highlight the organizational challenge NSW must contend with in order to become more relevant toward fighting an irregular natured conflict. Additionally, the mission lacks continuity
NAVAL SPECIAL WARFARE CENTER (NSWC)
The NSWC is based at Naval Amphibious Base (NAB) Coronado, CA. 
Taken from the Universal Joint Task Manual CJCSM 3500.04E, Appendix A Enclosure B (B-A-7-8): An example of vertical linkages in the UJTL is illustrated in  