# ID: 77b1a662a07b4f19b66c36b63b1e6c01
# Title: Multi-domain operation's viability as a future war concept of the Republic of Korea military: can it counter North Korean hybrid warfare?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The first possible counter-argument is that the MDO concept is not suitable to the ROK at all, because the MDO concept was created in accordance with the US national strategy "to deter and defeat Chinese and Russian aggression in both competition and conflict.
"2 31 F 232 Before answering the counter-argument, the definition of suitability needs to be reminded.
Suitability, in Yarger's definition, is "the degree of accomplishing the effect desired when the concept is attained.
"2 32 F 233 In an analysis of suitability in the previous chapter, this thesis discussed that the MDO concept with tenets of calibrated force posture, multi-domain formations, and convergence could, directly and indirectly, contribute to aspects of the ROK National Security Strategy and the National Defense Strategy.
By attaining the concept, the ROK can accomplish the effect desired as stated in both the Security Strategy and the Defense Strategy.
This may be the case because the types of North Korean military capabilities largely overlap with those of Russia and China, though the scale may vary greatly.
Thus, the suitability is not about the proclamation; it is about the possibility of gaining the desired effects, which makes the counter-argument an incoherent statement.