# ID: 77b1a662a07b4f19b66c36b63b1e6c01
# Title: Multi-domain operation's viability as a future war concept of the Republic of Korea military: can it counter North Korean hybrid warfare?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The 2017 US National Security Strategy (NSS) considers China and Russia as "revisionist powers" and that they are contesting US geo-political interests by attempting to overthrow the established international order to their advantage.
As seen in the central idea, the MDO concept provides two main options to the political leaders: first, "expanding the competition space," which would force the adversaries to recalculate their intentions; and second, "enabling a rapid response" that can deny an adversary's fait accompli attack, meaning irreversibly accomplished attack, and achieve a position of advantage to return to competition.3 0F 31 The MDO concept attempts to accomplish given tasks with three tenets of calibrated force structure: calibrated force structure, multi-domain formations, and convergence.
 3-8 proposes that EAB formations need to possess capabilities to "gain and maintain contact; persistently compete; posture; converge multi-domain-effects; exploit the initiative; and consolidate gains" to provide essential linkages to the joint forces.3 5 F 36 The document also states that EAB formations must include uniquely tailored theater armies, threat-focused field armies, versatile corps, and tactically-focused divisions.3 6F 37 Four initial reasons were taken into consideration for choosing MDO concept to counter North Korean hybrid warfare.
First, North Korean hybrid warfare capabilities inherently possesses multiple domain aspects.
As discussed in the previous section, North Korean conventional forces have capabilities across the land, air, and sea.
North Korea is also known to have one of the most destructive cyber operational capabilities in the world.
The regime also possesses nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities, which could extend to the space domain with limited means.
Second, Russia's military intervention in Ukraine in 2014, which is widely considered to be hybrid warfare, was one of the catalysts that prompted the US transition to Large-Scale Combat Operation (LSCO) doctrine and the MDO concept.
Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations, mentions Russian military intervention in Ukraine in 2014 as an example of why US military professionals need to be prepared to execute LSCO.3 7 F 38 Third, the concept emphasizes deterrence during the competition and winning during the conflict.
These two distinctions are also applicable on the Korean peninsula because North Korea poses similar types of threats 36 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-8, iv.