# ID: 77b1a662a07b4f19b66c36b63b1e6c01
# Title: Multi-domain operation's viability as a future war concept of the Republic of Korea military: can it counter North Korean hybrid warfare?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Meanwhile, Multi-Domain Operations (MDO), the US Army's future war concept, seek to deter and defeat future adversaries such as Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea by optimizing combat power in multiple domains.
This thesis examines if the MDO concept can be a viable future war concept for the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare.
The thesis concludes that the MDO concept is both suitable and feasible, but not acceptable, mainly due to excessive budget demands, thus making it not fully viable; however, the ROK should continue pursuing the integration of operations across multiple domains.
v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS First, I would like to express my gratitude to my wife, Eunju Lee, for being extremely supportive while I wrote this thesis.
She not only endured much without complaint, but also encouraged me to delve more deeply into the subject, so I could become more knowledgeable about the subject.
Without her support, I could not have finished the work.
I owe much of my accomplishment to her.
I am also deeply thankful for my MMAS thesis committee, Mr. Joseph Donalbain, Dr. John Modinger, and LTC Michael Thorpe, for their consistent advice on the structure, logic, and direction of the thesis.
They never hesitated to take significant portions of their time to discuss the thesis.
I also would like to recognize the Art of War scholars, who, under the guidance of Dr. Dean Nowowiejski, the Ike Skelton Chair of the Command and General Staff College (CGSC), provided me with many insights on how the thesis could be better structured and revised.
In 2006, Israel launched an attack into Lebanese territory.
This event, later known as the Second Lebanon War, was in response to a few hostile actions executed by Hezbollah, including rocket fires into Israeli territory and the abduction of two Israeli soldiers.
To counter the Israeli forces, Hezbollah used hybrid warfare, incorporating both conventional tactics, such as taking defensive positions with ground forces, and unconventional tactics, including insurgent and psychological tactics.
With the international and domestic pressure to end the war, Israel signed an UN-mediated ceasefire agreement without a significant military defeat; Hezbollah seemingly achieved, in their term, "the Divine Victory" by utilizing hybrid warfare.0 F