# ID: 77b1a662a07b4f19b66c36b63b1e6c01
# Title: Multi-domain operation's viability as a future war concept of the Republic of Korea military: can it counter North Korean hybrid warfare?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Hybrid warfare is a central theme of the North Korean regime's military strategy. It seeks to combine conventional and unconventional capabilities, backed by nuclear capabilities, to swiftly win an armed-conflict before substantial reinforcements can arrive in South Korea. Taking lessons from Hezbollah's hybrid warfare in Lebanon in 2006 and Russia's hybrid warfare in Ukraine in 2014, North Korea is likely to utilize hybrid warfare in future conflicts with increased complexity, due to its ties with Russia and Hezbollah, capabilities, and intention. Meanwhile, Multi-Domain Operations (MDO), the US Army's future war concept, seek to deter and defeat future adversaries such as Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea by optimizing combat power in multiple domains. This thesis examines if the MDO concept can be a viable future war concept for the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare. The thesis concludes that the MDO concept is both suitable and feasible, but not acceptable, mainly due to excessive budget demands, thus making it not fully viable; however, the ROK should continue pursuing the integration of operations across multiple domains.
15.
Meanwhile, Multi-Domain Operations (MDO), the US Army's future war concept, seek to deter and defeat future adversaries such as Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea by optimizing combat power in multiple domains. This thesis examines if the MDO concept can be a viable future war concept for the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare. The thesis concludes that the MDO concept is both suitable and feasible, but not acceptable, mainly due to excessive budget demands, thus making it not fully viable; however, the ROK should continue pursuing the integration of operations across multiple domains. v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS First, I would like to express my gratitude to my wife, Eunju Lee, for being extremely supportive while I wrote this thesis. She not only endured much without complaint, but also encouraged me to delve more deeply into the subject, so I could become more knowledgeable about the subject. Without her support, I could not have finished the work. I owe much of my accomplishment to her. I am also deeply thankful for my MMAS thesis committee, Mr. Joseph Donalbain, Dr. John Modinger, and LTC Michael Thorpe, for their consistent advice on the structure, logic, and direction of the thesis. They never hesitated to take significant portions of their time to discuss the thesis. I also would like to recognize the Art of War scholars, who, under the guidance of Dr. Dean Nowowiejski, the Ike Skelton Chair of the Command and General Staff College (CGSC), provided me with many insights on how the thesis could be better structured and revised. In 2006, Israel launched an attack into Lebanese territory. This event, later known as the Second Lebanon War, was in response to a few hostile actions executed by Hezbollah, including rocket fires into Israeli territory and the abduction of two Israeli soldiers. To counter the Israeli forces, Hezbollah used hybrid warfare, incorporating both conventional tactics, such as taking defensive positions with ground forces, and unconventional tactics, including insurgent and psychological tactics. With the international and domestic pressure to end the war, Israel signed an UN-mediated ceasefire agreement without a significant military defeat; Hezbollah seemingly achieved, in their term, "the Divine Victory" by utilizing hybrid warfare.0 F
1
Russia used hybrid warfare to achieve its political purpose-using a propaganda campaign to divide public opinions in Ukraine, drone technology to call for Multi Launching Rocket System (MLRS) fires, and cyber tactics to disturb Ukrainian information infrastructure-in addition to conventional tactics, such as dispatching Special Forces and mechanized units into Ukrainian territory1 F 2 . In the cases of Lebanon and Russia, one can see that hybrid warfare was the primary tool in achieving the nation's or the entity's political purpose.
Hybrid warfare, according to Sean Monaghan, a strategic analyst in the UK Ministry of Defense (MOD), is "the challenge presented by the increasing complexity of armed conflict, where adversaries may combine types of warfare plus nonmilitary means to neutralize conventional military power."2 F 3 The utility of using hybrid warfare, according to Monaghan, is revisionist actors and adversaries can offset strong conventional military states with an array of new, more cost-effective means to achieve their political goals, as seen in Lebanon in 2006 and in Ukraine in 2014.3 F 4 North Korea's central concept of war strategy is hybrid warfare, or Baehabjeon; and it would fit in the category of Monaghan's definition. The concept seeks to combine conventional and unconventional warfare to quickly overwhelm the South before US reinforcements arrive 3 in the South.4 F 5 Taking lessons from Russia and Hezbollah, North Korea is likely to utilize hybrid warfare in future conflicts with increased complexity, due to its ties to Russia and Hezbollah, capabilities, and intention. Evolving North Korean hybrid warfare will be a challenge for the ROK in preparing a future conflict. North Korea's Ties to Russia and Hezbollah North Korea's ties to Russia and Hezbollah increase the likelihood that North Korea would take lessons from their employment of hybrid warfare. It is widely known that North Korea has special ties to Russia. North Korea's military equipment, government organization, and ideology all have connections to the country. The former Soviet Union, of which Russia comprised the most substantial portion, designated Kim Il-Sung, the founding father of North Korea and ex-guerrilla commander who fought against Japan during the 1930s, to be the leader of the country following the brief trusteeship of the Soviet Union in North Korea after World War II.5 F 6 The Soviet Union also approved and supported Kim Il-Sung's plan to invade South Korea during the Korean War with provision of logistics, weapons, and military advisors to North Korea.
The former Soviet Union and Russia played the most influential role in establishing and modernizing the North Korean military. Majority of weapons systems 
5
6
North Korea uses today are either Russian-made or remakes of the Russian weapons.6 F 7 Military strategy, tactics, and organizations are also influenced by the former Soviet Union; Kim Il-Sung is known to have adopted the Red Army's Field Manual in 1936, written by Soviet Marshall Tukhachevsky.7 F 8 North Korean communist ideology was derived from that of the former Soviet Union initially, and they subsequently pursued their unique ideology with creative application to Marxism -Leninism over time.8 F 9 The continued influence is an essential factor in analyzing North Korea's strategy since it is likely that the regime would at least take lessons from Russian success in hybrid warfare in Ukraine.
Official exchanges between Russia and North Korea is another factor contributing to their relationship. Though there were times when the relationship was strained after the fall of the Soviet Union, a recent summit between Russian President Vladimir Putin and North Korean leader Kim Jung-Un and frequent exchanges between Russian and North Korean officials show that both countries continue to maintain strong ties. On 25 April 2019, Putin and Kim held a summit in Russia's Pacific city of Vladivostok proclaiming, according to a North Korean newspaper, Russia and North Korea agreed on the "concrete directions and steps for further promoting mutual understanding, trust, friendship and cooperation and propelling the development of the friendly relations between the two 7 조상진, "러시아 군사자산이 북한 군사력과 기술의 핵심," VOA 뉴스, 15 August 2019, https://www.voakorea.com/korea/korea-politics/5042336. 8 이상택, "북한 군사전략의 역사적 고찰," 군사 112 호 (2019 년 9 월): 140. 
9
North Korea also has maintained ties with Hezbollah, although the degree of relationship has not yet been revealed as much. The North Korean regime is known to have provided missile technologies and tunnel building technologies to Hezbollah. In 2013, in a US District Court ruling, Judge Royce Ramberth stated that North Korea and Iran were two countries liable for aiding Hezbollah in their launching of rockets into Israeli territory during the Second Lebanon War in 2006, which caused many Israeli and American civilian casualties.1 0F 11 Judge Ramberth assessed that North Korea provided missile technology and related equipment to Hezbollah which assisted Hezbollah's rocket attacks on Israel.1 1 F 12 North Korean tunnel technology, which became well known after South Korea discovered four of their secret tunnels under the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) into South Korean territory, was also transferred to Hezbollah and Hamas. Both of the groups took advantage of the technology in fighting against Israelis by establishing tunnels so they could execute surprise attacks on the Israeli Armed forces.1 2F 13 6 There were also considerable amounts of official exchanges between North Korea and Hezbollah. Judge Ramberth mentioned in his ruling that "Hezbollah members began traveling to North Korea for specialist instruction as early as the late 1980s; Hezbollah General-Secretary Hassan Nasrallah himself visited North Korea for training purposes during this time." He also mentioned that many of Hezbollah's intelligence and security chiefs were trained in North Korea, and North Korean officers were sent to Lebanon to advise and train the Hezbollah soldiers.1 3F 
14
1
North Korea also retains nuclear capabilities, which can be an advantageous leverage when it comes to executing hybrid warfare. Nuclear capabilities often serve as a deterrent to a possible augmentation of additional forces into the theater. The deterrent factor allows the adversary to employ hybrid warfare without external interference, as seen in the case of Russia's operation in Ukraine in 2014. The CFR report analyzes that North Korea's nuclear stockpile is estimated to be between 30 and 60 bombs; the regime seems to have succeeded in testing the Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs), capable of reaching the continental United States (See figure 
2
16
Another reason for suspecting the hostile intention of North Korea are the motives revealed by the leaders' comments and speeches. North Korean leaders, at times, published statements that expressed their wishes to unify Korea through force and with their ideology. In a 2014 New Year's address, Kim Jung-Un emphasized that "external forces must be denounced and the views of our people ourselves must be firmly adhered to."2 2F 23 Not many would disagree with the following interpretations: by "external forces," he means the US forces in Korea; by "our people," Kim refers to all Koreans including people in the South; by "the views," he most likely means the socialistic ideology of North Korea. According to his comments, it is easy to determine that the leader Kim Jung-Un pursues the reunification of Korea with a socialistic ideology without US intervention. Likewise, Kim Il-Sung, Kim Jung-Il, and Kim Jung-Un, all three leaders of North Korea, in their speeches maintained a similar concept that was displayed on Kim Jung-Un's New Year's speech in 2014, as this concept has been ingrained in their constitution and the Charter of the Workers' Party of Korea.
Military and party leaders' speeches carry critical meaning when it comes to interpreting the regime's intention. North Korean military leaders threatened South Korea by saying that they can make Seoul "a sea of fire" if they want. This view by the North Korean leaders is a reminder of Russia's hybrid warfare where Russia utilized anti-government activists to use them against the Ukrainian government. In the same way, North Korea will want pro-North Korea activists to lead the revolution when the appropriate time comes. These pieces of evidence show that statements made by the leaders, whether it be by the head of the regime or by the military or party leaders, also contribute significantly to the fact that North Korea possesses the intention to unify the two Koreas under their socialistic ideology.
North Korean hybrid warfare is the central concept of its war strategy to achieve the goal of reunifying the Korean Peninsula with its socialist ideology. With lessons from Hezbollah's and Russia's successful hybrid warfare in 2006 and 2014, it is more than likely that North Korea will fully utilize hybrid warfare in a future conflict, considering its ties with both actors, evolving capabilities, and hostile intention. Without a doubt, South Korea may be the biggest victim of those threats; however, the threats are also crucial for other Asian countries and countries worldwide, because hybrid warfare on the Korean Peninsula affects the regional stability and possible cases of future hybrid warfare elsewhere. If North Korea executes another successful hybrid warfare, more hostile countries or entities will seek to employ similar warfare against neighboring countries.
More North Korean detrimental weapons technologies that are prohibited by international law will be disseminated throughout the world, as was seen in the case of Hezbollah and Hamas. The quest for this research embarked on this problem of tackling North Korean hybrid warfare.
The 2017 US National Security Strategy (NSS) considers China and Russia as "revisionist powers" and that they are contesting US geo-political interests by attempting to overthrow the established international order to their advantage. As seen in the central idea, the MDO concept provides two main options to the political leaders: first, "expanding the competition space," which would force the adversaries to recalculate their intentions; and second, "enabling a rapid response" that can deny an adversary's fait accompli attack, meaning irreversibly accomplished attack, and achieve a position of advantage to return to competition.3 0F 31 The MDO concept attempts to accomplish given tasks with three tenets of calibrated force structure: calibrated force structure, multi-domain formations, and convergence.  3-8 proposes that EAB formations need to possess capabilities to "gain and maintain contact; persistently compete; posture; converge multi-domain-effects; exploit the initiative; and consolidate gains" to provide essential linkages to the joint forces.3 5 F 36 The document also states that EAB formations must include uniquely tailored theater armies, threat-focused field armies, versatile corps, and tactically-focused divisions.3 6F 37 Four initial reasons were taken into consideration for choosing MDO concept to counter North Korean hybrid warfare. First, North Korean hybrid warfare capabilities inherently possesses multiple domain aspects. As discussed in the previous section, North Korean conventional forces have capabilities across the land, air, and sea. North Korea is also known to have one of the most destructive cyber operational capabilities in the world. The regime also possesses nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities, which could extend to the space domain with limited means. Second, Russia's military intervention in Ukraine in 2014, which is widely considered to be hybrid warfare, was one of the catalysts that prompted the US transition to Large-Scale Combat Operation (LSCO) doctrine and the MDO concept. Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations, mentions Russian military intervention in Ukraine in 2014 as an example of why US military professionals need to be prepared to execute LSCO.3 7 F 38 Third, the concept emphasizes deterrence during the competition and winning during the conflict. These two distinctions are also applicable on the Korean peninsula because North Korea poses similar types of threats 36 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-8, iv. 
37
38
The primary research question for the thesis is: Is the MDO concept viable to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare?
The following secondary research questions need to be sufficiently analyzed to effectively assess a logical answer to the primary research question: There are numerous definitions regarding hybrid challenges among scholars: hybrid tactics, gray-zone tactics, competition short of war, hybrid warfare, etc. In his article "Countering Hybrid Warfare -So What for the Future Joint Force," Sean 20 Monaghan, a strategic analyst of the UK Ministry of Defense, argues that those unclear definitions of hybrid challenges prevent today's decision-makers from coming up with sound counter-strategies against hybrid challenges.3 8F 39 He further argues that distinguishing hybrid warfare from hybrid threats is crucial to effectively counter the hybrid challenges that are expected to grow significantly in the future. This thesis will use his definition of hybrid warfare and hybrid threat since his article offers a comprehensive and precise analysis of the language involved in discussing hybrid challenges (See figure 
4
39 Monaghan,
83.
4
Therefore, North Korean hybrid threats are the combination of activities that North Korea executes below the level of armed conflict to target vulnerabilities of South Korean society in achieving their political objectives. Moreover, North Korean hybrid warfare is the likely characteristics of how North Korea will fight against South Korea and US combined forces in the event of armed conflict. This thesis will focus on countering North Korean hybrid warfare.
US Army TP 525-3-1, US Army Multi-Domain Operations in 2028, defines MDO as "the rapid and continuous integration of all domains of warfare to deter and prevail as we compete short of armed conflict. If deterrence fails, Army formations, operating as part of the Joint Force, penetrate and dis-integrate enemy anti-access and area denial systems; exploit the resulting freedom of maneuver to defeat enemy systems, formations, and objectives and to achieve our strategic objectives; and consolidate gains to force a 40 
Monaghan,
87. 41
42
According to the Cambridge Dictionary, viability means the "degree of chance that something will succeed." 43F 
44
45
Yarger defines suitability as the probability of accomplishing the effect desired if the concept is attained; feasibility as the possibility of applying the concept with means available; and acceptability as justifiability of the cost for applying the concept against 43 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, iii. 
44
Assumptions for the thesis are as follows:
1. North Korea currently poses hybrid threats to both the United States and South Korea and will likely pursue hybrid warfare backed by nuclear capabilities when in armed conflict with both the United States and South Korea in order to achieve their political objectives.
2. The US Army continues to pursue the MDO concept as a future operating concept for all Army units, including US forces in Korea, and the concept will be accepted at the joint level in the near future as the joint operating concept.
3. ROK-US combined forces command structure will be maintained especially during conflict. ROK-US Operational Control transition process will continue as planned.
4. The ROK military is in the process of developing a new future war concept, and this research will inform the process on what to consider. 
46
The focus of this thesis is limited to whether applying the MDO concept to the ROK military could counter the hybrid warfare threat; this includes deterrence during competition and defeat during armed conflict. Thus, the thesis will not discuss whether the MDO concept could counter the hybrid threats North Korea poses to advance their political objectives. Also, the discussion of countering North Korean hybrid warfare will be focused mainly on using the military as the instrument of national power to narrow the scope of the research. The use of a nuclear weapon by North Korea will be limited to deterrence in support of hybrid warfare instead of direct use against US and ROK forces.
Chapter 1 describes the potential challenges the Republic of Korea would face with increasing North Korean hybrid warfare threats; the chapter also discusses what the MDO concept is about and why one should consider MDO to counter the threat. It lays out research questions as well as key definitions, assumptions, scope, and limitations for the research. Chapter 2 surveys existing literature on North Korean hybrid warfare threats and the MDO concept. It also serves to identify possible gaps in literature that need to be filled, possibly with this research effort among others. It also discusses the literature on elements of successful future war concepts in a strategic context. The chapter ends with the literature on Feasibility, Acceptability, Suitability (FAS) analysis, providing context to the research methodology of the thesis. Chapter 3 describes the methodology the thesis will employ to answer the primary research question of "Is the MDO concept viable to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare?" Chapter 4 look into each of the secondary research questions. The aggregate of the analysis will support the answer to the primary research question. Finally, Chapter 5 delivers a conclusion with possible counter-arguments, recommendations for decision-makers, and suggestions of further research related to this topic. CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW Twenty years of COIN operations have diminished the collective knowledge and ability to converse professionally about large-scale combat. In fact, one of the purposes of MDO is to drive the Army to the professional dialogue about largescale combat that used to be second nature to Soldiers.
-Lieutenant General Eric J. Wesley and Colonel(R) Robert H. Simpson Expanding the Battlefield: An Important Fundamental of Multi-Domain Operations North Korean Hybrid Warfare Although there are various articles related to North Korean hybrid warfare, the scholarly literature generally does not go further than describing the threat; moreover, there seem to be a wide range of definitions as to what the hybrid warfare is.
Sico van der Meer in "The North Korean Tradition of Hybrid Provocation" contends that the North Korean hybrid threat is not as new as it may seem and that North Korea has been utilizing the hybrid strategy for many decades already "to provoke, hurt and bully its perceived enemies, while at the same time mitigating escalation to the level of actual warfare."4 6 F 47 He also maintains that the North Korean hybrid strategy and the means used have "continuously adapted to the ever-changing circumstances," and therefore, requires "continuous flexibility." The author also claims that the threat is particularly aimed at the United States and South Korea. Van Der Meer refers to North 47 Sico van der Meer, "The North Korean Tradition of 'Hybrid' Provocations," in Hybrid Conflict: The Roles of Russia, North Korea and China (Hague: The Clingendael Institute, May 2018), 15.
Korea's hybrid threat as more provocations during peacetime that can achieve the regime's political objectives than threats during conflicts. Namhoon Cho, in "Hybrid Warfare on the Korean Peninsula," states North Korea chooses to utilize hybrid warfare strategy for four reasons: first, geographic proximity of North and South Korea; second, South Korea's vulnerabilities in economy and society; third, South Koreans' divided opinions on political and security issues; and fourth, the US military's presence in South Korea.4 7 F 
48
In "Exploring North Korea's Asymmetric Military Strategy," Mirk Tasic maintains North Korea pursues hybrid warfare to "obstruct an adversary's ability to further or achieve its political ends (e. g., South Korean and allied ability to conduct war or surgical strike, the positioning of the terminal high-altitude area defense system within South Korea, the imposition and maintenance of effective economic sanctions), and to mobilize others in support of its position and efforts."4 8F 49 The author goes on to say the experts have not directed much focus on incorporating measures to counter hybrid warfare because of the secrecy of the North Korean regime, thus discouraging experts 48 Nam-hoon Cho, "Hybrid Warfare on the Korean Peninsula," in Hybrid Conflict: The Roles of Russia, North Korea and China (Hague: The Clingendael Institute, May 2018), 20.
49 Mirko Tasic, "Exploring North Korea's Asymmetric Military Strategy," Naval War College Review 72, no. 4 (Autumn 2019): 62. from taking any significant measures to counter the threat.4 9 F 50 However, he also insists that the focus of the 21st century warfare plan against North Korea should be on the hybrid nature of the North Korea threat because hybrid warfare is the only way that North Korea can maximize its effort against great powers to gain their objectives.5 0F 51 Tasic describes the North Korean hybrid threat as something that could stand more toward the conflict side than a threat during peacetime.
Although the extent of the threat seems fairly wide, the literature on North Korean hybrid warfare have a few common themes: first, North Korea uses hybrid warfare as a means to achieve their political objectives; second, the composition of the North Korean hybrid threat is a mixture of conventional forces with unconventional means such as cyber units, propaganda elements, and Weapons of Mass Destructions (WMDs), including nuclear weapons; and third, North Korea, by utilizing hybrid warfare, attempts to achieve a surprise effect that cannot be dealt quickly, because doing so requires the unilateral agreement of multiple actors in the global environment where consensus plays an important role. The author goes on to say it is "not enough to acknowledge that these new developments need to be adopted," but the crucial thing is that "each of these new capabilities is given enough autonomy to fully realize their potential under the MDB concept, rather than merely aggregating them into current formations.5 2F 53 " The essence of MDB (now termed MDO), according to Liy, is that "these new domains and technologies must be able to pursue their objectives, and these objectives must converge with the efforts of the rest of the joint force" by applying the three tenets of calibrated force posture, multi-domain formations, and convergence.5 3 F 54 Jack Watling and Daniel Roper, in "European Allies in US Multi-Domain Operations," maintain the MDO concept has "a large number of dependencies upon allies embedded" within the concept ranging "from the permissions required to maintain a calibrated force posture, to critical expertise in order to effectively compete below the threshold of armed conflict."5 4 F 55 Thus, more cooperation and discussion between the United States and Allies is needed to make the concept more compatible. The study also emphasizes the necessity for the United States to increase support in combined training in the multi-domain environment as the training will have significant impact on the 52 Jose L.  
56
There are pieces of literature that validate the existence and variation of North Korean hybrid warfare, as well as hybrid threats. Some studies tested validity of the MDO concept in the US military while another study examined compatibility of the concept with the European allies. However, apparent gaps exist in the current literature concerning two matters: first, an effective way to counter North Korean hybrid warfare of evolving nature; and second, the viability of applying the MDO concept in the ROK military, or any non-western country within a strategic context. Thus, this paper will research the viability of applying the MDO concept to the ROK military to counter North Korean hybrid warfare to fill the existing gap in the literature.
In "Toward a Theory of Strategy: Art Lykke and the Army War College Strategy Model," Harry Yarger argues strategy is all about "how (way or concept) leadership will use the power (means or resources) available to the state to exercise control over sets of circumstances and geographic locations to achieve objectives (ends) that support state interests."5 7 F 58 He goes on to argue that a valid strategy "must have an appropriate balance of objectives, concepts, and resources, or its success is at greater risk"5 8 F 59 and that "any 
56
Watling and Roper,
vi. 57
58
59
6
Correlli Barnett, in The Sword-bearers, said "War is the great auditor of institutions."6 3F 64 If this is true, institutions such as a nation's military would be tested and 63 
Leonhard,
17. 64
65
France was that the concept was suitable for the strategic end. Shimon Naveh, in In Pursuit of Military Excellence, states the strategic aim in 1940 was "to break up the opposing alliance and inflict a complete defeat on the French armed forces." 65F 66 In his view, the concept was perfect for achieving Hitler's strategic aim: thus, a quick and decisive combined arms maneuver into France's territory to annihilate their military was one aspect that made the concept successful.6 6 F 67 Another aspect, however, feasibility, was the one that the German military lacked to win the war in applying the Blitzkrieg concept. James Corum, in his book, The Roots of Blitzkrieg, argues that "the panzer division was effective precisely because it was a combined-arms force that used all of its weapons, not just the tanks, with maximum effectiveness."6 7 F 68 He also further states that "the explanation for the dramatic German victory in 1940 can be found in two factors: One aspect of the Deep Operation concept that made it viable for the Soviet Union in 1944-1945 was that the concept was suitable for the Soviet Union's strategic aims. In the book, The Evolution of Operational Art, Olsen and Creveld maintain "Svechin provided the political-strategic concept of war," which was adopted by Stalin, and that "strategy would guide operational art. The brushstrokes Soviet commanders applied were the gift of deep operations."7 3 F 74 With Stalin's strategic direction, the commanders of the Red Army knew how to apply the operational concept to achieve strategic objectives.7 4F 75 Another reason why the concept was applicable to the Soviet Union at that time was that the Red Army possessed features that made the concept feasible. Olsen and Creveld go on to say Soviet leaders "only controlled the most critical details, and in some other operations they provided models but left the local commanders to execute the work after providing the instruments."7 5F 76 Moreover, Harrison held that "by the beginning of 1942, the Soviet industry had recovered sufficiently to begin supplying the army with a growing number of tanks and other armored vehicles."7 6 F 77 This enabled the massive formation of armored forces that would act as a breakthrough or shock force in the Deep-Operations concept. The last aspect of the concept in the Soviet military at that time is that the Red Army was willing to take the cost of creating multiple shock 
74
75
76
77
78
79
78 Naveh,
236. 79
The future war concepts of Deep Operations, and Air-Land Battle were viable for the Soviet Union and the United States, respectively, during the periods. The Blitzkrieg concept, however, was not fully viable for Germany, and this unviability led the country into the final defeat of World War II. Thus, lessons that can be generally drawn from the 
82
83
84
The primary research question is: Is the MDO concept viable to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare? The research methodology to answer this question is mainly qualitative with little quantitative assessments. The methodology will examine whether the MDO concept, as applied to the ROK military, holds significant promise in effectively countering North Korean hybrid warfare. This thesis will use the combination of Lykke and Leonhard models (See figure 
7
As described in Figure 
7
Overall viability of the MDO to the ROK military will be evaluated with four criteria: suitability, feasibility, acceptability, and risk. The MDO concept has to be suitable, feasible, acceptable to the ROK military and risks need to be mitigatable to be fully viable.
The first test has to do with suitability. This part of the thesis will examine whether the MDO concept, as applied to the ROK military, will be suitable for defense and military strategy. The intent of the test is to examine if the MDO concept significantly contributes to the ROK military strategy regarding North Korean hybrid warfare threats. It is hard to quantify the level of suitability in detail, so the result will be in the form of suitable, partially suitable, or unsuitable for each of the components of suitability, as well as overall suitability.
For the feasibility test, the thesis will examine if the ROK military possesses the capability the MDO concept requires or if the future capabilities the ROK military is planning currently will provide enough capabilities to employ the MDO. Those capabilities include ground, air, naval, marine, cyber, and space. Those capabilities also include the industrial capacity to acquire necessary weapons and equipment, the strength of the officer and NCO corps to operationalize new concepts, and train the military.
Finally, feasibility will be discussed in terms of feasible, partially feasible, or unfeasible, as well as overall feasibility.
For the acceptability test, the thesis will utilize cost-benefit analysis, plus the perceived willingness of ROK political and military leaders, as well as voters, to accept the concept. The analysis will be conveyed utilizing the same method as above: acceptable, partially acceptable, or unacceptable, as well as the overall acceptability.
For risk tests, the thesis will examine whether ends, ways, and means are in balance with each other when the MDO concept is applied as ways, ROK strategic guidance is understood as the ends, and current and future ROK capabilities as the means.
The result will also be in the form of no risk, partial risk, or high risk for each of the components of risk, as well as the overall risk.
In conducting the research, the biggest threats to validity in this thesis would be hasty generalization and confirmation bias. Hasty generalization can occur in this research if the thesis only looks at one case to draw elements of successful future war concept or one model that provides strategic lens. In order to prevent the hasty generalization, the thesis discusses three cases of future war concepts to identify elements of a viable future war concept in Chapter 2: Blitzkrieg as a non-viable future war concept, and Deep Operation concept and Air-Land Battle concept as viable future war concepts. Also, combining the Lykke model and Leonhard model enables the thesis to examine not only suitability, feasibility, and acceptability of the concept but also enables it to examine risks. Confirmation bias can occur in this research if the author has pre-existing belief on the MDO concept or hybrid warfare, or if there is any result that the author wants to have at the end of the research. To prevent the confirmation bias, the thesis will discuss the counter-argument in Chapter 5, by looking counter-arguments for each of the subsidiary research questions as well as the primary research question.
This research will answer the primary research question by using the combination model of Lykke and Leonhard models. The MDO concept, as ways, will be examined in a strategic context with limited objectives to counter North Korean hybrid warfare as ends and the ROK military's current and future capabilities as means. The evaluation criteria are suitability, feasibility, acceptability, and risk, all of which describe the relationship between ends, ways, and means, as well as the degree of balance among the three components. The thesis will attempt to avoid the threats to validity by drawing elements of viable future war concepts from three different cases, combining two different strategic models, and examining counter-arguments against answers to the subsidiary and primary research questions. These goals, if combined, would enable the government to achieve the national vision of "A Nation of the People, a Just Republic of Korea."8 6 F 87 Of these five goals, the goal of "a peaceful and prosperous Korean Peninsula" directly guides and relates to ROK national security strategy. 
86
Each of the governance goals is matched with different strategies that the ROK government formulated to achieve the goals. To be specific, to achieve the goal of "a peaceful and prosperous Korean Peninsula," the ROK government devised three related strategies: first, strong security and responsible defense; second, mutual cooperation and denuclearization; and third, taking diplomatic initiatives for international cooperation.8 7 F 88 Of the three strategies, "strong security and responsible defense" best relates to ROK security strategy in countering North Korean military threats, including hybrid warfare threats. The strategy then consists of five policy tasks that are part of the overall One Hundred Policy Tasks: "strengthening capabilities to counter North Korean asymmetric threats" (task number 85); "early wartime operational control transition based on strong ROK-US alliance" (task number 86); "robust push for defense reform and increased civil control over the military" (task number 87); "promoting defense industries in accordance with the fourth industrial revolution" (task number 88); and "improving working conditions and human rights for the soldiers" (task number 89).8 8 F 89 Except for task number 89, policy tasks 85 through 88 are either directly or indirectly related to countering North Korean hybrid warfare threats. Thus, analyzing whether the MDO concept can contribute to each of the tasks will help determine the suitability of the MDO concept to the ROK national security strategy.
First, the MDO concept can directly contribute to accomplishing task number 85, "strengthening capabilities to counter North Korean asymmetric threats." Task number 88 대한민국 정부, 10. 
89
90
91
92 Ji-hye Jun, "3 military systems to counter N. Korea: Kill Chain, KAMD, KMPR," Korea Times, 1 November 2016, http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/ nation/2016/11/205_217259.html. 
93
The MDO concept not only provides the conceptual frameworks to counter the above-mentioned asymmetric threats but also further expands the ways to deter the threat.
The concept first focuses on deterring the near-peers' threat of armed conflict by competition, which includes activities such as conducting intelligence and countering adversary reconnaissance, enabling defeat of the adversary's information and unconventional warfare, and demonstrating credible deterrent.9 3F 94 All of the above activities for the competition can support task number 85. Conducting intelligence and counter adversary reconnaissance would thoroughly analyze North Korean asymmetric threat systems and create uncertainty for the North Korean military in achieving its objectives through any type of provocations. Enabling defeat of the adversary's information and unconventional warfare would counter any North Korean military actions related to cyber, propaganda, or spy activities that can disrupt the ROK system.
Demonstrating credible deterrent would be most influential in preventing North Korea from executing asymmetric attacks as it demonstrates its "ability to immediately deny a fait accompli attack," "ability to penetrate anti-access and area denial systems," "ability to conduct strategic and operational maneuver," and "ability to support MDO."9 4 F 95 The MDO concept also expands to provide options to penetrate, disintegrate, and exploit when the deterrence fails.9 5F 96 Therefore, the MDO concept can directly contribute to achieving task number 85 concerning countering North Korean asymmetric threats. Although the MDO concept focuses primarily on near-peer threats such as Russia and China, the nature of the threat resembles that of North Korea. According to the MDO 97 Sukjoon Yoon, "6 Myths About OPCON Transfer And the US-South Korea Alliance," The Diplomat, 25 September 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/09/6-mythsabout-opcon-transfer-and-the-us-south-korea-alliance. 
98
Therefore, the application of the MDO concept would make the ROK military more capable of countering the threat, which can satisfy the conditions for the OPCON transfer. Also, the application of the MDO concept would increase the interoperability of the ROK-US combined forces, which is significant for the ROK general to command the entire CFC organization. The MDO concept assumes that allies "will develop and sustain sufficient interoperability to conduct combined operations that deter and defeat adversaries."9 9F 100 The concept also maintains that the effect of deterrence will maximize when the adversaries see the combined forces' interoperability to conduct MDO.1 00 F 101 By applying the MDO concept, the ROK military can not only increase the capabilities to counter North Korean threats but also enhance the interoperability, which will support setting the conditions for the OPCON transfer.
Third, the MDO concept can indirectly contribute to accomplishing both task number 87, "robust push for defense reform and increased civil control over military" and task number 88, "promoting defense industries under the fourth industrial revolution." Although the MDO concept is not directly related to task number 87, mainly focused on the ROK Defense Reform 2.0, there are aspects of MDO that can support the approach of the reform. After publishing the MDB in 2017, TRADOC complied with the lessons learned from the fielded force and reflected those lessons in the MDO concept in 102 대한민국 정부, 18.
103 Ibid., 22.
104 Ibid., 109. 
105
Based on the contents in the MDO publication, the concept can directly support task number 85 "strengthening capabilities to counter North Korean asymmetric threats," as well as task number 86 "early wartime operational control transition based on strong ROK-US alliance." The concept not only provides the framework to counter the North 106 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, F-1~F-2. 
107
108
Korean asymmetric threats but also expands by giving more options for deterrence and winning the war to the national-level decision-makers. While not as direct, aspects of the MDO concept can also contribute to achieving task number 87, "robust push for defense reform and increased civil control over military" and task number 88, "promoting defense industries under the fourth industrial revolution." The MDO concepts approach is generally aligned with what task number 87 and task number 88 pursue, especially the concept of optimizing the force efficiency to counter larger forces and using technology to the maximum effect. The application of the MDO concept, therefore, seems suitable for the overall ROK national security strategy, especially in achieving "the strong security and responsible defense" strategy, which will eventually contribute to the goal of "a peaceful and prosperous Korean Peninsula," one of the five governance goals as laid out in The 100 Dae Guk Jeong Gua Je.1 08 F 109
The MDO's Suitability with the ROK National Defense Strategy Although examining the entire defense strategy of the ROK is limited due to classified portions of the document, some features of the strategy are published through the ROK Ministry of National Defense White Paper. The defense white paper lays out six tenets of national defense policy that guides and provides directions for overall defense strategy: first, "establishing a robust national defense posture against omnidirectional security threats;" second, "developing a mutually complementary and robust ROK-US Alliance, and promoting exchanges and cooperation for national defense;" third, 109 대한민국 정부, 3.
"building a strong force that supports peace on the Korean Peninsula by firmly implementing defense reform;" fourth, "establishing a transparent and efficient national defense operation system;" fifth, "instilling a high-morale military culture that accompanies the people and invokes public trust;" and sixth, "building a foundation for peace establishment through inter-Korean military confidence building and arms control."1 09 F
110
First, the MDO concept can directly support the tenet of "establishing a robust national defense posture against omnidirectional security." By omnidirectional, the paper means that the military should be able to counter mainly North Korea but also potential threats from any of the surrounding countries.1 1 0F 
111
The MDO concept attempts to solve the problem of multiple adversaries. The concept mainly focuses on countering China and Russia but also includes Iran, North Korea, and other threats as possible future threats. The concept requires the Joint Force to "employ MDO adapted for the unique cultural, geographic, and military context against these and other future threats."1 13 F 114 The adaptability of the concept to counter multiple adversaries, though not necessarily at the same time, is one of the key features in the concept, which aligns with omnidirectional security challenges that the ROK defense strategy tries to solve. In addition to the multiple adversary problem, the concept also attempts to solve the problem of the all-domain nature of the threats. The concept perceives that the emerging operational environments are shaped by several key characteristics, one of which is that "adversaries are contesting all domains, the EMS, and the information environment."1 14F 115 North Korea can use these all-domain capabilities to conduct hybrid warfare in case of armed conflict. Thus, the approach that the MDO concept takes toward multi-adversaries and all-domain challenges aligns with the concept of omnidirectional security challenge within the ROK defense strategy. 115 Ibid., 6.
Second, the MDO concept can indirectly support the tenet of "developing a mutually complementary and robust ROK-US Alliance, and promoting exchanges and cooperation for national defense." This tenet pursues the ROK Armed Forces to be leading the combined forces in defense of the ROK under the smooth transition of wartime OPCON, as well as maintaining a mutually complementary relationship with the US forces and shaping a more favorable strategic environment for the ROK through exchanges and cooperation with surrounding countries.1 15F 
116
The last part of the tenet, "exchanges and cooperation for national defense," means exchanges and cooperation with neighboring countries as well as with key countries around the world.1 17F 118
The MDO concept requires the Joint Forces to "develop or improve capabilities to contribute cross-domain options" by "preparing the operational environment by building 116 ROK MND, 2018 Korea Defense White Paper, 45. 
117
118
119
Considering that the MDO concept for the US forces focuses on China as a threat, this could be a limitation; however, as long as the ROK applies aspects of the MDO concept that are related to the ROK strategic ends instead of blindly adopting the whole concept, this should not become a problem.
Third, the MDO concept can also indirectly support the tenet of "building a strong force that supports peace on the Korean Peninsula by firmly implementing defense reform." Although one of the ROK government's policy tasks touches on the issue of the Defense Reform 2.0, the defense strategy expands the concept of implementing the reform further. The goal of the Defense Reform 2.0 is "to build a strong military that supports the peace and prosperity of the ROK with force."1 19 F 
120
127
The MDO concept is suitable for the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare threats. The concept can either directly or indirectly support achieving the four ROK policy tasks that are part of the national security strategy in countering the threat. The application of the concept to the ROK military would also reinforce the national defense policy tenets. The strategic objectives of the MDO section of the concept discuss three ways that a multi-domain capable Joint Force can win and defeat the adversary: first, "effective competition that deters escalation and defeats adversaries' destabilization efforts;" second, "deny enemy objectives within days and achieve an operational position of relative advantage within weeks that leads to an acceptable, sustainable political outcome;" and third, "defeat the enemy in a protracted war."1 27F 128 This way of countering an adversary exactly aligns with the ROK strategy of deterrence first and to win the war if deterrence fails. Also, the adaptability of the concept allows the 62 ROK to prepare for the omnidirectional threat that the ROK attempts to overcome. The only possible concern is that the MDO concept primarily focuses on the threat of Russia and China, and the ROK wanting cooperation with surrounding countries may make unwanted friction; thus, the ROK needs to be mindful of the wording or contents of the concept when rewriting in a way that there is no misperception for unnecessary friction.
Is the MDO concept feasible for the ROK military to counter hybrid warfare? Feasibility, in this thesis, is defined as the possibility of applying the concept with the means available.1 28 F 
129
129
130
131
The MDO concept states its key required capabilities in fourteen different sentences. These descriptions include capabilities such as the "ability to calibrate force posture geographically and across all the Army components to defeat Chinese and Russian offensive operations" and "the ability to build partners' capacities and capabilities," which are not necessarily related to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare.1 32 F 
133
During a press brief explaining the Army Futures and Concepts Center 's recent work on "AimPoint Force," a new structure alignment to meet the MDO concept's organization requirement, its director, LTG Eric Wesley, emphasized the importance of continuing building EAB units for effective implementation of the MDO concept in near-132 Krause and Philips, 465.   133 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, B-1 -B-2. peer competition.1 33F 134 In TP 525-3-8, EAB formations are "the orchestrators of multidomain combined arms operation," and the EAB must include "uniquely tailored theater armies," "threat-focused field armies," "versatile corps," and "tactically focused divisions."1 34F 135 Thus, the focus of the discussion on the organization as part of the feasibility needs to be on the EAB level: division, corps, and Army level (field army) units. The only exception would be the theater army because the organization does not need to be separate from the field army for the ROK military, considering the nonexpeditionary nature of the military.
According to the MDO concept, threat-focused field armies are needed to "provide credible deterrence, execute multi-domain competition against near-peer threats, and enable a rapid transition to, and execution of, Large-Scale Ground Combat Operation (LSGCO)."1 35 F 136 Field armies in the MDO concept must be capable of "gaining and maintaining contact across all domains, converging multi-domain capabilities, and transitioning across the competition continuum to maintain the initiative."1 36F 137 Field armies also need to be able to operate as Land Component Command (LCC), to shape deep fire area, and to command multinational corps and enablers in the Area of Responsibility 134 Army New Service, "US Army Futures and Concepts Center evaluates new force structure," 24 April 2020, https://www.defencetalk.com/us-army-futures-andconcepts-center-evaluates-new-force-structure-75266. 
iv. 136
137
The ROK created a Ground Operations Command (GOC) combining two field armies of the 1st ROK Army and the 3rd ROK Army in 2019, in addition to the preexisting 2nd Operational Command, which is mainly focused on rear-area operations.
With eight corps (seven regional and one mechanized corps) under the command, an intelligence brigade that includes drone units, fire brigades with deep area target capabilities, and a sustainment command, all performing the role of Ground Component Command (GCC) during the war with some US units under the command, the ROK GOC can fulfill much of the MDO concept requirements for the field army.1 38 F 139 There are some gaps, however, which are spotted through published documents, between the current capability of the ROK GOC and the MDO concept's requirement for the field army: for example, a command and control system to effectively coordinate and control joint and multinational assets, longer precision fires to shape the operational deep area, and cyber/space capabilities.1 39 F 140 The fact that the ROK already possesses the army level units capable of performing some aspects of MDO show the positive feasibility of the concept application at the army level with possible future complements to the capabilities gaps. 144 Ibid. 
145 송진현, 13.
The MDO concept requires "tactically focused divisions to shape, dominate, and win the close fight."1 45 F 
146
The ROK Army plans to create drone-robot units from corps down to battalion level to 
54. 147
148
Overall, the main organizations required for the MDO concept is traditional EABs like divisions, corps, and armies with capabilities to exercise their combat power coordinated with joint forces in multi-domain environment. Large-scale ground combat has been the primary focus for the ROK military for a long time, and their current organization seems to be feasible to carry out the MDO concept with new future capabilities added to each echelon. Therefore, it is logical to say that it is feasible for the ROK Army organization to apply the concept if the ROK invests in those capability gaps in each echelon with the concept requirements. However, the ROK Army EAB formations need to have more flexibility to accommodate space, cyber, electromagnetic, information, and joint services elements in the formation to make it fit the multi-domain environment.
The creation of the National Training Center (NTC) after the Vietnam War is considered one of the critical factors that contributed to the victory of the US military in 
149 송진현, 21.
In summary, the ROK military can create a training environment for the force to apply the MDO concept and fulfill those requirements related to countering North Korean hybrid warfare. Although there needs to be modifications or improvements to existing systems, the ROK already possesses combat training centers such as KCTC and BCTP, conducts combined and joint exercises that can be utilized as training in a multi-domain environment, and develops training systems that the future force can use to train 
163
164
effectively using systems such as VR-or AR-enabled training systems. These systems altogether can contribute to the overall training of the future force of the ROK.
Possession of new materiel or technology does not guarantee success in the future war; for example, in 1940, Frances's possession of more tanks than Germany did not help France defeat the Germans. But it is common knowledge that a military that lacks necessary equipment or technology cannot possibly win against an adversary who already possesses such equipment or technology and knows how to use them, which is why many nations strive to develop up-to-date military technology and equipment. The MDO concept requires various capabilities that necessitate certain materiel acquisition or development. Among these, materiel that is crucial to countering hybrid warfare can be separated into three categories: first, a command and control system that enables commanders and staffs to "visualize and command a battle in all domains, the EMS, and the information environment;" second, weapons and equipment that "can converge capabilities to attack specific vulnerabilities" of the adversary; and third, systems that provide protection and sustainability to the forces so that the forces "can persist in a difficult operational environment" and "are able to conduct independent maneuver and employ cross-domain fires."1 64 F 165
The most important aspects of the command and control system that the MDO concept requires are visualization of the battlefield and the ability to command units in all domains.1 65F 166 The US Army, in an attempt to close the gap between the current and the future command and control capabilities, is now developing the Army Network as part of the Army's six modernization priorities that will drive the materiel development for the MDO concept.1 66F 167 The Army's line of effort has four priorities for the network. The first line of effort is "to provide ensured network transport in a contested environment against a peer adversary and dominate cyber electromagnetic activities," which will include a handheld manpack, small form fit radio, and tactical network technology modernization in service program.1 67 F 
168
170
169
170
171
The network modernization is one of the priorities in Army Vision 2030, the ROK Army modernization strategy document, to effectively enable communications between command elements and all future fighting platforms, including units, drones, and robots.1 71F 172 The first line of effort is to diversify communication nodes from only having ground communications nodes to extending them to air and space level nodes by utilizing aircraft, drones, and military satellites.1 72 F 173 In this way, the connection to units and any type of fighting platform will be diversified, thus allowing future units and platforms maneuverability in the Korea Theater of Operation (KTO). The second line of effort is to build a mobile and Internet of Things (IoT) system that can be used in tactical units with "Tactical Multi-Function Terminal (TMFT)" and will connect to various levels of commands with AI, IoT technology.1 73 F 174 This will enable each unit to effectively command and control their assets against North Korean hybrid warfare, as well as possess the flexibility to respond to any type of disaster or non-military threats. The third line of effort is to develop a Common Operating Picture (COP) system that can be shared from battalion level to Army level.1 7 4F 175 The initiative will ensure the visualization of the battlefield to each level of commanders and staff, thereby increasing the common understanding throughout the units. The fourth line of effort is to develop an aggregate 
172
173
174
175
The second capability of MDO directly relating to countering hybrid warfare is the weapons and equipment that "can converge capabilities to attack specific vulnerabilities" of the adversary.1 79F 180 These include materiel that enable units to maneuver and employ fires in a multi-domain environment such as Long-Range Precision Fire (LRPF), Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV), Future Vertical Lift (FVL), and 
176
177 Ibid.
178 Ibid.
179 유용원, "2020 년 국방예산, 정부안과 동일한 50 조 1,527 억원으로 확정," 조선일보, 11 December 2019, http://bemil.chosun.com/nbrd/bbs/view.html?b_bbs_id= 10067&pn=1&num=1257&fb.
Soldier Lethality (SL). To achieve the MDO capable force, the US Army aims to develop those maneuver and fire systems as part of the six modernization priorities. Long-range precision fires are employed to neutralize the adversary's Anti-Access/Anti-Denial (A2/AD) system, thereby shaping conditions for maneuver units. Next-generation combat vehicles would provide ground forces options to maneuver in the multi-domain environment with protection and will reinforce the firepower. Soldier lethality ensures individual soldiers to have enhanced weapon precision, night vision, and communication capabilities. 180F 181 These projects are being developed by Cross-Functional Teams (CFTs), which consist of experts and practitioners from various backgrounds, and the Army Futures Command (AFC) ensures the unity of effort for those teams to be properly supported by funds and other resources.1 8 1F 182
The ROK military focuses heavily on developing the Nuclear-WMD response system to counter North Korean missile strikes against South Korea. Among them, the strategic strike system capable of "the real-time detection and engagement of enemy launchers and missiles" consists of surveillance assets as well as strike assets such as the F-35 and missiles.1 82 F 183 The ROK continues to invest in these systems and utilize them to counter North Korean provocations as well as to neutralize their A2/AD systems when called on to conduct a counter-offensive. According to Army Vision 2030, the Army is developing Baekdoosan Tiger system, which includes warrior platform, next-generation 181 2019 Army Modernization Strategy, 6. 182 Ibid., 3. 
183
184
The last aspect of materiel that the MDO concept requires is the system that provides protection and sustainability to the forces so that the forces "can persist in a difficult operational environment" and "are able to conduct independent maneuver and employ cross-domain fires."1 85 F 186 The examples of this system to become the MDO capable force, according to the 2019 Army Modernization Strategy, include FVL and Air and Missile Defense (AMD).1 8 6F 187 The FVL platforms and technology enable forces to extend their operational reach deep into the adversary's area, and it also provides forces options 
184
194
Overall, the materiel that the ROK military has now and pursues in the future seems to satisfy most of the requirements that the MDO concept suggests: the concept is feasible to the ROK military as far as the materiel is concerned. There are gaps, however, between the ROK's current and future capabilities and those requirements: resilience of the network system that can work in the contested environment, interoperability of the network with other services and multinational partners, prompt missile systems such as hypersonic missiles, more protection and lethality in vertical lift capability, and multilayered air-defense system that can protect more units. The ROK possesses technology and capabilities to enable these projects; it is a matter of choice.
Having the best organization, training, and materiel are all in vain if the personnel who compromise the organization and leaders who manage the organization fail to live up to the standards that the organization is called to do. There are numerous examples in military history, where units and organizations failed because of inadequate or incompetent leaders and members. This is one of the obvious reasons why one must heavily invest in acquiring, retaining, and developing the personnel as well as the leaders.
The MDO, due to its unique environment, requires higher standards for personnel and leaders to successfully employ the concept in a contested multi-domain environment against near-peer adversaries. To evaluate whether the MDO concept is feasible to the ROK military, one must look at if the ROK's current and future personnel and leader capabilities match that of the MDO concept requirement.
The MDO's requirements on personnel and leaders are three-fold: first, leaders and soldiers who "continue to operate effectively in austere environments and conditions;" second, leaders and soldiers who are "high-quality, physically fit, mentally tough Soldiers who have the skills and expertise to conduct the MDO; and third, leaders who "create and foster conditions favorable to mission command so that ever disparate retaining the right personnel and leaders, there needs to be more focus on the mission command approach, mainly when developing and retaining the leaders because the MDO concept inherently necessitates the mission command approach to command and control.
Through analyzing the five elements of organization, training, materiel, personnel, and leadership, all of which were crucial for the feasibility of a future war concept, it is certainly feasible for the ROK military to apply the MDO concept in countering North Korean hybrid warfare with current and future planned capabilities.
There are, however, gaps that need to be addressed to make it completely possible in its application. For the organization, while maintaining the current EAB formations, the ROK Army needs to be able to accommodate space, cyber, electromagnetic, information element to counter the North Korean hybrid warfare down to at least Corps level. For training, the ROK Army needs: to make the VR/AR training system in a more combined and joint manner than leaving at separate training; to conduct BCTP training with joint, multi-national partners with cyber, space elements; and conduct exercises with a multidomain task force or with the multi-domain environment. For materiel, the ROK military needs: resilience of the network system that can work in the contested environment; interoperability of the network with other services and multinational partners; a prompt missile system such as hypersonic missiles, more protection and lethality in vertical lift capability, and multi-layered air-defense system that can protect more units. For personnel and leadership, the ROK needs to instill a culture that enables the mission command approach to the command and control.
Is the MDO concept acceptable to the ROK military to counter hybrid warfare? Acceptability is defined as justifiability of the cost for applying the concept against the benefits of desired effects.1 99 F 200 Blitzkrieg concept during 1940 was more than acceptable to Hitler, and his military leaders since the benefits of applying the concept, such as avoiding a protracted war, far exceeded the costs, such as creating Panzer Group Kleist and German air force Luftwaffe.2 00F
201
202
203
The cost estimation of applying the MDO concept can vary significantly, depending on the extent of what to include as far as required capabilities are concerned.
Feickert and McGarry's congressional report analyzes the Army's modernization strategy of fulfilling the MDO concept by looking at appropriateness, achievability, and affordability of the strategy.2 0 6F 207 Of particular concern in the report is the budget for the six priorities in the Army strategy concerning achievability and affordability (See figure 
9
The report mentions that there are 31 modernization initiatives, not all of which are programs of record, to support the six priorities in making an MDO-capable force.2 07 F 208 To field the MDO-capable force with six priorities by 2035, the Army projected "$57.3 billion in research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) and procurement funding for programs related to its six modernization priorities over the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) from FY2020 to FY2024."2 08 F 209 Also, the Army's budget request for FY2020 regarding the six priorities is about $8.9 billion.2 09F 210 These figures will only grow in the coming years, as it is natural that the Army would realign the funding ratio between the legacy programs and the modernization programs in a way that funding for the latter increases as the target year for the modernization nears. One must be reminded that the modernization budget of $57.3 billion for the five year-span from FY2020 to FY2024, which is destined to only grow in the future, does not include other service modernization requirement costs, opportunity costs, or joint projects such as the Joint All Domain Command and Control (JADC2) system. Thus, when projected for 15 years from FY2020 to FY2035, with the 2020 FYDP (five-year budget) of $57.3 billion, the pure total cost of the concept application needs to multiply 2020 FYDP by three and would be $171.9 billion. This is the bare-minimum cost of application for the Army MDO concept until 2035, as the concept is in the process of constant evolution, and there is no joint MDO concept formulated yet.
The first obvious benefit of the MDO application is the maximized deterrent effect, especially against North Korean hybrid warfare. North Korea's war strategy of a 
209
210
The second benefit has to do with the enhancement of the interoperability between joint partners as well as multi-national partners, such as US troops in Korea.
Previous joint operations focus heavily on the deconfliction of the operations within each services' boundaries. In his article, Jin-Hyun Song discusses how the establishment of the Forward Boundary (FB) line limits the fires and intelligence projection of the Army and Air Force and should thus be reconsidered as a coordination line with the advancement of technology and capabilities.2 10F 
211
The third benefit of the concept application is that the ROK military can be adaptable to counter not only North Korean threats but also other unexpected external threats. In an address to West Point cadets in February 2011, then-Secretary of Defense Robert Gates emphasized the unpredictability of the next war by saying, "when it comes to predicting the nature and location of our next military engagements, since Vietnam, our record has been perfect. We have never once gotten it right."2 11 F 
212
The fourth benefit of the concept application is the possible advancement of the defense industry. The MDO concept inherently requires various capabilities that do not exist at the moment: for example, capabilities to "visualize and command a battle in all domains, the Electro-Magnetic Spectrum (EMS), and the information environment and shift capabilities rapidly between domains and organizations to mass combat power against Chinese and Russian vulnerabilities;" the capabilities to "provide to the Joint Force Commander multi-domain formations and systems that can converge capabilities to attack specific vulnerabilities in Chinese and Russian multi-layered, mutually reinforcing military forces and systems;" and the resilient multi-domain formations with "systems, leaders, and Soldiers that are durable, can persist in a difficult operational environment."2 13 F 214 These requirements will inevitably force the defense industry into developing weapons and systems that necessitate the use of the most up-to-date technology such as AI, VR/AR, hypersonic, big-data, etc.
Now one must compare the cost with the benefit and analyze if the benefit of the concept application exceeds the cost to prove the acceptability; however, the cost of the concept application, which is predominantly quantitative, cannot easily be compared with the benefits, which is largely qualitative. Going back to the definition of acceptability can provide clues on how to conduct the cost and benefit analysis in this case properly.
Yarger defined acceptability by asking the following question: "Are the consequences of cost justified by the importance of the effect desired?"2 14F 215 In other words, if one can justify the cost of the MDO concept application over the importance of the effect desired, the result would be considered acceptable. To justify the cost in this sense, the cost needs to be put into the context of the ROK defense budget, and the benefits need to be examined with the willingness of the decision-makers.
214 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, B-2. 
215
The previously calculated total cost of the MDO concept application amounts to $171.9. To place the amount in the ROK defense budget's context, one must first decide what the target year should be. Both the ROK Defense Reform 2.0 and the Army Vision 2030 set the target year as 2030, so setting 2030 as the reference would be logical. To simplify the annual cost, $171.9 billion can be divided into the 10-year span from 2021 to 2030, which makes the minimum annual cost of $17.19 billion to apply the MDO concept. The 2020 ROK defense budget is set at $42.2 billion, 2.68 percent of the nation's GDP, making it the ninth largest country in the world in terms of the defense budget, just after Japan and Russia.2 15F 
216
The first option of adding $17.19 billion on top of the annual budget of $42.2 billion would make the new total $59.39, which is about a 40 percent increase from 2020. This amount will increase the GDP make-up of the budget from 2.68 percent to 3.77 93 percent. Considering the fact that the average defense budget increase each year from 2016 to 2020 was 6 percent and that the average GDP make-up of the defense budget for the five years was at 2.48 percent, the 40 percent increase and the 3.77 percent of the GDP make-up would likely sound too extreme for any national-level decision-makers.2 17 F 218
The second option of replacing the existing force improvement program with MDO capabilities might also be difficult to persuade the decision-makers since it would be at the cost of losing previously pursued acquisitions. Meanwhile, although the benefits of the MDO concept application, such as deterrent effect, interoperability, adaptability, and advancing the defense industry are significant, the implementation of the concept is not the only way to get those benefits. If the MDO concept was the only way to assure those four benefits, the cost is justifiable because losing those four benefits then could mean war on the Korean Peninsula on the negative term. Therefore, the benefit of the concept application does not seem to justify fully the high cost.
Applying the MDO concept, as it is written in the Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) pamphlet, to the ROK military is not acceptable in countering North Korean hybrid warfare. Based primarily on the Army's six-modernization related 2020-2024 FYDP budget request, the total cost of the MDO concept application by 2035 can be calculated at a minimum of $171.9 billion, even without considering other services' modernization budgets, joint command and control system budget, and other opportunity costs. Meanwhile, there are also major benefits for the ROK military to adopt the MDO concept such as maximizing the deterrent effect against North Korean hybrid warfare, optimizing interoperability with joint and multi-national partners including US forces in Korea, increasing the adaptability and scalability of the joint force, and advancing defense industry capacities. While the benefits are absolutely crucial to achieving security and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula, which is one of the governance goals of the ROK, the cost of the concept application exceeds more than an acceptable range of the defense budget. Also, the MDO concept is not the only option for the ROK to generate those benefits. Thus, the overall acceptability is considered very low based on the cost-benefit analysis.
Are there any risks for the ROK military in applying the MDO concept? Risk describes "the gap between what is to be achieved and the concepts and resources available to achieve the objective."2 18 F 219 Risk exists in any type of strategy since it is not possible to be 100 percent sufficient in resources and concepts to support the objectives; therefore, having a balance between the ends, ways, and means, thereby minimizing the risk, is critical in formulating a sound strategy.2 19 F 220 An example of the importance of considering risk when formulating a future war concept can be found in the Soviet operations during 1944-45. With the Soviet strategic goals of defeating Germans and creating favorable post-war conditions and the means of Soviet military capabilities, applying the Deep Operation concept as "the way" initially posed many risks, one of which is related to overstretching line of communication. In mitigating the risks, Stalin, 
219 Yarger,
6. 220
The first risk of applying the MDO concept to the ROK military is unnecessary friction with other neighboring countries, such as China and Russia. Although the ROK aims to primarily counter North Korean hybrid warfare threats with the MDO concept, the US Army MDO concept explicitly seeks to "deter and defeat Chinese and Russian aggression in both competition and conflict."2 21 F 222 Thus, adopting the concept as it is might signal to China and Russia that the ROK is willing to be part of the US actions of neutralizing Chinese or Russian A2/AD systems against those countries, and it might create unnecessary friction with them. Nevertheless, it is possible to mitigate the risks by not blindly adopting the concept but optimizing in the Korean context, for operating in the multi-domain itself is not a new theme, and many countries, including the ROK, are already pursuing the effective operations in a multi-domain environment. Thus, formatting and reasoning within the concept need to mitigate the risk.
The second risk has to do with one of the baseline assumptions of the concept that "the Army will adjust to fiscal constraints and have resources sufficient to preserve the balance of readiness, force structure, and modernization."2 22F 223 The MDO concept heavily relies on materiel or systems, such as LRPF, NGCV, FVL, AMD, SL, and Army network, which are not currently developed and need constant financial support to conduct R&D. When uncertainties occur, such as the COVID-19 pandemic that might impose budget limitations, the whole concept of MDO cannot be implemented, because the technologies and materiel essential for the concept cannot be fielded due to budget constraints. Furthermore, some of the technology may not be realized in the foreseeable future. In this case, the concept application can face significant limitations. The risk can be mitigated by maintaining the priorities among the initiatives so that when budget limitations arise, those with high priorities can continue to be processed.
The third risk is about the over-reliance on technology. It is important to note that "the units that become most effective at maximizing the capabilities of technological enablers can also become the most at-risk by their loss."2 23F 224 For example, the MDO concept requires a network system that can be used by not only Army units but also joint and multi-national partners so that the cross-domain synergy can be maximized in the window of superiority. This type of network system, while enabling those types of 97 synergy effects, is also vulnerable to an adversary's concentrated attack or technical failure. Those communications failures are critical impediments in conducting the operations in a multi-domain environment, and they can even lead to friendly forces' defeats. To mitigate the risk, technologies and materiel need to be made strong enough to withstand such external attacks, and all units need to be able to apply the mission command approach throughout the operational process.
The MDO concept, as "ways," needs to be put into the strategic context of the ROK to examine the viability of the concept to the ROK military. The risk in this context seeks to find any imbalance between the strategic objectives of strong security and responsible defense, the ways of the MDO concept, and the means of the ROK military's current and future capabilities. The main three risks are unnecessary friction with neighboring countries, possible inconsistency in budget support, and the over-reliance on technologies. These risks, however, can be partially mitigated by applying the concept using the ROK's unique operational context and terms, setting priorities, adding sufficient protection measures in the materiel, and applying mission command approach for all units. By considering and taking mitigating measures on these risks, the concept application can be more realistic and valid. Regarding the ROK National Security Strategy, the MDO concept can directly or indirectly contribute to accomplishing five of One Hundred Policy Tasks related to countering North Korean hybrid warfare: "strengthening capabilities to counter North Korean asymmetric threats" (task number 85); "early wartime operational control transition based on strong ROK-US alliance" (task number 86); "robust push for defense industries under the fourth industrial revolution" (task number 87); "promoting defense industries under the fourth industrial revolution" (task number 88); and "improving working conditions and human rights for the soldiers" (task number 89).2 24F 225 Regarding the ROK Defense Strategy, the MDO concept can also support the six tenets of the national defense policy: countering "omnidirectional security threats," "a mutually complementary and robust ROK-US alliance," "firmly implementing defense reform," "establishing a transparent and efficient national operation system," "instilling a high morale culture," and "building a foundation for a peace establishment."2 25 F 
226
226 ROK MND, 2018 Korea Defense White Paper, 44. 100 capabilities the MDO requires as the ROK envisions in the Army Vision 2030. Those capabilities are: a command and control system that enables commanders and staffs to "visualize and command a battle in all domains, the EMS, and the information environment;" weapons and equipment that "can converge capabilities to attack specific vulnerabilities" of the adversary; and systems that provide protection and sustainability to the forces so that the forces "can persist in a difficult operational environment" and "are able to conduct independent maneuver and employ cross-domain fires."2 26 F 
227
The MDO concept, however, is not acceptable to the ROK military due to the mismatch in the cost-benefit analysis. The concept necessitates the development of the Army's six modernization priorities: LRPF, NGCV, FVL, Army network, AMD, SL.2 2 7F 228
The Congressional Research Service's report on the Army Modernization Strategy states that the Army needs those six priorities in order to become a fully MDO-capable force by 2035.2 28F 229 The total budget to acquire those six priorities is not publicly announced; however, one can deduce the total amount from the US Army 2020-2024 FYDP of $57.3 billion for the six priorities, which can be calculated as the minimum total of $171.9 101 billion for the 15 years until 2035.2 29F 230 This budget, even without considering the inevitable increase, other services modernization budget related to the MDO, joint command and control system budget, and other opportunity costs, already exceeds the acceptable range of the ROK defense budgets when calculated into the annual budget until 2030, the target year for the Defense Reform 2.0 and Army Vision 2030. The benefits of the MDO application, such as maximizing the deterrent effect against North Korean hybrid warfare; optimizing interoperability with joint and multi-national partners, including the US forces in Korea; increasing the adaptability and scalability of the joint force; and advancing defense industry capacities can be achieved through other means as well. This cost-benefit analysis altogether makes the acceptability of the concept too low to apply to the ROK military as it is.
There are some risks, as any imbalance between the ends, ways, and means of a strategy, in applying the MDO concept to the ROK military. Those risks are three-fold: first, unnecessary friction with neighboring countries, because the US MDO concept specifically intends to counter China and Russia's capabilities while the ROK is primarily focused on the North Korean ones; second, possible inconsistency in budget support, which can strand the required capabilities for the development process thereby leading to failure in the MDO concept application; and third, the over-reliance on technologies which can make the systems vulnerable to the adversary's concentrated attack. These risks, however, are not unmitigable and can be overcome if the ROK applies appropriate mitigating measures when adopting the concept. least an additional $17.19 billion on top of the current budget, which triggers the 40 percent increase of the budget as well as the GDP make-up ratio change from 2.68 percent to 3.77 percent. Considering the fact that the average increases each year in recent five years was 6 percent and the average GDP make-up of defense budget was 2.48 percent, one can easily understand those figures to apply the MDO concept is extreme.2 37F
238
Depending on the take-away from the three counter-arguments, some might conclude that the MDO concept is viable to the ROK military to counter North Korean hybrid warfare. This would mean that the MDO concept described in the two US TRADOC pamphlets is suitable, feasible, and acceptable to the ROK military and that the ROK should blindly adopt the concept without considering the strategic and operational context of the Korean Peninsula. The MDO concept, when properly applied, would certainly provide adaptability and critical advantage against any type of adversaries; however, in the case of the ROK, there are some aspects or capabilities that are not essential to meet the ROK strategic objectives. Thus, adjustments to the concept are required to reflect the ROK security context to make the concept viable to the ROK military.
The ROK First, the ROK should continue pursuing effective operations in multiple domains to create cross-domain synergy by revising and developing doctrine, organization, training, materiel, personnel, and leadership in the ROK's own way. Although the ROK may not need capabilities to operate expeditionary forces and penetrate the A2/AD system to support the strategic objectives, all other capabilities and concepts described in the MDO concept are certainly useful to deter and defeat North Korean threats and adapt to any other unknown future threats. Also, many countries and US services other than the Army, though they may have disagreements in the MDO concept, pursue war concepts that necessitate operating in a variety of domains with a different approach.2 38F
239
Second, the ROK should invest in the joint/combined network system that can be compatible with different services and multi-national partners, especially the US troops in Korea and possibly the inter-agency partners, to visualize the battlefield and communicate with each other. The interoperability of services and multi-national partners is essential to achieving the maximum level of cross-synergy effect, because different services and different multi-national partners have different capabilities across the domains. The core of interoperability is the common network that can visualize and engage in those exercises and discussions with the United States and other partners so that the ROK can refine its concept, contribute to improving the interoperability, and enhance its capabilities in operating in a multi-domain environment. Experimenting with multi-domain approaches to counter the North Korean threats during regular ROK-US combined exercises can be an option as well.
First, the United States needs to initiate a discussion on the MDO concept, or joint all-domain concept-whatever the name may be-with allies immediately after the joint war concept develops. The current MDO concept assumes that there will be "sufficient interoperability between Services, government agencies, and allies to conduct combined operations that deter and defeat adversaries."2 41 F 242 Also, the concept requires the capabilities "to build partners' capacities and capabilities" to apply the MDO concept.2 42F 243 Thus, interoperability with allied nations is critical for the United States to operate in their respective area of operations. Nevertheless, each country has different cycles of deciding on what the future war concept would be and what materiel need to be the priority in different period. It is critical that the United States, if the country means to improve interoperability, initiates the discussion on the MDO concept among the allies, including the ROK, so that each nation may have time to adjust to their cycle of decision making. Otherwise, the assumptions and requirements in the MDO concept will not be valid.
242 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, A-1. 
243
244
Third, the United States should extend the multi-domain exercises to include allies and coalition nations that have the possibility of fighting together in a future war based on the threat priorities. At this evolving stage of the multi-domain approach to operations, it is critical to experiment with multiple scenarios and take lessons to improve the capabilities and interoperability. Exercises focused on China and Russia are surely priorities for the United States; however, exercises focused on other threats mentioned in the MDO concept, such as Iran and North Korea, are equally important because countries do not always get the war they want. Experimenting with the multi-domain approach to counter North Korean threats during regular ROK-US combined exercises can be an option as well. Using these kinds of exercises, various lessons can be learned and applied to the future development of the concept and doctrines. 
244
Another area of possible future study will be testing the viability of any future war concept to a particular country using a similar methodology as this thesis. This thesis mainly examines the viability of the MDO concept to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare; however, the methodology of exploring the future war concept can be applied to any future war concepts against any country. That is possible because the framework of suitability, feasibility, acceptability, and risk can fundamentally test any type of concept as ways against given ends and means of countries in the respective strategic situations. 
245
246
53  
53  
John R. Davis Jr, "The Greatest Challenge to the Army Profession of
and Beyond," Military Review (September-October 2013): 3.
Marcois.   
Eleanor Albert, "What Are North Korea's Military Capabilities?" Council on Foreign Relations, last updated 20 December 2019, https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/north-koreas-military-capabilities.
Albert.
Tae-Jun Kang, "North Korea's Influence Operations, Revealed," The Diplomat, 25 June
2018, https://thediplomat.com/2018/07/north-koreas-influence-operationsrevealed/.
Vaishnavi Vaidyanathan, "North Korean Media Criticize the US For Intervening In Inter-Korean Affairs," International Business Times, 1 November 2018, https://www.ibtimes.com/north-korean-media-criticize-us-intervening-inter-koreanaffairs-2729228.
23 Yong-Ho Park, "South and North Korea's views on the Unification of the Korean Peninsula and Inter-Korean Relations," Korea Research Institute for Strategy, 21 January 2014, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Park-Young-Hopaper.pdf.
In-Chan Hwang, "N. Korea threatens to turn Seoul into a sea of fire," Dong-A Ilbo, 9 August 2017, http://www.donga.com/en/article/all/20170809/1021460/1/N-Koreathreatens-to-turn-Seoul-into-a-sea-of-fire%C2%A0.
  25 Park, 6.   
US President, National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House, December 2017),
27 US Department of Defense (DoD), Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: DoD, 2018), 2. 28 US Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 (Fort Eustis, VA: TRADOC, 6 December 2018), 3. 29 Eric J. Wesley and Robert H. Simpson, "Expanding the Battlefield -An Important Fundamental of Multi-Domain Operations," Land Warfare Paper 131, Association of the United States Army, April 2020, 2.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, iii.
Harry R. Yarger, "Toward a Theory of Strategy: Art Lykke and the Army War College Strategy Model," in US Army War College Guide to National Security Issues, Vol. I (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2012), 7.
Thomas B. Gukeisen, "The Operational Art of Blitzkrieg: Its Strengths and Weaknesses in Systems Perspective" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 26 May 2005), 3.
 vi.   
The Republic of Korea (ROK), Ministry of National Defense (MND), 2018 Korea Defense White Paper (Seoul: MND, 31 December 2018), 44.
Ibid.
Ibid., 27.   
 47.   
 17.    
Ibid., 24.   
류준영, "군부대 배치될 VR 전투훈련 "피 대신 땀이," 머니투데이, 10 June 2018, https://news.mt.co.kr/mtview.php?no=2019060712575995807.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, B-2.
Sean Kimmons, "Army to build three Multi-Domain Task Forces using lessons from the pilot," Army News, 15 October 2019, https://www.army.mil/article/228393/army_to_build_three_multi_domain_task_forces_u sing_lessons_from_pilot.
Ibid.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance (New York: Routledge, February 2020), 244.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, B-2.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, B-2.
Global Security, "Surion-Korean Helicopter Program," accessed 6 December 2019, https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/rok/khp.htm.
The U.S. Army, The Army People Strategy (Washington, DC: US Army, October 2019), 5.
The Army People Strategy, 5.
김상윤, "육군 부사관, '전사'로 거듭나기," 국방일보, 25 April 2019, http://pdf.dema.mil.kr/pdf/pdfData/2019/20190425/B201904250701.pdf.
김상윤, "핵심가치 재정립…진정한 전사공동체로 재탄생," 국방일보, 8 May 2019, http://kookbang.dema.mil.kr/newsWeb/20190509/14/BBSMSTR_ 000000010023/view.do.
Yarger, 7.    
Krause and Phillips, 170.    
Ibid., 308.    
Ibid, 473.   
Feickert and McGarry, summary page.    
Ibid., 7.   
송진현, 24.   
Feickert and McGarry, 5.    
 15.   
The ROK Ministry of National Defense (MND), "Defense Budget," accessed 15 January 20, http://mnd.go.kr/mbshome/mbs/mndEN/subview.jsp?id= mndEN_030900000000.
Ibid.   
ROK MND "Defense Budget."   
Krause and Philips, 297.    
 vi.   
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, A-1.
 73.   
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, B-2.
Ibid., B-1.
Feickert and McGarry, 1.   
ROK MND "Defense Budget."   
Feickert and McGarry, 6.   
Colin Clark, "Gen. Hyten on the New American Way of War: All-Domain Operations," Breaking Defense, 18 February 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/02/gen-hyten-on-the-new-american-way-of-war-alldomain-operations.
241 Sean Kimmons, "Army to build three Multi-Domain Task Forces using lessons from the pilot," Army News Service, 15 October 2019, https://www.army.mil/article/228393/army_to_build_three_multi_domain_task_forces_u sing_lessons_from_pilot.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
strategy can be examined for suitability, feasibility, and acceptability, and an assessment made of the proper balance among the component parts. (See figure 
5
60 Yarger, 5. 61 Robert Leonhard, "Dialectic Strategy" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1993), 17. 62
The MDO concept states fourteen types of capabilities are required to be able to execute the concept properly.2 03 F 204 Nevertheless, not all of those capabilities are measurable in terms of cost. For example, the capability to have "necessary authorities and permissions to operate in competition and rapidly transition to conflict effectively," which is the sixth required capability, does not provide any clue on how much money or resources the capability needs for implementation.2 04F 205 Although it may not be all-encompassing, the materiel, such as the Army's six modernization priorities, is one of the objective measures to estimate the cost of concept application, because those priorities are what the Army says it needs to fulfill the MDO concept. In "The Army's Modernization Strategy: Congressional Oversight Considerations," Andrew Feickert, a specialist in military ground forces, and Brendan W. McGarry, an analyst in US defense budget, stated that the Army needs the six priorities "to not only provide a technological improvement over legacy systems but also support the Army's operational concept -in this case Multi-Domain Operations (MDO)."2 05 F 206 Thus, analysis of the cost of the six priorities needs to be the center of discussion regarding the cost of the concept application, since the six priorities will take up the most expensive portion of the application and are the most tangible aspects in the MDO to counter hybrid warfare threats. 
The MDO concept, as described in two TRADOC pamphlets, is not fully viable to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare, and therefore, the ROK military should not adopt the concept as it is. The ROK military may not need all the capabilities that the MDO describe to "prevail in competition" and "to penetrate and disintegrate enemy anti-access and area denial systems and exploit the resultant freedom of maneuver to achieve strategic objectives and force a return to competition on favorable terms" to achieve the strategic objectives to counter the threats.2 3 0F 231 Nevertheless, the ROK is already pursuing optimizing combat power through the synergy of multiple domains, and there are lessons and implications from the MDO concept that the ROK can take away in formulating its future war concepts. Taking those implications, which this thesis will address in the later portion, to the future war concept can significantly strengthen the capabilities to counter North Korean hybrid warfare.
This thesis concludes that the MDO concept is suitable and feasible, but not acceptable; therefore, the concept is not fully viable to the ROK military in countering North Korean hybrid warfare. It is important to address other possible answers so that the counter-points to this thesis can be examined as well. There may be three types of counter-arguments against this thesis especially regarding the answers to subsidiary and primary questions. First, some may say that the MDO concept is not suitable to the ROK military. Second, some might argue that the MDO concept is not feasible to the ROK military. Third, some could say that the MDO concept can be acceptable to the ROK 231 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, vii. 103 military. Speculating about these counter-points will provide readers with a balanced view of the issue.
The first possible counter-argument is that the MDO concept is not suitable to the ROK at all, because the MDO concept was created in accordance with the US national strategy "to deter and defeat Chinese and Russian aggression in both competition and conflict."2 31 F 232 Before answering the counter-argument, the definition of suitability needs to be reminded. Suitability, in Yarger's definition, is "the degree of accomplishing the effect desired when the concept is attained."2 32 F 233 In an analysis of suitability in the previous chapter, this thesis discussed that the MDO concept with tenets of calibrated force posture, multi-domain formations, and convergence could, directly and indirectly, contribute to aspects of the ROK National Security Strategy and the National Defense Strategy. By attaining the concept, the ROK can accomplish the effect desired as stated in both the Security Strategy and the Defense Strategy. This may be the case because the types of North Korean military capabilities largely overlap with those of Russia and China, though the scale may vary greatly. Thus, the suitability is not about the proclamation; it is about the possibility of gaining the desired effects, which makes the counter-argument an incoherent statement.
The second possible counter-argument is that the MDO concept is not feasible to the ROK military because the ROK does not have a sufficient defense budget like the United States to support necessary technological developments. The feasibility, in 232 TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, vi. 
233
Yarger's definition, is "the possibility of applying the concept with means available."2 33F 234
The ROK's 2020 defense budget is at $42.2 billion and ranked the world's ninth largest defense budget, just after Japan and Russia.2 34F 235 Meanwhile, the FY2020 request for the US Army's six modernization priorities, which take up the most expensive part of realizing the MDO concept, is $8.9 billion, though it is presumed that the budget will go up in the future.2 35 F 236 Also, the ROK military has organizations, training platforms, materiel, personnel, and leadership that can be extended to enable MDO application. Thus, it is possible for the ROK to apply the MDO concept with means available within the country. Therefore, investing in the MDO application is a matter of choice, rather than a possibility, which makes the counter-argument invalid.
The third possible counter-argument is that the MDO concept can be acceptable to the ROK military because the benefits of maximizing the deterrent effect against North Korean hybrid warfare, optimizing interoperability with joint and multi-national partners including the US forces in Korea, increasing the adaptability and scalability of the joint force, and advancing defense industry capacities exceeds the estimated concept application cost of $171.9 billion by far. Yarger defines acceptability as "justifiability of the cost for applying the concept against the benefits of effects desired."2 36 F 237 In the acceptability analysis in Chapter 4, this thesis estimated that it would cost the ROK at 
234 Yarger,
7.
236
237