# ID: 77b1a662a07b4f19b66c36b63b1e6c01
# Title: Multi-domain operation's viability as a future war concept of the Republic of Korea military: can it counter North Korean hybrid warfare?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Hybrid warfare, according to Sean Monaghan, a strategic analyst in the UK Ministry of Defense (MOD), is "the challenge presented by the increasing complexity of armed conflict, where adversaries may combine types of warfare plus nonmilitary means to neutralize conventional military power.
"2 F 3 The utility of using hybrid warfare, according to Monaghan, is revisionist actors and adversaries can offset strong conventional military states with an array of new, more cost-effective means to achieve their political goals, as seen in Lebanon in 2006 and in Ukraine in 2014.3 F 4 North Korea's central concept of war strategy is hybrid warfare, or Baehabjeon; and it would fit in the category of Monaghan's definition.
The concept seeks to combine conventional and unconventional warfare to quickly overwhelm the South before US reinforcements arrive 3 in the South.4 F 5 Taking lessons from Russia and Hezbollah, North Korea is likely to utilize hybrid warfare in future conflicts with increased complexity, due to its ties to Russia and Hezbollah, capabilities, and intention.
Evolving North Korean hybrid warfare will be a challenge for the ROK in preparing a future conflict.
North Korea's Ties to Russia and Hezbollah North Korea's ties to Russia and Hezbollah increase the likelihood that North Korea would take lessons from their employment of hybrid warfare.
It is widely known that North Korea has special ties to Russia.
North Korea's military equipment, government organization, and ideology all have connections to the country.
The former Soviet Union, of which Russia comprised the most substantial portion, designated Kim Il-Sung, the founding father of North Korea and ex-guerrilla commander who fought against Japan during the 1930s, to be the leader of the country following the brief trusteeship of the Soviet Union in North Korea after World War II.5 F 6 The Soviet Union also approved and supported Kim Il-Sung's plan to invade South Korea during the Korean War with provision of logistics, weapons, and military advisors to North Korea.