# ID: 795f61e5870e4513b5b99b763141340d
# Title: Reality Before Rhetoric: Toward an Air Force Narrative for the Early-mid-21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
I would like to thank the all the officers and NCOs that mentored me over my career, but they are too numerous too name. Nonetheless, I will attempt to thank a few who continue to shape me. Thank you to Lt Gens Michelle Johnson and Mike Gould
We interpret what we see, select the most workable of the multiple choices. We live entirely . . . by the imposition of a narrative line upon disparate images, by the 'ideas' with which we have learned to freeze the shifting phantasmagoriawhich is our actual experience.
-Joan Didion, 1979   Myth is much more important and true than history.
-Joseph Campbell, 1991   What is a narrative? Why do narratives matter to organizations? How does one know if a narrative is effective? Should an organization's narrative change over time? How does culture influence narrative, and how does narrative influence culture? Specifically, why does narrative matter to the United States Air Force (USAF)? Who are the key audiences for the USAF narrative? Finally, what is the USAF narrative and what should it be? These questions are central to the discussion of the role the United States Air Force fills in its contributions to national security. They are also the central questions of this analysis. 
1
Freedman defined narratives as "compelling story lines which can explain events convincingly and from which inferences can be drawn." 
2
3
4
The Air Force has work to do here. United States Air Force Chief of Staff (CSAF), General Mark Welsh laments that US Airmen are not equipped to tell the Air Force story. 
5
The USAF's struggle with forming a coherent organizational identity, organizational culture, and strategic narrative is widely recognized. 
6
7
4
5
Sept 17, 2013, 15. 6
7
air power was not the raison d'être of the Air Force, it was airplanes and flying. When the concept of air power no longer served as the altar for common worship . . . the unifying sense of mission, purpose, and cause within the intuition began to evaporate." 
8
Airmen can hardly be expected to tell a coherent and cohesive story if the Air Force's identity is in question. Builder's work looms large for those examining USAF culture and identity, but several others have commented on the issue more recently. Senior RAND analyst Paula
Thornhill also noted this phenomenon in her study of American Airmen's culture.
In 2012 Dr. Thornhill evaluated the Air Force narrative to see if it met then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Martin Dempsey's guidance to harness each service's unique culture to enhance the joint force. 
9
10
Air Force Narratives and American Public Opinion from 1917 to 2014. Vick argued that "When airmen come together to discuss the USAF's relative position among the services, its budget share, and its role in national military strategy, a common refrain is that the Air Force fails to 'tell its story' in an effective manner." 
12
13
This thesis is concerned with both internal and external aspects of the Air Force narrative and the degree to which they are consistent with each other and with the Air Force's actions. In other words, it investigates whether service rhetoric matches reality. 
14
The overarching aim of a narrative is to shape behavior in expected ways. 
15
16
17
Externally, a narrative comprises the core of strategic communication. The point of strategic communication is to be purposeful about information. 
18
13
14
15
16
17
narrative will serve any or all of those functions. 
19
There are two audiences for a strategic narrative, internal and external. Similarly, and not coincidentally, there are two audiences for this thesis. The first, and arguably more important, audience is internal. Airmen should know how to talk about airpower, and they should know the Air Force's story. If this study accomplishes its objective, it will suggest a persuasive narrative for leaders at all levels of the Air Force to conceptualize, internalize, and transmit. The second audience for the narrative is external. As noted earlier, a narrative is a sub-set of strategic communication. The audience for the Air Force's strategic communication might include, among others, the national command authority, legislators, policy makers, defense analysts, joint and coalition partners, journalists, academics, and citizens. Theoretically, all of the above are stakeholders in the Air Force and thus interested in the Air Force's strategic narrative.
This study seeks to define the Air Force narrative and propose an alternative to that narrative that will provide long-term benefit. The benefit of this thesis is that it will, at a minimum, add to a meaningful conversation about the Air Force story. While the goal to improve the organization through developing a coherent narrative is not flawed, the author is. Thus, this product will be limited by his own biases and experiences over a 13-year Air Force career in space operations. Though this study suffers from lack of objectivity, it strives to be accurate.
The analysis is based on evidence that the reader can consult.
The study necessarily includes some predictions about the future security environment and the USAF's role in that environment. This is necessary in order to put forth prospective narratives that anticipate the future. Predictions of this sort are bound to be wrong in part or whole. In considering those prognoses, the reader may take issue with them and thus disagree with the proposed narratives. This is the inherent difficulty in crafting a narrative that is sufficiently anticipatory-it can only be judged in retrospect. However, the Air Force does not have the luxury of not telling its story just because it does not know how it will turn out.
A further limitation of this study is that it only addresses a part of General Welsh's concern. This paper examines what the USAF narrative is and argues for what it should be. It does not address how to transmit or inculcate that narrative throughout the organization. As noted above, however, the Air Force has a proud heritage. If individual Airmen can connect their actions and their role to the role of the Air Force in defense of the country, it will go a long way to restoring confidence among the service. This study hopes to contribute to that end.
The evidence for this thesis comes in four categories. The fourth and final category consists of analyses from academia on the subjects of organizational culture and strategic communication; these constitute the theoretical basis for the thesis.
Chapter 2 reviews organizational culture and strategic communication literature to establish the role of narrative in organizations in general and the role of narrative in military services more particularly. From these analyses criteria for evaluating narratives are deduced.
This chapter concludes with two brief vignettes outside the Air Force that demonstrate one example of an effective narrative and one example of an ineffective narrative. Chapter 3 examines the existing literature on the United States Air Force narrative, starting with Builder and progressing through the work of Thornhill and Vick. Taking Thornhill's suggested cultural narratives as a given, Chapter 4 evaluates the USAF narrative post-Desert Storm and through Operations Iraqi and Enduring Freedom. As the history of an organization is important to an effective narrative, it is necessary to examine where the USAF has been to determine an effective narrative for the present and the near future. This chapter is not a contemporary history of the US Air Force, but a review of its narratives in their historical context. Chapter 5 is the crux of this thesis, as it proposes an alternative narrative and evaluates it for effectiveness against the current narratives. It will rank-order them on their ability to meet the previously established criteria and ultimately suggest an Air Force narrative for the early-mid-21st century. In order to suggest an anticipatory narrative, this chapter offers a forecast of the future security environment and the future of the Air Force. Chapter 6 recaps the findings of the study, suggests their implications, and suggests areas of future study.
Many analysts have noted the need for a coherent Air Force narrative and similarly noted that unifying narrative is absent in the Air Force today. There are two audiences for narrative and for this paper, external and internal. Then, the present study seeks first to understand what the Air Force narrative is, and propose viable alternatives. In order to arrive at the current narrative and prospective narratives for the future, it must first lay out the contemporary narratives of the institution and judge their effectiveness. The sources for this work are a mix of primary and secondary sources, with the primary sources coming from thought and organizational leaders of the Air Force. The analysis moves from general to specific by first evaluating the role of narratives in organizations, and then evaluating the specific role and history of the Air Force narratives. The study concludes with a suggested Air Force narrative for the early-mid-21st century.
The following chapter details what a narrative is and why it matters to an organization. It then proposes criteria to evaluate narratives and uses those criteria to evaluate two non-Air Force narratives.
Chapter 2
Metaphors and stories are far more potent . . . than ideas; they are also easier to remember. . . Ideas come and go, stories stay.
-Nassim Nicholas Taleb, 2007   Any strategic narrative, to be persuasive, must have emotional as well as rational purchase on an audience.
-Emile Simpson, 2012   On 1 July 1863 General Robert E. Lee's Confederate army met General George C.
Meade's Army of the Potomac at Gettysburg in one of the central battles of the US Civil War.
Both sides suffered enormous casualties, but on the third day of the battle Lee withdrew to Virginia. 
1
2
3
In the modesty of his nature, he said 'the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here; but it can never forget what they did here.' He was mistaken. The world at once noted what he said, and will never cease to remember it." 4 Indeed, we will never cease to remember it.
The address is still recited and frequently quoted in our own times. What was it about the Gettysburg Address that resonated with the audience at the time and has continued to resonate with audiences over a century later?
This chapter will describe the role of narrative in organizations as understood in the extant literature. Because there is scant academic literature on narrative as it applies to a military service, the analysis relies on social science, which often touches on the subject only tangentially.
Thus, the primary sources for this part of the research come from business authors, political scientists, and defense analysts. The chapter will first describe what a narrative is. It will next highlight the roles of narrative. Next, this chapter will synthesize the sources to find threads common to effective narratives. These commonalities comprise the evaluation criteria for prospective Air Force narratives later in the paper. In order to demonstrate the utility of the criteria, this chapter concludes by evaluating one example of an effective narrative and one example of an ineffective narrative using them.
The previous chapter offered a few descriptions of a narrative; the following working definition serves as a point of departure for further analysis:
narrative (n) a story that connects events in such a way as to allow inferences to be drawn. 
5
Connection gives a story its meaning and coherence.
Using the opening lines of the Gettysburg address, the reader can see all of the elements of a narrative.
"Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure. We are met on a great battlefield of that war." 
7
A simplified definition of a strategic narrative is that it is purposeful. In Hollywood, a film studio's purposes might be to entertain and make a profit. In news media, a network might aim to inform, but it may also aim to entertain, or to shock. Emile Simpson argues that in military operations a strategic narrative, "Explains policy in the context of the proposed set of actions in the abstract, and then explains those actions, having been executed, in terms of how they relate back to policy." 
8
9
A narrative does not have to be at the strategic level of the organization to be strategic.
Recall that for the purposes of this analysis, a strategic narrative must be important to the Air Force story. That condition can be met, however, at all levels of the organization. For this reason, in evaluating narratives a taxonomy of macro narrative, meso narrative, and micro narrative is useful.
A macro narrative describes the overarching narrative of an organization. While it adapts to major system shocks or changes in long-term goals, it is relatively stagnant. It ties history to vision and creates an arc for the audience to follow. In some ways this parallels a dramatic story arc in that has a beginning (history), middle (current actions), and end (vision).
For the purposes of this analysis, the macro narrative is the story the Air Force tells to itself and others.
A meso narrative has the same elements but applies not at the organizational level, but at the subordinate organizational level. Within the Air Force, the meso narrative exists organizationally at major commands (MAJCOMs) or numbered air forces (NAFs). A meso narrative might also exist functionally among, say, fighter pilots. A meso narrative should also tie history to current actions and a desired outcome, but it must nest within the macro narrative to be effective. Narratives should be coherent, externally consistent with superior narratives, and internally consistent with actions.
A micro narrative refers to the story of individuals or small groups. It contains the same elements and the same requirements for consistency as macro and meso narratives, but it deals with intimate groupings of individuals. Despite the name micro narrative and the tacit implication that it is something small, if properly nested, micro narratives have great potential impact. They are stories about people, and thus are easier to relate to than stories about organizations.
With the above taxonomy established, the analysis can turn to the functions of a strategic.
narrative.
Narratives are essential to how humans transmit ideas, as they are a more effective means of communication than lists or facts. It is intuitive to tell stories. It is far more effective to paint a mental picture for an audience, set the context, talk about actions and consequences than to merely say "do this, don't do that." In Made to Stick, Dan and Chip Heath used the following example to show the benefit of narrative. "Firefighters naturally swap stories after every fire, and by doing so they multiply their experience; after years of hearing stories, they have a richer more complete mental catalog of critical situations they might confront during a fire and the appropriate responses to those situations." 
10
In a debrief, an operations crew shares a micro narrative about its last mission. The crew members lay out the facts as best as they can recall, note mistakes from the mission, and attempt to find the root causes of those mistakes. In so doing, the crew learns from its mistakes and develops the ability to share that lesson in the form of a story with others. Effective strategic narratives, whether firefighter's story or a post-mission debrief, fulfill four functions. They seek to inform; persuade; impart purpose; and, most importantly, shape the audience's behavior.
To begin, a narrative informs an intended audience. To be effective, narratives should contain concrete language and examples. The information function represents the logical part of the message. This function appeals to people's reason; thus for the claims of the narrative to be effective, they must be credible. In Made to Stick, the Heath brothers suggested that "stickiest" ideas are concrete. They use descriptive language that allow audiences to create a mental image.
In their minds, "A V8 engine is concrete. 'High Performance' is abstract. Most of the time, concreteness boils down to specific people doing specific things." 
11
Second, a strategic narrative attempts to convince or persuade the audience of something.
Aristotle proposed three means of persuasion. 
12
13
Logos is in the information and persuasion functions. Information contains the concrete facts of the story and part of persuasion is an appeal to rationality. Pathos resides in the persuade function as the most effective narratives appeal to emotion. Lastly, ethos is most evident in the key characteristic of 'validity' found in next section. A strategic narrative is more than oratory; it is an abstract confluence of words and deeds. Hence, this model, though not inconsistent, does not directly parallel Aristotle's.
Modern authors Heath and Heath recognized the power of an emotional message, too.
They argued a narrative is more convincing if it can appeal to the audience's emotion, in addition to its rationale. 
14
15
16
17
13
14
15
Third, a strategic narrative should impart a purpose. Simon Sinek admonished leaders to
Start With Why, to inspire others to take action. 
18
19
22
23
An effective strategic narrative has four key characteristics. First, an effective narrative must be coherent. A narrative's most essential function is to connect. Lincoln connected the events on the battlefield at Gettysburg to the sacrifice required to preserve the union and the 
18
19
20
21
22
23
visionary future of a "new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth." 
24
Second, an effective narrative must be valid. To be valid a narrative must be well grounded in fact. Emile Simpson noted, "A convincing narrative means consistency in words and actions across the globe." 
25
26
27
28
29
Third, an effective narrative must be cohesive. The meaning of cohesive is two-fold.
Externally, a strategic macro narrative must bind together potentially conflicting meso and micro narratives. It should subsume those narratives in order to remain coherent. For example, the 3rd
Space Operations Squadron charged with flying Wideband Global SATCOM (WGS) and Defense Satellite Communications Systems III (DSCS III) satellites could make the claim that it is "The premier satellite communications squadron" because it delivers more bandwidth to users than do other squadrons. 
30
31
Internally, a cohesive narrative serves as an organization's unifying cultural identity. 
32
33
Fourth, an effective strategic narrative helps the audience anticipate future actions. An effective strategic narrative has to anticipate the future so that it is not rendered irrelevant or thought to be disingenuous. By coherently connecting past events to present actions and a desired outcome, a narrative creates an arc that an audience can use to make educated estimates about the future. This is analogous to a dead reckoning technique in land navigation. If someone knows where she has been (history) and knows her heading (explanation of current actions), she can anticipate not only future actions, but also where she will end up (desired outcome). Similarly, an audience can use past statements and explanations of current actions to make reasonable predictions about future actions. In this way, a strategic narrative can make the speaker or accommodate the possibility of future problems, it will not be judged as anticipatory. To the extent a narrative embodies all of the above criteria, it can be judged to be successful. The following sections briefly examine two narratives using the established criteria.
The Core of Apple Today we celebrate the first glorious anniversary of the Information Purification Directives. We have created for the first time in all history a garden of pure ideology, where each worker may bloom, secure from the pests of any contradictory true thoughts. Our unification of thoughts is more powerful a weapon than any fleet or army on earth. We are one people, with one will, one resolve, one cause. Our enemies shall talk themselves to death and we will bury them with their own confusion. We shall prevail!
37
Meanwhile, a blond heroine, wearing a tank top bearing the Apple logo, sprinted into the room and launched a sledge hammer at the screen as the speaker said the last words. The "1984" commercial is not Apple's narrative per se, but a reinforcement of it. Apple's strategic narrative was that technology could help individuals break away from conformity and express their individuality. 
42
43
Further, the commercial was cohesive with Apple's strategic narrative. It was about rebellion and change, challenging the status quo. Finally, the commercial anticipates Apple's future role and actions. Simon Sinek wrote the "1984" commercial, "is as relevant today as it was twenty-five years ago when it first aired." 
44
In January 1986, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) planned to send the first civilian into space through the Citizen in Space program. By this point the shuttle had made 24 successful flights, and just a few years earlier Sally Ride became the first American woman to travel in to space. 
46
47
48
49
50
This chapter began by defining a narrative, first in general terms and then driving to the specifics of a service narrative. A narrative is a story that connects events in a way that allows inferences to be drawn. A strategic narrative is also purposeful. Strategic narratives of all types have various functions. They seek to inform; persuade; impart purpose; and, most importantly, shape an audience's behavior. Furthermore, the most effective narratives are coherent, valid, cohesive, and anticipatory. The analysis concluded with two vignettes. Apple effectively employed a strategic narrative in their '1984' advertisement, the core of which remains today.
Though '1984' was stylistically and substantively different from the Gettysburg address, both narratives fulfilled the functions and criteria of an effective narrative. Shortly before the Challenger disaster, however, NASA's strategic narrative had become disconnected from its identity. This lack of congruence failed to anticipate a significant human tragedy which led to a loss of public confidence. Though both organizations have had successes and failures since then, the vignettes serve as useful reminders of the stakes of narratives.
The primary finding here is that organizations are responsible for their macro narratives and creating cultures in which nested meso and micro narratives can thrive. This suggests that the macro narrative must be at once sufficiently broad to capture the diversity of the organization and sufficiently specific enough to persuade and impart purpose. Furthermore, organizations cannot "not" communicate. Actions, inactions, stories, and silence all convey something whether intended or not. Thus, leaders should be purposeful in how they approach the construction and delivery of their narratives. The next chapter will examine the Air Force narrative as a specific case of a macro, strategic narrative. It will also examine the extant literature on Air Force culture and narrative.  Service Narrative -A valid story that connects events in a way that allows inferences to be drawn for the dual purposes of a) informing, inspiring, and uniting its service members and b)
explaining how its actions solve problems for external stakeholders in the context of service policy 3
Having defined the purpose of a service narrative, the rest of this chapter examines the interplay of Air Force culture and narrative from the perspectives of three defense analysts.
If not the first to comment on Air Force culture, Builder is certainly the most widely known. Builder's influence requires some explanation. In 1989, Carl Builder published an insightful book, The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis, which examined the core cultures of the US military services. The Masks of War was influential at the time of its publication and is still widely read and cited among those interested in Air Force culture. 
4
Builder to visit the Air Command and Staff College (ACSC), to conduct a detailed study of Air Force culture. 
5
6
As you indicated, air power is one piece, the profession of arms is the other. One is the heart of the Air Force, the other is its soul. The senior leadership of the Air Force is the trustee of the heart; but everyone in the Air Force is a trustee of its soul. The heart is about organizational purpose or mission-air power-and the soul is about the profession of arms-the absolute and total commitment to mission (what sets the profession of arms apart from other professions is the commitment to mission, even unto death). The problem, as I see it, is that the two-heart and soul-have failed each other. The senior leadership has failed to keep the heart-the mission of air power-alive and vibrant by keeping it at the forefront of all its actions. And without that mission, the members of the Air Force have had nothing to commit themselves to except their own careers or specialties . . . If the organization sends out mixed signals about its mission or its dedication to its mission, it can hardly complain if professionalism and commitment to the mission falter among its people. 
7
8
9
Builder argued that the Air Force had a cultural identity much like an individual has a personality and that those "personality traits" were deterministic of Air Force actions.
Furthermore, he argued that the cultural fissure within the Air Force stemmed from abandoning "air power theory" as the source of the institution's identity. 
10
Since the publication of The Icarus Syndrome in 1994, Air Force operations have become significantly more diverse. Increased space and remotely piloted aircraft (RPA) operations and the addition of cyber operations to the Air Force's mission set exemplify that diversity. If the initial break in the Air Force's identity came as a result of friction between "air power theory" and the growing diversity of Air Force missions, the problem is more pronounced today than it was in 1994. The next two sections summarize the pertinent arguments found in The Masks of War and
The Icarus Syndrome.
In The Masks of War, Builder described the personalities of each of the services and how those personalities influenced everything from strategy to decision making. Written in 1989, Builder's analysis addresses now-defunct or relieved organizations such as Strategic Air
Command and Tactical Air Command. It also predated a relative rise in importance of space and cyber operations. Still, there is an enduring quality to Builder's work.
The central argument of the book is three-fold. First, Builder argued institutions have "distinct and enduring personalities that govern much of their behavior." 
11
Builder, Icarus Syndrome, 203. military services, "not the Department of Defense or Congress or even their commander in chief, the president." The third argument synthesized the first two by suggesting that to understand the service personalities is to understand much of what has happened and will happen in national security. For the purposes of this analysis, one does not have to take Builder's argument as being entirely valid. There are important implications, however, if Builder was even partially correct.
If service identity is to some degree determinate of service action; and, if the services are powerful actors in the national security arena, then the service narrative, as an outward embodiment of that identity, could have significant consequences for the national-security apparatus. In making his case, Builder made several claims about the core culture of the Air Force relevant to determining an Air Force narrative.
Builder's first claim was that the Air Force saw itself, "as an independent and decisive instrument of warfare " 
12
Though this is less true today than it was in 1989, elements of Builder's argument remain valid.
The second claim was that the Air Force worshiped at the altar of technology as the service would not exist without it. Builder did not see such worship as a deficiency, but as something the Air Force should embrace. He argued, "If the Air Force is to have a future of expanding horizons, it will come only from understanding, nurturing, and applying technology." 
13
14
Builder's third claim was that the qualities of the USAF were determined more by "cultural and institutional preferences for certain kinds of forces than by the 'threat.'" 
15
12
13
14
15
technology" is correct, it reveals a potentially problematic institutional tendency. The crux of the problem is this: How should the Air Force harness its predilection for and dependence on aviation technology, while being true to needs of the nation and retaining the allegiance of non-pilots?
The Icarus Syndrome: The Role of Air Power Theory in the Evolution and Fate of the U.S.
In The Icarus Syndrome: The Role of Air Power Theory in the Evolution and Fate of the U.S. Air Force, Builder directly engaged the issue of the Air Force's identity. Builder's core assertion was that the Air Force sacrificed its institutional identity, which was historically grounded in "air power theory," when it accommodated other missions such as space and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) operations. 
16
Next, Builder asserted that the Air Force's loyalties were often to its aircraft and systems, rather than to its mission of national defense. Without a unifying culture, Builder argued, the Thornhill's first historical narrative, "over not through," covered this early period of innovation. 
23
24
Thornhill's second major narrative, "give me liberty," described the message of Mitchell and his disciples. 
25
Power," 
26
27
28
While "victory through air power" was intact in the early stages of Operations Enduring and Iraqi
Freedom, the Air Force quickly assumed a larger supporting role in the increasingly irregular conflicts. Led in part by Airman supporting those conflicts, and picked up by General Norton Schwartz, the Air Force assumed the narrative, "we are critical enablers." 
29
30
31
32
The original RAND study that led to Thornhill's analysis concluded, "The Air Force serves the nation best when it creatively marshals its human capital and material resources to provide the president and his advisors with innovative, implementable solutions to developing, tough national security challenges." 
33
Innovation was foundational to the first flyers and the first Airmen. Thornhill also argued for its modern-day currency. "It ["over not through"] emphasizes the fusing of independent-minded Airmen with a willingness to embrace new technologies and a devotion to innovation that collectively produces creative solutions to vexing national problems."
34
Alan Vick continued the thread started by Thornhill. Vick took Thornhill's inward looking narratives, concluded that they matched the service's external narratives, and measured their effectiveness in positively influencing public opinion. Though this study is not interested in public opinion, per se, much of Vick's analysis and conclusions directly relate to the evaluation of contemporary narratives and development of a future narrative.
In 2014, the USAF Quadrennial Defense Review Office (HAF/CVAR) commissioned a RAND study to address two issues. First, Major General Steven Kwast, director of HAF/CVAR, and his team wanted help in articulating the benefit of high readiness across the USAF. 
35
36
37
39
35
36
37 "Data limitations prevent a statistical analysis of the relationship between narrative (the independent variable) and public opinion (the dependent variable). There are no quantitative metrics to measure narrative variables (e.g., strength, breadth, depth, originality, social currency levels for military services, it coincided with a fall in enthusiasm for aviation in general. From this, Vick concluded that, "It was publicity about real-world events and concrete accomplishments-improvements in aircraft, world-record flights, and performance in combatthat gave airpower its great social currency, not narratives, however carefully constructed." 
40
41
42
By Vick's admission, however, his analysis did not address the role of the narrative on decision makers. Vick admitted narratives, "may have much greater sway with . . . audiences who are more directly involved in policy, programming and budgeting decisions." 43 For this reason, the impact of the narrative on external audiences, though less well understood, cannot be neglected. Related to this point, Vick cited Samuel Hunnington's admonishment that, "Every governmental agency in a democracy has a responsibility to present a compelling case explaining why the public should devote scarce resources to funding its mission." 
44
Finally, Vick argued that a strong airpower narrative fulfills four functions. 
45
40
41
42
43
44
45
that the current USAF focus on advanced technologies and innovations offers promise, but that the Air Force should re-think how it talks about ongoing operations. 
46
47
This chapter began by defining a service narrative as a subset of a strategic narrative with the dual purposes of informing, inspiring, and uniting service members and tying its actions and policy to the needs of external stakeholders. This chapter continued by describing three Either the Air Force should have a broader narrative to subsume the competing subnarratives; or, it should offer a more compelling narrative for the current context. Thornhill concluded "over not through" was a suitable narrative for the present-a proposition that is evaluated in chapter 5.
Alan Vick examined the same narratives over almost a century of American airpower. He concluded that the narrative might not be as useful to external audiences as Airmen previously believed, but that its impact on policymakers, legislators and citizens, while unmeasurable, is not unimportant. Vick also offered alternative criteria for evaluating effective airpower narratives similar to those presented here. In sum, Vick's work reinforced the purpose of an effective service narrative. While a narrative is critical to internal cohesion it is less effective on public opinion and has undetermined value on decision makers outside the Air Force. The narrative should be tailored accordingly. This survey of the prominent thinking on USAF culture identified the historical evolution of and the functions of several components of Air Force culture which, 
46
47
when combined with Air Force's s structural diversity make the prospect of developing and maintaining an effective narrative seem almost Sisyphean. 
48
Alexander de Seversky's idea of "victory through air power" came to the fore again in the wake of Desert Storm. Much as de Seversky wanted to convince the American people that "airpower had revolutionized warfare, becoming its paramount and decisive factor," many analysts claimed that airpower was the cornerstone of a RMA in the early 1990s. 
2
12 6
7
8
9
13
14
15
16
17
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Prior to becoming Secretary of the Air Force in 1989, Donald Rice had been president
and chief executive of RAND where he concluded that the Air Force's biggest problem was "its inability to think conceptually." Rice once said, "When you poke a person in a light blue suit, they talk about their airplanes and their command. They do not talk about air power." 21 Just before Desert Shield, in an effort to conceptualize airpower, Rice published an Air Force white paper with one of Warden's acolytes, then Lt Col David Deptula. That paper, "The Air Force and U.S. National Security: Global Reach-Global Power," represented a shift away from the "peace is our profession" narrative of the Cold War. In some ways, it was ahead of its time as the Soviet Union still existed and the success of the Gulf War was months in the future. "Global Reach-Global Power" contained many key elements to the "victory through air power" narrative. For example, it asserted that "The Air Force's speed, range, and flexibility enable us to rapidly apply combat power against vital elements of an enemy's structure." 
22
23
23
24
25
composite of Instant Thunder and AirLand Battle. With that, the stage was at least partially set for Warden's "victory through air power." The victory was a smashing success and Warden's legacy casts a long shadow on the Air Force narrative even today.
In the aftermath of Desert Storm, the United States stood atop a unipolar world. Not only had the Soviet Union collapsed, but also the United States had just dismantled one of the largest armies in the world with a mere 100-hr ground campaign due largely to the lethality of American 
Fallout from the dissolution of the Soviet Union caused Yugoslavia break into various factions with differing degrees of ethnic homogeneity. Thus, the Bosnian War had elements of nationalism and ethnic cleansing. The latter motivated the UN, and ultimately NATO, to take action against the Serbs. Domestic political debates on both sides of the Atlantic initially led to limited political will for anything other than the employment of UN peacekeepers. 
30
31
The American political debate had roots in a doctrine debate that predated the Bosnia The simultaneous or 'parallel' approach to warfare helps explain the decisive effect of the air campaign against Iraq. We didn't obliterate the entire country or its leadership, but we paralyzed it, and took away the ability to coordinate a response. In the end, our ground forces did not have to roll back an army in linear fashion. They ran through, over, and around a broken force. 
36
The stakes were such that NATO members believed they had to do something about ethnic cleansing in Europe, but they were hesitant to commit ground forces, even to prevent potential genocide. While NATO ultimately deployed a 10,000-troop Rapid Reaction Force Coherence "Victory through air power" remained coherent through Deliberate Force because it tied the post-Desert Storm narrative to ongoing operations. To Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the air campaign "was the decisive factor in bringing the Serbs to the peace table." 39 As noted above, airpower was not the only factor, but it was, at least, a very important factor in the NATO victory.
It was rational for NATO to see it as an airpower victory because airpower represented its primary stake in the conflict. Had NATO ground forces been present, the assessment would have been different. 
36
37
38
39
The narrative was valid, albeit in a limited way. Deliberate Force represented a successful employment of airpower for coercion, but the case has often been overstated. Colin
Gray deemed it an "ambiguous success." 40 He argued, "It would be a considerable exaggeration to claim that Deliberate Force alone delivered the Bosnian Serbs in an abruptly if ungraciously acquiescent mood and primed for political agreement. But it is plausible to argue that the air campaign was physically and psychologically important, and perhaps decisively so." 
41
The narrative was internally cohesive; Airmen wanted "victory through air power" to be true and believed it to be true. Thus, the narrative continued to serve as a unifying cultural element. This was true despite the fact that the application of airpower was not fully in keeping with the "victory through air power" narrative. Externally, "victory through air power" was not cohesive with the administration's narrative. The Clinton Administration, particularly UN Ambassador Madeline Albright, saw great benefit in using a limited application of airpower as the principal instrument of coercive diplomacy, whereas "victory through air power" was much more in consonance with the Powell doctrine of decisive force. Despite this contradiction, the narrative persisted. This is probably because the success of the campaign allowed both sides to claim victory. "Victory through air power" advocates could argue that air power was decisive in the defeat of Milosevic, and the Clinton administration could claim that it was a limited application of airpower for limited means.
The narrative that remained after Desert Storm carried through Bosnia and Kosovo. American Airmen promised airpower could help achieve national policy objectives more cheaply and with less risk than ground forces. In the right context, this prediction of future actions was valid. Thus, the narrative was sufficiently anticipatory for the short term. Success in Bosnia created a subnarrative of "easy victory through air power." This was the proposition decision makers would look to in preparing for Operation Allied Force years later.
Before the end of the Cold war, Serbia revoked Kosovo autonomy. 
45
48
49
50
51
52
and the attitudes of certain senior airmen toward the air campaign show that the traditional American concept of strategic bombing continues to shape Air Force thinking." 
53
54
55
56
57
58
The "victory through air power" narrative persisted through Operation Allied Force more through power of will than any recognition of airpower's contributions to the ongoing fight.
Nevertheless, before, during, and after Operation Allied Force, Airmen proclaimed "victory through air power." The narrative connected Operations Allied Force and Deliberate Force despite its questionable validity.
59
Like its predecessor Deliberate Force, Operation Allied Force was not the smashing success for airpower that some made it out to be. For the purposes of coding, it could be deemed a success for the narrative, but only partially so. The reality is more nuanced, but "victory through air power" drowns out the nuance. Granted, the constraints on US airpower were political, but that made them no less real. Ultimately, after a 78-day air campaign, Serbia capitulated. As airpower was the only militarily coercive instrument, this might seem like a confirmation of the "victory through air power" narrative. The way NATO employed airpower, however, did not match the intent of de Seversky or his heir to the narrative, Warden. This was not because the senior Airmen did not want to attempt a such a campaign. In fact, Lt Gen Short would have prosecuted a by-the-book "victory through air power" campaign if allowed. In sum, he was insensitive to the need for coalition consensus and the feasibility of achieving that consensus for a "victory through air power" campaign.
To the airmen approaching Kosovo, the strategic use of airpower in the 1991 Gulf War had shown that rapid escalation and overwhelming force aimed at the enemy's leadership constituted the preferable way to apply airpower . . . This approach did not fit the political nature of the Kosovo crisis . . . As a result, the U.S. Air Force was unprepared for the coercive diplomacy it was intended to support. 
60
61
The narrative was internally cohesive in much the same way that it was in Bosnia.
"Victory through air power" represented the core of the USAF identity in the late 1990s.
Externally, the narrative was not cohesive. True, the airpower was the coercive instrument of choice for the administration. Eliot Cohen showed how the Airman's narrative was reconciled with the statesman's views.
The apparent contribution of air power to the triumph over Iraq, and its subsequent applications-however inelegant-in Bosnia, Serbia, and Kosovo persuaded many that the air weapons employed independently offered the ideal tool for the sorts of military problems facing the United States in the 1990s . . . Air power became the weapon of choice for American statecraft. 
62
Anticipation "Victory through air power" would survive as the preeminent Air Force narrative for four years after operations in Kosovo. Thus, it was effective in the short-term. Arguably, the subsequent successes in Iraq and Afghanistan had their operational and technical roots in the air war of 1999 more so than the Gulf War of 1991. Kosovo saw widespread use of RPAs, allweather precision-guided munitions, extended range and endurance, and rapid relay and assimilation of intelligence information. 
63
The The "unique blend of airpower" came to be known as the "Afghan model." The Taliban discovered that if they massed forces to counter the indigenous Afghan formations they made excellent targets for allied airpower. Conversely, if they dispersed, they were ineffective against the those forces. 
66
64
65
66
67
The beginning of OEF made good on the RMA promise. In fact, the fusion of information, live intelligence and a shortened "kill chain" were more pronounced in the opening stage of OEF than at any previous point in the history of air warfare. 
68
Airmen perfected many of the techniques that had debuted in Kosovo, making the beginning of OEF a logical extension of the "victory through air power" narrative.
"Victory through air power" was an apt narrative for the beginning of Operation Enduring
Freedom. The Afghan model was a recognizable implementation of "victory through air power"
inasmuch as the opponents in Afghanistan resembled a traditional foe. First, Allied airpower established air superiority by defeating the Taliban's fighter force and surface-to-air defenses. 
69
As friendly Afghan forces took strategic positions, allied Airpower struck traditional interdiction targets such as roads and bridges. By January of 2002, strike operations had slowed dramatically.
One month later, airpower's primary role was policing. 70
Internally the Air Force narrative during the early stage of Enduring Freedom was indistinguishable from ODF and OAF, with one notable exception. Airmen were exacting the retribution that the United States' demanded. Airmen could take pride in that. Externally, "victory through air power" nested perfectly in the national narrative. The evening of the attacks, President George W. Bush said, "The search is underway for those who were behind these evil acts. I have directed the full resources of our intelligence and law enforcement communities to find those responsible and to bring them to justice. We will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them." 71 President Bush perfectly captured the American sentiment for justice. Once again, Airpower was the coercive tool of choice among US instruments of power, but this time Airmen were truly the nation's sword.
"Victory through air power" would survive as the predominant Air Force narrative for the beginning of conflict in Iraq. Analysts of Operation Iraqi Freedom often credit American 
68
69
70
72
73
As the conflict with AQ took shape, the United States increasingly assumed an enabling role. When the war moved from combat operations, to constabulary, to full counterinsurgency,  In the Iraq War of 2003, the strategic air campaign was largely ineffective. It certainly did not lead to the fall of Saddam's regime . . . Only a ground invasion that moved into the center of the Mesopotamian Valley and occupied Baghdad could succeed in overthrowing Saddam . . . Air power allowed coalition ground forces to win their overwhelming conventional victory. 
83
If the opening of Operation Enduring Freedom was coherent with previous iterations of "victory through air power," the opening of Operation Iraqi Freedom was even more so. The opening attacks of Operation Iraqi Freedom represented the purest incarnation of Warden's "victory through air power." The United States Air Force rapidly established air dominance,
attacked Iraq simultaneously at all levels of war (tactical through strategic), attempted a decapitation strategy, and struck Iraqi critical infrastructure. That the strategic attacks were of questionable efficacy is more a question of validity than coherence. To be coherent, the narrative only had to connect to the past, the previous narrative, and ongoing events. The coalition attempted to execute Operation Iraqi Freedom in harmony with "victory through air power," and that satisfies the coherence criteria.
The on an ill-equipped, poorly motivated, and incompetently led opponent." 85 But, the "victory through air power" narrative demanded victory in a particular way. Murray questioned the effectives of the conventional strategic attacks. First, he pointed out there was no evidence that the strategic targets significantly influenced Hussein or his colleagues. 
86
83
84
It was not Warden's idea of strategic paralysis that defeated Hussein and his regime; it was soldiers and marines in Baghdad. As military theorist, Rear Admiral J.C. Wylie said, "The ultimate determinant in war is the man on the scene with a gun." 88 It is worth noting that this does not diminish the value of airpower. As Lambeth argued, Just as the toppling of Hussein's regime could not have occurred without a substantial allied ground presence to seize and occupy Baghdad, the ground offensive could not have succeeded with such speed and such a relatively small loss of friendly life . . . without the contribution of allied air power toward establishing prompt air supremacy over Iraq and then beating down enemy ground forces to a point where they lost both their will and their capacity to continue organized fighting. 
89
The narrative was internally cohesive because the campaign was a smashing joint success and airpower shared in that success. In this sense, it was close enough to "victory through air power" to be useful Certainly, the coalition attempted a Warden-like campaign, albeit with limited success in the conventional strategic campaign. It was externally cohesive as it nested in the Bush administration's narrative for the Department of Defense. Secretary Rumsfeld was a true believer in the RMA. He believed in a smaller, lighter, more lethal joint force and wanted to see it displayed in Iraq. 
90
As successful as the coalition was in the initial campaign, US airpower was not well suited for the demands of irregular warfare. After more than a decade of the "victory through airpower" narrative during conventional conflicts, most people from the President of the United States to the average citizen believed in the promise of airpower in any conflict. Yet, the context changed so dramatically that airpower's role after 2004 was nearly unrecognizable from the role it played in the campaigns of the 1990s through 2003.
Dating back to its origins with de Seversky, "Victory through air power" consistently As in all counterinsurgency campaigns, it quickly turned out that the larger and the more powerful the available aircraft, the less useful they were and the higher the cost of using the relatively few available ones . . . Having resolutely refused to face reality from the time of Vietnam on, the U.S. Air Force entered the war without a counterinsurgency doctrine of any sort. 
92
Enduring and Iraq Freedom shifted shape, "victory through air power" slowly gave way to the narrative "we are critical enablers." One of the most interesting aspects of this narrative is that it started as a grass roots campaign. 
93
Gen Moseley "over disagreements regarding the size of the F-22 program buy and Gates's perception that the USAF was more concerned with protecting its high-technology programs and fighting future conventional wars than in helping win today's wars." 
94
Gates believed that the Air Force narrative at the senior levels was out of touch with reality. The nation was involved in two insurgencies and needed its Air Force committed to supporting those conflicts in every way. To Gates, the In many ways, the dual firing was a rejection of the "victory through air power" narrative.
Moreover, Gate's firing of Gen Moseley constituted a message to the institution. Gates thought the Air Force was overly concerned with "high-tech air-to-air combat and strategic bombing against major nation states," and was not concerned with the needs of troops in combat. 
95
The US-led coalition handled the occupation of Iraq poorly. Two weeks after President disbanded the Iraqi Army, much of the country's police, and its internal security forces. 
101
In hindsight, it is also clear that the initial deployment of U.S. ground forces was too small to stabilize Iraq. In congressional testimony, Gen Eric Shinseki estimated that it would take For the better part of the next decade, the United States would be involved in counterinsurgency and stability operations in which airpower played a critical supporting role, but a supporting role nonetheless. Shimko highlights the limitations of the "victory through air power" narrative, "The perfected reconnaissance-strike complex that decimated the Iraqi military proved decidedly less useful for stopping looters, preventing foreign fighters from crossing the border, or making the people of Iraq feel safe and secure from insurgents, terrorists and religious zealots. And it was completely useless for rebuilding Iraq's political and economic infrastructure." 
107
Airmen conducting the mission were much quicker to notice this than organizational  (1979-89). 
110
The preceding section detailed the first part of this story. In an airpower-centric campaign, the US-led coalition handily defeated the Taliban. With the Taliban and AQ defeated,
The United States turned its efforts to rebuilding Afghanistan. In April 2002, President Bush announced a "Marshall Plan" for Afghanistan, "Peace will be achieved by helping Afghanistan develop its own stable government. Peace will be achieved by helping Afghanistan train and develop its own national army, and peace will be achieved through an education system for boys and girls which works." 
111
Thornhill argued that, in this irregular war, Airmen shifted their focus to ISR, airlift, medical evacuation, space, and cyberspace. 
118
At first glance, "we are critical enablers" was not coherent because it represented a stark break from the past. Whereas "victory through airpower" relied on strategic application of force to defeat an enemy, "we are critical enablers" assumed that the main effort was land-centric. If one were paying attention after Desert Storm, however, elements of the "we are critical enablers" narrative were present. Here, one should recall Murray's claim that airpower's most vital contributions to the beginning of OIF were in close air support and interdiction. One could add to that list mobility operations that enabled marine supply lines and an ISR-fused strike complex, with everything supported by space assets. This suggests that the discontinuity in the narratives need not have been as distinct as it was. On the contrary, the narrative could have matched reality much earlier had it done so, there could have been an evolution from Desert Storm to the irregular wars in Iraq and Afghanistan rather than a sharp break. Physicist and author Thomas Kuhn argued that institutions form strong networks of commitments based on unifying ideas, called paradigms. 
119
120
The Air Force did not face such a crisis in the Post-Desert Storm era until it confronted irregular warfare. When Secretary Gates demonstrated the reality of the crisis with the firings of Secretary Wynne and Gen Moseley, the paradigm, as Kuhn would predict, shifted dramatically.
"We are critical enablers" was valid, but not comprehensive. The narrative certainly fit for those Airmen supporting ground forces in the irregular campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Successful counterinsurgencies require engagement with a target population and control of territory. Airpower is not suited for direct contribution to either task, but is exceptionally well suited for an indirect contribution. In that respect, "we are critical enablers" was valid. On the other hand, while fighting irregular wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the US Air Force also had to prepare for major conventional conflicts against a number of potential adversaries. Whether that adversary was China, Russia, or North Korea, airpower would certainly play a more central role in such a conflict than it played in Iraq or Afghanistan. Therefore, "we are critical enablers" alone was insufficient.
Internally, the narrative was not entirely cohesive with its subnarratives. On one side of the ledger, it represented what much of the force was doing over a 10-year period. From the mobility air forces to space operators and defenders to logisticians, most Airmen could relate to being critical enablers since the ground campaign received the weight of effort. On the other side of the ledger, not all Airmen were excited about the narrative. Alan Vick argued, "This narrative was firmly rejected by many airmen (particularly in the fighter and bomber communities) and has lost some urgency as the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan have wound down."
121
The narrative "we are critical enablers" was externally cohesive as it was consistent with the various counterinsurgency narratives rolled out by the Joint Forces Commanders. 
122
"We are critical enablers", like "victory through air power" before it, had very specific contextual elements that had to be present for the narrative to be valid. Namely, for the narrative to be valid, the United States had to be in an irregular conflict where the weight of effort resided with the land component commander, and traditionally core missions of the air force like strategic attack and interdiction were far less important than in conventional conflict. To some extent, the anticipatory value of this narrative remains to be seen. If the next decades' conflicts look like the irregular wars of the 2000s, then perhaps "we are critical enablers" will persist. This is suggestive of the incompleteness of this narrative. While it anticipates traditional irregular war very well, it does not anticipate conventional war at all. Furthermore, even in the context of irregular war, the United States may opt for aerial intervention rather than a traditional groundcentric COIN campaign.
In fact, even before the United States concluded the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, US airpower prepared for another air-only option in Libya, an operation that would look more like the Balkans of the 1990s than the irregular wars of the 2000s. Thus, before Gen Schwartz's tenure ended, the signs of a new narrative were on the horizon.
Simply put, the narrative was a product of a particular time for the Air Force. It was an overcorrection to the "victory through air power" narrative and undersold the significant contributions of the Air Force to joint operations. Remarking on this period, Colin Gray noted, "The 2000s have been widely regarded as registering some notable measure of retreat in airpower's relative significance."
123
Let there be no doubt-we, in your Air Force, are "all in." . . . Whether it is serving alongside ground forces in convoys or in Joint Terminal Attack Controller roles, or providing game-changing Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance capabilities with unmanned aerial vehicles, or helping our wounded warriors with life-saving medical care and aeromedical evacuation, or providing rapid and precise strike capabilities in counterinsurgency or close air support roles, hear me loud and clear when I say that we are all in. This is our priority as an Air Force. 
124
This chapter described the post-Gulf War Air Force narratives and analyzed the extent to which they were effective. In sum, "victory through airpower" was mostly effective, but lacked full validity and anticipation. While all narratives should evolve with context, "victory through airpower" was too far off from a likely future. Had Air Force leaders adopted the rhetoric of the service to the reality of Air Force contributions, the narrative may have evolved rather than had to be radically changed. In this respect, it only partially succeeded. "We are critical enablers," was also only partially effective. It too was only valid in a particular context. It was also not entirely cohesive. Many fighter and bomber pilots rejected the narrative out of hand. Finally, it did not anticipate a transition back to a preparation for "high end," major combat operations.
Overall, "we are critical enablers" created a curious position for the next Chief of Staff, Gen Mark Welsh who had to deal with the aftermath of drawing down from two wars while simultaneously preparing for a rising China and a resurgent Russia, as well as possible conventional wars against Iran and North Korea. The next chapter evaluates the current Chief and Secretary's narratives against two candidate narratives and recommends a narrative for the early-mid-21st century.
"We find ourselves in a thicket of strategic complexity, surrounded by a dense mist of uncertainty. "  -Nick Bostrom, 2014   "The true irony of airpower history is that aviation actually has been seriously undersold as a consequence of its being oversold." -Coin S. Gray, 2012   "Strategic ambiguity" might be the most apt description of the present national security environment. While it would be historically arrogant to suggest that the present is more tumultuous than the past, there is a great deal of uncertainty in the present. The future is even less clear, as it results directly from decisions made in this ambiguous present. Strategically, the United States faces many threats. Islamic extremists threaten the West and its way of life.
China's increased economic might coincides with increased appetite for regional dominance, The present United States Air Force narratives reflect this ambiguity. On the one hand, the United States faces (and will likely face for some time) a widespread, persistent, though nonexistential, threat from Islamic extremism. On the other hand, the United States faces competition bordering on hostility with China, open aggression from Russia, and wild cards in Iran and a nuclear-capable North Korea. Any of these latter threats could be existential. As noted in the previous chapter, the last two Air Force narratives failed in anticipation because they did not account for likely possibilities. This suggests that the most effective narrative must be sufficiently broad to encompass airpower's contributions to both irregular and conventional war.
This reality might lead one to conclude that the Air Force narrative need only match the more prevalent of the two styles of war to be effective. This, however, could create a false dichotomy.
Rather, the Air Force narrative should be sufficiently broad to cover both cases, as well as deterrence; stability operations; and, as unlikely as it may seem, nuclear war. In other words, an effective narrative cannot be biased toward a subset of ongoing operations at the expense of other forms of war.
This chapter first describes Operations Odyssey Dawn and Inherent Resolve and their influence on the current Air Force narratives. It will then evaluate the current narratives against previously established criteria. It will next put forth a prospective narrative developed from this thesis' previous analysis. Finally, it will weigh the two existing Air Force narratives against the prospective narrative and recommend a narrative for the early-mid-21st century.
Before transitioning to the analysis, however, one note is in order. Offering judgments on events as recent the 2000s, as the last chapter did, is risky. The fullness of time offers a perspective that one simply cannot gain from looking back ten or twenty years. This chapter is even riskier as it evaluates events that continue to unfold. As such, the analysis here is offered with an appropriate amount of caution.
The Bahrain are now yet more autocratic, in some ways, than when the protests began. And Syria has descended into an abyss." 
3
In Operations Odyssey Dawn (OOD) and Unified Protector (OUP), NATO and several partner nations outside the alliance waged war on the Qaddafi regime. 
4
7
8
9
This might have suggested a return of the "victory through air power" narrative. Gen Welsh's message, however, was more measured than a pure "victory through air power" narrative would prescribe.
In part, the work of Dr. Thornhill may have tempered Gen Welsh's approach. RAND published Thornhill's occasional paper, "Over Not Through," in 2012, the same year Gen Welsh became Chief of Staff. Just a few months after taking over as Chief, he was already talking about the importance of innovation to the service. "We value innovation in this business. In fact, I think we value it more than we even realize we do. We kind of started with innovation in the Wright Brothers' lab, their workshop. This service is all about it." 
10
About the same time, Welsh debuted his second narrative, "Airpower. Because without it, you lose." 11 Though Thornhill did not identify it as a historical narrative, Welsh's second narrative was also rooted in Air Force history. Commander of the US Army Air Forces General
Henry "Hap" Arnold succinctly captured the idea. "A modern, autonomous, and thoroughly trained Air Force in being at all times will not alone be sufficient, but without it there can be no national security." 
12
While contending with a shrinking budget and a corresponding shrinking in end strength the US Air Force not only had to prepare for the Asia pivot, but also to plan and execute an aerial intervention against a new extremist threat, ISIS. In a putative Asia Pacific conflict, airpower would not be a critical enabler, but a prime player. Similarly, in Operation Inherent Resolve, directed against ISIS, the US airpower is the primary American tool being used to defeat ISIS.
Thus, it is easy to see that "we are critical enablers" was not sufficiently anticipatory. As a result, Gen Welsh debuted two complementary narratives after his appointment as CSAF, "over not through," and "Airpower. Because without it you lose." Here, the reader should recall Dr.
Thornhill's observation cited in the introduction, "The fact that five discernible narratives exist, however, suggests that Schein's criterion of a strong, single narrative to unite Airmen is missing.
defines aerial intervention as a strategic approach "involving external powers intervening in a conflict primarily or entirely through the use of airpower, while cooperating to a greater or lesser degree with indigenous forces." 
27
28
It would seem that this subnarrative persisted into Western decision making. The context in Libya, however, was different from the two uses of airpower against Milosevic. While the initial support of Operation Odyssey Dawn may have proved decisive for the rebels, the coalition gave too little thought to post-war stability. Once again, tactical and operational success did not provide long-term, strategic success.
As for the long-term impact of Operation Odyssey Dawn, Libya has been engaged in a civil war since the Arab Spring. While it is impossible to determine the exact effects of aerial intervention in 2011, the country has been in a civil war since then, and Libya is becoming increasingly ungoverned. The Economist opined, "Five years after Western air power helped remove Muammar Qaddafi, the chances of another intervention in Libya are steadily increasing.
Islamic State may be retreating in Iraq and under pressure in Syria, but in Libya it is a growing menace." 
29
We averted large-scale civilian casualties, we prevented what almost surely would have been a
prolonged and bloody civil conflict. And despite all that, Libya is a mess." 30 Admittedly, future aerial intervention in Libya may be the least of the bad options. Regardless of its efficacy for creating enduring change, aerial intervention is likely to remain a tool for US strategy in the future.
If success has many fathers and failure is an orphan, then the failure that led to the rise of the Islamic State is traced best to the strategic blunder in the Iraq invasion aftermath. David Kilcullen argued that both the 2003 invasion of and 2011 withdrawal from Iraq created "Ground Zero for the greatest strategic screw up since Hitler's invasion of Russia." 
31
The war in Iraq . . . alienated a host of potential partners and ultimately created AQI. The disaggregation strategy, after 2005, atomized the terrorist threat, just as social media and electronic connectivity were exploding in such a way as to spread the pathogen throughout our societies, enabling remote radicalization and leaderless resistance to an unprecedented degree. The precipitate withdrawal from Iraq in 2011 revived AQI in the nick of time after it had been reduced by 90 per cent and almost annihilated during the Surge. The precipitate pullout from Iraq, the killing of Osama bin Laden, the AQ succession crisis that followed, and the failure of the Arab Spring-all in the same key year of 2011-helped turn AQI into ISIS and gave it a global leadership role it proceeded to exploit with utter and unprecedented ruthlessness. 
32
President Obama assured the country that the military should only act when it has a clear mandate, which he believed existed in the case of ISIS. President Obama did not feel, however, that a military solution could ultimately solve the ISIS problem. 
33
34
Indeed, Kilcullen argued that the West's disaggregation strategy referred to above "carried the seeds of disaster within it." 
35
36
37
In order to propose a prospective narrative for the early-mid-21st century, it is necessary to posit some ideas about what the future will look like. The following anticipations fit that period. A brief disclaimer: by their nature, long-term predictions are less likely to be accurate than short-term predictions. Even seemingly insignificant events can have noticeable consequences over longer time horizons. Moreover, extremely significant events can happen over the same period. The most impactful of these are what Nassim Taleb refers to as "Black Swans," or unpredictable events that carry an "extreme impact. 38 " To hedge against such events, Taleb suggested planning for the consequences of such events, which can be known, rather than trying to predict their specific occurrence, which cannot be known. For example, it is possible to plan for the consequences of a massive earthquake on the west coast of the United States; it is not possible to predict when such a thing will happen. Thus, this analysis will make assumptions about the future, as the Air Force must still tell its story, despite not knowing how it will turn out.
But it will document assumptions as such. Military futurist, Andrew F. Krepinevich warned that 
35
36 Kilcullen,
Blood Year,
pp. 4,
[228]
[229]
[230]
38 "First, it is an outlier, as it lies outside the realm of familiar expectations, because nothing in the past can convincingly point to its possibility. Second, it carries an extreme impact . . . Third, in spite of its outlier status, human nature makes us concoct explanations for its occurrence after the fact, making it explainable and predictable." Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. 2nd edition. New York: Random House Trade Paperbacks, 2010, xxii.
the military services are often wrong when they count on one potential outcome to the exclusion of others. 
39
Ideally, a service narrative would only change in response to the most drastic changes in the character of war. Practically, this paper must make an assumption about the half-life of the prospective narrative. In order to scope the analysis, this paper averaged the length of previous Air Force narratives' efficacy. That average, as indicated below, is 19.4 years. Therefore, this analysis argues that the prospective narrative should strive for 20 years of efficacy. 
The US and the West will occupy one pole of a multi-polar world, China another, and
Russia, yet another. America's relative power will decrease, especially with respect to China.
However, the American-created liberal international order will stay relevant and potent. Those partnerships and alliances will remain linked to the US ability to project power rapidly and globally, as indicated by the posture indicated in the USAF Strategic Master Plan. 
39
40
This analysis assumes that the Air Force will continue to perform air, space, and cyber missions. Admittedly, this is a conservative prediction and it is possible that the Air Force will lose the cyber mission by the year 2036. 
43
41
43
commentary on how well cyber fits within the Air Force's enduring principles: speed, access, and economy of risk. 
44
45
46
47
48
The United States is presently pursuing a "third offset" strategy to close a perceived technological gap with its adversaries. It is easiest to understand the third offset in the context of the first two offsets. The first was President Eisenhower's New Look Strategy. In the beginning of the Cold War, the Eisenhower Administration estimated that it would take 92 US and NATO divisions to have a reasonable chance of defending Europe from 175 Soviet divisions located in the western USSR. 
49
In response, the United States is pursuing a third offset to regain a technical and operational advantage over its prospective foes. The third offset a combination of approaches aimed at pursuing new technologies and maintaining and expanding its alliances. To deter aggression successfully, this approach will also require advanced training and interoperability.
Undersecretary of Defense Bob Work estimates that third offset technologies will not bear fruit until the 2030s. 
50
51
Several other observations about technological advances are germane. First, nuclear deterrence will remain a priority for the United States. Second, United States space and cyber awareness and defense will become more robust and result in the ability to attribute attacks to specific parties. Thus, the United States will require a range of response options. 
52
53
This section analyzes three prospective Air Force Narratives. The first, "over not through," reflects Thornhill's suggested narrative. In 2012 Thornhill argued that innovation was the Air Force's original story. Similarly, Vick argued that the best Air Force narratives combined technology and problem solving to tackle tough challenges facing the nation. In this respect, "over not through" conforms to those analysts' ideas about the ideal Air Force narrative. Gen Welsh's second narrative, "Airpower. Because without it you lose" focuses on the reality that the nation in general and the joint forces in particular require airpower. The joint force will not fight without airpower. Both narratives have their roots in a resource-constrained context. As the Department of Defense seeks to reduce its budget, doing more with less in innovative ways is a common refrain. "Over not through" plays well in such an environment. "Without it you lose" also resonates well in an era of fiscal frugality.
The analysis to this point has yielded insights suggesting that the current narratives can be improved. This thesis argues ""the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is a more effective narrative than the current Air Force narratives. "The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives"" is sufficiently broad to encompass both of the current narratives and it is valid across more present and potential future contexts. Furthermore, it has the potential to engender more cohesion than the two existing narratives.
This section evaluates each narrative against the previously established criteria. The following section scores each narrative independently in order to suggest an Air Force narrative for the early-mid-21st century.
Dr. Thornhill argued that, "Over not through" underpins all other historical AF narratives, that it is timeless, and has broad appeal. 
54
55
61
While not mutually exclusive from "we are critical enablers," the return to "over not through" narrative was disjointed. In part, this disjointedness is a reflection of shifting context.
Gen Schwartz' narrative reflected airpower's contributions to two irregular wars and Secretary
Gates' guidance. Gen Welsh, on the other hand, transitioned from those conflicts to an Asia pivot and decreasing budgets. As noted in Chapter 2, macro narratives should be more stable than their subnarratives. For example, Apple has not substantially changed its narrative since 1984.
Apple's employees and consumers today would recognize Apple's macro narrative from 1984.
This raised the question of whether "over not through" is a faulty narrative because it lacks coherence with "we are critical enablers," or "we are critical enablers" was too far off the mark in anticipation and inclusiveness and should thus shoulder the blame for the lack of coherence. This analysis is inclined toward the latter argument. Over a broader time scale, "over not through" connects Airmen today to the first Airmen and is deeply rooted in airpower history.
Undeniably, innovation is a hallmark of Airmen. 
Thornhill argued, "Not only is "over not through" the first narrative chronologically, it emphasizes the fusing of independent-minded Airmen with a willingness to embrace new technologies and a devotion to innovation that collectively produces creative solutions to vexing national problems." 63 For that reason, she suggested that it created a "powerful shared identity."
64
Externally, this narrative matches the entrepreneurial and adventurist spirit of America.
In 2011 the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars published, "A National Strategic
Narrative" by two military officers, Wayne Porter and Mark Mykleby. They penned the piece to construct a story that answers the question, "Where are we going in this world?" They concluded that part of what fuels America's continuing advantage is innovation. "From the earliest days of the Republic, America has depended on a vibrant free market and an indomitable entrepreneurial spirit to be the engines of our prosperity . . . Inherent in our children is the innovation, drive, and imagination that have made, and will continue to make, this country great." Innovation is central to the prosperity of America. As "over not through" nests within that national narrative, it is externally cohesive.
On one hand, this narrative should be sufficiently anticipatory, as the service will always The message for the service is that airpower is necessary in nearly all contexts across multiple global engagements from humanitarian to total war. All of these contexts require the attributes that airpower brings, and therefore nearly all engagements are dependent on airpower. The best advertisement for the USAF should not come from within; rather, it should come from U.S. national-level decision makers and sister services that require airpower's dominant capability in air, space, cyber. Simply understood, there is no conceivable context where U.S. military operations could succeed without the prerequisite of airpower control . . . In terms of strategic communication, the idea of "dependence" rather than independence is significant and cannot be understated. It should and must define airpower's capability and ultimately its destiny. 66
Gen Welsh has used several iterations of the "without it you lose" narrative. As noted above, he introduced the narrative at the same time that the Air Force released "Global Vigilance, Global Reach, Global Power for America." 67 More important than the slogan itself is its underlying message. The same document claimed, "Exploiting such technologies is not unique to the Air Force, but we are the only Service that brings them together in ways that allow our sister Services the freedom to maneuver in their respective domains without fear of attack by enemy air forces . . . Air Force airpower gives America the ability to control and exploit this ultimate high ground that is essential to winning our Nation's wars." 68 This narrative is a story of reliance. The narrative argues that the nation and the joint team must have the Air Force to win the nation's wars.
"Global Vigilance, Global Reach, Global Power for America" continued, "Air Superiority has been and remains an essential precondition to successful military operations . . . Without it, our Nation's military would have to radically change the way it fights." 69 The claim, however, is not related solely to air superiority, but also to space superiority, ISR, mobility operations, and global strike. In that way, this narrative ties historical Air Force missions to current missions and their necessity to joint operations.
While not as strongly stated as "victory through air power," "without it you lose" is a significant divergence from "we are critical enablers." As mentioned in evaluating "over not through," this is probably more of a reflection on the lack of anticipation and inclusiveness of "we are critical enablers." While "without it you lose" is a stark break from its immediate predecessor, it has firm roots in airpower history. 
For the near future, "without it you lose" will be widely applicable. Most military In other words, airpower saves live, space-enabled airpower saves more lives, and cyber and space-enabled airpower saves even more lives.
In short, this narrative better connects the Air Force to the nation's needs by shifting the focus from a capability (airpower) to the institution that provides both this capability and others, i.e., space and cyber power, that are inherently germane to the nation's defense. It improves upon the preceding narratives in several other ways as well. This section will detail those improvements, explain what the narrative means in terms of the Air Force's enduring functions, and conclude with how the narrative performs against the established criteria.
First, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" focuses on the Air Force's contributions to the nation. All the services have aircraft and contribute to airpower. The nation, however, only has one Air Force. Thus, the first part of this narrative is externally facing and unifying.
Second, this narrative draws attention to the Air Force as an institution, rather than a single, albeit vital, capability. This narrative is about the Air Force, which is naturally inclusive, not just "airpower," which is only inclusive under the terms of USAF doctrine. 
75
Should the Air Force choose to define airpower more literally in the future, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" will still be relevant. Finally, "The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" improves upon previous narratives in terms of the criteria here established in three important ways. First, it is inclusive and is thus more anticipatory than "victory through air power" or "we are critical enablers." "Victory through air power" was too narrowly defined to meet the context of irregular war and "we are Finally, the narrative has the potential to improve cohesion of "we are critical enablers."
While speculative, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" will appeal to all Airmen. From the air-superiority fighter pilot, to the cyber operator, to the wrench-turning maintainer, all Airmen contribute to the narrative "the nation's Air Force . The US Air Force provides Global Power by holding targets at risk around the globe.
The United States has unmatched ability to project both conventional and nuclear power around the world. Power projection contributes to US escalation dominance over its enemies from the smallest conflict to nuclear war. 
80
"The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is a break from the current narrative(s) and from "we are critical enablers." Elements of the narrative exist in today's narrative and previous narratives, but it has not taken on the stature of a service narrative. While "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" does not appear in historical rhetoric, it appears in virtually every historical action of the Air Force. For example, despite all the arguments against the efficacy of strategic the two Balkan wars of the 1990s or the operations discussed in this chapter to see this way of war in practice-in all four cases, the United States preferred an airpower answer to an answer requiring American soldiers and marines in harm's way. Small crews of Airmen can deliver massive amounts of firepower relative to, say a 4,400-person Brigade Combat Team. Obviously, the two do not serve exactly the same purpose, but sometimes an airpower solution does not just enhance American ground forces, it can replace them. Thus, American airpower is politically more desirable because it requires less blood and less commitment.
"The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is pithy. Speculatively, without any additional intended purposes is for Airmen to understand where they fit in and to share the Air Force story, it is a useful narrative.
Externally, it is a message that resonates with the American way of war. As noted above, many administrations have preferred aerial intervention to larger intervention efforts. Certainly, this narrative is consistent with political desires to keep casualties low while achieving national objectives. One could debate the efficacy of aerial intervention, but as a strategy it has demonstrated the political desire to use the Air Force to achieve national objectives with the least possible commitment of American blood.
As long as the United States retains its relative predominance in aerial warfare, this narrative will be effective. Well-resourced, well-trained Airmen will almost always save lives. If an adversary has a substantial airpower threat of its own, American airpower is all the more critical to saving lives because as American adversaries have learned fighting without air superiority is a deadly proposition.
This section analyzes the prospective narratives and assigns each a rank for each criterion (summarized in Table 
2
Given the Air Force's legacy of innovation, "over not through" scored highest on coherence. Neither of the other two narratives had as deep of roots in the past. Elements of "without it you lose" were in Gen Arnold's lexicon, but the narrative was not as pervasive as that of innovation. As a prospective new narrative, it is unsurprising that "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" was the least coherent. One could certainly find elements of the narrative throughout the Air Force's history, but it too was a distinct break from "we are critical enablers" and did not benefit from being part of the CSAF's current narrative.
"The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" scored highest on validity. The US Air Force has provided an asymmetric advantage for US forces since the Gulf War. Undoubtedly, the United States suffers fewer casualties with a capable Air Force. But the Air Force also saves the lives of allies and potentially even adversaries. Since the advent of PGM, avoiding collateral damage has been a priority of US military operations. As noted above, through Global Reach, the American airpower also supports humanitarian and aid missions and saves lives in that way. One support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty." 84 Kennedy was a master of narrative and succinctly captured the American ethos and narrative in that speech.
While the United States will "bear any burden" and "meet any hardship," Airpower allows it to do so with the least loss of life to Americans, friends, and even foes. The Air Force, and the capital-intensive way of war that it represents, are thus central to the American ethos.
The extent to which "Airpower. Because without it you lose" is valid, on the other hand, may depend on the future conflict. While the Air Force enables the joint force, irregular war is a ground-centric affair that requires personnel on the ground. "Airpower. Because without it you lose" ultimately seems to be a response to a competitive budget environment, which may or may not persist through 2036. It comes in second. Likewise, as the pendulum swings on budgets, "over not through" may lose some of its momentum as innovation will not have the premium it does presently. It ranks third among the narratives for anticipation. Based on the preceding rank-order analysis, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is the suggested narrative. "Airpower. Because without it you lose" is a close second. While it bested the suggested narrative in coherence, its negative framing and potentially narrow applicability diminished its effectiveness. "Over not through" was also promising, but it suffers like "we are critical enablers." While valid, "over not through" is a narrow narrative that can fit under a broader narrative.
In conclusion, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is a strong candidate for the Air narratives. While all three narratives could work, the intent here is to identify the best service narrative. Arguably, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" could fairly easily subsume the other two proposed narratives.
The reader may wonder what he or she has gained by reading thus far if one of the current narratives could suffice. The answer is that the current narratives are diffuse.
Undoubtedly, innovation is important to the service, but selling innovation harkens to previous
Air Force attempts at corporate practices (see "Quality Air Force"). Innovation is a valid subnarrative for the Air Force, but it should not be the service narrative. Likewise, the idea of dependence represented by "Airpower. Because without it you lose," is a valid subnarrative. It is certainly an important external facing narrative in the resource battle with the other services.
Their effectiveness depends on the US Air Force. "The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is a compelling narrative for the Air Force that is broad enough to subsume the other two narratives.
Airmen innovate in order to be more effective at saving lives through Global Reach, Global The next chapter summarizes the content of the thesis. Additionally, it offers some conclusions, implications, and suggested areas for further study.
"Words are also actions, and actions are a kind of words."
-Ralph Waldo Emerson, 1844
The argument presented here serve as a cautionary tale to Air Force leaders. Reality must come before rhetoric, and rhetoric must be in consonance with reality. Context is important, but a slogan derived from a single campaign does not a narrative make. A sound service narrative should include not just elements of the present, but should connect those elements to the core missions of the service, to its legacy, and to its anticipated future. It should also bond Airmen and inform citizens.
This thesis began by defining a narrative, first in general terms and then detailing the specifics of a service narrative. A narrative is a story that connects events in a way that allows inferences to be drawn. A strategic narrative is purposeful. Strategic narratives have various functions. They seek to inform; persuade; impart purpose; and, most importantly, shape an audience's behavior. A service narrative is even more specific. It is a type of a strategic narrative with the dual purposes of informing, inspiring, and uniting service members and tying its actions and policy to the needs of external stakeholders.
Effective narratives share several common characteristics. They are coherent, valid, cohesive, and anticipatory. An important finding here was that the Air Force is responsible for its macro/service narrative and creating a culture in which the nested meso and micro narratives can thrive. This suggests that the macro narrative must be at once sufficiently broad to capture the diversity of the Air Force and sufficiently specific to persuade and impart purpose. Furthermore, the Air Force is constantly communicating, whether it intends to or not. Actions, inactions, stories, and silence all convey meaning. Thus, Air Force leaders must be purposeful in how they approach the construction and delivery of their narratives.
Several analysts have commented on Air Force culture and narrative. Carl Builder's The Masks of War described service culture as the "personality" of the service. That insight helps observers understand why military services seem to have a predilection for certain missions over others. In The Icarus Syndrome, Builder blamed many of the Air Force's problems on what he saw as the abandonment of "air power theory." The problem he identified is more acute today because the Air Force has a more diverse set of missions than it did when Builder wrote. Paula Thornhill's examination focused on the Air Force narrative as it related to the service's organizational culture. She succinctly described five distinct cultural narratives and suggested they were not mutually exclusive. Her findings imply one of two things. Either the Air Force should have a broader narrative to subsume the competing subnarratives; or, it should offer a more compelling narrative for the current context. Thornhill concluded "over not through," one of the narratives used in the past, was a suitable narrative for the present.
Alan Vick examined the same narratives over almost a century of American airpower. He concluded that the narrative might not be as useful to external audiences as to Airmen previously believed but that its impact on policymakers, legislators and citizens, while difficult to assess, is not unimportant. Vick concluded that while a narrative is critical to internal cohesion, it is less effective on public opinion and has undetermined value on decision makers outside the Air Force.
The narrative should be tailored accordingly. Due to the ever-changing context in which a narrative is received, the prospect of developing and maintaining an effective narrative seem almost Sisyphean.
After establishing the theoretical basis for the analysis, this thesis analyzed the post-Gulf War Air Force narratives and the extent to which they were effective. In sum, "victory through airpower" was largely effective but lacked full validity and anticipation. Had Air Force leaders adopted the rhetoric of the service to the reality of Air Force contributions, the narrative may have evolved rather than requiring radical attention. "We are critical enablers," was also only partially effective. It too was only valid in a particular context. Furthermore, it did not impart cohesion because many fighter and bomber pilots rejected it out of hand. Finally, it did not anticipate a transition back to "high end," major combat operations. "We are critical enablers" created a curious position for Gen Welsh, who had to deal with the aftermath of drawing down from two wars while simultaneously preparing for a rising China and a resurgent Russia, as well as possible conventional wars against Iran and North Korea.
Finally, this study compared the two predominant Air Force narratives against the proposed alternative narrative, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives." It concluded "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is a promising candidate for the near to mid-term Air Force narrative. It is powerful and concise, and it scores well across the narrative criteria and potentially could subsume the two existing narratives.
The current competing narratives, "over not through" and "airpower. Because without it you lose" are diffuse. Innovation is important to the service, but sounds corporate. Similarly, the idea of dependence represented by "without it you lose," is a valid subnarrative but should not be the service-level narrative. "The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is a pithy narrative for the Air Force that is broad enough to subsume the other two narratives. Airmen innovate in order to be more effective at saving lives through Global Reach, Global Vigilance, and Global Power. The nation's Air Force saves the lives of joint partners by providing emergency close air support, MEDEVAC, and combat search and rescue. The nation's Air Force saves the lives of enemies by directly striking at all levels of war, from tactical to strategic, thereby reducing the need for firepower and attendant casualties associated with larger ground forces. "The nation's Air Force .
. . saving lives" has a well-established past and a bright future. Since World War II, certainly through the immediate past and into the future, American airpower will save lives.
This study has devised a mechanism for examining the Air Force narrative and ultimately suggesting a narrative for the mid-21st century. Simon Sinek wrote, "Finding WHY is a process of discovery, not invention." 
1
Airpower alone is hard enough to understand, as Colin Gray argued. "The world is well stocked with people who genuinely are deeply knowledgeable about some features of airpower, but it is much less populated with those who have a plausible claim to understand airpower's strategic narrative. This represented a significant organizational upheaval. In Operation Allied Force, the dominant Air Force narrative, "victory through airpower," contributed to Lt Gen Short's being at loggerheads with Gen Clark over strategy. Short wanted to pursue a decapitation strategy despite having no political mandate to do so. Thus, in a very tangible way, the Air Force narrative 
7
8
12
11
10
40  
40  
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2003/05/02/rumsfeld-announces-end-of-afghancombat/9507f2f8-a7e8-497c-be9d-5eae475f1b47/.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2003/05/02/rumsfeld-announces-end-of-afghancombat/9507f2f8-a7e8-497c-be9d-5eae475f1b47/.
91 Van Creveld, Age of Airpower, 419. 92 Van Creveld, Age of Airpower, 419. 93 Paula G. Thornhill, Over Not Through: The Search for a Strong, Unified Culture for America's Airmen Santa Monica, CA: RAND Project Air Force, January 2012, 7. 94 Alan J. Vick, Proclaiming Airpower: Air Force Narratives and American Public Opinion from 1917 to 2014. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Project Air Force, 2015, 76.
Bush declared "Mission Accomplished" aboard the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln, 97 John Tirpak, "Gates Versus the Air Force," Air Force Magazine, March 2014.
Bush declared "Mission Accomplished" aboard the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln, 97 John Tirpak, "Gates Versus the Air Force," Air Force Magazine, March 2014.
66 Smith, Tomorrow's Air Force, 227, emphasis added.  67  
66 Smith, Tomorrow's Air Force, 227, emphasis added.  67  
https://doctrine.af.mil/download.jsp?filename=V1-D21-Airpower.pdf, 27
https://doctrine.af.mil/download.jsp?filename=V1-D21-Airpower.pdf, 27
80 RAND Project AIR FORCE described "escalation dominance" by saying, "Coercion is more likely to succeed when the coercer can increase the level of costs it imposes while denying the adversary opportunity to neutralize those costs or counterescalate." Byman, Daniel, Matthew C. Waxman, and Eric V. Larson. Air Power as a Coercive Instrument. Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1999, xiii, emphasis in original. 81 Max Hastings. Overlord: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy. Reprint edition. New York: Vintage, 2006, 122.
80 RAND Project AIR FORCE described "escalation dominance" by saying, "Coercion is more likely to succeed when the coercer can increase the level of costs it imposes while denying the adversary opportunity to neutralize those costs or counterescalate." Byman, Daniel, Matthew C. Waxman, and Eric V. Larson. Air Power as a Coercive Instrument. Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1999, xiii, emphasis in original. 81 Max Hastings. Overlord: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy. Reprint edition. New York: Vintage, 2006, 122.
82  
82  
"Nation's Air Force . . . Source: Author's Original Work.
Builder, The Icarus Syndrome, 35.   
Paula G. Thornhill, Over Not Through: The Search for a Strong, Unified Culture for America's Airmen Santa Monica, CA: RAND Project Air Force, January 2012, 1.
Thornhill, v.  Dr. Thornhill considers the story of American Airmen, which predates the USAF as a separate service. Similarly, I consider the history of the Air Force to predate the Air Force as a distinct service.
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 7.   
Alan J.Vick, Proclaiming Airpower: Air Force Narratives and American Public Opinion from 1917 to  2014. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Project Air Force, 2015, xiii.   
I recognize that senior AF leaders may tailor the narrative on the margins for specific audiences, but the core must remain consistent.
The author's own definition with ideas borrowed from http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/narrative?s=t and Freedman (See Chapter 1).
Edgar H.Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership. 3 edition. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass,  2010, 242.   
"Made to Stick: Introduction." Heath Brothers, accessed March 7, 2016. http://heathbrothers.com/madeto-stick-introduction/
11
2007.
12
Lincoln, "The Gettysburg Address."
Simpson, War from the Ground Up, 181.
Aristotle, On Rhetoric, 38.   
Aristotle, On Rhetoric, 39.   
Tami Davis Biddle . Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare: The Evolution of British and American Ideas about strategicbombing, 1914-1945. Princeton University Press, 2009. 175   
For instance, the idea that "the bomber will always get through" led the United states delaying the development of pursuit aircraft with suitable drop tanks for escort. In turn, this led to taking unnecessary US bomber losses early in the war. This happened despite the fact that other country's wars from the interwar years suggested that the bomber would not always get through. "Indeed, only in 1943-after disastrous losses-would the Americans decide finally that unescorted bombers could not successfully shoot their way in and out of foreign territory." Biddle,[169][170][171][172][173][174] 
Educator Noah Tavlin would take issue with this description of Orwellian as it might be too narrow of a description of what Orwell himself may have thought. My point, however, is that for better or worse, Orwellian commonly means heavy-handed government or authoritarian. Tavlin, Noah. "What 'Orwellian' really means." Ted-ed Original. http://ed.ted.com/lessons/what-orwellian-really-means-noah-tavlin, accessed 27 Jan 15.
"Apple 1984 Super Bowl Commercial Introducing Macintosh Computer (HD)." 24 Jun 2010. https://youtu.be/2zfqw8nhUwA, accessed 31 Jan 2015.
"TV Guide Names Apple's "1984" Commercial as #1 All-Time Commercial" The Mac Observer. 29 June 1999. http://www.macobserver.com/news/99/june/990629/tvguide1984.html, accessed 27 Jan 15.
Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, 8 November
(As Amended Through 15 November 2015), 230.2  Vick, Proclaiming Airpower, xv. It is worth noting that when Vick refers to an airpower narrative he clearly means an organizational narrative for the Air Force.3  Author's own definition derived from definitions in chapter 2, Joint Publication 1-02, and Vick, Proclaiming Airpower.4  The success of Masks of War is partly why AU commissioned Builder to write the Icarus Syndrome. As of 2015, Builder's work is still referenced at the Air Command and Staff College, this author attended a briefing titled "The Masks of War." Furthermore, Google Scholar shows that The Masks of War has been cited approximately 475 times in published works. Google Scholar search. https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&q=masks+of+war+builder&btnG=&as_sdt=1%2C1&as_sdtp=.Accessed 3 Feb 2016.   
Carl Builder, The Icarus Syndrome: The Role of Air Power Theory in the Evolution and Fate of the U.S. Air Force. New edition. New Brunswick, N.J.; London: Transaction Publishers, 2002. xiv.
Builder, Icarus Syndrome, xiv.   
Builder, Icarus Syndrome, xvii, emphasis added.   
Builder, Icarus Syndrome, xviii.   
Both Thornhill and Vick reference  Builder numerous times in their works, moreover, their lexicon is shaped by Builder's early work. The fact that all three worked under the auspices of RAND no doubt contributed to this. However, many other authors examining aspects of the Air Force culture point back to Builder as well. See the introduction of this thesis for more.
Carl Builder, The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis. A Rand Corporation Research Study. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989, 3.
Builder, The Icarus Syndrome, 203.   
Nick Kotz as quoted inBuilder, Icarus Syndrome,  
183-4.18  Builder, The Icarus Syndrome, 220.
Retired brigadier general, and PhD, Paula Thornhill is the director of the Strategy and Doctrine Program within RAND Project AIR FORCE.
Martin Dempsey, as quoted in Thornhill, 1.
Paula G.Thornhill, Over Not Through:  The Search for a Strong, Unified Culture for America's Airmen Santa Monica, CA: RAND Project Air Force, January 2012, 1.
"Airmen" as used here, represent the forbears to the Air Force. Air Force members throughout this text are referred to as Airmen (capitalized). Since this usage refers to those that predate the institution, it is not capitalized.
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 3.   
Lee Kennett, The First Air War: 1914-1918. New York: Free Press, 1999, 226.   
Thornhill, Over Not Through,[3][4] 
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 4, 
Thornhill, Over Not Through,
[5]
Thornhill, Over Not Through,
5.
Thornhill, Over Not Through,[7]
[8]
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 7.   
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 7.   
Thornhill, Over Not Through,
8.
Thornhill, Over Not Through, iii.   
Thornhill, Over Not Through,
9.
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online, s. v. "Sisyphus", accessed February 26, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/topic/Sisyphus. "Sisyphus, in Greek mythology, the cunning king of Corinth who was punished in Hades by having repeatedly to roll a huge stone up a hill only to have it roll down again as soon as he had brought it to the summit." The task of creating and maintaining a narrative requires a significant effort, and it is never complete.
Alan J.Vick, Proclaiming Airpower: Air Force Narratives and American Public Opinion from 1917 to   
Santa Monica, CA: RANDProject Air Force, 2015, 108.   
Phillip S Meilinger, "Alexander P. de Seversky and American Airpower," School of Advanced Airpower Studies. The Paths of Heaven: The Evolution ofAir Power Theory. Maxwell Air Force Base: Air  University Press, 1997, 239.   
Shimko, Keith L. The Iraq Wars and America's Military Revolution. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2010, 26
Robert Frank Futrell. Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine. Vol. II: Basic  Thinking in the UnitedStates Air Force,  1907-1960. Maxwell Air Force Base: Air University Press, 2004,  
 5 Futrell, Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine, Vol II   
Henriksen, NATO's Gamble,[90][91][92][93][94][95][96] 
Henriksen, NATO's Gamble,96.   
Henriksen, NATO's Gamble,70.   
Henriksen, NATO's Gamble, 93.   
As quoted inHenriksen NATO's Gamble, 96.   
Robert Owen, "Operation Deliberate Force, 1995," A History of Air Warfare. Washington, D.C: Potomac Books, 2010. 202. CHECK CITATION
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," A History of Air Warfare. Washington, D.C: Potomac Books, 2010,  225.   
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 225.   
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 225.   
Gian P. Gentile, How Effective Is Strategic Bombing?: Lessons Learned from World War II to Kosovo. World of War. New York: New York UniversityPress, 2001, 191.   
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 229. Clark was clear to Jumper, the air operation was intended to coerce, not destroy Milosevic's government or forces.
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 249.   
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 249.   
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 244.   
Martin Van Creveld, The Age of Airpower. New York: PublicAffairs, 2011, 330.
The reader will recall from Chapter 2, that a to be coherent a narrative must connect events from the past to the present. In this case the narrative was relatively unchanged through the 1990s.
Henriksen, NATO's Gamble, 192.   
Mason, "Operation Allied Force," 249.   
Eliot A. Cohen, "Kosovo and the new American Way of War." War Over Kosovo: Politics and Strategy in a Global Age (2001), 53.
Shimko, Iraq Wars,[203][204] 
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 7.   
Milton Beardman. "Afghanistan, Graveyard of Empires." Foreign Affairs. March 16, 2016, accessed March 16, 2016. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/afghanistan/2001-11-01/afghanistan-graveyardempires.
  110  Beardman, "Graveyard of Empires,"17-20.   
Thornhill, Over Not Through, 7.   
Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions: 50th Anniversary Edition. Fourth Edition. Chicago ; London: University Of Chicago Press, 2012, xxiii
Kuhn, Scientific Revolutions, 77.   
Vick, Proclaiming Airpower, 79.   
e.g. "by, with, and through"; "clear, hold, and build"; "hearts and minds."
Gray, Airpower for Strategic Effect, 235   
Gen Norton Schwartz, Pride in Service, Heritage, speech to American Legion 49th Annual Washington Conference,March 3, 2009. Emphasis added.   
As quoted in Shane Harris. @WAR: The Rise of the Military-Internet Complex. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,
53 2 Kilcullen, David. Blood Year: The Unraveling of Western Counterterrorism. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016, 2.
Mueller, Precision and Purpose, 6.   
Dennis Drew, "Air Theory, Air Force, and Low Intensity Conflict: A Short Journey to Confusion," The Paths of Heaven: The Evolution of Air Power Theory. Maxwell Air Force Base: Air University Press, 1997, 322.
"The next Front against Islamic State." The Economist, February 6, 2016. http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21690057-libyas-civil-war-has-given-caliphatefresh-opportunities-western-military?zid=304&ah=e5690753dc78ce91909083042ad12e30.
Thornhill, "Over Not Through",
8.
Thornhill, "Over Not Through",
8.
Global Vigilance, Global Reach, Global Power for America, 3, emphasis added.
Gregory, Clean Bombs, 4.   
Thornhill, "Over Not Through",
9.
Thornhill, "Over Not Through",
9.
Smith, Tomorrow's Air Force, 223.   
The author acknowledges an intellectual debt to Col M.V. "Coyote" Smith who originally suggested the idea "Airpower saves lives."
Even intercontinental ballistic missiles meet this criterion. Paradoxically, the deterrent value of nuclear weapons depends on their ability to inflict devastating harm to civilians. While their use is terrible to imagine, in practice, nuclear weapons save lives through deterrence.
Simon Sinek.  Start with Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action. New York, NY: Portfolio, Penguin,
2009, 214.   
He completed Officer Space Prerequisite Training in 2003 and Initial Qualifications Training as a Defense Support Program satellite vehicle operator in 2004. He has variously served as an instructor, weapons officer, and flight commander across multiple space systems. He deployed to Kandahar, Afghanistan from 2006-2007 in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom
USAF Weapons School and Air Command and Staff College. Upon SAASS graduation
Major Sanders
Aerospace Data Facility-Colorado
OEF "underlined the military capabilities the United States could project when it had the will to do so." 
77
Leading up to the conflict, CENTCOM air component commander Lt Gen T. Michael "Buzz" Moseley argued that airpower should target Iraqi air defenses and leadership before any ground conflict commenced. 
78
79
80
Due to 12 years of no-fly zones and intermittent action against Iraq's air defense system, the coalition established air supremacy from the beginning of the conflict. The initial "shock and awe" air campaign was brutal, but it did not result in enemy capitulation as some members of the Bush administration had hoped. 
82
77
78
79
80
81
82
Instead, individual Airmen adopt the narrative that appeals to them most." 13 General Welsh's adoption of two narratives suggests that the Air Force still struggles to discern a strong, unified cultural narrative. Furthermore, the dramatic changes between Generals Schwartz and Welsh suggest disjointedness. The following analysis reviewing operations against the Qaddafi regime in Libya and against ISIS is intended to describe the context for the current narratives.
In analyzing the factors that led to Operation Odyssey Dawn and the subsequent Unified Protector, one must look at the evolution of US/Libyan relations dating back to the Reagan Administration. By the late 1970s, Western powers believed Muammar al-Qaddafi to be one of the world's most foremost sponsors and practitioners of international terrorism. 
14
15
16
17
19
20
21
25
26
71
Simply put, since the advent of airpower, the US military has not fought without airpower.
Whether mobility support, ISR, strike, or close air support, the joint force requires air power. As Field Marshal Montgomery said in World War II, "If we lose the war in the air we lose the war and lose it quickly." 72 It is important to note that this does not suggest that airpower guarantees victory; this is not "victory through air power." It is also worth noting that in irregular warfare from Vietnam to contemporary conflicts against violent extremists, adversaries have been very resilient in the face of airpower. This suggests "without it you lose," is not a universal and does not apply to belligerents everywhere. Rather, it suggests that American way of war requires airpower.
Once again, while speculative, "without it you lose" would seem to appeal internally to Airmen. Taken in the context of OOD, OUP, and OIR, airpower comprises the only military option from an alliance and coalition perspective. Unlike their peers in the other services, Airmen have been continuously "at war" since 1991. Even though the conflicts in Libya and Syria are irregular, they do not involve large contingents of US ground forces. As such, the US Air Force is providing a key capability to indigenous forces, and rebels. Without airpower, they would certainly lose. On the other hand, this narrative is framed negatively, which weakens its appeal.
Ironically, this negative framing directly contributes to its validity, i.e. it is not as overstated as "victory through air power."
Externally, joint forces might bristle at the implication of the narrative as somehow demeaning to their contributions to the joint fight. Prima facie, other services could perceive this narrative as having an embedded value judgment against them. This is not trivial. One of the functions of a narrative is to inform policymakers and those allocating funds. On the other hand, no service would genuinely claim that they would want to operate without the US Air Force, just 71 William Mitchell. Winged Defense: The Development and Possibilities of 
Modern Air Power--Economic and Military. Tuscaloosa, AL: Fire Ant Books, 2010, 140. 72 Westenhoff, Military Airpower, 18.
Admittedly, it was difficult to decide on rankings for validity for the three narratives. All are valid; but this evaluation method requires a judgment. "The nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" is the foremost expression of the American way of war. "Over not through" is less valid and more aspirational. Sure, innovation has a long history in the Air Force, but the tagline suggests that all Airmen are problem-solvers and this is not true to the extent that it was in 1914 or 1944. Simply put, if necessity is the mother of invention, the USAF has not had the impetus it once had for innovation. Therefore, "over not through" was ranked last for validity.
Once again, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" scored highest on cohesion. It is elegant and compelling. Admittedly, "Without it you lose" is also simply and powerfully stated so it scores in second place. "Without it you lose" puts airpower in terms to which Airmen can relate. But, its focus is on airpower, not the organization. Thus, it loses some cohesion among those who do not fit under a traditional or more exacting definition of airpower. It also loses some effectiveness due to its negative frame. Americans in general and American Airmen in particular are not interested in "not losing," they want to win. "Over not through" simply sounds too corporate. Airmen are warriors, not businessmen. They resent buzzwords. "Over not through" ranks last in cohesion.
Finally, "the nation's Air Force . . . saving lives" has the greatest anticipatory value. In his inaugural speech, President John F. Kennedy Jr passionately said, "Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship,