# ID: 79f0ca3b7df148b096d13bff2d519acc
# Title: Airborne Next: Rethinking Airborne Organization and Applying New Concepts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The airborne concept has had a lasting impact on military force structures since its employment on a large scale during World War II. It is puzzling to consider how little airborne organizational structures and employment concepts have changed in the intervening seven decades, considering the great amount of change occurring in warfare.
This thesis examines the future potential of airborne concepts by rethinking traditional airborne organizational structures and employment concepts. Using a holistic approach in the areas of organization, doctrine, technology, and strategy as guiding frames of reference, this thesis recommends updating the organizational structures of airborne forces to model a "small and many" approach over a "large and few" approach, while incorporating a "swarming" concept. Utilizing historical and contemporary vignettes to demonstrate airborne utility, this research reveals how a parachute capability displays the unique attributes to complement a swarming concept. Under an updated organizational structure and new employment concept, airborne forces can offer renewed relevancy to the U.S.
In September 1944, over 20,000 Allied airborne troops were utilized in the Netherlands as part of Operation Market Garden. 
1
2
airborne forces' structure has remained largely unchanged since World War II, 70 years ago. The 82nd and the 101st remain two of only eight active duty infantry divisions, and such mass drops still regularly assault the fields of Forts Campbell and Bragg. 
3
4
The organization and employment of all military forces is rooted in government strategies set forth by decision makers. The National Security Strategy (NSS) serves as the United States' guiding security document. The NSS places special emphasis on preserving the military's ability to access the globe and defeat anti-access capabilities that would restrict power projection. 
5
6
8
The organizational structure of military forces does not simply exist for its own sake, but rather serves, ideally, to optimally achieve the military objectives desired by the force employers and decision makers. As such, the structure of military forces requires a careful consideration of not only organization, but also a well-informed understanding of strategy, doctrine, and technology. For example, the rise of the German panzer divisions 5 White House, National Security Strategy (NSS) (Washington, DC: White House, 2010), 14. Of particular note, the Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC), January 17, 2012, ii, declares the essential access challenge for future joint forces is to be able to "project military force into an operational area" and "sustain it in the face of armed opposition."
6 Department of Defense, Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC) (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2012); Secretary of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2014).
7 Department of Defense, Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC), 1.
in the 1930s required a holistic understanding of all areas in strategy, doctrine, and technology to justify that organizational change. 9 Heinz Wilhelm Guderian could not have made an attractive case for reorganizing the armored tank forces into a relative few divisions without an accurate technological frame of reference that displayed understanding in improved attack aircraft, mobile artillery, tank mobility, and advances in the radio. From a doctrinal point of view, the panzer division could only be successful if used for decisive penetration maneuvers and not for the protracted attritional battles of World War I. In a strategic context, these changes enabled visions of quick and decisive campaigns, which meant the Germans could achieve victory with fewer forces employed by re-organizing their armor into panzer divisions. As this example illustrates, organization, doctrine, technology, and strategy are closely linked and reliant upon each other; understanding these concepts allowed the Germans to make well-informed organizational changes to optimize their fighting force. For this reason, the authors' method considers each of these areas. 
10
10 Dr. John Arquilla provided the guidance and information on the Guderian methodology example for the link between strategy, doctrine, organization, and technology. change their current doctrine to heavy armored capabilities that combat the modern antiaccess/area-denial (A2AD) threat employed by U.S. adversaries. Finally, U.S. policy makers and senior leaders must be willing to accept change and risk in the current security environment. A reorganized airborne force and new employment concept for both small and large units are necessary for today's U.S. airborne forces.
Using strategy, doctrine, and technology as guiding influences for organizing the modern airborne force, this project identifies the pertinent components of each for the DOD to make an informed consideration of future airborne organization. Instead of making a narrow judgment on the tactical utility of airborne operations for the DOD, it holistically addresses the ways airborne forces have been, are, or could be organized for modern and future operations. This review is accomplished in four sections that address organization and doctrine, technology, strategy, and recommendations. These sections proceed as follows.
First, the issues of organization and doctrine are addressed. This section categorizes the taxonomy of airborne units to include both small and large-scale forces.
The contemporary operating environment suggests that small wars and conflicts occurring in hybrid form are increasingly more common. The small-scale, Special Forces (SOF) airborne roles display greater relevancy in this trend for their speed, precision, and stealth capabilities. Yet, the expansion and proliferation of A2AD systems offer renewed possibilities for conventional, large-scale airborne employment. Recognizing that the large-scale airborne roles are much less likely to recur, an increased investment in smallscale airborne capability is recommended.
The next section links technology and force structures and delineates the broad and narrow technology frames of reference to provide context to the reader on the broader implications of technology trends and the specific changes occurring within airborne technology. For airborne concepts, it means greater mobility is granted to smaller formations and larger formations are imperiled.
The third section of the body discusses the incorporation of airborne operations into a swarming concept. Swarming characteristics incorporate autonomous, integrated, coordinated, and dispersed small-units designed to operate in standoff or close-in distances while sustainably pulsing with force or fire. This section applies the reorganized airborne force structure and doctrine with a proposed swarming strategy.
The concluding section offers the necessary tools to implement the new employment concept. Areas of future research are offered to advance this concept by using SOF as a test bed for the swarming concept. Further attention should be allotted to the DOD force structure design, doctrinal rewrites, and swarming applications with U.S.
parachute forces.
Airborne forces continue to enjoy a prominence in U.S. force structure. Nearly three quarters of a century later, most historians would consider Airborne's greatest utility to have occurred during World War II with the division-sized drops that were undertaken across the European theater. It is noteworthy and somewhat puzzling that the organizational structure of an airborne unit of action has remained largely intact since its inception. The airborne division continues to be the U.S. DOD's structural formula for airborne force organization. It adds to the growing debate on force structure and organization within all the DOD for optimizing the modern force. Many traditionalists long to maintain the larger force structures, while progressive thinkers seek to replace the "few and large" with the "many and small." 11 While attempts to scale down the U.S.
Army's unit of action resulted in the creation of the brigade combat teams (BCT), the airborne division maintains ultimate authority. Yet, utility in airborne extends far beyond the capabilities of the airborne division.
The aim of this chapter is to redefine the role of airborne forces to relate the employment of airborne forces to the growing debates on military force structure and the concept of swarming in modern operations. First, the taxonomy of airborne forces is addressed to include both the conventional and SOF. Second, airborne operational roles, to include those involving both small-and large-scale forces, with historical vignettes are critically examined. Third, the current operating environment is discussed, to include the threats generated by both state and non-state actors. In conclusion, this chapter summarizes the roles of small and large-scale airborne utility and the contributions to the new operational concept of swarming.
11 Arquilla, "The New Rules of War." Dr. Arquilla argues that the military needs a new perspective for combating modern warfare with an organizational structure of "many and small" over "few and large."
Small-scale airborne forces are organized under SOF and large-scale airborne forces come under conventional forces. For this analysis, small-scale airborne forces are defined as any element smaller than a battalion. Small-scale airborne forces typically utilize high-performance parachutes in military free-fall operations with the latest in training and equipment fielding. These units operate independently in austere environments with a decentralized chain of command, offering a low signature for specialty-type operations. For this analysis, large-scale airborne forces are defined as a battalion element and larger. Large-scale operations utilize static-line operations with non-steerable parachutes to seize terrain. The units are capable of deploying up to a division-sized element with a large amount of coordination and logistics. The following sections define each camp (conventional and SOF) to further develop the argument about small-or large-scale airborne operations.
The U.S. Army maintains a conventional airborne capability with one active division in Fort Bragg, North Carolina and three active brigades: one in Italy, one in Alaska, and one in Hawaii. The mission of these conventional airborne units is to "strategically deploy, conduct forcible entry parachute assault and secure key objectives for follow-on military operations in support of U.S. national interests." 12 Additionally, three ranger battalions and one ranger special troops battalion (RSTB) conduct airfield seizure operations as one of their legacy tasks. The roles associated with maintaining an 
12
The U.S. The roles associated with maintaining an airborne capability for these units are for raids, reconnaissance, and special warfare missions.
A variety of roles for U.S. airborne forces are accepted within the DOD. These roles are specified in U.S. doctrine, joint doctrine, and rooted in national policy. 
16
Based on these various sources, Figure 
1
13
14 The 1st Special Forces Regiment has five active Special Forces Groups (1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th SFG(A)) and two National Guard Groups (19th and 20th Group) implementation of both small-and large-scale airborne forces. The three roles for smallscale airborne assaults are for their use in reconnaissance, raiding, and special warfare.
The three roles for large-scale airborne assaults are seizures, shows of force and reinforcement. These roles are explained in further detail in the following sections. 
Small-scale airborne forces are advantageous for gaining operational access by using stealth, standoff, speed, and precision. Historical and contemporary evidence reinforces the utility of small-scale airborne operations in modern warfare. U.S. doctrine describes the capabilities of small-scale airborne operations to include "providing intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities and may conduct direct action operations." 18 Figure 
2
17
18 Headquarters, Airborne Operations: Field Manual 90-26, 1-5.
Small-scale Airborne Roles
Figure 
2
Reconnaissance is a primary mission for small-scale units because it provides a stealthy and expeditious means of gathering intelligence and in forming the planning considerations of military commanders. 
19
strikes. An example of the latter is recon for intelligence purposes. Conducting airborne as an infiltration platform for recon provides the planner improved operational access for deep infiltration, unreachable terrain, low signature, and in a contested environment.
Recon has been used in airborne operations since its inception and has many historical case studies that highlight its importance.  
21
22
The MACVSOG example shows the importance of using a small-scale airborne operation for combat and to gather intelligence. The "smaller is better" approach was effective because of its ability to infiltrate behind enemy lines and identify adversary locations. These reconnaissance missions laid the groundwork for many operations today.
Units, such as the U.S. 75th Ranger Regiment, various SOF, and other surgical strike units, have reaped the benefits of using military free-fall insertions for reconnaissance missions.
Raids offer an important role for small-scale airborne operations because of the aggressor's ability to conduct surprise entry with swift execution and rapid exit. 
23
21 Ibid.
22 Richard H. Shultz, The Secret War Against Hanoi: The Untold Story of Spies, Saboteurs, and  Covert Warriors in North Vietnam (New York: Perennial, 2000), 111.
23 JP 1-02 defines a raid as an operation to seize an area temporarily to secure information, confuse an adversary, capture personnel or equipment, or to destroy a capability. It ends with a planned withdrawal upon completion of the assigned mission. Department of Defense, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Joint Publication 1-02) (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, November 2010 as amended through August 15, 2014), 302.
to the Germans at Eben Emael and the United States at Los Banos in the World War II.
The Germans effectively utilized airborne raiding in their earlier conquests in Europe. The raid and capture of the Eben Emael fortress was made famous for utilizing an airborne force to overtake what was considered to be a nearly impregnable fortress. 
24
The daring operation to liberate the prisoners at Los Banos in the Pacific Theater during World War II exemplified a textbook airborne raid. General Macarthur ordered the 11th airborne division commander to liberate the approximately 2,200 prisoners held by the Japanese at Los Banos prison. 
25
26
Contemporary examples of airborne raids include the Navy SEAL team military free-fall (MFF) operation into Somalia to rescue two aid workers from a terrorist organization. 
27
25 During the conduct of the operation, the raiding airborne force completely surprised the prison guards. In swift execution, the operation took no more than 20 minutes; the entire 243-man prison guard detachment was dead. In a combined effort, trucks, amphibious tracks, and air transport were coordinated to facilitate the withdrawal and evacuation of prisoners. Gerard M. Devlin, Paratrooper!: The Saga of U.S. 
Army and Marine Parachute and Glider Combat Troops During World War II (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1979), 598. 26
27 Jeffrey Gettleman, Eric Schmitt, and Thom Shanker, "U.S. Swoops in to Free 2 from Pirates in Somali Raid," The New York Times, accessed March 12, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/26/ world/africa/us-raid-frees-2-hostages-from-somali-pirates-html.
austere environment. The operational detachment used MFF airborne infiltration to seal the objective without alerting the presence of an incoming raid. 
28
Airborne infiltration in special warfare relies heavily on speed and stealth to avoid detection. Special warfare typically includes clandestine infiltration, which makes airborne infiltration a good fit for these types of missions. 29 Airborne offers this spectrum set of missions a speedy and stealthy method of linking up with indigenous forces.
Airborne utility in special warfare dates back to the World War II Office of Strategic Services (OSS)/Jedburgh teams. 
30
28 ODA 074 conducted a combat standoff MFF insertion into Iraq in support of OIF on May 30, 2007.
29 Special warfare as the execution of activities that involve a combination of lethal and nonlethal actions taken by a specially trained and educated force that has a deep understanding of cultures and foreign language, proficiency in small-unit tactics, and the ability to build and fight alongside indigenous combat formations in a permissive, uncertain, or hostile environment. Department of Defense, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Joint Publication 1-02), 343.
30 Operation Jedburgh was a part of the larger operational plan devised for Operation Overlord. In doing so, the Jedburghs and OSS could organize, train, and equip the resistance forces to cut off rail lines and obstruct roads using ambush and sabotage methods. Andrew L. Hargreaves, Special Operations in World War II: British and American Irregular Warfare, vol. 39 (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2013), 1-9. 
31
The Jedburghs example shows the importance of investing in human capital with specialized training for elite soldiers. The amount of time and resources invested in the Jedburghs was a small fraction of the overall war budget and the payoff was tremendous for the Allies. Currently, the Special Operations Command (SOCOM) recognizes the utility of airborne in special warfare and is currently making changes to instill a "collective military free-fall capability throughout the Army's Special Forces Regiment [that will] ensure the U.S. Army's unconventional-warfare force can effectively enter and perform within the operational areas of today and tomorrow." 
32
Evaluating the effectiveness of small-scale airborne operations may not be as simple as examining the track record of successful vs. non-successful missions. Recons, raids, and special warfare have a high degree of success throughout history. Finding the relevancy in modern warfare is a more beneficial way to evaluate the small-scale roles. A common tool in the military for discussing applicable doctrine is called C4ISR. This evaluation tool is useful in highlighting how the U.S. military is fighting air, land, and sea battles against future opponents. The same evaluation criteria are used for small and large-scale airborne operations.
Small-scale airborne operations are most successful when units implement a decentralized command and control structure. These units work independently behind enemy lines in small teams emphasizing a simple, effective command and control structure. Using this flattened command structure is beneficial when operating in denied territories with minimal resources. Newer technologies in communications and computers are ever evolving. SOF operators now communicate under canopy with advanced technologies in radio. MFF jumpmasters are now using computers for calculating global positioning system (GPS) high altitude release points (HARP) and designated impact points (DIP) for a more reliable and successful landing. These types of equipment fielding also streamline the communications process for relaying intelligence, calling in air strikes, or requesting resupply. SOF missions will continue to require advanced training and equipment fielding.
Large-scale airborne utility is often used when a military force aims to seize terrain with a large amount of personnel. These operations are used as a forced entry technique to gain access to an area of operation. Figure 
3
33
Seizing serves as a primary role for large-scale airborne operations with airfield seizure as the most prominent form. 
35
36
37
38
39
40
36 The German seizure of Maleme Airfield in WWII was another example of a large-scale raid; however, the success was marginal due to weather and bad intelligence.
37 Macarthur wanted to seize and occupy the city of Lae and nearby Nadzab Airfield to use as a stepping stone northward. The operation involved using an intricate combination of airborne, amphibious, and air-landing troops. Devlin, Paratrooper!: The Saga of U.S. 
Army and Marine Parachute and Glider Combat Troops During World War II,
255. 38 Ibid.,
261. 39 Ibid.,
262. 40
time, preparation, planning, and personnel are required to make this operation successful.
The debate arises when a more capable opponent in the defense has advanced technology in A2AD to combat massing airborne infiltration. This debate is further explored in the technology section of this thesis.
A fully activated airborne unit may serve as a show of force to an adversary on the verge of committing troops. 
41
43
44
45
The reinforce role for airborne utilization encompasses a wide breadth to include support to units beyond reach from land forces, exposed flanks, disrupt, degrade, deny, and delay. Operation OVERLORD combined the roles of both seizing and reinforcement operations for airborne infiltration into denied territory in Europe. The plan called for four infantry divisions onto the Normandy beaches with two airborne divisions inland 
46
47 While there is little evidence that show of force deters, the lack of conflict may be an indicator that show of force was sufficient.
48 JP 1-02 defines reinforcing as a support mission in which the supporting unit assists the supported unit to accomplish the supported unit's mission. Only like units (e.g., artillery to artillery, intelligence to intelligence, armor to armor, etc) can be given a reinforcing/reinforced mission. Department of Defense, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Joint Publication 1-02), 309. 
49
50
from the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions. The United States blocked German reinforcements and seized the bridges north of the town of Caene. 
51
The two divisions were not able to seal off the beach completely, but did allow the Allied landing at Utah beach to proceed without much opposition. 
52
The French in Mali displayed the most modern example of airborne serving in a seize and reinforce role. 
53
54
55
56
57
DOD doctrine and airfield seizure TTPs.
Specifically for airborne, the antiquated ways of organizing an inherently rapid infiltration technique with multiple layers of oversight stalls the real strengths of an airborne capability. Additionally, the large numbers of airborne paratroopers maintained for readiness, but rarely used, adds to another point of contention. Some military experts agree that an entire airborne division of parachutists does not make sense in modern warfare. 
58
With over 35 small wars in existence and minimal conventional wars, the current operational landscape for warfare continues to evolve. Israeli military historian Martin van Creveld describes the environment as "large-scale, conventional war-war as understood by today's principal military powers-may indeed be at its last gasp; however, war itself, war as such, is alive and kicking and about to enter a new epoch." 
59
63
64
65
Traditionalists view that the future of conflict will likely remain conventional and reflect state-on-state warfare. The United States and its allies are facing state threats that include rogue regimes, such as North Korea and Iran who continue to challenge the safety of global security. 
66
67
68
Other external threats to the United States and its allies arise from global powers, such as China and Russia, which strive to modernize their militaries for future conflict.
Increasing tensions throughout Southeast Asia and the Pacific indicate expansionist efforts by the Chinese that shake the regional balance. 
69
71
Following attacks to executing attacks that are smaller and less complex." 73 Terrorist aspirations for weapons of mass destruction (WMD) are a constant threat to U.S. national strategy.
Foreign terrorist groups affiliated with al Qa'ida, as well as individual terrorist leaders, may seek to recruit or inspire Westerners to carry out attacks against the U.S. homeland with little or no warning. 
74
One certainty about warfare is the difficulty in predicting what the future of conflict will be. Given both categories of warfare, it seems that a conservative position on this debate is that conflict will consist in some hybrid form between conventional and irregular. However, conventional and SOF camps agree that irregular aspects of fighting will continue into the foreseeable future. In tallying the recent types of conflicts, the overwhelming amount of irregular conflict that occurs between state and non-state actors cannot be discounted, as well as the much fewer that occur between states. Given this overall increase in irregular conflict, military and strategic decision makers must prepare forces to deal with the myriad of changes in warfare for the near future.
Using U.S. doctrine as a guide, this section has categorized airborne roles into small and large-scale. Small-scale airborne roles consist of reconnaissance, raid, and special warfare, while large-scale airborne roles consist of seize, show of force, and reinforce. Each role displayed utility in historical and modern scenarios that lend credit to the continued relevancy of airborne. While not all roles are utilized equally, or even frequently in modern crises and conflict, a comprehensive look at airborne roles and utility may offer decision makers new perspectives for military force organization.
As the debate over force structure continues, the manner in which units are organized will increasingly be called into question. Budget constraints, risk, political 73 Ibid., 8.
74 Secretary of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), 8.
implications, evolving threat, and emerging technology are only a few of the long list of force structure considerations. For these reasons, the DOD continually reassesses the military force structure and organization to optimize the fighting force for modern warfare. Many traditionalists seek to maintain larger hierarchal force structures, while progressives seek to reorganize into smaller de-centralized force structures. Whether a traditionalist, progressive, or moderate approach is taken, this research urges the DOD to closely consider the roles and utility of airborne when re-thinking the military force structure and future operational concepts.
Technological understanding and the effects of major innovations date back to the beginning of warfare. 75 William McNeill, for example, in his seminal book, The Pursuit of Power, addresses the broad focus of technology in armed conflict by hearkening back to numerous historical cases of innovations that altered warfare. 
76
77
78
Drawing back on the Guderian example pre-World War II, the German technological frame of reference came from both broad and narrow advances. The broad frame stemmed from advances in communications and radio capabilities that afforded maneuver units greater mobility across larger distances. The narrow frame of reference This section examines technology from a broad and narrow frame of reference to justify rethinking the airborne organization and adopting new military operational concepts that fit this era. The broad frame provides the overall global context, while the narrow frame addresses airborne specific technological vulnerabilities and capabilities.
As Figure 
4
Modern military organizations serve as a model of large hierarchical institutions plagued by inefficiencies. An institution of this size also places great value in large platforms. Today, large platforms, such as tanks, ships, and planes dominate the battlefield. Martin Libicki argues that the days of platform dominance are coming to an end. 
82
83
The broad technological concepts of the information age provide context to military organizations about how to structure forces and adopt operational concepts for future conflict and crises. While traditional mindsets display resistance to such changes, it cannot be denied that networks are replacing hierarchies as the more effective organizational structure. Holistically, "small and many" over "large and few" evokes a new mindset, especially in military affairs. Certainly, all military services and their respective branches can benefit from updated thinking in organizational structures. As the previous section suggests, airborne concepts standout as an adaptable infiltration capability with a wide breadth of utility from small to large-scale. The technologies that specifically relate to the evolution of the airborne capability directly influence the airborne impact on future operational concepts. 
Modern vulnerabilities to airborne forces are a direct result of technological improvements to counter-measures. These counter-measures are A2AD systems and armored ground forces. The specific areas of concern for airborne forces are surface-toair missiles (SAMs), advanced artillery, non-stealthy deployment aircraft, mobility, and armored protection on the ground. These challenges can be summarized as "getting to the fight, getting into the fight, and staying in the fight." 
84
form. An adversary can much easier offset the costs of defending as opposed to an offensive maneuver, which closely relates to Robert Jervis' concepts developed in "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma." Jervis refers to a security dilemma of this type as the puzzle of offense/defense balance and the ability to distinguish between an offense or defense posture. 
85
A2AD 87 threats pose a significant challenge to airborne forces and create critical vulnerabilities to airborne employment. 
88
85 Robert Jervis, "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma," World Politics 30, no. 2 (January 1978): 167-214.
86 Ibid.
87 Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC), January 17, 2012 forward by Martin E. Dempsey. Distinction between anti-access and area-denial: Anti-access refers to those actions and capabilities, usually long-range, designed to prevent an opposing force from entering an operational area. Area-denial refers to those actions and capabilities, usually of shorter range, designed not to keep an opposing force out, but to limit its freedom of action within the operational area. 
88
89
90
91
92
93
The fear is that A2AD systems and technologies will not be limited to a few state actors, but will proliferate to other states further complicating the ability to achieve access and operate in contested areas of the world. 
94
such systems exist in the arsenals of over 100 states and at least 13 non-state groups, such as Hezbollah, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), and the Tamil Tigers. 
95
Advances in airborne technological capabilities attempt to mitigate the vulnerabilities just surveyed. Technological developments in improved parachutes, advanced airborne equipment, and new concept aircraft are examples of such attempts.
This sub-section addresses the technological capabilities from both SOF and conventional forces; modern airborne forces reflect a dichotomy in capabilities optimized for specific purposes. Currently, SOF focuses on extending airborne capabilities to infiltrate with more stealth, speed, and precision in special warfare environments. Conventional forces, arguably, should seek to include more armored protection for survivability and mobility in the modern A2AD environment.
New parachute systems offer improved capabilities of airborne infiltration. The U.S. Army updated the static-line parachute system used for dropping airborne soldiers at low altitudes. The T-11 replaced the T-10D, which afforded the paratrooper a greater degree of maneuverability under canopy and greater parachute reliability, which ultimately, reduced the risk of injury. For United States Special Operations Forces (USSOF) forces, the U.S. Army updated the MFF parachute system used for dropping airborne soldiers at high altitudes. The RA-1 replaced the MC-4 that allowed the operator to carry more weight, travel farther distances under canopy, and give a higher degree of precision on the DZ. The MFF parachute continues to offer the military a stealth capable parachute for the purposes of clandestine infiltration.
Future concepts of airborne parachute development include the use of modified wing suits to propel operators at even greater distances than standard parachutes. 
96
In the interim, incremental advances in airborne supporting equipment provide paratroopers and operators with greater capability. Rarely publicized due to the classified nature of most USSOF operations, MFF airborne infiltrations are becoming increasingly more relevant. 
97
99
97 Cleveland, ARSOF 2022 Document, 20. 98
99
forces on the DZ, the Russians packed all equipment and personnel inside lightly armored vehicles and dropped them by parachute.
100
The U.S. military has yet to adopt a lightly armored airborne vehicle capable of accomplishing the requirements necessary to operate effectively in an A2AD environment. The U.S. military solution was thought to be the Stryker combat vehicles; however, fully equipped weight of the vehicle became a restriction for airborne use. A mounted, armored vehicle capability for airborne forces offers a viable solution to overcoming the distance challenge for airborne forces once on the ground.
This chapter has offered a brief summary of the broad and narrow technologies that must be considered for rethinking airborne organization. Broadly, the information age is ushering in new technologies that alters how institutions should organize.
Narrowly, the technology race will continue to produce airborne capabilities to overcome vulnerabilities. Arguably, it is represented by a defensive-dominant era by placing heavy costs and risk on the airborne employer. 
101
Advancements in technology will continue to improve upon parachute systems and airborne equipment. Even yet, future technological developments may very well eliminate the need or outweigh the cost of employing an airborne force altogether.
However, the foreseeable future seems to indicate incremental advancements of airborne capabilities designed to overcome their vulnerabilities. To summarize the findings, SOF airborne units will greatly benefit from organizing into smaller-scale units of action to maintain speed and stealth. Additionally, conventional forces require organizing into smaller, but more protected units of action-with armor-to survive the modern A2AD threat network. In application of these two concepts, the former can be done at a fraction of the price to maintain SOF proficiency in airborne. Rather, the conventional force requires additional funding to build and outfit armored protective vehicles capable of operating in the modern A2AD environment.
More importantly, technology is not a replacement for effective organization, doctrine, and strategy. All the technological tools mentioned in this section require careful consideration of military commanders and decision makers to employ and organize airborne forces effectively. As Max Boot indicates, the paradox of today's age is that modern technology is both "the great separator and the great equalizer in military affairs." 
102
The following chapter serves to introduce the concept of swarming and how airborne forces can use the technological capabilities of the modern era to thrive under a new doctrine of fighting.
Given the preceding discussions of airborne history, along with emerging technological and threat environments, this section addresses a force developmental strategy and doctrine in rethinking airborne organization. More specifically, the authors argue that the DOD should consider restructuring the airborne force by organizing into smaller, decentralized, integration-focused airborne units of action while deliberately implementing a swarming concept to attain greater utility in modern and future warfare.
Swarming offers airborne forces an updated way of fighting in the information age. Swarming is "seemingly amorphous, but it is a deliberately structured, coordinated, strategic way to strike from all directions, by means of a sustainable pulsing of force and/or fire, close-in as well as from stand-off positions." 
103
Using the basic characteristics of swarming, this section applies swarming design elements to the modern airborne force.  While technology has changed the tools used by military organizations, the organizations remain the same, hierarchal, top-down-driven units of action. In similar fashion, Bevin
Alexander acknowledges that large concentrations of troops and weapons serve as targets for destruction, and in the future, will no longer exist. 
105
• Autonomous or semi-autonomous units engaging in convergent assault on a common target • Amorphous but coordinated way to strike from all directions-"sustainable pulsing" of force or fire • Many small, dispersed, internetted maneuver units • Integrated surveillance, sensors, C4I for "topsight" • Stand-off and close-in capabilities • Attacks designed to disrupt cohesion of adversary contends that the key to winning future wars is knowing when to move from one form of military organization to another. 
107
108
Using swarming characteristics as a guide, Arquilla and Ronfeldt applied design elements that envision the military organizational structure for a swarming force capable of fighting in future conflict scenarios. The defined airborne roles-small-and largescale-identified in the previous sections, compliment the characteristics of swarming and can directly fulfill the design elements intended to create a fighting force for future conflict. The following design elements of swarming are used to assess the viability of an  
A swarming force must be small, dispersed, and internetted to be decisive. Under the swarming concept, those characteristics can be exhibited by a restructured airborne force. First, airborne forces can easily be organized into "many and small" maneuver units. A "many and small" structure allows the swarming concept to work effectively. As previously argued, the age of platform dominance and other large military structures may be coming to an end. Large platforms only make larger targets; smaller elements are much more maneuverable, flexible, and make themselves much more difficult to be located and hit by modern weapons. In today's environment, it is most likely that airborne forces will be called upon to secure lodgments-airports of debarkation (APOD)
and sea ports of debarkation (SPOD)-rather than support large-scale ground force operations. The seizure of such lodgments can be especially challenging given the proliferation of A2AD capabilities to include SAMs employed by both state and non-state actors. Smaller elements of airborne units will prove much more effective in neutralizing such A2AD threats and suppressing enemy air defenses prior to the securing of lodgments to facilitate the advancement of follow-on forces. LGOP mission intent would come from a flattened command structure that purposefully allowed the LGOP to accomplish mission intent autonomously.
LGOPs could effectively swarm targets with overwhelming localized force to achieve relative superiority and re-disperse immediately following the completion of objectives.
Third, swarming airborne forces must be closely internetted to allow maximum information dissemination. Early airborne forces could not accomplish it optimally without the information and internetted components of the modern information era.
Modern radios, blue force trackers, and other reliable sources of communication technology allow military units to stay internetted for close coordination.
Using a doctrine of swarming, all-service coordination requires joint and combined arms efforts by all branches and services. Many small maneuver units cannot maintain an "all-purpose" approach to forces and equipment that existing military structures tend to maintain today. In this regard, a swarming force requires the support of other services to provide the logistical, medical, or fire support to make up for the loss in capability. Logistically, and in combat, airborne forces continue to advance in this regard.
The air transport support provided by the Air Force and Army Aviation assets demonstrate the all-service efforts to deliver and re-supply an airborne force. The heavy lift delivery capabilities of the C-17 and C-130 afford airborne units great reach across large distances and rapid delivery of logistical requirements. Modern GPS-guided bundles allow for precise resupply that does not require ground transport or additional support assets for delivery.
In other displays of all-service coordination in a combat scenario, several
Operational Detachment-Alphas (ODAs) demonstrated the power of well-coordinated fire during the beginning stages of Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. 110 These ODAs relied on close air support and naval fire support to employ precision guided munitions onto desired enemy targets. The ODAs directed the swarms of munitions onto their objectives, which effectively neutralized their targets. Mission success was achieved with a few ODAs, close air support, and the fighting support of host nations forces.
Future scenarios of this type could easily utilize airborne infiltration to emplace small units of action quickly to reign down well-coordinated precision fire onto key objectives.
In this context, airborne forces are increasingly appropriate; the capabilities of modern parachutes offer both reliable stand-off and close-in employment for swarming by force. As noted in the technology section, modern SOF utilize MFF techniques to infiltrate clandestinely from great distances under parachute canopy to avoid detection.
The SOF can achieve stand-off distances of up to 40 kilometers using the latest parachute systems. Programs are currently being implemented to expand the MFF capability to all 
Army SF operators. 111
112
Advances in static-line parachutes for close-in capabilities continue to be refined.
For example, static-line parachute advancements have reduced the rates of injury on jumping to less than (.005) percent. 
113
Beyond the combat application of close-in capabilities, swarming with airborne forces can be used for the roles humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HA/DR). For Churchill's direction to the SOE was to "set Europe ablaze."
119
Within in the realm of parachute capable forces, airborne units-when organized into small, decentralized units of maneuver-can offer renewed possibilities of increased relevance in modern conflict scenarios by adopting a swarming concept. In lieu of continuing to orient the airborne force towards large-scale action, the DOD should accept that it is highly unlikely to occur in the future. The DOD should instruct the Army to downsize the sheer numbers of airborne forces to match the modern and future likelihood of airborne implementation by organizing around small-scale operations. While largescale airborne implementation may occur, the re-organized airborne force into smaller units of action can "ramp-up" to accomplish the unforecasted large-scale requirements.
The methods or techniques of airborne must be tailored to existing challenges;
warfare itself has followed these very same maxims. While the roles of modern airborne forces has changed very little, the scale and utility in which it is used requires an update in organizational mindset, small and many over large and few.
A byproduct of military reorganization efforts evokes new visions of fighting doctrine. The swarming concept may hold great utility for an airborne force. Instant communications, mobility, and flexibility from small maneuver units allow for effective swarming to occur. Arguably, the age of technology will have arrived when a parachute capable force armed with modern equipment has the necessary components to fulfill a swarming concept. Using Arquilla and Ronfeldt's design elements for a swarming force, a reorganized airborne force operating under this concept can increase the relevancy of airborne forces in future conflict scenarios.
The primary purpose of airborne forces remains largely unchanged; infiltrating personnel and equipment utilizing a parachute capability. However, military organization, doctrine, technology, and strategy under the purview of the rapidly changing and complex contemporary operating environment suggests rethinking the future organization of airborne forces and the application of new employment concepts. As a series of airborne specific vignettes were considered, modern airborne concepts continue to remain relevant, as evidenced by their utility across a spectrum of small and large-scale employment. Small airborne forces fulfill the roles of reconnaissance, raids, and special warfare; large airborne forces are aptly suited for seizure, show of force, and reinforcement. Categorizing the taxonomy of airborne roles into small and large-scale appropriately links airborne roles to the modern contemporary operating environment and more closely aligns the SOF with small and conventional with large, which considers that these roles are not exclusive to each.
This thesis took a very holistic approach to considering the future possibilities of airborne employment. The value of this research is the ability to connect themes with practice across airborne organization, doctrine, technology, and strategy. Throughout the analysis, several themes occurred in considering future airborne employment.
First, the contemporary operating environment suggests that small wars and conflicts occurring in hybrid form are increasingly more common. The small-scale, SOF airborne roles display greater relevancy in this trend for their speed, precision, and stealth
capabilities. Yet, the expansion and proliferation of A2AD systems offer renewed possibilities for conventional, large-scale airborne employment. Recognizing that the large-scale airborne roles are much less likely to occur, an increased investment in smallscale airborne capability is recommended.
Second, the "small and many" over "large and few" concept proposed by Allowing small units of action complete autonomy ranks among the highest of these factors. For this to change of occur, the DOD needs to accept the likelihood of increased risk to mission and to force, especially in an increasingly complex and uncertain threat environment. Risk aversion largely derives from a traditionalist mindset and a vision to continue fighting the "American Way of War." 
120
option
75 Daniel R.
75 Daniel R.
109 Arquilla and Ronfeldt, Swarming and the Future of Conflict, 45.    
109 Arquilla and Ronfeldt, Swarming and the Future of Conflict, 45.    
John C. Warren, Airborne Operations in WWII European Theater, USAF Historical Studies, no. 97 (September 1956):
226-227, http://www.afhra.af.mil/shared/media/document/AFD-090602-016.pdf. Some 28,000 troops dropped on D-Day and shortly thereafter.2 Ibid.3 The 101st restructured to an air assault division; however, some specialty units still stay proficient in airborne operations at Fort Campbell.4 John Arquilla, "The New Rules of War," Foreign Policy, February 11, 2010, http://foreignpolicy. com/2010/02/11/the-new-rules-of-war/. Dr. Arquilla argues that the military needs a new mindset for combating modern warfare with an organizational structure of "many and small" over "few and large."
Charles Flynn and Josua Richardson, "Joint  Operational Access and the Global Response Force," Military Review, July-August 2013.
Charles Cleveland, ARSOF 2022 Document (Ft.  Bragg, NC: U.S.Army Special Operations  Command, 2014), 20.   
This figure provides insight of the key components to the primary small-scale airborne roles.
Max Boot, "The Paradox of Military Technology," The New Atlantis, 20, Fall 2006, http://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/the-paradox-of-military-technology.
Denis Kungrov, "Russian Army Receives New BMD-4M 'Airborne' Assault Vehicles," August 14, 2014, http://rbth.com/defence/2014/08/14/russian_army_receives_new_bmd-4m_airborne_assault_vehi cles_39027.html.
This defensive-dominant strategy does not always benefit against a small-scale, covert, airborne operation.
Boot, "The Paradox of Military Technology," 14.
Michael Richard Daniell Foot, SOE in France: An Account of the Work of the British Special Operations Executive inFrance, 1940-1944 (London, UK: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1966), 11.   
Rothstein, "Less is More: The Problematic Future of Irregular Warfare in an Era of Collapsing States," 277-279. Rothstein defines the "American Way of War" as the application of a quantity of force using superior mass and firepower towards important strategic-level objectives.
The authors would like to thank the amazing women in their lives who have supported them, both inside and outside of the classroom. The direction of this project was kept on track thanks to 
Professor Leo Blanken
COL Guy LeMire
Dr. John Arquilla
The rise of the information age is characterized by a shift in traditional industry to one based on information, computerization, and networking. As many scholars suggest, the information age is greatly impacting military affairs, which in many ways, affects how modern institutions are organized. This "information revolution" is primarily based on the technological abilities to collect and receive massive amounts of data and smartly process it into useful and manageable packets of information. 
Integrated surveillance refers to dispersed sensors and emitters with the operational ability to communicate and report between each other for the purposes of "topsight," to provide the "big picture" view of what is occurring. 
114
115
116
Historically, swarming forces were unable to achieve an internetted level of integration without the technology of the modern era. Yet, the power of small groups prevailed even without it. Demonstrating a successful effort of what a small, dispersed, autonomous group can accomplish despite the technology shortcomings is the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) during World War II. 
117
118
121
122
With these themes in mind for the future of airborne concepts, the SOF serves as an excellent test bed to integrate the "small and many" approach to airborne employment.
Airborne reorganization under a "small and many" structure, combined with an implementation of a swarming concept, offer renewed relevancy to an infiltration technique that has seemed to have lost some modern utility. Further attention and detail is required to organize airborne forces optimally for small-and large-scale airborne utility under new employment concepts, and to turn new airborne employment visions into working concepts and practical application. Regardless of any change to airborne structures, airborne maintains a lasting impact that pervades numerous modern military capabilities. If given the right amount of attention, even now, airborne has excellent potential well into the next era of conflict. 
121
122 Ibid.