# ID: 7a49235791404325a621e2b9def239e3
# Title: A Force Orientation for the Continuum of Conflict
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The leadership of the U.S. Army is often criticized for its falure to anticipate the next conflict and structure itself accordingly. Is this a valid criticism? This monograph considers relevant scholarship on the current trends and recent history of armed conflict in attempt to discern what types of conflict the U.S. Army can realistically expect in the near-term future. These considerations are then filtered through current strategic military documents to arrive at a synthesis of of future threat relevance -specifically that the future is unknowable and, while different types of threats may be more likely, all types are relevant. This synthesis is then applied to differing potential force orientations of the U.S. Army -irregular focus, traditional focus and hybrid focus -and some of the key implications of each force structure orientation. It concludes with the acknowledgement that, since the U.S. Army is unable to select the types of conflict in which it will engage, that a policy of least regret is the most advisible and a hybrid threat orientation is thus the best force orientation for the structure of the U.S. Army.
When it comes to predicting the nature and location of our next military engagements, since Vietnam, our record has been perfect. We have never once gotten it right. From Mayaguez to Grenada, Panama, Somalia, the Balkans, Haiti, Kuwait, Iraq and more -we had no idea a year before any of these missions that we would be so engaged.
-Hon. Robert Gates, Secretary of Defense 1
There has never been any shortage of futurists that speculate on the future of warfare and what the next war for the United States will look like. The current environment is no exception.
Scholars, practitioners, and pundits all prognosticate regularly on what types of future conflicts the U.S. Army is most likely to face. Some contend that wars against non-state actors and other asymmetric threats represent the future of conflict and that the U.S. Army should focus its efforts accordingly. Others assert that while low-intensity combat operations may be the flavor of the day, defense planners are wise to take a broader view of history and accept that the threats posed by states and their more traditional combat forces still matter. Further, some contend that preparing for state threats represents the highest form of military preparedness and that forces so trained can easily adapt to lesser forms of hostilities. Indeed, some say the same thing about nonstate threats. Regardless of what views the prognosticators advocate, however, most agree that the future of armed conflict is increasingly characterized by deepened complexity engendered by globalization, information technology, and potential resource scarcity.
It is against this backdrop that this monograph considers whether or not the current structure of the U.S. Army is appropriate to the future threats it is most likely to face. Building a military is not as simple as arming men and sending them on their way. Important decisions are made regularly with regard to what the army should look like, from recruitment to retention. In just the last year, the U.S. Army has announced not one, but two Brigade Combat Team 1 Robert Gates, "Address to West Point Cadets" (United States Military Academy, West Point, NY, February 2011), quoted in Micah Zenko, "100% Right 0% of the Time,"Foreign Affairs, October 16, 2012.  reorganizations and sweeping reforms to its Aviation fleet. Do these changes support a broader strategy focused on likely threats? Manning levels, equipment fielding and maintenance, and readiness of forces based on training are the three primary variables the U.S. Army must juggle against time and money.
Regardless of whether the U.S. Army is in a period of growth or contraction, decisions remain as to what threats to structure the force against for the simple reason that resources are always finite.
Is the Army better served by orienting itself to confront non-state, or, for the purposes of this paper, "irregular" threats that consist of amorphous armed groups of varying levels of sophistication that are unlikely to adhere to existing borders? Or is the Army better served by organizing against a traditional state threat as these conflicts, though rare, are difficult to prepare for in terms of training and equipping and, after all, are the battles that determine the fates of nations. Perhaps a more moderate path is preferable. These decisions will directly determine whether or not the U.S. Army is postured to fight and win the next war.
Warfare must be treated as a continuum of armed conflict grounded in history and drawing from recent trends. This continuum spans all armed human conflict; from as low-order as terrorist criminal activity to as high-order as peer-state threats with robust conventional forces.
While the U.S. Army can, and will, be optimized by military planners in various ways to enhance its ability to address threats concentrated at certain points along the spectrum that are deemed more likely, the Army must continue to retain the ability to fight and win against threats from across the continuum of conflict.
Considerable controversy exists within recent scholarship on the future of conflict. Some who have written on the matter, such as John Mueller and Joseph Nye, contend that there is a distinct trend in armed warfare characterized by decreases in both its scale and frequency.
However, some such as Andreas Wimmer suggest that only the character of warfare is changing.
Conflicts brought about by nationalism and other factors internal to the ever-expanding nationstate system are as prevalent as ever. Both of these viewpoints have important implications for the utility of military force in the 21 st century. John Mueller is perhaps the primary proponent of the idea that warfare is decreasing in intensity and frequency (see Figure 
1
3
4
6
Nye and Mueller. 7
8
While there are many authors today who recognize a trend of decreasing frequency and intensity in armed conflict, particularly as it relates to the historical convention of state-on-state warfare, Colin S. Gray stands nearly alone as an author and strategist who argues in opposition to those views. Over the course of several works, he consistently cautions contemporary readers against historical trend spotting and concluding that any reduction in large-scale, armed hostilities is likely but a historical blip. Three of his works in particular prove illustrative and eloquent with regard to this paper's purposes.
First, Gray's Another Bloody Century, published in 2005, sets the basis of his argument against historical "trendspotters." 
9
11
12
Gray, Another Bloody Century: Future Warfare (New Haven, CT: Phoenix, 2005), 33. 10 Ibid., 13-14. 11 Ibid., 13-22.
13
14
15
16
13 Gray,
Another Bloody Century,
15
16
18
19
20
21
Additionally, over-categorization of conflict is a potentially lethal distraction that could conceivably force defense planners to create a military that can deal with an impossibly broad spectrum of possible threats and scenarios. Thus, in accordance with Gray's logic, defense planners should create and maintain an Army that is not all that different from the one of today.
In considering the future of conflict, it is perhaps worthwhile to examine its recent past more critically. Seeking to quantitatively analyze military conflict as conducted by major nationstates since World War II, Patricia Sullivan and Michael Koch provide an eminently useful evaluation of just that topic in their co-authored article "Military Intervention by 
Powerful States, 1945
-2003." 22
Limiting their analysis to the military activities of the nation-states of the U.S., Great Britain, France, Russia and China, Sullivan and Koch apply a definition of military intervention as a use of armed force that involves the official deployment of at least 500 regular military personnel (ground, air, or naval) to attain immediate-term political objectives through action against a foreign adversary. 
23
1
24
3
29
3
Sullivan and
Koch, "Military Intervention by Powerful States, 1945-2003," 713. 29
30
Military conflicts, despite the prognostications of some, are still very much with us. As the data provided by this study supports, conflicts of a state-on-state variety are nearly equally likely among the world's major powers as are those oriented against a non-state actor. While whether or not the conflicts considered could have been resolved by other means is clearly beyond the present study's scope, the fact that military interventions are successful in support of their political objectives up to and beyond three years in 52 percent of cases speaks to the utility of military or "hard" power. It may not be a glowing success rate, and it is clearly dimmer in some areas than others, but military force will likely remain the most effective tool in some scenarios.
Source: Data adapted from Sullivan and Koch, "Military Intervention by Powerful States, 1945-2003," 715.
Any attempt to determine whether or not the structure of the U.S. Army is appropriate to the contemporary and future international environment necessarily relies on the scholarship and commentary of many organizations and individuals. After all, the Army represents but a single arm of the larger U.S. military establishment, which itself is but a single tool of U.S. foreign policy. U.S. policymakers then expect this tool to be able to achieve objectives that are often impossible to know in advance and may, or may not, be connected in an obvious way to an enduring, over-arching national strategy. It is potentially useful in the pursuit of an answer, then,
to ask what those tasked to provide that Army and ensure it is consonant with current and future U.S. strategic objectives have to say on the subject. In order to do this, it is perhaps illuminating to canvas some of the strategic documents the military uses to shape its organization and cognitive approaches to the attainment of national objectives. In this light, this paper will consider The document's projection of the future describes an environment characterized by uncertainty and complexity. Describing changes brought about by the diffusion of destructive technologies to non-state actors, the proliferation of communications technology, and increasingly complex economic interactions, the document directs a comprehensive U.S.
governmental approach to international issues in which all elements of U.S. power are applied. 
33
The document additionally makes the assertion that the U.S. must rebalance strategically toward the Pacific. This shift is based largely on the document's projections of increased interconnectedness and rising threats, the imminent conclusion of combat operations in Afghanistan, and the understanding that fiscal realities will compel a reduction in U.S. military 
31
32
33
34
35
Perhaps the most significant idea contained in this document is its prescription of the aggregate capability of the U.S. military. To wit: "As a nation with important interests in multiple regions, our forces must be capable of deterring and defeating aggression by an opportunistic adversary in one region even when our forces are committed to a large-scale operation elsewhere." 
36
35
36
The document does provide other force composition guidance such as being able to guarantee the global commons and that U.S. forces will no longer be sized to conduct large-scale, prolonged stability operations, although omitting any other prescriptive guidance. 
37
Capstone Concept for Joint Operations: Joint Force 2020
38
The CCJO opens by describing a security paradox that asserts that while the world is trending toward greater stability, destructive technologies are proliferating to a wider array of potential adversaries resulting in a world that is more dangerous to U.S. interests than ever before. 
39
40
41
Critical to the CCJO is the Chairman's assertion of the purpose of the U.S. military. Specifically, the CCJO contends that it is the role of the U.S. military to keep America immune from coercion. 
42
43
In continuing to describe the concept of globally integrated operations, the CCJO makes certain assumptions that are critical to future force structure. Acknowledging that budgetary realities will have significant bearing on the future force, the document describes the challenge 
40
41
42 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Capstone Concept for Joint Operations, 3. 
43
for the U.S. as determining how the Joint Force with constrained resources will protect U.S. national interests against increasingly capable enemies in an uncertain, complex, rapidly changing, and increasingly transparent world. 
44
45
46
48
The concept of a "human domain" in conflict provides the basis for meaningful conclusions in the paper. The document defines armed conflict in Clausewitzian terms, specifically as a "violent clash of competing interests between or among organized groups, each attempting to impose their will on the opposition." 
49
50
Specifically, the document references the role of U.S. landpower in maintaining international order outside of direct conflict and providing disaster relief. The document is unclear, however, in exactly how it is that U.S. strategic landpower serves to maintain international order. The nearest example of such a justification in the document is a brief and related allusion to the Cold War, which is most likely a subtle attempt to refer to a deterrent effect produced by a sizable land force. 
51
52
53
50
51 Strategic Landpower White Paper, 7. 
52
53
Lastly, the document points to what its authors consider the necessity of maintaining the capability and capacity of U.S. landpower. The document argues that the world has shifted from the bipolar world of the Cold War to a multi-polar world of diffuse power and low barriers to entry to potential threats who seek access to information and destructive technologies. Further, the paper argues increasing complexity, rapidity of operations, and public sensitivity due to the widespread access to information characterize this evolving international climate. It is entirely logical in such a climate that military professionals would advocate for maintaining the capacity of U.S. landpower, particularly when one considers the historical U.S. tendency to downsize in post-conflict environments. That part of the intent of the Strategic Landpower White Paper is to justify the existence of a considerable, standing U.S. landpower force is beyond question and entirely reasonable when considered from the perspective of those officials responsible for ensuring continued U.S. national defense in the face of an uncertain and ever-evolving future.
Thus, the Strategic Landpower White Paper makes several insightful points with regard to the human element of conflict and the utility and uniqueness of strategic landpower. The old saw that land is where the people are is clearly evident in the underlying logic of this paper.
Further, the document is a welcome call for U.S. strategies that go beyond the battlefield and attempt to connect military strategies to the grand strategy of the U.S. Government. However, the document also reads like much of its intent is to articulate a case to maintain U.S. strategic landpower forces at their current manning levels without providing much substance to support this idea. The document projects a future in which it explains how strategic landpower can "achieve enduring outcomes," but in failing to articulate and substantiate the threats to these outcomes the document is guilty of advocating capability for its own sake. While it is certainly true that an argument can be made that in the face of an uncertain future, military planners in particular can and should advocate maintaining as many options as possible. But in so doing, and as is certainly done in the context of the Strategic Landpower White Paper, potential military threats are the only threats to U.S. strategic objectives considered. In choosing so narrow a view, the authors of the Strategic Landpower White Paper are guilty of committing the strategic error they are trying to prevent: failing to think beyond the battlefield.
If the previous documents under consideration can be interpreted as being more conceptual in nature, the U.S. Army's annual Statement on the Posture of the United States Army 2013 is a much more pragmatic document. 
54
The document wastes little time in referring to the fiscal constraints placed upon the Army by the Budget Control Act of 2011, more commonly referred to as "sequestration," and the possible implications of budgetary short-falls. In fact, the document's second paragraph states that the "Army's ability to perform" its vital role in support of Afghanistan and other contingencies and "field a ready and capable force that meets missions requirements, has been placed at risk by fiscal challenges in FY13." 
55
54
Common to all of these documents is the idea of increasing complexity in world affairs in general and military operations in particular. Diffusion of power, globalization, the spread of information technologies, and the potential proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are all conspiring to create an operating environment in which threats are more numerous and conflicts much more difficult to anticipate. Each of these documents represents an attempt to address these factors in an environment of decreasing budgetary resources and prioritization challenges. When considered together, these documents provide a framework upon which to orient the U.S. Army.
The Priorities for 21 st Century Defense specifies the requirement to be able to fight a war and a half and pivot resources toward the Pacific. The CCJO provides a philosophy for carrying out the orientation outlined in Priorities for 21 st Century Defense. The Strategic Landpower White Paper, with its emphasis of the idea of a "human domain," provides a cognitive approach as to how 56 Ibid., 5. strategic success is achieved with landpower. And, lastly, the Army Posture Statement provides stark warnings that all of these might be under threat due to precipitous budgetary shortfalls. What these documents do not consider is the type of force required to meet their objectives. There is much discussion of end-strength and modernization, but none of the Army's design. What type of Army will best meet these challenges of complexity and globalization?
Having considered what scholars and practitioners project for the future of conflict, it is important now to apply those viewpoints in a practical way. That is, defense planners must consider the implications of those viewpoints relative to the structure of the U.S. Army in order to assess whether or not the current structure is appropriate to the environment in which it is likely to be employed by political leaders. As Frank G. Hoffman argues, in a perfect world the U.S.
Army would have robust forces optimized to fight in every discernibly different mission across the spectrum of conflict. 
58
The remainder of this monograph will consider three basic primary orientations for force structure: irregular threat focus; traditional threat focus; and hybrid threat focus. While the various structures are not necessarily mutually exclusive, the differences inherent in placing the weight of effort and resources against each of these threats are sufficiently varied in each case to produce forces structures that vary considerably. Each section will consider the theoretical justification and a description of the character of the conflict each orientation is best suited to, a brief overview of the general Army structure appropriate to each orientation and, lastly, some of the more significant benefits and weaknesses of each.
In order to evaluate the efficacy of a given force orientation, it becomes necessary to bound the language used to describe the emphasis of each force structure. Joint Publication 1-02 defines irregular warfare as a "violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s)." 
59
There is simply no shortage of theoretical justification for force structures oriented on irregular wars. Popular works as widely known as Barnett's "The Pentagon's New Map" 60 and Robert Kaplan's "The Coming Anarchy" 61 are clear projections of increased conflict between states and irregular or non-state forces based on increasing resource scarcity, demographic forces, and under-governed spaces. Other ideas that support the concept of the emerging primacy of irregular-type threats are Joseph Nye's description of the expanding diffusion of power from states to non-state actors in the international system as well as the recently popular idea of the So what type of force is appropriate to address this threat? Robert Scales, author of "The Past and Present as Prologue: A View of Future Warfare through the Lens of Contemporary Conflict," contends that the future "high ground" for American forces, particularly the U.S. Army, will be to capture the perceptions of populations, as opposed to the seizure of terrain. 
63
64
In sum, an Army that is oriented primarily on maintaining the ability to successfully conduct irregular war is an infantry dominated, light force. It is highly deployable in small units that are capable of operating in a relatively decentralized fashion for long periods of time in and among a local populace. A premium is placed on soldier education, intelligence capabilities, and precision fires while capabilities such as armor, non-precision fires, and air defense artillery would be largely obsolete, or required only in small numbers.
Of course, there are advantages to such a force. The divestment of large, expensive weapon systems would allow for either a larger force or a considerably less expensive one. Large scale deployment could theoretically take place much more quickly due to the decreased reliance on heavy combat systems that require slow seaborne transportation and extensive port facilities.
Similarly, logistic requirements for items such as fuel and repair parts would be significantly reduced in accordance with the reductions in heavy combat systems, potentially reducing currently problematic tooth-to-tail ratios and making more soldiers available for combat arms service. Also, contemporary counterinsurgency (COIN) operations in Iraq and Afghanistan have had the desirable side-effect of continuing to inculcate hard won relationships and understandings between the conventional force and SOF. An effective blending of conventional force and special operations missions, leading to greater operational synergies, could reinforce these relationships.
Just as there are advantages to such a force, however, there are clearly disadvantages as well. Worthy of particular emphasis is that a focus on irregular war necessitates a de-emphasis on traditional or conventional state-on-state war to at least some degree. Some degradation in the Army's ability to wage a conventional conflict is necessarily inherent in organizing specifically to conduct irregular warfare as described. Another potential drawback to such an organization is the increased difficulty in finding and attracting sufficient numbers of soldiers of the requisite quality to man such a force. Special operations forces are considered "special" for several reasons, not the least of which is their demanding selection processes. The more conventional force missions and those historically conducted by SOF merge the more capable the average soldier must be. A challenge for recruiters as well as the Army's training base.
Considered in totality, there is ample warrant for some force structure devoted to irregular threats. Irregular threats are simply too pervasive in today's operating environment and too potentially deadly to be neglected. To create a force without some specialized capability to fight and prevail against irregular threats would be strategically negligent. However, it would be equally irresponsible to premise the structure of the entire U.S. Army on irregular threats. Despite the fact that much of the U.S. Army's combat experience in the last decade has been against threats that are irregular in nature, there remains some justification for the capacity to deal with traditional threats.
The next force orientation for consideration is one focused on what is generally considered a "traditional" threat. A "traditional" threat, for the purposes of this paper, is primarily a state-actor fighting a largely conventional conflict, mostly along traditional lines of effort and with generally conventional means. These terms are hedged of necessity due to the reality that any given conflict rarely consists purely of some single "type." In this construct, however, the predominant form of a conflict is that of a nation-state seeking to engage another in some traditional way.
While it has become fashionable recently to characterize armed conflict as shifting primarily into the provenance of amorphous non-state actors, there remains a real and credible threat from traditional states and significant scholarship that cautions us against following these popular trends. One need only look at Iran, China, North Korea, and even Russia to find states with considerable land forces and tense relations with the United States. While it is certainly possible that the U.S. will never go to war with any of these states, it is also possible that the U.S. could find itself in an unanticipated situation in which armed conflict with any of these states is unavoidable. In his now famous work, The Clash of Civilizations, Samuel Huntington helps us reconcile the increasing significance of non-state actors with the traditional Westphalian state. 
65
Is traditional conflict relevant enough to warrant basing the entire structure of the Army on its premise? State-on-state conflict is much more likely than its irregular counterpart to be spectacular in nature. As Clausewitz states, war is the continuation of policy by other means and tends to escalate toward its absolute form. 
68
66
67
Sullivan and
Koch, "Military Intervention by Powerful States, 1945-2003." 68
An army built primarily to deal with such a threat consists of large formations of forces trained and equipped to fight those similar to themselves; formations of uniformed soldiers from another state. These forces would be necessarily, but not exclusively, heavy, as tanks, air defense and large artillery systems are some of the hallmarks of state-on-state warfare. However, it would not consist exclusively of these capabilities as defense planners are often no more able to choose the time or location of traditional conflicts than they are irregular ones. Some terrain, such as deserts of the Middle East, are more suited to maneuver warfare, whereas the jungles of Southeast Asia and mountains of the Hindu Kush require forces that can operate dismounted in difficult terrain. Additionally, the extensive periods of time and resources required to transport heavy formations over long distances necessitates a lighter force capable of bridging the temporal gap in an emergent crisis. Therefore, substantial infantry formations are required even in traditional conflict scenarios. Differing amounts of individual capabilities can be adjusted based on likely threats, or the total volume as the likelihood of conflict changes, but the basic requirements for a force oriented on a traditional threat remains generally constant.
There are two significant benefits to orienting the Army against a traditional threat. The primary advantage to such a force orientation is obviously that the U.S. is better prepared to wage spectacular, existential conflict if necessary. While these types of conflict do not often spring up overnight, being prepared in advance is a logically preferably way to begin such a conflict as opposed to a rapid mobilization. The second, and more difficult to quantify, advantage is the deterrent effect a large standing force oriented on state-on-state conflict could provide. The idea of deterrence has a long history in U.S. military thought and is not without merit. In fact, Brian
McAllister Linn describes deterrence as a cornerstone of traditional American military thought he characterizes as "guardians" who believe first and foremost in national defense. 
69
Just as there are advantages, however, there are also disadvantages to a force oriented against a traditional adversary. Chief among them is the fact that big formations of large, technologically-advanced, and well-protected systems are expensive to procure, maintain, and operate. Similarly, those same formations are ponderously slow to deploy and additionally costly due to the vast numbers of ships and aircraft required to transport such forces. Just as deterrence can be a potential advantage of such a force, it can also be a drawback. As Everett Dolman points out, a large force can create a "deterrence paradox" in which the very actor one seeks to deter can feel threatened and attempt to increase his or her security through increased force. 
70
71
The last force orientation for consideration is one focused on combatting a "hybrid" threat. Army Doctrinal Publication 3-0: Unified Land Operations (ULO), one of the U.S. Army's capstone publications, defines a "hybrid threat" as "the diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorist forces, criminal elements, or a combination of these forces and elements all unified to achieve mutually benefitting effect." 
72
71
forces. 
73
Perhaps most compelling, virtually any past armed conflict can be interpreted to serve as the justification for a hybrid force orientation as discreet conflicts only rarely exist in pure typologies. For instance, the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003 is generally considered to be a traditional conflict as large U.S. armored formations battled Iraqi forces with both maneuver and firepower. That conventional hostilities ultimately culminated with the seizure of Baghdad further supports this conception. What is considered less often, however, is the huge U.S. special operations mission undertaken in the northern portions of the country that prevented an Iraqi Corps from reinforcing to the south. 
74
75
74 Charles H. Briscoe, et al., All Roads Lead to Baghdad (Fort Bragg, NC: USASOC History  Office, 2006), 115-21.  expansion; and Phase III is ultimate decision or destruction of the enemy. 
76
Army's understanding of hybrid threats and Mao's methodology, further underscoring the soundness of orienting the Army to respond to a hybrid threat.
A force oriented to deal with hybrid threats will necessarily be a hybrid in its composition. In fact, it may not look all that different than the Army of today. In order to be prepared to face hybrid threats, the U.S. Army would retain some ability to act across the full continuum ranging from pure irregular to pure traditional and all points in-between. Highly trained, small unit centric forces would be required to deal with emergent terrorist and criminal threats. Other highly-trained small units consisting of soldiers specially selected to train partner nation forces and conduct irregular warfare would also be required. Also, more conventional forces would be required to provide the ability to conduct stability and defense support to civil authorities (DSCA) missions as well as large scale combat operations in diverse terrain.
Advantages to this force orientation lie primarily in the Army's ability to address a broad array of contingencies quickly without having to mobilize or reconfigure extensively. While choices will always be required as to what portions of such a diverse force to privilege with regard to training, equipping, and manning a hybrid force orientation would always retain some 76 Department of the Navy, Fleet Marine Field Reference Publication 12-18: Mao Tse-Tung On Guerilla Warfare (Washington, DC: Headquarters, United States Marine Corps, 5 April 1989), 21. capacity to address nearly any conceivable conflict. Further, such a force would prove easier to man as different missions require lower levels of specialization and can thus be performed by a broader range of people; not an insignificant fact considering some estimate as many as 75% of military-aged Americans are either unfit or undesirable for military service. 
77
As with any orientation, a focus on hybrid threats does have risks associated with it.
Chief among them, a "jack of all trades, master of none" idea that does have some merit. As resources decrease of necessity, there will be increasing pressure to sacrifice some specialization in the name of savings. Betz is prominent among critics of such an approach as, in his words, "if we continue on this path, the risk is of ending up with the worst of all worlds: an army that is not just too few in number for sustaining low-intensity campaigns, but too light for high-intensity combat."
78
However, such threats can be acceptably mitigated by professional stewardship that appreciates that, while some potential military scenarios attract attention and thus funding, the Army is required to maintain the capability to act in a range of scenarios that may fall in and out of fashion.
Orienting the force against a hybrid threat is not without its drawbacks. Unfortunately for military planners and decision makers, however, there are rarely any optimal solutions. A hybrid force orientation represents a balance between a force tailored to deal with irregular threats and a force conceived to deal with traditional threats. The risks associated with lack of strategic depth and over homogenization are real and meaningful. But there can be little doubt that a force built to combat adversaries whose core competencies lie at varying points along the continuum of conflict is the best and possibly only option for the U.S. Army.
A review of the literature on the subject reveals that, while there may be a recent trend toward low intensity conflict or non-state warfare, the threat of large-scale armed conflict still very much exists. It is possible that Mueller is correct when he compares warfare to slavery as an enduring human social convention that is falling out of favor. It is also possible that others who see no meaningful reductions in warfare are correct. Also, as Gray and Huntington contend, any reductions in the level or even types of violence are potentially mere historical anomalies and we should continue to expect wars in the future. Regardless, while there are many that claim armed conflict is decreasing, no one claims it is gone forever. If we can derive any meaningful lessons from human history, among them must surely be that defense pl anners are better served in preparing assiduously for the next conflict than they are anticipating a future without one.
Building upon these lessons, defense planners can logically derive that warfare, in all its types, has a place in our future. As the practitioners suggest, future conflict may be characterized by increased levels of complexity, but it will continue to exist all the same. For these reasons, it would be foolhardy to organize and equip the U.S. Army to only address threats from one portion of the continuum of conflict (see Figure 
2
The question then becomes one of capability versus capacity. Given that the U.S. Army does not have the luxury of choosing the conflicts in which it will be engaged, it must retain the capability to act across the continuum of conflict. This is, and likely forever remains, the cost of doing business for the army of the leading global power. Army Doctrine Publication 1-0: The Army, citing Title 10, United States Code (USC) and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5100.01, describe the mission of the U.S. Army as, "to fight and win the Nation's wars through prompt and sustained land combat." 79 Until specific types of warfare are definitively proven to be obsolete, the Army retains the requirement to act at any given moment at any particular point along the continuum of armed conflict. Regardless of whether or not the Army is in a period of growth or contraction, resources are always limited to some extent and Army leadership is compelled to make choices to address potential threats. In a time of war this task is easier as a tangible conflict exists that the Army can be oriented to address. In times of relative peace, however, this task is much more difficult as any number of scenarios could demand the immediate application of U.S. ground combat power. Accordingly, United States Army decision makers are best advised to man, resource, and train the army to address a "hybrid" type threat. It is only through this approach -a policy of "least regret" -that military decision makers and planners can be assured that the U.S. will have sufficient capacity to address the threats our nation 
79
49  
49  
Joseph S. Nye, The Future ofPower (New York: Public Affairs, 2011).
Andreas Wimmer, Waves of War: Nationalism, State Formation, and Ethnic Exclusion in the Modern World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
Ibid.
Ibid.,[24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35] 171.   
Patricia L.Sullivan and Michael T. Koch, "Military Intervention by Powerful States, 1945
- 2003
 23  Ibid., 709.
Sullivan and
Ibid., 710.   
Sullivan and
Ibid., 709.   
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, Capstone Concept for Joint Operations: Joint Force 2020 (Washington, DC: The Joint Staff, 10 September 2012).
Ibid., 3.   
Frank G.Hoffman "Future Threats and Strategic Thinking", Infinity Journal, no. 4 (Fall 2011): 18, accessed October 3, 2013, https://www.infinityjournal.com/article/34/Future_Threats_and_Strategic_Thinking/.
Army Doctrine Publication 3-0: Unified Land Operations (Headquarters, Department of the Army, October 2011), III.
Stephen Biddle, The 2006 Lebanon Campaign and the Future of Warfare: Implications for Army and Defense Policy (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2008), xvii.
Associated Press "Most Americans Not Fit to Join," Military.com, March 13, 2006, 1, accessed  March 18, 2014, http://www.military.com/NewsContent/0,13319,90736,00.html.    
Betz, "Redesigning Land Forces for Wars Amongst the People," 223.
may face. This is particularly true if, as Secretary Gates suggests, we remain perfect at failing to anticipate what shapes those threats will take.
ATZL-SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Unlimited Defense Support to Civil Authorities DoD Department of Defense