# ID: 7db56eb351e74bfabf30da8d02f959ad
# Title: The End of Hegemony: Technologies of a New Tripolar World
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
The era of US global hegemony is drawing to a close. Within the next quarter century, revolutionary technological developments and new military capabilities will fracture the geopolitical strategic landscape, propelling today's near peer states into a parity position with the US. A shift to an information-centric globe will see ongoing conflict over the control of information through the new global commons of space and cyberspace. Technological advances in these areas coupled with the deterrent value of nuclear weapons will reduce the effectiveness of US conventional forces, and US interests will be challenged on a global scale. A new reality of continuous conflict over information will emerge in space and cyberspace where it will not be possible for a single state to maintain dominance. Through a deliberate focus on information and space control technologies, China and Russia are positioned to gain strategic military parity with the United States, resulting in the emergence of a new tri-polar world.
Three examples of technologies critical to the conflict over information control are explored: information warfare, space operations, and nuclear weapons. The Chinese have embarked on a campaign of "Informationization" to attain mastery of both the electromagnetic spectrum and the global cyber sphere. This approach includes the attempted dominance of air, space, and cyber mediums, through cyber operations, information operations, electronic attack, and kinetic attack. Given the Chinese view that there are no distinct boundaries between peacetime and wartime information warfare, the Chinese should be expected to employ this capability across the spectrum of conflict.
China is also preparing for an "inevitable" competition in space, as it is recognizes that "controlling space controls the globe." Chinese authors have discussed multiple space attack methods to include kinetic attack, directed energy attack, electronic attack, and ground attack of satellite control signals and control stations.
The third technology example illustrates the Russian Federation's robust research, and development program focused on an entirely new class of "fourth generation" nuclear weapons. This new weapons technology will introduce exquisite low yield weapons within the next 20 years. These weapons combined with a Russian theory of "deescalation" through the limited use of nuclear weapons points to a more aggressive posture than the one signaled in Russia's written doctrine.
We are in the midst of a shift in strategic eras from the traditional American way of war through mass and dominance to an ambiguous state of constant conflict over information. In this new era, the effectiveness of today's conventional global strike will be reduced to the point where it is of limited deterrence value. Due to their significant infrastructure, matched with a doctrinal emphasis on aggressive use of space, cyberspace, and nuclear weapons, the threat of conflict over control of information with China and Russia should not be taken lightly. The US must recognize that it will not be able to control the new domains of cyber and space as it has enjoyed the control of the sea and air, and must appropriately prepare for this new reality.
The era of US global hegemony is drawing to a close. Within the next quarter century, revolutionary technological developments and new military capabilities will fracture the geopolitical strategic landscape, propelling today's near peer states into a parity position with the US. While a flattening world promises to bring new capabilities to all nations and even individuals, nation states that are able to support long term, focused, and well funded research and development programs are uniquely poised to capitalize on emerging technologies for military gain. Through a deliberate focus on information and space control technologies, China and Russia are positioned to gain strategic military parity with the United States, resulting in the emergence of a new tri-polar world.
A shift to an information-centric globe will see ongoing conflict over the control of information through the new global commons of space and cyberspace. Technological advances in these areas coupled with the deterrent value of nuclear weapons will reduce the effectiveness of conventional forces enabling China and Russia to challenge US interests on a global scale. A new reality of continuous conflict over information will emerge in space and cyberspace where it will not be possible for a single state to maintain dominance to the degree that the US has over the last 60 years. States operating in these new unexplored, and even undefined global commons will, at best, control narrow slices of space and cyberspace for limited periods of time.
The future of warfare is on the precipice of radical change. In their 1993 book "War and Anti War", Alvin and Heidi Toffler posit that "the way we make war reflects the way we make wealth". 
1
Warfare will correspondingly shift to a conflict over the control of this information.
The nature of the rising conflict over information in the new global commons of space and cyberspace are far different from the mediums that the US currently operates in with nearly unchecked freedom of action. Due to the attributes of the new global commons of space and cyberspace, this level of dominance will be lost. Space and cyberspace will be an ambiguous environment marked by speed of light actions and challenging attribution resulting in a continuous, modulated level of conflict with the potential for rapid escalation. This new reality will lead to an inevitable state of parity between the US, China, and Russia, driving a state of constant conflict in the struggle over space and cyberspace control.
Of course, the role of conventional forces will not diminish entirely. Robust land, naval, and air forces will be necessary to control territorial borders and maintain regional stability. Due to the growth of anti-access/area denial capabilities over the next decade, however, the ability for conventional forces to project power globally will be significantly reduced. 
3
The nation that can best control the information environment will have vast strategic advantage.
In this way, it may be possible for near-peer states to gain coercive leverage over the US without matching US investment in expensive conventional ground, naval, and air forces. When this happens the effectiveness of conventional deterrence through threat of a kinetic strike will be significantly diminished.
This shift to an information-centric globe will have profound effects on the military strategy. The strategic ends, ways, and means of nation states will shift to become more focused on the control of information. In this world, information control will be the strategic ends achieved through the control of space and cyberspace (the ways), enabled by a nation's educated human capital able to operate in these mediums. As the transition occurs to a conflict over the control of information it will still be necessary to deter territorial aggression against the homeland. While conventional forces will have reduced importance, nuclear forces will provide deterrent from territorial aggression. Along with the United States, China and Russia are uniquely poised to succeed in a struggle over control of information due to their robust capabilities, infrastructure, and funding available to develop technologies in the cyberspace, space, and nuclear technology areas.
Three examples of the technology areas critical to the conflict over information control are explored in this paper: Chinese information warfare concepts and technologies, Chinese space operations, and Russian nuclear weapons development. These technology areas should not be viewed in a vacuum, as it is the combination of all three that will provide national power during the transition to an information-centric strategic era. Furthermore, these are simply examples of the approach that is being taken. Both China and Russia have robust capabilities in all three areas and have the infrastructure, funding, and human capital to leverage these areas in the future. Additionally, to better understand the application of these technologies, this paper evaluates Russian and Chinese doctrine to help assess how the technology might be used in a future conflict.
While military capability is the focus of much of this paper, to truly evaluate the potential threat of a nation state to US interests, intent and opportunity should be part of the overall calculus. In the case of China, James Clapper, Director of National Intelligence testified to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence on February 10, 2011 that "China's external behavior remains inextricably linked to the leadership's overarching concern with maintaining economic growth and domestic stability." 4 Changes in domestic context have the possibility of rapidly adjusting a nation's military intent with respect to other nations. Therefore, a top level discussion of national issues is necessary in order to better understand China and Russia's approach to leveraging new weapons and capabilities likely to emerge by 2035.
Today, China sees a parallel between the Warring States period of the 3 rd and 4 th centuries BC and today's geopolitical framework, with the world moving toward multi-polarity.
China foresees a world dominated by US, China, Russia and Japan, where India and Germany play important but lesser roles in geopolitics. 
5
We are not a military threat to any country." 7 Given the rise of Chinese national power over the last 20 years, however, there is currently a conflict between a desire for more international deference and the desire to maintain its peaceful rise during a "window of strategic opportunity." 8 Within the first decade of this century, the rise of China appears to have been accelerated through aggressive economic development and parallel financial challenges of the US. Along with China's economic rise, its military capabilities have changed dramatically in the last two decades. Following the 1991 Gulf War, China began an ambitious program to modernize its military and has made significant strides in high technology weapons sets. The Department of Defense's estimate of China's military related spending in 2009 was $150 billion. 9 10 During 2008 and 2009 China's military spending increased 17.5% and 18.5% respectively before moderating to 7.5% in 2010. 11 Given the looming cuts to US defense budgets coupled with a conservative outlook of 5% to 10% annual growth rate of China's economy, it can be seen that the two trend lines of declining US defense spending and increasing Chinese defense spending will soon cross. From a market rate view point this is expected to occur in the early 2020s, however, when adjusted for purchasing power parity the lines will cross much sooner. 
12
13
14
15
There is a significant contrast between China's stated goals and many of the military programs it is undertaking. When put into a context of a rising economic power, China's rise is a cause for closer observation. During testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee, PACOM commander Adm. Robert Willard concluded that "the scope and pace of its modernization without clarity on China's ultimate goals remains troubling. For example, China continues to accelerate its offensive air and missile developments without corresponding public clarification about how these forces will be utilized." 
16
Despite an economic decline following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has maintained a sizeable conventional military force focused on resisting NATO expansion and maintaining influence in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and the Far East. Within Russia this force is seen as a key to their national strength on the global stage. There is recognition however, that the force requires significant modernization, as much of Russia's military equipment has not been upgraded to keep pace with technological change. To counter this, Russia has embarked on an ambitious program to modernize its forces, invest heavily in military related research and development, and sustain its top tier nuclear forces. In order to achieve these goals a military investment plan was announced in 2008 to reduce the size of conventional forces while focusing on asymmetric, rapid response actions to support Russia's interests. 17 While Russia's GDP remained stagnant for the 1990s through the mid 2000s, it has increased three fold in the last 10 years 18 , and is the world's 7 th largest economy at over $2.2 trillion, as measured by purchasing parity. 
19
21
This paper was limited to open source research. Examples discussed are an illustration of the type of asymmetrical military technological capabilities that are being developed. Threats discussed are of a sophisticated, "high end" variety that don't lend themselves to transfer to lesser states or non state actors. Part of this is because the capabilities evaluated leverage massive, long-term, focused investment to develop the infrastructure required to generate highend capabilities. Additionally, this paper focuses on the threat side of the equation and does not address known US weaknesses that might be exploited.
The year 2009 was a busy year for China's Information Warfare specialists when they were accused of infiltrating and seizing control of almost 1300 computers in 103 countries belonging to the Dalai Lama and other Tibetan leaders. 
22
23
Drawing lessons from US and allied campaigns during the 1991 Gulf War and the war in Kosovo, the Chinese have embarked on a campaign to modernize the People's Liberation Army (PLA) through "Informationization". This focus appears to be an attempt to integrate information across the armed forces to increase efficiency and command and control. China's 2011 Defense White paper calls for "major progress in informationization" by 2020, and within the paper there is a clear focus on "operations under conditions of informationization." 24 From this foundation emerges the Chinese concept of Information Warfare, which does not have an analogous concept in the US. China views Information Warfare as an integrated approach to impact an adversary's information in order to alter perceptions, confuse, or delay action. A significant part of this approach includes information modification, deception, or confusion, based on the historic Chinese precept "hide a knife behind a smile." 
25
26
28
29
32
33
34
35
Fusion of cell phone, computer, e-mail, radio transmissions, and even satellite spectral imaging will enable the Chinese government to deploy sophisticated non-traditional intelligence, reconnaissance, and surveillance networks with an ever expanding footprint. Even with encryption mechanisms, supercomputing advances will reduce the time required for decryption of coded computer, telecommunications, and radio transmissions. When this capability is linked to the operational experience gained from monitoring and "correcting" information internal to the Chinese state, it can be seen that within the next 25 years the Chinese government will develop information warfare experience and capabilities far exceeding those of Western nations.
Perhaps the most alarming factor with information warfare is the concept of data confusion and deception. There is clear thought to interfering with military command centers and headquarters by changing data in the systems, thus, causing confusion and driving incorrect actions. 
36
To remedy the uncertainty of computer based information warfare the Chinese also have plans for more direct, lethal operational concepts in the event of hostilities, under the banner of "integrated network electronic warfare." 37 This tool includes both electronic attack and kinetic attack as methods to disrupt command, control, and communications in an attempt to induce paralysis in an adversary during a military operation. While integrated network electronic warfare is to occur throughout the entire campaign, the emphasis is on the tactical level of attack during the first phases of an operation. 
38
39
40
41
Given the Chinese view that there are no distinct boundaries between peacetime and wartime information warfare, and little distinction between internal and external actions, the question is not if information warfare will be used against adversaries, or when an attack might come. Rather, the question is simply what level of conflict is currently occurring? Since deception principles are embedded in information warfare there is no straightforward answer to this question. How does an individual or even a nation detect when they are being deceived or manipulated? This insidious, pervasive nature is one that will pose a most vexing challenge to China's adversaries over the next 25 years. Due to China's institutional practice of employing information warfare principles on its own people, it will master the capability. There is a clear intent and ongoing actions to employ this capability across the spectrum of conflict. Finally, the opportunity to employ information warfare is practiced on a daily basis and will only increase as the world becomes more electronically integrated.
On January 11, 2007 a Chinese ballistic missile intercepted the aging weather satellite Fenyun-1 in a direct ascent head on collision, instantaneously sending an explosion of over 35,000 shards throughout space. 
42
43
A year before the successful anti-satellite test, the 2006 US China Economic and Security Review Commission report foreshadowed China's eventual development of space weapons by publically stating that the PLA's goal appeared to be focused on "obtaining space-related information dominance and the ability to disable its opponents' space assets." 
44
50
51
Within the ambiguity of both civil and military use satellites, China views space as an extension of the "informationalized" environment. Military doctrine treats space as an extension of the information battlefield resulting in no delineation of space as a distinct theater. 
52
53
54
Under the direct attack category one of the simplest approaches is to use a high altitude weather monitoring rocket that upon reaching its apogee, releases pellets that fly into the path of a low earth orbit satellite. Even this approach requires precise tracking of the targeted satellite.
More sophisticated attack techniques include the combination of multiple technologies. For example, Pillsbury unearthed a recommendation to use submarine anti-satellite weapons to provide a stealthy method to launch microsatellites into low earth orbit (LEO). Once launched these microsatellites could be used to maneuver in close proximity to a target satellite to jam the satellite communications or impact the satellite. A close proximity maneuver capability has already been demonstrated with the recent-orbital BX-1 micro-satellite test carried out as part of the manned Shenzhou-7 mission. 
55
A foundation for directed energy interference with satellites has already been set through the development of terrestrial laser tracking systems. Chinese authors have studied US and Russian laser tracking capabilities, noting that Russian ground based lasers have temporally blinded US satellites in the past. 
56
57
Developing potentially asymmetric capabilities in space is a natural strategic approach given the US's overwhelmingly superior conventional forces. Today the United States relies on space assets for both military and economic means to a greater extent than other countries, so this presents a perfect "Achilles heel" for asymmetric challenge by adversaries. 
58
59
The conflict for control of space has already begun.
In The newest doctrine of the Russian Federation states "Nuclear weapons will remain an important factor for preventing the outbreak of nuclear military conflicts and military conflicts involving the use of conventional means of attack (a large-scale war or regional war)". 
62
63
64
In 1999 the concept of "de-escalation" through the use of nuclear weapons was introduced by a group of officers led by Major-General V.I. Levshin writing that "fulfilling the de-escalation concept is understood to mean actually using nuclear weapons for both showing resolve as well as for the immediate delivery of nuclear strikes against the enemy." 
65
There is clear evidence that a first use of tactical nuclear weapons has been considered in the past and that the Russian armed forces continue to train and deploy for such an action. Five years after the conflict, for example it was revealed that the Russians had considered the use of nuclear weapons in response to NATOs efforts in Kosovo in 1999. 
67
75
76
Ongoing efforts in this area are being pursued by many countries to include Russia. DT fuel promises to provide a new fuel for nuclear power generation that provides a more compact and continuously adjustable energy source. 
77
In support of this research, Russia has embarked on building the world's largest laser facility with a planned power of 2.8 million joules of ultraviolet laser energy. 
78
The second, more challenging technology set required to weaponize DT fuel is development of a compact trigger component. Again, a number of countries including Russia are conducting research into areas to include pentawatt "super lasers", nuclear isomers, magnetic explosion, chemical laser initiators, and even antimatter triggers. 
80
We are entering an era where there is an equalization of the effects between tactical nuclear weapons and conventional non nuclear weapons. The challenge over the next twenty years will be a balance between conventional weapons achieving "nuclear effects" versus the continued development of new forms of nuclear weapons. Nations are likely to take different approaches, and herein lies the problem of nuclear weapons. Since Russia recognizes it can't afford to develop and maintain a nuclear capability on par with United States, militarily it must embrace the capabilities of tactical nuclear weapons as a hedge against US conventional force dominance. Given Russia's relatively low threshold for nuclear weapons employment, the looming conflict over control of information may lead to a dangerous escalation from continuous conflict in domains of space and cyberspace to that of a nuclear war.
We are in the midst of a shift in strategic eras from the traditional American way of war through mass and dominance to an ambiguous state of constant conflict over information. The nature of the new global commons of space and cyberspace will have a leveling effect where parity between world powers is inevitable. In this new era, the effectiveness of today's conventional global strike will be reduced to the point where it is of limited deterrence value.
The US must recognize that it will not be able to control the new domains of cyber and space as it has enjoyed the control of the sea and air, and must appropriately prepare for this new reality.
US vulnerability to information warfare through the commons of space and cyberspace is acknowledged by today's military leaders. With respect to the role cyberspace plays in security operations, US Pacific Command Commander Admiral Robert Willard recently admitted to the Senate Armed Services committee "I depend entirely, nearly, on cyberspace for the command and control of the broader Asia-Pacific, of our forces there". 
81
82
Even the emergence of a new tri-polar reality dominated by the US, China, and Russia will only last for so long. In the far future, once the transition to a true form of information warfare occurs, nuclear weapons will become less important. There will be a continuous level of conflict, and the tenet that possession of nuclear weapons is a deterrent force in itself will break down. When ambiguity and parity replace deterrence, the relative power of states will be flattened through an explosion of capabilities of peer or near peer states. India, Japan, Iran, European nations, and even non state actors will enter into competition to control information based on their ability to generate the human capital as the means to operate in the conflict over information and ideas.
For the immediate future, however, should China or Russia make significant strides in any of the analyzed technologies at a rate greater than that of the US, the US will be placed at a strategic disadvantage. Due to technological developments, through information warfare and space operations backed up with the deterrent effect of nuclear weapons, China and Russia will gain in national power and ability to directly threaten US interests on a global spectrum. Given the superiority of the US's conventional forces, other nations will naturally focus on asymmetrical capabilities to gain strategic advantage. Due to their significant infrastructure matched with a doctrinal emphasis on use of space, cyberspace, and weapons, the threat of an information warfare conflict with China and Russia should not be taken lightly.
The chilling reality is that both China and Russia have extremely low thresholds to apply new space, cyber, and nuclear capabilities across the full spectrum of conflict. This shift to an era of continuous conflict over information in the space and cyberspace domains can be anticipated and should be prepared for in order to counter erosion of US power during the emergence of a new tri-polar world.
(All notes appear in shortened form. For full details, the appropriate entry in the bibliography) 
1
32
Intelligence and Cyber Reconnaissance Infrastructure,
6 34
China 2010, 26 35
50
11 51
52
53
54 Pillsbury,
5 55
56
58
59
60
63
64
65
70
72
74
75
78
CENTCOM as a Combat Search and Rescue pilot and an 
Iraqi Air Force Aviation Advisor
UH-60A
OH-6
C-12
UH-1N