# ID: 7e93ecd7b4b04b29a3626988b26ee5c2
# Title: The Russian General Staff Understanding the Military's Decisionmaking Role in a" Besieged Fortress"
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world safer and more
The Russian General Staff, with its broad authorities and responsibilities for ensuring the defense of the Russian state, is unlike any single organization within the U.S. defense establishment or even the broader U.S. government. The absence of an analog in the United States, among other reasons, means that audiences within the U.S. civilian and military communities largely are unfamiliar with the concept of a General Staff. Because of the increasing militarization of Russian foreign policy since 2008, it is important to understand not only the formal authorities and responsibilities of this institution but also its capacity to influence Russia's national security decisionmaking process.
In this report, we employed a mixed methods approach to analyze the Russian General Staff along multiple axes with the objective of advancing the collective understanding of the roles and responsibilities of the General Staff within the Russian national security decisionmaking process. We draw on a variety of primary and secondary Russian-language sources-e.g., statutes, speeches by political and military elites, and academic military writings-which inform our characterization of the General Staff's statutory mandate. We then apply this baseline of knowledge regarding the roles and responsibilities of the General Staff in three contexts to create a more complete (albeit somewhat speculative because of the absence of concrete evidence) picture of the General Staff's role within Russian national security decisionmaking.
First, we apply this information by placing the General Staff in a comparative institutional context, providing a high-level evaluation of the institutional roles, responsibilities, and authorities of the General Staff's U.S. counterpart-the Joint Staff. Second, we consider what the formal roles and responsibilities of the General Staff suggest about the relative balance of power among Russia's political leaders, the General Staff, and the broader Russian military. We focus on the role of the General Staff during peacetime (because its role is to prepare Russia's Armed Forces for potential war). Finally, we apply our understanding of the roles and responsibilities of the General Staff in a practical context by analyzing two case studies of this institution's involvement in recent conflicts: Ukraine (2014-2021) and Syria (2015-2019). These cases allow us to draw inferences about how the General Staff behaves in practice and its role within the Russian decisionmaking process.
The research for this report was conducted prior to Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, which unfolded shortly after this report was written. Therefore, this report does not examine the role of the General Staff in the ongoing campaign. But we would be remiss in discussing the progress of the Russian Armed Forces as an institution without also acknowledging the initial observations of the press and analytical community regarding the stumbles that Russia's military took in its first weeks of its incursion into Ukraine. Thus far, the Russian military has encountered numerous challenges-stemming from logistical, morale, and command and control (C2), and capability issues-in its operation in Urkaine. 
1
In terms of the networks of actors who our analysis revealed to have had some influence over decisionmaking in the Ukraine and Syria conflicts, it is notable how the actors in each network tend to be mostly (though not exclusively) individual people rather than organizations (e.g., government agencies or other bureaucracies). Thus, the Russian General Staff, as an institution, seems to emphasize interpersonal relationships among key players. This fits with the argument that an informal political network perspective can be helpful in describing both Russian domestic and foreign policymaking. In that context, individuals tend to hold more sway when compared with more-formal entities or structures, such as laws or bureaucratic rules.
Although the network analysis lends support to the contention that informal personal networks dominate national security decisionmaking, consistent with the literature on Russian informal politics, our research suggests that bureaucratic rules and procedures appear to dominate military decisionmaking. It certainly appears that the use of force by Russia reflects the will of political leaders and not the military. However, the arduous process of reforming the Russian military demonstrates that the ability of the political leadership and other institutions to play an effective oversight role is highly constrained in the Russian context.
Moreover, it is important to move the conversation beyond the relatively simplistic question of whether the General Staff participates in national security decisionmaking. Multiple passive and active opportunities exist for the General Staff to influence the Russian decisionmaking process, in addition to participating in the actual decision to use military force. The General Staff has numerous ex ante and ex post opportunities to influence said decisionmaking. Before any particular national security policy decision is made, the General Staff has the primary role in determining what kind of military is available to decisionmakers. Also, decisions must be implemented, and the General Staff again plays the central role in determining the effectiveness and capabilities of the Russian Armed Forces in this implementation role. Therefore, the formal decisionmaking system of the General Staff appears to uniquely condition the informal decisionmaking system that dominates national security.
Finally, it is plausible that the broader, bottom-up issues discussed in this report-from the General Staff's tight grip on information and its treatment of knowledge as currency, to the military's institutional resistance to reforms, to the General Staff's highly hierarchical C2 structure, and the influence of corruption on the armed services-are at least partly responsible for the Russian military's performance in Ukraine thus far. The improvements that ostensibly allowed the Russian Armed Forces to become a relatively more effective fighting force in its limited operations in Ukraine (2014) and Syria (2015) have thus far appeared to be insufficient when attempted at scale. Further research is needed to fully understand the implications of this conflict and the Russian military's ability to effectively wage a large-scale, highly complex operation.
The Issue
Over a five-day period in August 2008, Russia's Armed Forces were "victorious," swiftly mobilizing a force with overwhelming numerical superiority to defeat a much smaller foe. Russian forces achieved their military objective-bringing two Georgian breakaway territories, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, under Russian control. Yet while Russian forces demonstrated better planning and operational proficiency relative to the two wars in Chechnya (1994-1996 and 1999-2000), Russia's Armed Forces struggled more than was anticipated by both Russia and the West against the Georgian military. Russia's command and control (C2) chains experienced multiple failures at nearly all echelons. Obsolete Russian equipment suffered numerous breakdowns, thus halting the forward flow of forces. The Russian air component lost more than ten aircraft flying only 200 sorties against an opponent that lacked fighter aircraft or advanced air defenses. 
1
2
3
4
1
2 Vendil Pallin and Westerlund, 2009, p. 408. 3
Minneapolis, Minn.: East View Press, 2015, pp. 163-164;
and Christopher Marsh, Developments in Russian Special Operations: Russia's Spetsnaz, SOF, and Special Operations Forces Command, Winnipeg: CANSOFCOM Education & Research Centre, 2017, p. 21. 4
The research for this study was conducted prior to Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, which unfolded as this report was being written and prepared for publication. As a result, this report does not examine the role of the General Staff in decisionmaking, planning, or execution related to this ongoing campaign. But we would be remiss in discussing the progress of the Russian Armed Forces as an institution without also acknowledging the initial observations of the press and analytical community regarding the stumbles Russia's military had in its first weeks of its incursion into Ukraine. Thus far, the Russian military has encountered numerous challenges-stemming from logistical, morale, C2, training, and capability issues-in its operation in Ukraine. 
5
In this report, we employ a mixed method approach to analyze the Russian General Staff along multiple axes with the objective of advancing the collective understanding of the roles and responsibilities of the Russian General Staff in the state's national security decisionmaking process. In the first section of the report, we draw on Russian-language materials, especially General Staff of the Russian Military: Past and Present, edited by former Chief of the General Staff, Yurii 
Baluevskii. 6
First, we apply this information by placing the Russian General Staff in comparative institutional context. Drawing on U.S. statutes and institutional histories, we provide a high-level evaluation of the institutional roles, responsibilities, and authorities of the General Staff's U.S. counterpart-the Joint Chiefs of Staff and its supporting Joint Staff. We use this high-level comparison to distill insights regarding the potential benefits and trade-offs entailed in the Russian model, which-particularly relative to the U.S. model-concentrates a significant amount of power in the hands of one institution.
Second, we consider what the roles and responsibilities of the General Staff suggest about the relative balance of power between Russia's political leaders, the General Staff, and the broader Russian military. We survey the existing political science literature regarding civil-military relations in Russia. Although the existing literature tends to focus on the role of the so-called power ministries in foreign policy decisionmaking, we instead focus our analytic efforts on examining the role of the General Staff during peacetime in the process of preparing the Russian Armed Forces for war. 
7
Finally, we apply our understanding on the roles and responsibilities of the General Staff in a practical context by examining case studies of this institution's involvement in two recent conflicts: Ukraine (2014-2021) and Syria (2015-2019). These cases provide additional analytical traction for advancing our understanding of the General Staff by allowing us to draw inferences about how the General Staff behaves in practice and its role within the Russian decisionmaking process. Although our ability to present an exhaustive characterization of the General Staff's involvement in each conflict is constrained by the opaque nature of this institution and Russian national security decisionmaking in general, we examine a diverse variety of sources to assess how the Russian General Staff appears to have participated in each conflict. We also use the data from the case studies to inform our construction of high-level network analyses that visualize the key General Staff members and their relationships (both direct and indirect) for each conflict. The diagrams produced for this report offer a novel vehicle that provides new insights about who within the General Staff is central, who is peripheral, and who is connected to whom to depict where and how the actors within the General Staff interact with the larger cast of characters.
Before diving into the analysis undertaken as part of this research effort, it is important that we acknowledge the limitations of our analysis. Although we have taken an analytically rigorous approach in seeking multiple independent sources in building our analysis, particularly for the case studies, the reader should be mindful of several caveats. These are as follows.
As a highly personalized system, Russian decisionmaking, particularly at the highest levels, is a function of decisionmakers' personal networks. Thus, to understand which actors and institutions possess decisionmaking power, one must understand the specific individuals involved. While we address these networks to the degree that it helps explain the role of the General Staff as an institution, it is not an aim of this study to produce an exhaustive network analysis. A wide collection of actors influence national security policymaking in Russia, including actors within the Ministry of Defense (MoD), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Presidential Administration, Security Council, Federal Security Service (FSB), and key state corporations, among other groups. While we are cognizant that the more senior members of the General Staff and Russian military necessarily have connections within this broader network, this report is not an attempt to comprehensively place the individuals within the General Staff in the so-called power vertikal. 
8
We suspect that no one individual or institution, including the General Staff, is wholly responsible for the improvement-or lack thereof-of the Russian Armed Forces in the post-2014 period. Other factors and actors that fall beyond the scope of this effort likely would have to be considered to provide a comprehensive explanation for the improvement of the Russian Armed Forces. Factors contributing to the increase in Russian military effectiveness include Russia's economic growth from the rising price of oil at the turn of the century and the decades-spanning longevity of key political and military figures, among other factors.
In terms of the impact of the economy, Russia has experienced a tumultuous boom and bust cycle in the three decades after the fall of the Soviet Union. The 1990s economy was marred by the transition recession and default of the years of Boris Yeltsin's presidency, which saw the Russian defense budget cut from an estimated U.S. $344 billion in 1988 to U.S. $52 billion in 1992 and less than U.S. $20 billion in 1998. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
The Russian decisionmaking apparatus is opaque, and thus this analysis is necessarily speculative to some degree. As has been described by multiple experts in Russian politics, informal networks dominate the Russian decisionmaking process. 
17
18
19
20
In Chapter Two, we focus on the statutorily defined roles, responsibilities, and authorities delegated to the Russian General Staff, which provide the legal basis for its sweeping authorities and contribute to the adaptability and longevity of the institution. This chapter also provides a human resources perspective, discussing the occupant at the helm of each office, including their military experience prior to ascending to the position. While formally the list of the General Staff's roles consists of 16 tasks, we focus on those that were necessary to secure the transition of the Russian Armed Forces from its post-Soviet incarnation to a modern military. Specifically, we consider how the General Staff's authorities, structure, and staffing support its key responsibilities: strategy conceptualization, planning, execution, and C2. The consistency of the General Staff's mandate over centuries provides the first marker indicating that Russia continues to be influenced by legacy ideas. This chapter thus provides an authoritative characterization of the General Staff's statutory mandate, which subsequent chapters then apply to create a more complete if necessarily somewhat speculative picture of the General Staff's role in Russian national security decisionmaking.
Leveraging this detailed account, Chapter Three places the Russian General Staff in a comparative institutional perspective. Specifically, we offer a high-level comparison of the roles, responsibilities, and authorities of the General Staff relative to those of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff. This chapter is not meant to provide an exhaustive comparative case study. It is intended to broadly illustrate the seemingly key respects in which the mandates of these two institutions diverge and thus their centrality within their respective national security decisionmaking processes. The notable differences between these two institutions, particularly in terms of the centralization and concentration of C2 authorities-or lack thereof, in the case of the Joint Staff-to a large degree arise because Russia and the United States seek divergent outcomes with these two bodies. Yet, the implications of these differences for the peacetime process of preparing for war, let alone the prosecution of a war, are significant. This chapter thus concludes by offering some observations regarding the potential implications of the two organizational approaches.
In Chapter Four, we apply the our understanding of the authorities and responsibilities of the General Staff to an examination of some of the external factors that shape the ability of the General Staff to affect the evolution in Russian military effectiveness. Although much analysis has focused on the evolution of Russian Armed Forces post-2008, our research suggests there are greater benefits to be gained from a retrospective look. We therefore assess the role of the General Staff in the post-Soviet environment, when the military found itself mired in institutional crisis. 
21
22
23
The subsequent three chapters apply our understanding of the roles and responsibilities of the General Staff to examine how the General Staff's elements operated in practice, i.e., in the context of real-world campaigns: Ukraine (2014-2021) and Syria (2015-2021). These cases allow us to draw inferences about how the General Staff behaves in practice. For each case, we consider the role of the General Staff in the planning and decisionmaking processes from the initial decision to intervene, to planning the operation, and then to overseeing the execution of the operation. These cases provide two types of comparative perspective. First, they offer the opportunity to assess the role of individuals within the General Staff and the General Staff as an institution, relative to the multitude of other actors with national security equities in Russia. Second, the two cases address within-case variation, thus allowing the opportunity to draw insights about how the General Staff has operated in different conflict settings (though both settings do represent limited military engagements). For each case, we visualize the key General Staff members and their relationships for each conflict, providing novel insights into who within the General Staff is central and which institutions are central, peripheral, and interconnected.
We conclude by presenting our findings as to what the organization of the General Staff reveals about the leadership system that it serves and the balance of power within Russia's national security decisionmaking structure. We thus discuss the position of the General Staff within the context of the broader Russian national security system, both formally and informally, including why certain concepts and authority structures persist and how the General Staff affected the transformation of the Russian Armed Forces into an effective tool of foreign policy. Although the network analyses of the individuals involved in Ukraine and Syria lend support to the contention that informal personal networks dominate national security decisionmaking, which is a finding consistent with the literature on Russian informal politics, our research suggests that bureaucratic rules and procedures appear to dominate military decisionmaking. Moreover, our research suggests that multiple passive and active opportunities exist for the General Staff to influence the Russian decisionmaking process, other than participating in the actual decision to use military force. Therefore, the formal decisionmaking system of the General Staff appears to uniquely condition the informal decisionmaking system that dominates national security. We thus propose some tentative conclusions about what the organization of the General Staff reveals about the leadership system it serves.
Finally, we also offer our initial observations about the potential implications of Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine; these observations were written in the first four weeks of the war. For example, it is plausible that the broader, bottom-up issues discussed in this study-from the General Staff's tight grip on information and its treatment of knowledge as currency, to the military's institutional resistance to reforms, to the General Staff's highly hierarchical C2 structure and the influence of corruption on the armed services-are at least partly responsible for the Russian military's poor performance in Ukraine up to that point in time. The improvements that allowed Russian Armed Forces to become a relatively more effective fighting force in its limited operations in Ukraine (2014) and Syria (2015) have appeared to be insufficient when attempted at scale. Further research is needed to fully understand the implications of this current conflict and the Russian military's ability to effectively wage a large-scale, highly complex operation. 
23
In conclusion, I want to state that, regardless of how strong the enemy is, regardless of how perfect [sovershennya] its forces and means for the armed struggle, the forms and means of their use, it [the enemy] will always have weak spots; this means that the possibility exists for an adequate defense.
-V. G. Gerasimov 
1
2
3
4
The central role of this institution, throughout its existence, has been to conceptualize and operationalize the military requirements to prepare for the state's "adequate defense." 
5
1 Valerii V. Gerasimov, "Tsennost' nauki v predvidenii," Voenno-promyshlenniy kur'er', Vol. 8, No. 476, February-March 2013, p. 3. 2
3
4
5 Gerasimov, 2013, p. 3.
6
7
The tasks and functions of the Russian General Staff are formally defined by Presidential decree in the Regulations on the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. The current version of the decree, most recently updated in 2020, defines the General Staff as the central body of military command of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation . . . and the main body of operational control of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. . . . In accordance with the decisions of the President of the Russian Federation, the Supreme Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, and the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, the General Staff performs command and control of the Armed Forces, organizes defense planning of the Russian Federation, mobilization training and mobilization in the Russian Federation within the powers of the Ministry of Defense of Russia, and also coordinates activities other troops, military and special formations in the field of defense. 
8
9 6 Baluevskii, 2006. 7
8
9 Baluevskii, 2006.
A central task for the Russian General Staff is the application of military science (Voennaya nauka) to theorize about and forecast the future of warfare. 
10
10
gist and scholar Aleksandr Svechin, wrote that the General Staff "should represent the guard of emerging ideas . . . to grasp, cherish and preach them." 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Using these calculations, which are designed to determine the future nature and likelihood of war and of the correlation of forces and means, the General Staff is then responsible for developing military strategy and the broad templates that commanders can use to develop their operational plans. 
19
20
21
22
23
In a break from the Soviet model (which was based on mass mobilization to man skeleton units), the modern Russian military model seeks to field combat-ready forces-i.e., suitably trained and equipped forces in peacetime that are ready to be moved into the theater within hours. 
24
25
26
27
19
20 Gerasimov, 2014. 21
22
23
24
', No. 3, 2007, p. 27. 25
26
28
29
30
31
32
Two facets of C2 are subsumed within this category: organizational and technical. While the "On Defense" law codifies the chain of command-specifically, that the General Staff reports to the President through the Minister of Defense-the General Staff retains responsibility for structuring the chain of command for all levels below it. 
33
34
35
36
37
28
29
30
31
Bartles, 2020, p. 23. 32
33
34
35
36
38
39
Finally, as should be intuitive given the significant concentration and centralization of responsibilities within the General Staff, this body is assigned the crucial coordination role to facilitate a whole-of-government approach to warfighting, which is perceived as critically important in modern warfare. 
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
Studies, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2020b, pp. 248-249. 45
46
However, the 2020 version added a subclause (11b), which directed the General Staff to undertake this effort "together with federal executive authorities." 
47
Although not explicitly defined in the Regulations on the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, it appears that each of the 16 tasks assigned to the General Staff roughly correlate with the subcomponents of the General Staff (Main Directorates and Directorates). Consequently, it is possible that the document reflects the preexisting structure of the General Staff, rather than creates it.
Moreover, the information on the internal organization of the General Staff is scarce and an organizational chart is not publicly available. Attempts to cleanly define the internal structure and the General Staff's roles and responsibilities are blurred additionally by the fact that the General Staff is part of the structure of the MoD, and the Chief of the General Staff is also a First Deputy Minister of Defense. 48 Thus, this individual oversees the General Staff as the central organ of the military command of the Armed Forces Administration, several bodies of the MoD, as well as the Service Branches and Arms Commands and Military District Commands. 
49
2
In the sections that follow, we discuss the responsibilities of the General Staff bodies, which include four Main Directorates, four Directorates, the Archive Service, and the National Defense Management Center. Each body includes a brief biography of the head of that organization, which we use as an indicator of the relative importance of a given body. Unless stated otherwise, the responsibilities of the General Staff bodies and biographies of their heads use information provided by the MoD. 50 47 President of the Russian Federation, 2017b, point 11b. 
48
49
'" Order No. 379, September 28, 2021. 50
The Russian military tradition places a significant amount of personal responsibility on commanders. 
51
52
51 Donnelly, 1988, p. 152
52 Gareev, 2003. 53
54
55
The Chief of the General Staff is also responsible for the development and implementation of a unified military-technical policy regarding weapons and military equipment, organizes scientific research in the interests of defense, manages the military-scientific complex of the Armed Forces, and supervises militaryscientific cooperation with foreign states. 
56
• The Chief of the General Staff tends to be an officer from the Ground Forces. All chiefs have come from the Ground Forces, even if they might have had experience in other services (such as the Naval Infantry or the Strategic Missile Forces). This illustrates the gravitational pull of the Ground Forces in Soviet and Russian military thinking and tradition. After all, the Main Command of the Ground Forces retained operational C2 authorities for the longest period, even after these authorities had already been removed from the main commands of other services, and the Ground Forces form the core of the Russian general-purpose forces. • The chief tends to have experience from key military engagements. Since the 1950s, most chiefs gained military combat experience or staff experience from other key engagements of the time, for example, during World War II, the war in Afghanistan, or the Chechen Wars. This would suggest that combat experience is perceived as providing practical skills in command and control.  
56
57
58
59
60
It seems that the choice to appoint Gerasimov as the Chief of the General Staff stemmed from his military experience and the respect he commanded among troops. 
61
62
The Main Operations Directorate (Glavnoe operativnoe upravlenie-GOU) dates back to the beginning of the 1700s and traditionally has been the center of strategic and operational planning and command and con- 
58
Baluevskii, 2006. 60
Gerasimov Valerii Vasil'evich,
" webpage,
63
The Main Operations Directorate is a kind of headquarters within the General Staff, which to a greater or lesser extent depends on the style and methods of work of the Chief of the General Staff personally. 
64
According to the MoD website, the GOU is responsible for "operational command and control of troops in peacetime and wartime" and for " [organizing] cooperation between the Armed Forces and federal executive bodies, including other troops, military formations and bodies." Furthermore, the GOU oversees "strategic and operational planning of the use of the Armed Forces," "[organizes] the development of the Defense Plan of the Russian Federation," and participates in drafting proposals for the State Armament Program. The GOU analyzes the sources of military threats and drafts proposals for the Armed Forces' development to address these threats. It also coordinates planning for the development of other militarized forces. Finally, the GOU controls operational training of the Armed Forces and "[supports] military cooperation events in the format of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization." 
65
66
67
In addition, the generals and officers of the GOU take an active part in the negotiation processes to resolve conflicts in Syria [and] make a significant contribution to the implementation of the peacekeeping initiatives of the Russian Federation. 
68
69
70
It should be noted, however, that part of the responsibilities traditionally carried out by the GOU are performed by the NTsUO. In particular, tasks related to combat, real-time control of training activities, and interagency coordination appear to reside with the NTsUO. Consequently, the weight of day-to-day situational awareness and decisionmaking has shifted away from the Main Operations Directorate. It is too early to say whether the establishment of the NTsUO will weaken the influence of the GOU, but the choice of the current head of the GOU could serve as evidence that this could be the case.
Traditionally, heads of the GOU have gained experience on military district staffs. For example, Colonel General Andrei Kartapolov (head of the GOU, 2014-2015) was the Commander of the 58th Combined Arms Army (2010-2012), a Deputy Commander of the Southern Military District (2012-2013) and the Chief of Staff of the Western Military District (2013-2014). 
71
72
The head of the GOU remains the First Deputy Chief of the General Staff, which indicates that individual's continued seniority. However, if that changes, it would be a clear indicator of a shift of the prestige and power away from the GOU, likely to the benefit of the NTsUO. The career paths of officers in each body could serve as another indicator of such a shift. In the past, the GOU-trained officers later served as commanders of military districts. That was the case for both Colonel General Vladimir Zarudnitsky, who was appointed the Commander of the Central Military District in 2014, and Colonel General Andrei Kartapolov, who was appointed the Commander of the Western Military District in 2015. 
73
69
Zvezda, No. 19, 2019, p. 3. 70
71
72
It is possible, however, that the GOU will maintain its position as the intellectual powerhouse of the General Staff, even as the visibility and centrality of other portions of the General Staff (specifically, the NTsUO, discussed in the following section) start to increase. To forestall this challenge to its position of primacy within the General Staff, for example, the GOU might choose to second some of its officers to the NTsUO so that the GOU retains influence within this new center. Furthermore, it is safe to assume that the GOU will maintain its planning function and its responsibility for analyzing lessons learned during combat deployments and training. 
74
The Main Directorate (Glavnoe upravlenie-GU), formerly the GRU, is perhaps the best-known Directorate of the General Staff, even though it is often seen as somewhat of an independent agency. Despite its formal name change, few within the analytical community or media have adopted its new moniker and instead continue to call it the GRU. Thus, we refer to this body as the GRU throughout the study. Formally, the GU is the military intelligence body of the MoD and the Armed Forces and is tasked with providing senior political and military leadership with intelligence information necessary to make decisions regarding political, economic, defense, scientific, technical, and environmental matters. The responsibility to supply information to federal legislative and executive bodies outside the MoD guarantees the GRU a slightly higher degree of independence than its subordination to the Chief of the General Staff would indicate.
Similar to other departments of the General Staff, the GRU also has experienced changes as a reaction to major security and strategic events. For example, during then-Chief of the General Staff, Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov's command in late 1970s and early 1980s, two new offices were created under the GRU to improve its abilities to analyze the strategic plans of potential opponents. 
75
76
77
75
76 Baluevskii, 2006. 77
79
80
The tasks of the Main Organization and Mobilization Directorate (Glavnoe organizatsionno-mobilizatsionnoe upravlenie-GOMU) are related to ensuring combat readiness of troops according to war plans created by the GOU. That is, the GOMU is responsible for "planning mobilizational training and deployment of the Armed Forces, other troops, military formations and bodies"; "planning the recruitment of mobilization reserves for the Armed Forces, other troops, military formations, bodies and coordination of work on maintaining military registration of citizens of the Russian Federation"; and "planning the provision of the Armed Forces with the main types of weapons, military equipment and other material resources." The Directorate also plans and organizes measures to "improve the structures of military command and control bodies, formations, military units and organizations of the Armed Forces." 
81
82
83
The Main Communications Directorate (Glavnoe upravlenie svyazi-GUS) is responsible for organizing the communications in the Armed Forces. It "plans and implements measures to maintain constant combat and mobilization readiness of the Signal Troops of the Armed Forces." The task of the GUS focuses on the organization, monitoring, provision, support, and maintenance of communications and automated control systems in the Armed Forces. It also plans, organizes, and maintains courier-postal communications. 
84
79
80
81
82
21, 2021, p. 3. 83
Eastern Military District for Communications. 
85
86
87
The NTsUO was established only in 2014, replacing the Central Command Post of the General Staff. The NTsUO was modeled on the MChS Management Center, which was built under Shoigu's leadership. 
88
Strategic Nuclear Forces Command Center controls the use of nuclear weapons.
Combat Control Center monitors the military-political situation in the world and the socio-political situation in the Russian Federation, analyzes and forecasts the development of threats, develops ways to respond, and controls the use of the Armed Forces, as well as troops and military formations that are not part of the structure of the Russian Ministry of Defense.
Day-to-day Operations Management Center monitors all areas of comprehensive support of the Armed Forces and coordinates the activities of federal authorities to meet the needs of other troops, military formations, and bodies for defense purposes. 
89
90
91
92
93
86
July 8, 2014;
and Dmitrii Voronin, "Park 'Patriot' v Efire!" Soyuz Radiolyubitelei Rossii, October 20, 2016. 87
88
89 "NTsUO Rossiiskoi Federatsii zastupil na boevoe dezhurstvo," Rossiiskoe voennoe obozrenie, No. 12, 2014. 
90
91
92
September 1, 2014, On the Procedure for Collecting Information on the Defense of the Russian Federation and Exchanging This Information, and the list of bodies and organizations required to cooperate with the NTsUO has expanded since its inception. 
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
Zvezda, No. 129, 2017
, p. 1. 96 Kozanchuk, 2015, pp. 15-16. 97
98
99
The main tasks of the Operational Training Directorate (Upravlenie operativnoi podgotovki-UOP) seem to be twofold. First, UOP oversees short-and mid-term planning of training activities of the Armed Forces. The UOP monitors the coordination and approval of plans for operational training in the Armed Forces, controls their implementation, analyzes the results of operational training, and drafts recommendations for the plans' improvement. Secondly, the UOP is responsible for planning and overseeing the conduct of high-profile training activities-i.e., operational training under the leadership of senior officials of the Russian Federation, the Minister of Defense, the Chief of the General Staff, or some combination thereof; training with international partners; or training with troops and military formations outside the MoD. The UOP provides yearly summaries of the results of the training and sets training tasks for the following year. 
103
104
The Directorate of Electronic Warfare Troops leads the development, training, and maintenance of the combat readiness of the Electronic Warfare Troops; plans and organizes electronic warfare measures; manages and protects electronic warfare equipment for interservice use; and serves as the main radio frequency authority of the MoD. 
105
106
104
105
106 Jonas Kjellén, Russian Electronic Warfare: The Role of Electronic Warfare in the Russian Armed Forces, Stockholm: FOI, FOI--R--4625--SE, September 2018, p. 29 
107
The Directorate for the Construction and Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems was established in 2013. Its role is to organize and coordinate efforts to develop systems based on UAVs, coordinate equipping the Armed Forces with these systems, organize comprehensive support for their use, and organize training of personnel necessary to operate and sustain UAVs. This directorate oversees the 924th National Unmanned Aviation Center, responsible for training unmanned aviation specialists, conducting tests of complexes with UAVs, and conducting other scientific work in the field. 
108
109
110
111
The structure and tradition of the General Staff-as a headquarters body, not just an administrative or advisory body-that emerged following World War II persists. The core responsibilities of the Russian General Staff are to analyze dynamically evolving military-political situations, anticipate further developments, plan for contingencies, ensure combat readiness of the Armed Forces, and perform centralized command and control of the Armed Forces. Hence, the General Staff can be best conceptualized as the single professional military interface between Russia's political leadership and the Armed Forces in their warfighting function.
The chain of command flows from the President as the Supreme Commander in Chief to the Minister of Defense to the Chief of the General Staff. Additionally, Shoigu, the Minister of Defense, has a strong personal relationship with the President. 
112
113
114
The President and the Minister of Defense are responsible for formulating and defining the political will of Russia, and the General Staff is responsible for the military aspects of its execution through the employ-ment of the Armed Forces. In other words, while technically the President as the Supreme Commander in Chief or the Minister of Defense can give orders directly to any military unit, in practice, these orders come through the General Staff.
Moreover, the Chief of the General Staff is personally responsible for the fulfillment of the tasks assigned to bodies directly subordinate to him, especially for the combat readiness of the Armed Forces. The Chief of the General Staff is directly subordinated to the Minister of Defense, but, contrary to most Western countries, the subdepartments of the MoD seem to be a support rather than a control body for the General Staff-i.e., while the General Staff defines the equipping and sustainment needs of the Armed Forces, it is the MoD that is responsible for solving problems of logistic, financial, housing, medical, and other support, and for organization of acquisition of weapons and military equipment. 
115
Relatively successful Russian military interventions in Ukraine (2014-2021) and Syria (2015-2019) appeared to have increased the influence of Shoigu and the military within the broader national security system. 
116
117
118
Kramnik, "Reforma Serdyukova-Makarova," Natsional'naya Oborona, No. 12, 2011. 116
117 Isaac Chotiner, "The Purges in Putin's Shrinking Inner Circle," New Yorker, 
March 22, 2022. 118
119
120
121
Having detailed the legal mandate and organizational structure of the Russian General Staff in Chapter Two, in this chapter, we place the organization in comparative institutional context with the U.S. Joint Staff. This high-level comparison provides a reference for policymakers and warfighters alike who engage with their counterparts in Russia, and it illuminates structural differences and how they affect how U.S. and Russian military leadership make and execute decisions. This chapter is not meant to provide an exhaustive comparative analysis that mirrors the structure of Chapter Two. It is intended to broadly illustrate the key respects in which the mandates of these two institutions diverge.
First, we briefly discuss the history of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) and how the institution has evolved since its instantiation during WWII. Drawing on Title 10 of the U.S. Code,
1
The analysis in this chapter demonstrates how different the Russian General Staff and JCS are as organizations, so it is perhaps unsurprising that their organizational structures, authorities, and roles in their respective national security decisionmaking processes vary considerably. Yet, the asymmetries in the mandates of these institutions are consequential. Thus, we conclude this chapter with a high-level assessment of the potential implications of each model.
Unlike the centuries-old tradition of the Russian General Staff, the JCS was formed during World War II. The JCS was established in 1942 by President Franklin Roosevelt without a formal charter or articulation of roles and responsibilities. When the attack on Pearl Harbor drove the United States into the war, the U.S. military lacked a means to coordinate large-scale global campaigns either internally or in concert with allies. Roosevelt sought to fill this void with the JCS, which included senior officers from the Army and Navy and the air components of these services, who reported to him directly. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Furthermore, the Reorganization Act codified the Joint Staff as a military planning staff to the Secretary of Defense in his role overseeing the military command structure, while the relationship between the CJCS and military commanders grew stronger. 
10
11
12
• The CJCS became the principal military adviser to the President, the National Security Council, and the Secretary of Defense. • The role of Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (VCJCS) was created.
• The Joint Staff came under the control of the CJCS. 
13
14
15
The National Security Act of 1947 codified the roles and responsibilities of the CJCS, chief among them being the provision of strategic military advice to the President. 
16
17
With respect to the first function, in addition to its advisory role assisting the President and Secretary of Defense in the provision of strategic direction to the armed forces, the CJCS is responsible for (in part): assisting with strategic contingency planning; providing advice on global military integration, i.e., advice concerning ongoing military operations and the allocation of forces among geographic and functional commands; evaluating the overall preparedness of the joint force; assessing technology and concept of operations advances to advise the Secretary of Defense regarding potential new and alternative joint military capabilities; developing doctrine and policy for the employment of the joint force; and recommending a budget to the Secretary of Defense for the activities of the unified and specified CCMDs. 
18
Preparation of the National Military Strategy includes the responsibility for assessing the "strategic environment," assessing the "military ways, ends, and means" of supporting the objectives in the National Security Strategy, developing "military options" to address the identified threats, assessing "joint force capabilities, 
13
99-433, 1986. 14
15
16
Staff, 2019;
and Lowrey, 2016, p. 14. 17
19
20
Recently, then-CJCS General Joseph Dunford successfully advocated for an increased role of the CJCS, specifically the role of global integrator, an authority legally added to the CJCS's mandate in 2016. 
21
22
23
24
25
26
The personnel that comprise the Joint Staff and report to the Chairman must be assigned in roughly equal numbers from the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force. Unlike the General Staff, person- 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
Grau and Bartles, 2016, p. 10. 28
29
30 Veneri, 2008, p. 424. 31
32 Jackson et al., 2020, p. 84
Presently, the Joint Staff is organized into eight Directorates, which encompass all aspects of military planning and operations. These Directorates typically are led by three-star generals or admirals, although exceptions may occur. The Directorates, their leaders as of October 2021, and their areas of responsibility are summarized in Table 
3
Figure 
3
2
The directorate titles in Figure 
3
2
34
Some of the responsibilities of the Russian General Staff are more closely aligned to that of a regional U.S. CCMD, but for the entire war effort rather than a specific theater of operations. For example, U.S. European Command (EUCOM) has the autonomy to develop operational plans, set the military exercise training schedule, and develop force planning requirements for the CCMD. The Russian General Staff retains the same responsibilities. 
35
In terms of equivalency, the Russian General Staff has the same responsibilities for long-term planning duties conducted by the U.S. Office of the Secretary of Defense and unified combatant commanders; elements of strategic transportation performed by USTRANSCOM [U.S. Transportation Command]; doctrinal and capabilities development, as well as equipment procurement for all branches of the Ministry of Defense. It even has an inspector-general like function for ensuring that its standards and regulations are adhered to. 36 
Since its inception, the Joint Staff has been expressly prohibited from functioning as a general staff. 
37
38
39
40
38
39
40
41
3
3
42
46
47
48
49
[i]t is the duty of the commander, with the help of staff, to exercise kontrol' over his subordinates, i.e. to check that they have carried out their orders, as an element of upravleniye voyskami. Kontrol' does not mean "control" but "monitoring" or "checking." 50 Thus, relative to the Joint Staff, the General Staff exercises significant C2 authorities over the armed forces, even absent operational control of general-purpose forces, and does so in a more expansive manner than any officers with command authority in the U.S. military. Recall that the officers of the GOU are embedded with fielded units and participate in day-to-day operations planning. In the Russian model, the General Staff acts as a mechanism to improve the information flow between the General Staff and lower-echelon C2 bodies-hence its deployment with fielded forces-plausibly serving as a support function. Yet, the General Staff simultaneously serves as a mechanism for ensuring that the information reported by lower-echelon commanders is accurate-i.e., a control function.
The scope of the General Staff's authority within this context thus in many ways contradicts the assessment of some experts that the General Staff does not have operational control of forces. Moreover, while the commanders of Military Districts bear full responsibility for the military operations in their respective areas of responsibility and the service branches and combat arms commands are responsible for training and equipping their respective troops, the presence of the officers of the Main Operations Directorate seems to ensure that the decisions at these lower echelons align with the plans developed by the Main Operations Directorate. 
51
52
53
54
55
56
The Russian General Staff and the Joint Staff have been tasked with two very different mandates: The General Staff is the "central body" responsible for ensuring Russia's defense, and the Joint Staff is responsible for providing military advice and advocating for jointness. Moreover, while their organizational structures are similar in some ways, these parallels appear to reflect that these two organizations are merely similar in type-i.e., they are both a military staff. Yet these two bodies are very different in kind. The General Staff does not compete with other military organizations for authority within the MoD. The General Staff sits above the services and the military district/OSK commanders in the chain of command. In the U.S. model, on the other hand, the Joint Staff is at best a peer of the services and CCMDs. The General Staff is thus not developing solely joint doctrine; it is developing all doctrine, and it has this more expansive role within each of its directorates.
Although there are certainly additional explanations, the differences in the mandates of these two bodies can in part be explained by historical experience and perceptions of the threats to the state. With its long history of being invaded (and being the invader) and its enormous land mass, the Russian military is postured for homeland defense with a heavy emphasis on ground forces. Expectations that a conflict will occur within or near its vast borders-which constitute several potential fronts to defend-require a C2 structure that allows for swift decisionmaking and a highly integrated defensive effort. In this context, imbuing a single, centralized body with the authority to coordinate and manage the state's defense appears logical. The United States places less emphasis on territorial defense, having historically benefited from peaceful relations with its nearest neighbors. Instead, the United States military is postured for force projection over vast distances and for its forces to execute combined operations with allies. In this context, it appears logical to give authority 
53
54
55
56
The preceding analysis highlighted key differences in the U.S. and Russian approaches to organizing their military staffs. It also highlighted how the functions that the U.S. Joint Staff and Russian General Staff serve in their respective militaries diverge in important respects. The analysis emphasized the substantial difference in the centrality of each organization within its respective national security decisionmaking processes. This section seeks to leverage the broad comparison presented in this chapter, in combination with the analysis in Chapter Two, to distill key, high-level insights regarding the potential implications of these two divergent organizational approaches.
The breadth of the General Staff's responsibilities and authorities are so expansive that Russia appears to have centralized strategy development, force planning and requirements, force structure, prioritization of resources, and the command and control of forces via the OSK commanders within one organization.
This model gives one body the responsibility and authority to make and prioritize decisions. Russia scholar Greg Whisler argues, for example, that the simplified organizational structure and clearly defined roles and responsibilities, with a powerful arbiter at the top, enables defense policy consistency over time, a greater ability to make hard strategic and organizational choices. 
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
The General Staff model is also structured to moderate the likelihood and impact of service parochialism. 
72
73
67
68
Bartles, 2019, p. 57;
and Golts, 2019, p. 159. 69
70
71
72 Donnelly, 1988, p. 144;
and Grau and Bartles, 2016, p. 12.
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
[t]he commander of the military district forces, as a rule, is a representative of the tank or motor rifle forces and has a thorough understanding of the algorithm of the work of the officials in the structural elements of the OSK in commanding the Ground Force grouping. However, at the present time he is in no way prepared to effectively command a force grouping of Air Force, Air Defense, and Naval forces that are included in the force structure of the military district. 
81
82
The career path of current General of the Army, Sergei Surovikin, also suggests Russia may be beginning to understand the constraints its model places on the ability to achieve jointness. When the VKS were first stood up in 2015, combining the Air Force, Air Defense, and Aerospace Defense Forces, the first Commander was the former Commander in Chief of the Russian Air Force, Colonel-General Viktor Bondarev. 
83
84
The high-level institutional comparison presented in this chapter reveals a couple of key insights. First, C2 takes very different forms in practice within the Russian and U.S. military contexts. The Chairman of the Joint Staff does not possess command authority-a deliberate decision that reflects the United States' longstanding reluctance to vest too much military authority in one individual and the concern that military demands and considerations might dominate political demands. 
85
83
84
85
The General Staff and the Balance of Power Very much is required from the Chief of the General Staff. A governing body such as the General Staff, which has traditionally high authority and great rights, if not carefully analyzed, systematically monitored, and not corrected in time, can turn into a bureaucratic machine working primarily for itself.
-S. F. Akhromeev and G. M. Kornienko, 1992 
1
This intuition was largely borne out during the 2008 reforms implemented by then-Minister of Defense Anatoly Serdyukov and then-Chief of Staff Makarov. The overall purpose of these reforms was to create mobile forces with high readiness units equipped with modern equipment and weapons. 
2
3
4
5
6
At the end of the Cold War, the Russian military found itself in a state of chaos. This period is described by one former Russian Chief of the General Staff as "so unbalanced that it was unrealistic to talk about any pros- 
1
2 Nikolay Makarov, "Reformi Prodolzhayutsa," Armeiskii Zbornik, No. 8, August 2013. 
3 Makarov, 2013. 4
5
7
In this chapter, we begin by explaining the early, fitful attempts at defense reform, which were largely stymied by Russia's defense bureaucracy. 
8
In the 1990s and 2000s, the Russian military found itself in dire need of reform. At least four rounds of various reforms were proposed to, among other initiatives, reduce the size of the Russian military; reduce the use of conscripts-i.e., professionalize the military; create a professional noncommissioned officer corps; change officer oversight and training; and implement greater political oversight over military spending. 
10
11
7
Gazeta, 2005
-11-19NBP-No. 089, November 19, 2005. 8
9 Westerlund, 2021, p. 41;
Renz, 2018, p. 197
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
13 Baluevskii, 2006
14
15
16
17
18
20
21
22
23
24
25
That said, some reforms were attempted throughout this early period. Some of these reform efforts failed because of a lack of funds or because the concepts being implemented were ill-advised, among other reasons external to the military. However, the General Staff and the military played a role in stymieing reform efforts by taking a variety of active and passive steps to avoid and slow the implementation of these policies. 
26
27
28
29
30
Culture plays an essential enabling role in explaining the military's ability to resist reform. As Mahoney argues, "Among its different functions, culture mediates a society's approach to reality by supplying an understanding of what is reasonable or 'rational.'" 
31
32
33
34
35
36
Although the strategic visions and concepts that hold sway in the General Staff emphasize non-contact warfare and the employment of other tools of state power (other than military force) to achieve political objectives, Russian writing on these topics began to find traction only in the early 2000s. 
37
38
39
40
41
[t]he legacy of World War II is still considered, in our military academies, as the finest of modern military tactics, operational art and strategy. Suggestions that drastically would cut numbers in exchange for increasing quality are dismissed as pro-Western diversions that are intended to "disarm Russia" in the event of an imminent U.S.-lead NATO invasion. 
42
Finally, as detailed in Chapters Two and Three, the General Staff specifically and the Russian military in general exist as largely autonomous bodies, and this was particularly the case prior to 2008. There are few truly "civilian" individuals who staff the MoD, except for (most notably) Shoigu. This has been a long-standing historical practice. Distinct advantages accrue from such institutional autonomy and reverence. Conveniently, by monopolizing these positions, the military also has been able to claim a monopoly on military-technical knowledge. 
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
Just as instructive as understanding how the military was able to obstruct reform is an understanding of the elements that had to materialize and coincide to enable the 2008 reforms. Discussions of military reforms began as early as the 1980s in the Soviet Union; even then, the administrative reforms that were announced and implemented were later revoked when the main proponents of the reforms left their positions. 
51
Although accurate figures are difficult to come by, the official Russian military death toll during the first Chechen War was reported to be roughly 6,000 soldiers; independent calculations suggest the number is perhaps double. Civilian causalities are estimated to be as high as 100,000. 
52
46 Renz, 2018, pp. 52-55.
48
49
50
51 Felgenhauer, 2005. 52
53
54
55
56
57
58
During the first Chechen war, Yeltsin ordered the military to "employ all means at the state's disposal" to swiftly quash Chechen demands for independence, contrary to the public disagreement of his generals that such an action would be a "blood bath." 59 Perhaps ironically, this horrific performance and experience left Yeltsin unable to implement the reforms that were so clearly needed, having materially weakened his political standing. 
60
61
62
63
Even with the necessary domestic support, efforts at reform were stymied for lack of a Minister of Defense who was willing to weather the public firestorm that would inevitably result from carrying out the decision to fire thousands of military personnel and bring accountability to the military's financial system. Enter Anatoly Serdyukov, formerly the head of the Federal Tax Service and the first true outsider to be placed at the helm of the MoD. U.S. Ambassador William J. Burns described Serdyukov's appointment in the following manner:
Serdyukov has his work cut out for him in bringing order to a ministry badly in need of reform. While he lacks military credentials, Serdyukov has proven capable of making tough decisions-and serving as a hatchet man when called upon. 
64
65
67
68
Though the exact size of Russia's Armed Forces is notoriously opaque, the number of personnel in Russia's military was well over 2 million after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. This figure shrank to 1.2 million in 1999 but largely appears to have stayed in the range of 1.1-1.3 million in subsequent years. 
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
As noted in earlier sections, a key objection to previous reform efforts was the contention that the military was insufficiently resourced to undertake such an overhaul. 
78
79
80
81
82
The final explanatory variable required to understand the reforms that were initiated in 2008 is demographics. Russia simply did not have access to the same masses of manpower to which the Soviet Union could avail itself. For example, in 2009, an estimated three-quarters of a million people would need to be drafted to maintain the numerical strength of a million-person military. That same year, only 840,000 men turned 18, more than half of whom would be eligible for deferments based on health-or college-related reasons. 
83
84
85
86
Understanding the fraught history of Russia's reform efforts, particularly during the decade prior to 2008, offers several instructive insights regarding the role of the General Staff in decision-and policymaking. First, it is striking how many factors had to coincide to undermine the military's resistance to reform. Legacy ideas and vested bureaucratic interests held the peacetime military decisionmaking process hostage. The centuries-long militarization of Russian culture and the high degree of autonomy granted to the military organization allowed these concepts and authority structures to persist.
And it is not clear that the 2008 reforms have fully broken through these legacy ideas and deference to the military. For example, the Russian military has not abandoned the idea of possessing a manpower reserve available for mobilization. While the 2008 reforms were designed to transition the Russian military to a permanently ready, professional force, a 2015 presidential decree provided funds to the MoD for the formation of a mobilization reserve, although little progress has been made as of the time of this writing, and the mobilization base remained largely dormant in the 2010s. 
87
88
Second, this history illustrates the critical peacetime role of the General Staff in the process of reforming the Russian Armed Forces and in preparing the military for the threats of the post-Cold War environment. Given the alignment of authority and responsibility within this one body, when the General Staff as an organization supported reform, the speed of change was impressive. On the other hand, in this chapter, we also showed that when the organization opposed change, it was clear that the organization possessed sufficient autonomy to choose to act in its own best interests, and to do so for at least a decade. Moreover, the performance of Russian Armed Forces one month into its February 2022 invasion of Ukraine suggests that there are limits to the kinds of conflicts that this reformed military is suited to fight: Large-scale operations present 
84 Felgenhauer, 2009.
86
87 Reach, Blanc, and Geist, 2022, pp. 44-45. 88
This case study thus demonstrates that the General Staff is an organization like any other, and the extreme degree of autonomy, responsibility, and authority invested in this institution creates an opportunity for a similarly extreme degree of obstructionism. The General Staff's compliance was crucial for implementing the 2008 reforms. However, these reforms shied away from implementing the kinds of systemic changes that might have curtailed the independence of the General Staff, thus leaving open the potential for this body to again resist, stymie, or roll back reforms. Without the support of the General Staff, at least some portion of the reforms-and the military effectiveness gained from them-could quickly unravel. Although the 2022 war was still in its early stages as of this writing, the challenges impeding the Russian military during the first month of its invasion of Ukraine lend credence to the contention that relatively few barriers prevent institutional interests within the military from reasserting their dominance and acting in ways that undermine the 2008 reforms, and these challenges call into question the Russian Armed Forces' ability to operate effectively in a large-scale, complex operation.
Third, this history demonstrates that while informal personal networks might dominate national security decisionmaking consistent with the civil-military relations literature, bureaucratic rules and procedures appear to dominate military decisionmaking as it relates to the preparedness of the Armed Forces for potential conflict. Aligning authority and responsibility to such an extreme degree within one institution raises obvious concerns about the ability of political leaders to ensure that the military institution serves the interests of the state rather than itself. It certainly appears to be the case that the use of force by Russia reflects the will of political leaders and not the military. 
89
The preceding chapters largely examined the Russian General Staff's behavior, organization, and culture through an operation-agnostic lens. The purpose of Chapters Five and Six is to place this body in the context of two recent military efforts, Russian military operations in Ukraine (2014-2021) and Syria (2015-2019). These case studies afford the opportunity to observe the roles, responsibilities, and authorities of the General Staff in practice.
We selected these two cases because they represent recent examples of Russia's post-Cold War military engagements abroad. 
1
2
3
In the wake of the ousting of then-President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014 and the ushering in of a new government following months of mass demonstrations in Ukraine's capital city of Kyiv, nearly 1,000 km away on the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea, anonymous "volunteer" forces seized all strategic sites across the peninsula, including the Crimean parliament, where new authorities took power in a matter of weeks. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
4
14
While the Crimean annexation and conflict in the Donbas have been subject to much scholarship and analysis, little of that analysis has addressed the role of the Russian General Staff in these campaigns specifically. The following sections will examine both campaigns through this specific lens.
The question of who influenced the decision to seize Crimea is hotly debated in scholarly and analytical circles. Putin has declared that the decision was his own, in reaction to events unfolding on the ground. 
15
16
17
18
19
20
14
15
16
17
18
19
Vendil Pallin, 2007;
and Taylor, 2011. 20
Even less concrete evidence is available on Russia's decision to militarily intervene in the Donbas. Details on Russia's role in the early separatist unrest and skirmishes remain murky. This is in large part by design because of the denied nature of Russia's operation. Furthermore, the maze of actors involved-from official Ukrainian military forces and Ukraine's volunteer battalions on the one hand to pro-Russian separatists, Russian mercenaries and contractors, Russian forces, and foreign fighters on the other-makes it even more challenging to pinpoint when the Russian military's role officially commenced and who was responsible for this decision. 
21
22
Starting in early March 2014, prior to the Crimean referendum, reports of large numbers of Russian troops exercising and massing along Ukraine's eastern border piqued anxieties in Kyiv and in Western capitals. 
23
24
25
26
27
Beginning in April 2014, the EU began to sanction various Russians, including former GRU chief Igor Sergun, citing his "responsib[ility] for the activity of GRU officers in Eastern Ukraine" as justification. 
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
Once the Kremlin decided to intervene in Crimea, the operation had to be planned and executed. This became the point at which the General Staff-and more specifically the GRU-seems to have become more central. The GRU was not alone in its efforts because the FSB (successor to the Soviet-era KGB), its Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), and the Ministry of Internal Affairs are also believed to have operated in Ukraine broadly and Crimea specifically. 
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
What little we can say about the C2 and chain of command of the General Staff-aligned forces in Crimea is extrapolated from what is known about Russian C2 and command structures more broadly. The GRU-Spetsnaz brigades report directly to GRU leadership, which is subsumed under the General Staff. That said, when operating in combat, these units often are loaned to the territorial commander(s) in charge of the operation "subject to the final authority of the General Staff." 
55
Additionally, evidence tying key Wagner personnel with the Russian military chain of command and security service has surfaced. For instance, Dmitry Utkin, whose nom de guerre, Wagner, served as the namesake for the PMC, is believed to have served as a field commander for the organization, including in Ukraine. 
56
57
The evidence related to the nascent phases of the war in the Donbas is insufficient to determine exactly how prominent the Russian military's role was in precipitating the conflict. However, by piecing together snippets of evidence revealed by the Ukraine's security service responsible for counterintelligence, the Security Service of Ukraine (Informatsionnaya sistema boyevogo upravleniya, or SBU), and investigative organizations and journalists, we can sketch out the broad contours of General Staff-aligned forces in the execution of the Donbas operation.
The presence of Russian forces, their arms, and their equipment on the battlefields in eastern Ukraine has been substantiated by satellite imagery, video footage, and still images disseminated through social media, interviews, and firsthand accounts, and by the capture and arrests of GRU operatives. 
58
59
55
Bartles, 2016, p. 11;
Galeotti, 2020. 56
57
58
April 30, 2014. 59
70
71
72
73
74
Lastly, the early political leaders that emerged in key positions in the newly formed DNR and LNR, notably Aleksandr Borodai (Russian political consultant turned DNR prime minister), his replacement Alexandr Zakharchenko, and Igor Plotinsky (Minister of Defense then later Prime Minister of the LNR), are all suspected of having ties to the Russian General Staff through various indirect connections, as depicted in Figure 
5
Because relationships can affect the degree of influence that actors typically wield on decisions, we examined the networks of people and organizations that appear to be involved in the Ukraine case study using our analysis of publicly available documentation. 
75
76
70
71
72
73
Kofman et al., 2017, p. 60. 74
75
5
78
5
5
5
5
It is also noteworthy that the node representing Putin (number 29) appears in a cluster of red nodes (those with known Russian affiliations) and is a few steps away from the central cluster of actors in the figure. In that part of the figure, Valerii Gerasimov (number 26) appears to be a bridging node between three periph-78 Network figures were produced using Gephi. The same force-directed, multilevel algorithmic layout was used to space nodes in each figure; see Y. F. Hu, "Efficient and High-Quality Force-Directed Graph Drawing," Mathematica Journal, Vol. 10,  No. 1, 2006.  It is likely that this network figure does not fully capture the actual influence of peripheral actors or even absent actors given data limitations. This limitation, along with similar limitations, such as the unclear role of many actors, underscores the complex and ambiguous domestic relationships that informed Russia's engagement in Ukraine.
Lessons Learned by the General Staff from Crimea and the Donbas When Igor Sergun assumed the role as chief of the GRU in 2011, the General Staff's intelligence service was suffering from a tarnished reputation and diminished political clout. The GRU's stale intelligence and inaccurate analyses during Russia's 2008 conflict with Georgia contributed to several Russian military missteps and subsequent loss of cachet for the GRU. 
79
80
81
82
83
Although they are not explicitly documented in the Russian military-scientific literature, we can nevertheless speculate about the types of lessons the General Staff may have learned based on the observable events related to the seizure of Crimea and Russia's military operations in eastern Ukraine. First, General Staff leadership may have observed that the military's use of secrecy and deniability can prove operationally advantageous when used in limited, tightly scoped operations, as was the case in Crimea. However, this secrecy also placed significant constraints on the Russian General Staff's orchestration of the conflict in the Donbas. By continuing to publicly maintain the narrative that the conflict in eastern Ukraine was a civil war-in which Russian regular forces had no part-the Russian military establishment was forced to work with and through proxies and others. These proxies and other actors were not directly subordinate to the General Staff, which would have been the case had the operation been conducted in a more overt, conventional manner.
Relatedly, reliance on proxies and other shadowy figures that fell outside the formal chain of command and military institutions-as was the case in the Donbas-introduced a unique element of unpredictability that sharply contrasts with the General Staff model of centralized C2 and the practice of closely monitoring and overseeing decisions made at lower echelons. A similar trade-off between the advantages of using proxies and the desire for operational oversight is seen in the Syria conflict, as is discussed in the next chapter. The reliance arguably led to a crucial turning point in the conflict-the downing of MH17-which united support within Western governments for more-robust sanctions against Russia. Although not explicitly part of this analysis, it is worth noting that, as of this writing in early 2022, Russia appears to have chosen to use secrecy again in service of its recent invasion of Ukraine, which, at this early stage of the conflict, appears to have been a stumbling block in the military's initial performance. Notably, the initial evidence emanating from the evolving conflict indicates that personnel in the Russian armed services, including mid-grade officers, were not apprised of Russia's plans to invade Ukraine in advance. 
84
In recent years, the Russian intervention in the conflict in Syria has served as a laboratory for the General Staff to test new operational concepts, C2 systems, and weapon systems. The conflict also offers a window into the influence of the General Staff in Russian national security decisionmaking and the relative influence of different components of the General Staff, the General Staff's relationship with nonstate actors, and ties between the General Staff and foreign militaries. This case study begins with an overview of Russian intervention in the Syrian conflict with a particular emphasis on the role of the General Staff in decisionmaking related to the conflict. It then discusses the key lessons that the General Staff has learned from the conflict in Syria.
With regard to strategy and planning, readiness, C2, and coordination, this Syria case shows that the General Staff undertook all of its traditional roles and responsibilities in the conflict while testing new methods of command and control and new weapon systems and enabling Russian forces to gain significant hybrid warfare experience. Regular Russian forces-ground troops, fighter jets, bombers, transporters, reconnaissance aircraft, and naval assets-flowed into Syria, and the General Staff developed the strategy and planning for the employment of these forces. The General Staff also appears to have leveraged the Syria conflict as a means of increasing readiness; a significant number of Russian service members cycled through Syria. The conflict also provided the General Staff with an opportunity to employ and test new and emerging C2 concepts. A combat control group (gruppa boevogo upravleniya-GBU) led by officers from the GOU, was established to provide in-theater oversight of the campaign. Finally, the NTsUO was used to provide a mechanism for coordination among the General Staff, the MoD, combat forces on the ground in Syria, and Russian political leadership.
The Russian military began deploying its forces to Syria in late summer 2015. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
The overall C2 scheme for Russia's intervention in Syria has been described as a "three-tiered structure." 
45
46
47
6
49
51
52
53
6
In terms of the actors who dominate the Syria case study, most appear to be individuals who are formally affiliated with either the Russian or foreign governments. This network is composed of one component held together by three Russian actors, Putin (number 17), Shoigu (number 19), and Gerasimov (number 9). Gerasimov has the highest degree centrality score (nine ties), followed by Shoigu (seven ties) and Putin (four ties). 
59
61
In addition to the insights generated through the network analysis described in the preceding section, our analysis of the Syria case study reveals several insights regarding the role of the General Staff in decisionmaking and the importance of the Syria conflict for the General Staff.
The conflict in Syria functioned as a laboratory for the General Staff to experiment with and test new operational concepts and C2 systems. In a March 2019 speech at the annual meeting of the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, Gerasimov characterized the Syria conflict as playing an "important role" in the development Russia's "strategy of limited action." This strategy, he explained, relies on "self-sufficient groupings of troops" to achieve a limited set of tasks in an overseas conflict. In his speech, Gerasimov highlighted that the Syria conflict had further tested the use of Russian forces to conduct "humanitarian operations" to protect the local civilian population. 
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
73
75
76
77 Dvornikov, 2018
. 78 Lavrov, 2018, pp. 3, 6. 79
80 Lavrov, 2018, pp. 24-25. 81
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
97
98
99
100
101
Drawing Conclusions About the Role of the General Staff in National Security Decisionmaking
Having characterized the roles, responsibilities, and authorities of the General Staff in statute and practice, placed this institution in comparative context, described the fraught process of modernizing the Russian military, and detailed the role of the General Staff in practice, in this chapter, we present our conclusions regarding what the organization of the General Staff reveals about the leadership system it serves and the balance of power within Russia's national security decisionmaking structure.
First, we position the General Staff within the context of the broader Russian national security system, considering how this formal institution interacts with the informal Russian power structure. Although the tendency in the literature has been to focus on the question of whether the Russian General Staff and military have a seat at the table in foreign policy decisionmaking, this binary question shrouds important nuances about the General Staff's role. 
1
Second, we offer some tentative conclusions about what these various analytical facets suggest regarding Russian views on the relative importance of the variety of potential threats to the state-domestic security, crisis management, and war.
The Russian foreign policy and national security decisionmaking system has both formal and informal network elements. Although formal elements of an organization, such as official titles or codified documentation, including laws and charters, can provide a map for how actors are supposed to relate to one another, informal relationships speak to how decisionmaking is conducted in practice. Formal and informal networks can be highly correlated or divergent depending on the context of the organization or setting.
In the case of the Kremlin, the foreign policy and national security decisionmaking system can be described as having two parts: the formal system, which is composed of government bodies, advisory boards, and key senior personnel, and a second informal system that is based on patronage and consists of networks of elites and other loyalists who advise Kremlin leaders on sensitive national security decisions. Membership in these two systems is not mutually exclusive, and a few individuals have influence in both. The Kremlin decisionmaking system is an insular system. Those who are on the bottom or middle rungs of the hierarchy try to move up in the hierarchy through formal positions, and those on the outer rims of influence attempt to move inward closer to the center horizontally through informal connections. 
2
3
These dynamics are particularly visible in the case of the decision to intervene in Crimea, as discussed in detail in Chapter Five. If decisionmaking in Russia operated as a formal system, we would expect Lavrov to have occupied a seat at the table for the February 22-23, 2014, meeting during which Putin reportedly instructed his confidants to "start work on the return of Crimea to being part of Russia." 
4
5
6
7
Given this broad consensus that power is exercised informally and decisions are made outside "welldefined constitutional bodies or bureaucratic institutions . . . behind closed doors by unknown individuals," it logically follows that the influence of the General Staff and the military in general would flow through the Chief of the General Staff's personal relationship with either the Minister of Defense or 
Putin. 8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15 8 Marten, 2015, p. 193
9 Menning and Mahoney, 1982, p. 92. 10
11
12 Westerlund, 2021, pp. 42-43.
Here too, the Crimean case reinforces this conclusion. As discussed in Chapter Five, if we are to take Putin and Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov at their word, the decision to intervene in Crimea "was a personal decision of the head of state. He was the only person who could and had to make it and who made it," in the words of Peskov. 
16
Passive and Active Influence: More Complicated Than a Seat at the Table Beyond questions about the relative weight of formal versus informal influence within the Russian system, crucial nuance is lost in this relatively simplistic question of whether the General Staff participates in foreign policy and national security decisionmaking. Multiple passive and active opportunities exist for the General Staff to influence the Russian decisionmaking process, other than participating in the actual decision to use military force. As was shown in Chapter Four, the military has numerous ex ante and ex post opportunities to influence said decisionmaking. First, as this report has demonstrated, the General Staff has the primary role in determining what kind of military is available to decisionmakers before any particular foreign policy decision is made. Second, as this report also has shown, once a decision has been made it must be implemented, and the General Staff again plays the central role in determining the effectiveness and capabilities of the Russian Armed Forces in this implementation role. Thus, the formal decisionmaking system of the General Staff appears to uniquely condition the informal decisionmaking system that dominates national security.
The first section of this report detailed the central role of the General Staff in leading Russia's strategy, doctrine, force planning, capability development, and procurement processes. For example, the Main Operations Directorate sets the direction of development of the Armed Forces based on its long-term threat assessment, develops defense policy, defines training and equipment requirements, and plans for new concepts of operations. As a result of this broad authority, Galeotti argues, the Directorate is well positioned to influence, promote, and block policy, "especially when there is no clear steer from the Minister or the Kremlin." 
17
Of course, the inverse is also plausible. That is, political decisions and constraints can also influence how operations are planned and executed. For example, the desire to maintain plausible deniability at the political and diplomatic levels appears to have affected how many Russian forces could go into Donbas, how proxies were used, how forces were disguised, how personnel were recruited, and how their service and combat deaths were handled.
And, as we showed in Chapter Four, the General Staff, with its attachment to legacy ideas around conscription and mass mobilization, materially affected the readiness and structure of the forces available to political leaders in both Chechen wars and in Georgia. Russia's international prestige collapsed in tandem with its military, and Renz argues, "This did not escape the country's political elite." 
18
The decade of obstructionism orchestrated by military elites constrained meaningful reform of Russia's Armed Forces. Russia's conventional military disintegrated as the General Staff held on to its strategic visions of fighting a great power war with operational concepts fueled by mass conscription until multiple factors forced a change in the late 2000s. The General Staff and military elites thus enfeebled a key foreign policy tool and constrained the options available to decisionmakers. Although circumstances have improved and the Russian military appears to have obtained a greater level of competence, the circumstances continue to exist for the General Staff and military elites to reverse these reforms. If at some future point the General Staff's support for reforms is lost and institutional interests become the greater priority, it seems plausible that at least some portion of the reforms-and the military effectiveness that Russian forces appear to have gained from them-could quickly unravel.
Finally, the General Staff plays a leading role in setting the conditions that Russia's Armed Forces could encounter given its responsibilities in facilitating security agreements with other countries, including arms control agreements. The General Staff continues to have a substantial role in the preparation of official positions and recommendations for Russian government delegations to international negotiations on security and arms control matters. The General Staff analyzes and plans negotiations and, in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, prepares the "draft directives" for Russian representatives engaged in the talks. Thus, the General Staff serves as an advisory body to the MoD and government more broadly. The General Staff also monitors the weapons development programs of the United States and other NATO countries to ensure both strategic and conventional parity. The General Staff would be the implementing body of the results of any such negotiations, specifically ones on the reduction of strategic offensive weapons, which require the General Staff to determine how to implement the agreement. 
19
After a decision is made, someone needs to implement it. The self-reinforcing cycle noted previouslywhereby Russian decisionmakers tend to exercise military instruments for lack of more-robust alternativeshas created the conditions under which the bodies responsible for actualizing Kremlin decisionmaking has increasingly become the General Staff and Russian Armed Forces. The relative effectiveness of Russia's Armed Forces in Ukraine and Syria and the consequent uptick in support from Kremlin leadership have intensified this cycle and further raised the influence of the military. 
20
21
19 Baluyevski, 2006. 20 Andrew Radin, Lynn E. Davis, Edward Geist, Eugeniu Han, Dara Massicot, Matthew Povlock, Clint Reach, Scott Boston, Samuel Charap, William Mackenzie, Katya Migacheva, Trevor Johnston, and
22
How the General Staff goes about implementing the direction of political leaders also constitutes a source of influence. In this regard, both case studies appear to offer an instructive lesson concerning the extent to which the General Staff may be willing to compromise on core values for operational success. For example, in the Donbas, the General Staff appears to have at least indirectly participated in covering up soldiers' deaths in the name of plausible deniability. In Syria, the General Staff worked with mercenary formations-even though such formations are illegal in Russia-seemingly to increase the likelihood of operational success and preserve plausible deniability. These examples, although not enabling definitive conclusions, suggest that there is a culture within the General Staff of succeeding at all costs in service of military objectives, career advancement, satisfying superiors, or some combination thereof.
The Syria and Ukraine cases in particular, and this report in general, thus offer practitioners and analysts a richer understanding of the ways in which the Russian military establishment broadly and the Russian General Staff specifically behave in practice-e.g., how they perceive the threat environment, plan, and operate. Although our analysis did not examine the 2022 conflict in Ukraine, some of the findings of our research nevertheless are relevant to the war. Almost four weeks into Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, signs that the Russian military has so far struggled to achieve objectives in Ukraine through its use of force have surfaced. Reports have appeared of airborne troops dropped deep behind Ukrainian lines having become cut off from resupply. The now infamous 40-mile-long convoy of Russian armor has encountered many logistical and other impediments on its way to Kyiv. 
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
It is also plausible that the broader, bottom-up issues discussed in this report-from the General Staff's tight grip on information and its treatment of knowledge as currency, to the military's institutional resistance to reforms, to the General Staff's highly hierarchical C2 structure, and the influence of corruption on the armed services-are also partly responsible for the Russian military's performance in Ukraine thus far. 
30
However, it seems implausible that Russian political and military leaders would concoct a similar strategy in the context of a Russia-NATO war. Perhaps most prominently, there would be no expectation of indifference to Russian invading forces. Additionally, we know from the case study of Syria that Russian forces can operate in a more sophisticated combined-arms manner, employing UAVs to suppress electronic signals and find and fix targets and using precision-guided munitions to destroy targets from stand-off ranges; these tactics have not been systematically employed at scale at least one month into the conflict in Ukraine. The morale of Russian soldiers and thus their will to fight also might plausibly be different in the context of a conflict with NATO. And it also seems plausible that Russia would have less incentive to hold portions of its more sophisticated conventional weapons in reserve in such a conflict. Finally, Russian emphasis in the air likely would be on the defensive-denying air superiority to NATO as opposed to trying to achieve it.
Given the interaction of these factors, the difficulty of knowing which factors might arise in a potential conflict with NATO, and the reality that the war in Ukraine seems far from over and future developments could reveal important additional information about the state of Russian forces, further research will be required to develop stronger findings regarding the future implications of this conflict.
However, the analysis in Chapter Four suggests that military reforms might be neither politically possible nor necessarily be able to improve Russia's ability to effectively fight absent structural changes to combat corruption within the military and military-industrial complex. History might at least rhyme again, with Putin-similar to Yeltsin in the wake of the first Chechen war-finding himself in public disagreement with his generals and having materially weakened his political standing. It is possible that, even if Russian forces eventually prevail in Ukraine in some form, Putin's political position might have been so damaged that focusing on military reform or identifying individuals willing to implement these reforms simply will be untenable. Depending on the damage to the Russian economy by Western sanctions at that future point, this reform challenge will only be more difficult. 
31
Mindful that the General Staff conditions the policy options available to decisionmakers and of the increasing move toward further centralization and top-down leadership demonstrated by the case studies of Ukraine and Syria, this concluding section considers what the organization of the General Staff reveals about the leadership system that it serves and the threats that the General Staff views as most pressing.
First, civilian executive-level leaders ultimately make high-level decisions with foreign policy implications and exercise relatively more control over the military than prior to the 2008 reforms. However, the expansive roles, responsibilities, and authorities the General Staff has retained suggest that the tendency to defer to the military on lesser decisions remains robust. Moreover, the military continues to influence political decisions in all the indirect ways mentioned previously. This suggests that the Russian system's prioritization of attachment to personal authority and elite prerogatives-rather than legal-rational or constitutional considerations-continues to dominate. 
32
33
34
35
36
Finally, our research suggests that the General Staff may have an increasingly central role in the Russian national security decisionmaking process, shaping this process, and implementing those decisions. Moreover, the 2013 and 2020 Regulations expanded the internally focused responsibilities of the General Staff, assigning this body with the responsibility for mobilizing and coordinating all of Russia's various forces to confront domestic issues. This legal remit certainly gives this body a more powerful role over internal problems. However, the central focus of the General Staff still appears to be confronting external-not internal-threats. 
35
Studies, Vol. 33, No. 1, 2020a, pp. 97-98. 36
55
SOURCES: RAND analysis of Joint Chiefs of Staff, "J1: Manpower and Personnel," webpage, undated-b; "J2: Joint Staff Intelligence," webpage, undated-c; "J3: Operations," webpage, undated-d; "J4: Logistics," webpage, undated-e; "J5: Strategy, Plans, and Policy," webpage, undated-f; "J6: Command, Control, Communications, and Computers/Cyber," webpage, undated-g; "J7: Joint Force Development," webpage, undated-h; and "J8: Force Structure, Resources, and Assessment," webpage, undated-i.
41  
41  
A. V. Dvornikov, "Forms of Combat Employment and Organization of Command and Control of Integrated Force Groupings in the Theater of Military Operations," Bulletin of the Academy of Military Sciences,Vol. 2, No. 63, 2018, p. 5; and  Mark Galeotti, "The Main Operations Directorate: The Head and the Heart of the General Staff," Mayak Intelligence, 2021, pp.12-13.   
The term power ministries is one of several (others being force ministries and power agencies) used in scholarly and analytical circles to refer to, for example, Russian security services and military bodies. For a discussion of definitions, see Carolina Vendil Pallin, "The Russian Power Ministries: Tool and Insurance of Power," Journal ofSlavic Military Studies, Vol. 20, No. 1,  2007; and Brian D. Taylor, State Building in Putin's Russia: Policing and Coercion After Communism, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2011.   
Alecsandr M.Golts and Tonya L. Putnam, "State Militarism and Its Legacies: Why Military Reform Has Failed in Russia,"  International Security, Vol. 29, No. 2, Fall 2004.    
Viacheslav Zherebtsov, "On Some Directions of Russian Armed Forces Organizational Development at the Present Stage," Armeyskiy Sbornik, April 1996.
"Shoigu rasskazal o moshchnosti superkomp'yutera Tsentra upravleniya oboronoi," RBK,
December 31, 2016.
Aleksei Egorov, "Voennaya priemka. Natsional'nyi tsentr upravleniya oboronoi. Chast' 1. Dezhurnaya smena," Telekanal  Zvezda, December 15, 2019a.   
Makhmut A. Gareev, "Point of View: General Staff  Versus the Committee of Chiefs of Staff," Nezavisimoe voennoe obozrenie,
July 12, 2002.
  120  Shaposhnikov, as retold in Gareev,
2003.121
Gareev, 2003.
U.S. Code, Title 10, Armed Forces.
Steven L. Rearden, Council of War: A History of the Joint Chiefs ofStaff, 1942-1991, Washington, D.C.: National Defense  University Press, 2012, pp. xi, 2,  
Joint Chiefs of Staff, "The Joint Chiefs of Staff Celebrates 72 Years Today," July 26, 2019.
Steven L. Rearden, The Role and Influence of the Chairman: A Short History, Washington, D.C.: Joint History Office, Office of the Director, Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, September 2011, p. 2.
Rearden, 2011, pp. 3-4; and  Nathan S. Lowrey, The Chairmanship of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 1949-2016, Washington, D.C.: Joint History Office, Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2016, p. 6.
Rearden, 2011, pp.  
8-9.  See also Carl H. Builder, The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1989.   
10 U.S.C. § 155.
Note that the services and OSKs are responsible for combat training in the Russian model. The General Staff and the OSKs are responsible for operational training-"the capabilities of the C2 system and abilities of commanders and their staffs to execute war plans." SeeWhisler, 2020b, p. 246.   
Joint Chiefs of Staff, DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Defense, last updated November 2021.
For example, see Charles K. Bartles, "Defense Reforms of Russian Defense Minister Anatolii Serdyukov," Journal of Slavic MilitaryStudies, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2011; McDermott and Bartles, 2020, p. 12; and Bartles, 2019, p. 56.    
We make this distinction of general-purpose forces because the Strategic Rocket Forces and Russian Airborne Troops are controlled by the Supreme High Command, which is directly subordinate to the General Staff. Thus, the General Staff can give the order to "pull the trigger" to this subset of Russian forces. SeeBartles, 2019, p. 52.   
Whisler, 2020b, p. 256.   
This does not foreclose the ability of the General Staff to incorporate lessons learned, in general, which the General Staff does appear to be quite proficient at, as we discuss in the Syria case study in Chapter Six.
Westerlund, 2021, p. 56.   
We exclude the
Russian invasion of Ukraine from this chapter; that conflict commenced after the study's period of analysis had concluded.
2
Lucian Kim, "Kremlin TV: Vladimir Putin's New Faux Documentary Is Trying to Rewrite the History of His Own Aggression," Slate,
March 19, 2015.
6
According to scholar James Sherr, the labyrinthine nature of Russia's operation in the Donbas is in fact reflective of the state of Russia's environs:
Service in the Black Sea Fleet, for instance, functioned as a cover for approximately ten GRU and FSB intelligence and counter intelligence detachments during this period (Mark Galeotti, Putin's Hydra: Inside Russia's Intelligence Services, policy brief, European Council on Foreign Relations, May 2016c, p. 4).
DFRLab, "Watchdog Finds Russian General's Separatist Ties with a Watch," blog post, Medium, November 21, 2017. In a 2017 gaffe, DNR leadership publicly gifted Istrakov a watch in commemoration of his "significant personal contribution to the formation and development of the Donetsk People's Republic," a gesture that the DNR christened in a formal document published on its website.
Rácz, 2020.
Copp and Tucker, 2022;
and Strobel, 2022.
Laila Bassam and Tom Perry, "How Iranian General Plotted out Syrian Assault in Moscow," Reuters, October 6,
Betweenness centrality is a measure that captures the extent to which a node lies on the shortest path to all other nodes; see Linton C. Freeman, "Centrality in Social Networks: Conceptual Clarification," Social Networks, Vol.1, No. 3, 19781, No. 3,  -1979. .  In essence, a node with a high betweenness centrality score connects different parts of a network.
A notable exception to this point isWesterlund (2021), in which the author considers both the willingness and ability of the Armed Forces to comply with political policy preferences.
For the purposes of this report, we use the following definition of power: "the ability to exert traction inside the system, or to transmit ideas and lobby for benefits or changes in course," per Fiona Hill, "Understanding and Deterring Russia: U.S. Poli-
Bettina Renz, "Civil-Military Relations and Russian Military Modernisation," in Roger N. McDermott, Bertil Nygren, and  Carolina Vendil Pallin, eds., The Russian Armed Forces in Transition: Economic, Geopolitical and Institutional Uncertainties,  Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2012, p. 204.    
Mikhail Tsypkin, "Lessons Not to Learn: Post-Communist Russia," in Thomas C. Bruneau and Florina Cristiana Matei,  eds., The Routledge Handbook of Civil-Military Relations, Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2013, p. 120; and Renz, 2012, p. 196.   
"Decision on Crimea Made Solely byPutin," 2014.    
Galeotti, 2021, p. 8.   
Galeotti, 2021, p. 10.    
Max Hauptman, Convoy Outside of Kyiv Is 'Stalled'-and a Big Sitting Duck," Task and Purpose,
March 3, 2022.
Sam Jones, John Paul Rathbone, and Demetri Sevastopulo, "'A Serious Failure': Scale of Russia's Military Blunders Becomes Clear," Financial Times,
March 12, 2022.
Jack Watling, "Just How Tall Are Russian Soldiers?" RUSI Defence Systems, Vol. 24, March 11, 2022.    
Watling, 2022.
Jones, Rathbone, and Sevastopulo, 2022.
Mark Galeotti, "Spooks in the Kremlin," Foreign Policy,April 27, 2019a.   
Formal reviews by 
Bruce McClintock
Andrew Monaghan
funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/research-integrity. This report was completed as part of an ongoing research project for the 
Russia Strategic Initiative
United States European Command
conducted within the 
International Security and Defense Policy Center of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD)
RAND National Defense Research Institute (NDRI)
Office of the Secretary of Defense
Joint Staff
Unified Combatant Commands
Navy
Marine Corps
For more information on the 
RAND International Security and Defense Policy Program
In the U.S. Department of Defense, the term command and control is defined as "the exercise of authority and direction by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment of the mission." 
43
Command and control is a more complex issue in the Russian General Staff. The assertion by some experts that the General Staff "does not exercise operational control over armed forces" might lead one to surmise that Russian statute similarly constrains the C2 authorities of the General Staff. 
44
45
The General Staff in a Practical Context: Ukraine Case Study station for volunteers heading to and from the war . . . The GRU and . . . FSB have also been implicated by Kiev and the West in a campaign of low-level terrorism behind the Ukrainian lines. 
60
61
62
63
64
65
According to Ukrainian military intelligence, one of the most senior leaders responsible for the military operation in the Donbas as of early 2015 is Colonel General Sergei Istrakov, Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces. 
66
67
68
69
61
62
63
64
65
June 3, 2015. 66
The nodes (or circles) in Figure 
5
77
77
6
Key decisions in the Syria case study seem to include:
• July 2015: Assad made a formal request for Russia to conduct airstrikes in Syria. 
54
55
56
54
55
56
57
58