# ID: 7e98b909136e46ee86a6f44791202c07
# Title: Joint Special Operations University 7701 Tampa Point Boulevard MacDill AFB, FL 33621
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
The Joint Special Operations University (JSOU) provides its publications to contribute toward expanding the
T he first two decades of the 21st century presented a global security environment unanticipated by the end of the Cold War and bipolarity between the United States and the former Soviet Union. The unipolar world that followed the Soviet collapse is transforming into a multipolar system driven by the challenging rise of China, a resurgent Russia, an economically weaker European Union, and the development of India, Brazil, and Germany as independent power centers.
Meanwhile, state actors like North Korea and Iran have acquired or seek to acquire the capability to cause catastrophic nuclear destruction, while at the other end of the spectrum violent non-state actors like al-Qaeda challenge the nation-state system itself. As the United States moved to end its decadeslong intervention in Iraq and begins to wind down the war in Afghanistan, the uprisings of the Arab Spring altered the strategic map of the Middle East. Against this backdrop, on 5 January 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) released a new strategic guidance articulating priorities to sustain U.S. global leadership during the 21st century.
The guidance reflects the DOD's need to affect significant budget cuts mandated by Congress in the wake of the 2008 economic crisis, implement the Obama administration's new strategic turn or "pivot" to the Asia-Pacific region, and complete a reduction in European-based U.S. forces. It seeks to rebalance U.S. foreign, economic, and military policy as U.S. military forces would no longer be sized to "conduct large-scale, prolonged stability operations" like the ones in Iraq and Afghanistan, since the aim was to have a joint force that was "smaller, leaner, agile and flexible, able to work within a range of operational concepts and environments." 
1
We illustrate the multidimensional nature of the challenges presented by the Asia-Pacific to the SOF community as it retools for the future by highlighting one important dimension of URW known as "lawfare."
W riting in the journal Foreign Policy in November 2011, former Secre- tary of State Hillary Clinton stated, "As the war in Iraq winds down and America begins to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan, the United States stands at a pivot point. … One of the most important tasks of American statecraft over the next decade will therefore be to lock in a substantially increased investment-diplomatic, economic, strategic, and otherwise-in the Asia-Pacific region." Furthermore, she indicated that the "pivot" raises the priority allocated to Asia-Pacific in U.S. foreign policy. 
2
To address the larger purpose of my visit to this region-our efforts to advance security, prosperity, and human dignity across the Asia-Pacific. For the United States, this reflects a broader shift. After a decade in which we fought two wars that cost us dearly, in blood and treasure, the United States is turning our attention to the vast potential of the Asia Pacific region. … As president, I have, therefore, made a deliberate and strategic decision-the United States has been, and always will be, a Pacific nation … the United States will play a larger and long-term role in shaping this region and its future, by upholding core principles and in close partnership with our allies and friends. 
3
4
5
6
7
8
Historically speaking, the U.S. shift to Asia began four decades ago during the Cold War period. President Richard Nixon's 1972 memorable visit to Beijing ended the policy of isolation of the People's Republic of China (PRC) following the "ping-pong" diplomacy. For almost a century China had been a failed state until the PRC was established. The United States did not even recognize the PRC as a legitimate government for 30 years until 1979. 
9
10
The U.S. has had a lot to do with the economic and military rise of China since Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger traveled to China and sought an alliance with the PRC against the Soviet Union. Their visit to Beijing, for instance, laid the groundwork for the export of advanced dual technology to China. Later in 1993 the Clinton administration, after chastising the "butchers of Tiananmen Square," loosened export restrictions allowing, among other things, the sale of Sun Microsystems supercomputers to China. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
I n the field of international relations the Power Transition Theory addresses the rise and decline of great powers from the Peloponnesian Wars to the collapse of the Soviet Union. The theory has its critics because of its cyclical approach to historical events and reliance on two main variables-power parity and degree of satisfaction or dissatisfaction. 
17
18
19
20
behavior.  
21
From a military standpoint the pivot to Asia is a continuation of a return to the Asia Pacific region interrupted by a decade of war in the Middle East following the 9/11 terrorist attacks. From a SOF perspective, it means a rebalancing of resources and deployments from the U.S. Central Command area of responsibility (AOR) to the U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM) AOR at a time when China is rapidly modernizing its military and, among other things, expanding its special forces units. 
22
23
24
25
26
27
We have noted that the United States issues this guide to its defense strategy, and we will closely observe the impact that U.S. military strategic adjustments has on the Asia-Pacific region and on global security. … The accusations leveled at China by the U.S. side in this document are totally baseless. … We hope that the U.S. will flow with the tide of the era, and deal with China and the Chinese military in an objective and rational way, will be careful in its words and actions. 
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
1
The U.S. rebalancing toward the Asia-Pacific region will bring its military face to face with URW, the asymmetric warfare strategy advocated by certain elements within the Chinese military establishment.
The lack of transparency regarding the respective interests and objectives of China's civilian government and its military lies behind the American concern over its military buildup. In particular, open expression of support by Chinese military officers to the strategy of URW is a policy driver in the relations between the two countries.
Former USSOCOM Commander Admiral Eric Olson has indicated that URW is not a doctrinally defined term. 
36
37
38
Significantly, the events that compelled the writing of the manual were their participation in the 1995-96 Taiwan Strait crisis and the U.S. dominant performance during the Gulf War, which they underscore as the "one war that changed the world." 39 A translator's note indicates that in a subsequent interview Qiao Liang summarized the book's core theme as "the first rule of unrestricted warfare is that there are no rules, with nothing forbidden." 
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
52
2
53
54
55
56
59
60
61
62
63
After a decade of war in Iraq and Afghanistan with increasing casualty levels the American people have remained as proud and supportive of its military as ever. Public opinion studies, in fact, have shown that the American public is not casualty averse but is keenly aware of the ends-andmeans aspects of military intervention taking their cue from military leaders and policymakers. The myth of risk aversion results from a misinterpretation by the national security leaders who mistakenly believe that the public is risk averse and will not support use of force except when vital interests are at stake. 
64
65
The Chinese colonels' emphasis on U.S. concern with casualties seeks to highlight the differences in strategic culture between the U.S. and China. An example of the strategic cultural divide appeared during the 1995-1996 Taiwan missile crisis. To intimidate Taiwan, prevent a March 1996 election, and press for "reunification," on 21-26 July 1995-after giving advance notice-China fired six short range missiles to an area within 40 kilometers of Taipei. (Figure 
3
Taiwan and announced in public that it had stolen the design for the neutron bomb from the United States and successfully tested a device in 1984. 
66
67
68
The body count was a measurement of the adversary's manpower losses; we undertook it because one of Westy's [General Westmoreland's] objectives was to reach a so-called crossover point, at which Vietcong [sic] and North Vietnamese casualties would be greater than they could sustain … We were wrong. Indeed, the crossover point never arrived because the enemy did not think like us. 
69
70
The main strategic assumption of Chinese URW is that the United States is currently unmatched in conventional weapons and cannot be defeated through direct confrontation. But it can be defeated indirectly through what the authors call the "principle of addition" which is the method of combination. 
71
72
74
75
76
In his book On China, Henry Kissinger states that the Chinese are shrewd practitioners of Realpolitik or political realism and follow a different strategy than the West. 
77
78
79
In his 2005 "Future War Paper" Van Messel dismisses the Unrestricted Warfare text because the authors do not provide specifics on "how to do it." 
81
For the authors of Unrestricted Warfare, territorial boundaries, lines of demarcation, tripwires, battlefields, sovereign spaces, and the like are no longer as relevant in the conduct of 21st century warfare. The reason is that there is no "non-battlespace" because virtually every space has battlefield significance-"All that is needed is the ability to launch an attack in a certain place, using certain means, in order to achieve certain goals." 
82
83
84
85
88
2. Financial warfare: a hyperstrategic weapon because it is concealed and highly destructive by relying on currency, banking, and stock market manipulation, use of foundations.
3. New terror warfare: terrorism using high technologies and weapons of mass destruction against humanity as a whole.
4. Ecological warfare: employing modern technology to influence the natural state of rivers, oceans, the crust of the earth, the polar ice sheets, the air circulating in the atmosphere, and the ozone layer.
5. Psychological warfare: perception management of strength and capabilities to intimidate and breakdown the will of the enemy.
6. Smuggling warfare: throwing markets into confusion with illegal goods and counterfeit products.
7. Media warfare: media manipulation to influence opinions, attitudes, and images; intimidation of journalists and media outlets.
8. Drug warfare: profiteering from illicit drug sales used to destabilize and weaken other countries. 9. Network warfare: conducting non-attributable cyber attacks. 10. Technological warfare: monopolizing critical nodes. 11. Fabrication warfare: deception, lying, and perception and narrative management to conceal one's true weakness and project false strength.
12. Resources warfare: plundering the stores of natural resources by controlling access to them by other countries. 13. Economic aid warfare: providing aid to control and create dependency. 14. Cultural warfare: influencing and shaping foreign cultures, values, and practices into accepting, absorbing, and integrating your own; leading cultural trends so yours will be adopted.
15. International law warfare: controlling the legal and regulatory environment; using the judicial system to advance your own agenda and defeat your adversary.
The authors predict that any future war would lead to the use of what has been labeled a "Beijing cocktail," a mixture of the above nonmilitary means with the use of force. In such a war, the goal should be "to use all means whatsoever-means that involve the force of arms and means that do not involve the force of arms, means that involve military power and means that do not involve military power, means that entail casualties and means that do not entail casualties-to force the enemy to serve one's own interests." 
89
T o achieve victory, the URW strategist must learn to combine means and methods using a Machiavellian approach of going beyond limits by transcending ideology. The masters of warfare like Alexander the Great and the kings of the Zhoud Dynasty were great cocktail mixers who combined weapons, means, battle arrays, and stratagems. Unlike the 21st century master, however, their combinations were limited to the military domain. The new method of warfare is called "modified combined war that goes beyond limits." 
91
A supra-national combination is the most powerful that a country can use and has been the trend since the Gulf War. It is a cocktail combination of national, international, transnational, and non-state organizations that is used to solve problems and achieve objectives. One example would be the European Union (EU) and its adoption of the euro as a common currency to achieve unity. The current crisis in the Eurozone with the almost bankrupt economies of Portugal, Italy, Greece, and Spain threatens the 27-member EU with disunity as the value of the euro as a common currency is in jeopardy. To reset the group, Germany and France, the economically strongest European countries, must succeed in cooperating in sustaining restabilization policies. One issue in the Franco-German relationship, however, is that French Socialist President Francois Hollander was elected on a political platform of opposition to the German Chancellor Angela Merkel's austerity and euro stabilization program. The ability of the leaders of those two countries to protect the Eurozone will have global consequences beyond the EU's own stability by forcing domestic changes in the weak European states or hastening departures from the EU at a time when the U.S. is reducing its NATO involvement as it pivots to Asia. 
92
93
94
95
Islamic Republic of Iran has blamed Israel and the United States for the killing of four nuclear experts including the more recent killing in London of Mostafa Ahmadi Roshan on 11 January 2012. The U.S. has condemned the attacks and denied responsibility. 
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
105
To summarize, the importance of combinations of military and non-military elements in the theory and practice of URW is derived from the conclusion that no matter when a war took place, all victories or failures have one common denominator, namely, the winner is the best organized to implement a multidimensional combination. Nonetheless, in a combination-prone strategic environment one must not ignore the power ... the importance of combinations of military and nonmilitary elements in the theory and practice of URW is derived from the conclusion that no matter when a war took place, all victories or failures have one common denominator, namely, the winner is the best organized to implement a multidimensional combination.
that can be exercised by one single actor or lone wolf in today's digitally connected world as the Robin Sage caper reminds us. On 18 July 2010 the Washington Times reported about Robin Sage, the "Mata Hari" of cyberspace who according to her profile on Facebook and other social-networking websites was an attractive, flirtatious 25-year-old woman working as a "cyber threat analyst" at the U.S. Navy's Network Warfare Command. Within a few weeks she was able to establish nearly 300 social-network connections with security specialists, military personnel, and staff at intelligence agencies, and defense contractors. Her connections ranged from men working for the nation's most senior military officer, to the National Reconnaissance Office, one of the most secret government agencies. She gained access to e-mail and bank accounts and learned about secret military units. But Robin Sage did not exist; she was a fictional cyber analyst created in December 2009 by Thomas Ryan, a security specialist and hacker from New York who took her name from a training exercise of the U.S. Army Special Forces and created several accounts in Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn and other social media networks. His purpose was to conduct a short Red Team experiment that proved how people entrusted with sensitive information would be willing to share it with third parties through social networks. His conclusion was that terrorists using a similar approach could obtain valuable information affecting our national security. 106
Anti-Access/Area Denial Combinations in Asia and the Middle East Will rebalancing our "pivot" to the Asia-Pacific help deter China, North Korea, violent extremists, prospective adversaries, or emerging challengers from future war and conflict escalation? Former Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates said in 2011 that if it continues on its current path, North Korea could be a "direct threat" to the United States in five years or less. 
107
108
… consistently boosted its special warfare capabilities, deploying a light infantry division under an Army corps stationed on the frontline and adding a light infantry regiment to an Army division there. … The number of North Korean special forces, the world's largest, was 120,000 in the 2006 defense white paper and about 180,000 in the 2008 white paper. By 2010, they accounted for 17 percent of the North's 1.19 million soldiers-1.02 million in the Army, 60,000 in the Navy and 110,000 in the Air Force. 
109
110
In response to North Korea's erratic behavior the U.S. has relied on a combination of incentives and disincentives engaging them diplomatically, providing food and oil supplies in exchange for restraint, more transparency about its nuclear program, and cooperation with nuclear inspectors of the IAEA. Since North Korea is highly dependent on China for cash flows and subsidies the U.S. has prompted China to get more involved bilaterally and through the Six Party Talks (i.e. North Korea, China, Russian Federation, South Korea, Japan, and the United States) in changing the North Korean government's behavior. At the same time the U.S. continues to support and strengthen its key allies South Korea and Japan by maintaining, among other things, close political and military cooperation with sufficient American bases and troops, joint exercises, and expanding trade and commerce. Moreover, the U.S. has pushed the two countries into bilateral cooperation culminating in an unprecedented set of symbolic military agreements to share military intelligence and mutually serving in UN peacekeeping and humanitarian missions. 
111
The People's Republic of China (PRC) is pursuing a long term, comprehensive military modernization program designed to improve the capacity of China's armed forces to fight and win "local war under conditions of informatization," or high intensity information-centric regional operations of short duration. 
112
113
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
The DOD 2012 Annual Report to Congress on China indicates that China's current leaders are not likely to move in the direction of using force on Taiwan unless the Taiwanese leaders were to seek independence and also because the Chinese leaders view the current modernization of the PLA as "An essential component of their strategy to take advantage of what they perceive to be a 'window of strategic opportunity' to advance China's national development during the first two decades of the 21st century." 
123
124
125
On the eve of former President Jintao's January 2011 state visit to the United States the official Chinese Communist Party newspaper boasted that "China's emergence is increasingly shifting to debate over how the world will treat China, which is the world No. 1 and has overtaken the U.S." 
126
127
On 5 July 2011 the U.S. Department of State Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance requested that the International Security Advisory Board (ISAB) undertake a "study of policy options the United States could pursue to ensure a stable U.S.-China strategic relationship over the next 20 years to pursue its regional and global interests against a backdrop of expanding Chinese economic, political and military power." 
128
129
American efforts to engage China in a cooperative and more transparent relationship have continued unabated, however. For example, beginning on 7 May 2012, General Liang Guanglie, China's Minister of National Defense and the highest-ranking military official to visit the U.S. in recent years, was welcomed at the Pentagon and various military installations (e.g. Southern Command, Fort Benning, Camp Lejeune, West Point). The visit was similar in motivation to the one hosted by former Secretary Gates in October 2009 for General Xu Caihou, China's second ranking military officer-to
demonstrate American openness and transparency, assuage China's concerns regarding the pivot to Asia, understand China's rapid military expansion, and establish a military-to-military relationship that is "healthy, stable, reliable, and continuous." 
130
131
(2) dominance in the Asia/Pacific region, together with growing influence on a global level; and (3) prevention of Taiwan's de jure independence." 
132
133
134
135
136
137
139
141
142
143
One designed to maintain our ability to use the sea as a platform for offshore bombing (to support operations like the ones in Iraq and Afghanistan); one designed for littoral Special Operations combat against terrorist groups (based in and around Indonesia Malaysia, and the southern Philippines, for example); and one designed to enhance our stealth capabilities (for patrolling the Chinese mainland and the Taiwan Strait). 
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
6
7
152
153
154
155
Because the Chinese are adopting a realist posture the U.S. has begun to view them in realist terms, too. The strategic "pivot" is therefore the logical counter to a rising military/economic power aspiring to regional or global hegemony. Shambaugh suggests, however, that adopting such a posture will "contribute to an inexorable action-reaction cycle" and the U.S. needs to devise a more complex strategy. 156 Such a strategy has been proposed by Aaron Freidberg who believes that following Sun Tzu's dictum, China wants to win without fighting. 
157
158
(2) build alternative new regional institutions designed to exclude the U.S. (e.g. Shanghai Cooperation Organization, ASEAN Plus Three) and weaken the foundations of the American regional alliance system; (3) stabilize its continental "rear areas" in Central Asia and the Russian Far East to establish a "land security environment"; and (4) focus on threats and opportunities in the maritime domain. 
159
160
162
163
164
165
tensions in the larger area by reassuring our allies and friends, but it may also lead to more tension and conflict if Chinese leaders see it as an offensive move to encircle China and prevent it from fulfilling its national destiny. It has been suggested that China could counter the pivot, for example, by following a combination of initiatives including: breaking the semicontainment ring by dropping North Korea and drawing South Korea into its orbit; encouraging India to continue to hedge its position vis-à-vis the U.S. in solidarity with the other three members of the five BRICS (e.g. Brazil, Russia, China); following an access-denial approach in the medium term but switching from building a blue-water navy to building missiles and drones that could swarm U.S. carriers; buying European debt to gain leverage since it would drive up U.S. interest rates; keeping the U.S. distracted and dissipating its treasure and energies in the periphery by propping up global troublemakers like Sudan, Zimbabwe, and others (e.g. North Korea, Syria, Iran, Cuba, Venezuela) as we seek to enforce "the responsibility to protect" principle. 
166
167
168
It might be useful to recognize that the purely military aspects of hybrid, high-end challenges, e.g. a hostile state's armed forces, may be peripheral to the actual conflict or competition. Instead, these components might be diversions or foils employed by adversaries to increase U.S. risk calculations or capture U.S. attention while the real "war" occurs in other domains-politics, economics, social action, etc. 
169
T he United States is committed to the rule of law as a foundational principle of its political system. As such, it is considered a source of our strength and stability. Establishing the rule of law is also a major component of our foreign policy as shown in our effort to establish modern judicial systems during our interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan. The legalization of global politics through international human rights law, for instance, seeks to establish the rule of law on a global basis as an alternative to the use of force. Our commitment to the rule of law is also a vulnerability when our enemies use it against us, however. For instance, on 31 March 2004, four Blackwater Security Consulting private military contractors were part of a convoy ambushed by insurgents in the Iraqi town of Fallujah. The four were killed and their mutilated and burned corpses were hung from a bridge crossing the Euphrates. One of the most wanted Iraqi terrorists, Ahmed Hashim Abed, codenamed "Objective Amber," was suspected of being the mastermind of the operation and was captured in September 2009 by Navy SEALs from Seal Team 10. Following the capture and interrogation of Abed he filed charges against three of his captors claiming that they mistreated him by punching him and had also made false statements. The three SEALs faced assault charges but refused non-judicial punishment ("a captain's mast") and requested a court-martial for violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. 
170
Litigation is a battle of words and wills that can be expressed in Clausewitzian terminology as the continuation of business carried out by other means to impose your will on the opposition (the enemy). 
173
174
175
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
Lawfare uses international and domestic legal claims, regardless of their factual basis, to win public support to harass American officials-military and civilian-and to score ideological victories. Each legal action is a thread. The cumulative effect binds the American Gulliver. Enemies who cannot score military victories can nevertheless impair our defenses by litigating warfare. Lawfare is particularly effective against the United States, because it exploits America's laudable reverence for the law and uses our own finest instincts and institutions-our very respect for lawto make us vulnerable to enemies who have nothing but contempt for those very instincts and institutions. 184
Lawfare as a form of warfare is consistent with Carl von Clausewitz's notion that war is a continuation of politics by other means. Lawfare is not as deadly as war in traditional ways with guns, tanks, cannons, or ballistic missiles, but it can be as effective. As noted above, lawfare can be offensive and defensive in nature and it is used against both domestic and foreign opponents. Paul Williams notes that "the recent case by Serbia against Kosovo in the International Court of Justice on the question of the legitimacy of Kosovo's declaration of independence is a prime example of how a party switched to an offensive lawfare tactic after losing on the battlefield." 
185
186
188
In exchange for the lifting of sanctions imposed by the United Nations and United States, Libya halted its support for terrorism, paid $2.7 billion to the families of the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing victims, and allowed a team of British and U.S. government experts to enter Libya and dismantle its weapons of mass destruction infrastructure. 
189
However there is an asymmetric balance of law between non-state actors, who do not tend to follow international norms, and nation-states who are held both by international law and binding treaties. The conduct of lawfare against the United States relies on this asymmetry.
The Burmese (Myanmar) junta presents an example of what is called a 51 multi-tiered offensive approach to lawfare within the domestic sphere. 
190
191
192
The 2005 National Defense Strategy of the United States clearly identified exposure to lawfare as one of our nation's vulnerabilities: "Our strength as a nation state will continue to be challenged by those who employ a strategy of the weak using international fora, judicial processes, and terrorism." 
193
194
195
196
197
Although the United States is not likely to lose militarily in the battlefield, the United States is far more vulnerable in the world of public opinion. Knowing that our society so respects the rule of law that it demands compliance with it, our enemies carefully attack our military plans as illegal and immoral and our execution of those plans as contrary to the law of war. 
198
199
In the book Unrestricted Warfare, the authors assert that changes in weaponry precede revolutions in military affairs. 
200
8
201
On 30 September 2011, the global media reported that U.S. forces in Northern Yemen acting under the direction of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had conducted a UAV strike against a car containing al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula leader Anwar al-Awlaki, Samir Khan, an American born in Saudi Arabia and editor of al-Qaeda's English language web magazine Inspire, and two other al-Qaeda members. At the time, al-Awlaki was a U.S. Treasury Department "Specially Designated Global Terrorist" also included in the UN Security Council Resolution 1267 list of terrorists, and considered the "most dangerous man in the world" by the New York Police Department Counterterrorism Division. 
202
The targeting of al-Awlaki, an American citizen, became a magnet for a combination of media and lawfare activity because prior to his demise the New York Times had reported on 6 April 2010 that with the approval of the National Security Council, President Obama had authorized his targeted killing. 
203
204
205
207
208
209
210
211
The increased reliance on targeted killing began in 2008 after the USG lost a string of judicial cases-e.g. Rasul v. Bush, Padilla v. Rumsfeld, Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (2004); Boumediene v. Bush (2008)-involving the right of unlawful or unprivileged enemy combatants and detainees held in the Guantanamo Bay detention facility and foreign lands to gain access to the U.S. court system. 
213
Targeted killings in warfare are not unusual, however, as the shooting down of the plane carrying Admiral Yamamoto during World War II exemplifies; nor do they need to rely on advanced technology weapons like the UAVs since they can take place with a knife, a bullet, poison, or even by asphyxiation with a pillow. The argument advanced in favor of the strategic use of UAVs against an elusive and networked enemy is that terrorists cannot easily be arrested and brought to justice, while the use of highly sophisticated precision weapons and munitions is economical, reduces collateral damage (i.e. civilian deaths), and falls within the international legal principle of proportionality in the use of force. Generally, as far as the latter is concerned, in the UN system the jus ad bellum, or law on the use of force, is codified in the UN Charter Article 2 (4) that prohibits the use of coercive force against other states. Article 51 of the charter provides an exception to the use of force as a countermeasure to an armed attack. Use of force in collective security action is also allowed under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. In those instances, the use of force must be proportional to the unlawful aggression. In the jus in bello, or Law of Armed Conflict under the Geneva Conventions, proportionality traditionally means that in the conduct of hostilities belligerents do not have an unlimited choice of means to inflict damage on the enemy and the countermeasure must be proportionate to the attack and the needs of self-defense. The problem is that terrorists and other non-state actors are not parties bound by these treaties and conventions nor are they likely to abide by them. So as far as the use of UAVs as the weapon of choice, "the principle of proportionality is generally held to govern the extent to which a provocation may be lawfully countered by what might otherwise be an illegal response. 
214
215
216
217
In addition to the United States there are now about 40 countries that operate UAVs for military use. The unmanned aerial vehicles are not unmanned and those of the U.S. are operated by a joint forces team of specially trained flight operators and pilots together with intelligence analysts and lawyers who participate in the targeting process.
The equivalents of "burnout" and the possibility of developing a callous, wargame mentality are two of the things that should be of concern in the use of UAVs. Faulty intelligence leads to tragic mistakes in targeting as the complaints from President Karzai should remind. The mistakes may occur in the identification of the wrong target, in failing to minimize collateral damage, or in ignoring cultural aspects of the battlespace. For SOF operating in target rich places in the Middle East and soon in the Asia-Pacific there will be a need for more Judge Advocate General-trained lawyers keen on the need to protect the team against aggressive lawfare action by opponents and their supporters. The lawyers would need to provide counseling on when and where the laws of war apply given their targeting criteria.
T he 21st century special operator faces not only enemies who can kill with high-velocity bullets, suicide bombers, and improvised explosive devices. He confronts an array of non-kinetic weapons of comparable lethality-ranging from a computer worm or virus that might misguide the global positioning system in an aircraft tracing its trajectory, to a false charge of rape by an unknown local, to a legal deposition about his role in a nighttime raid resulting in the loss of innocent lives. Under conditions of URW his battlefield is now everywhere and anywhere, but particularly inside his own head, for that is where he is most vulnerable. If the latter sounds farfetched one should check the military suicide rates since the 9/11 attacks because the URW opponent is unquestionably examining it too as he plans his next move. The attack could be in the form of a honey trap aimed to destroy the operator's effectiveness by disrupting his family stability or the hacking of his financial record to ruin his credit and deprive him of a security clearance. In a war with no rules how do you live by the rules? Such is the mind game challenge presented by the URW model and such is the "perceptional trauma" that we must overcome-what is real about URW? 
218
At the core of the URW model is the conception of integrated attacks along many lines of operation-from cultural, financial, and psychological to terrorist networks, media, and as noted above lawfare. To counter this combined array we must develop a grand strategy directed at the same dimensions and component elements in an interlocking but dynamic fashion. We are best advised to recognize that we are engaged in a total war in the grandest of forms and for the most indefinite period of time. The enemy is not one but an amorphous and opaque supra-combination of states and nonstate actors that relies on deception and that is global in reach and objectives. It seeks to avoid a direct military confrontation because it seeks to win without fighting. One can see the strategy operationally manifested at the state level in the diplomatic and military moves, for example, of the current Iranian regime, as well as those in North Korea and Venezuela. Another contributing challenge is the transforming combination of terrorist networks, transnational criminal organizations, and drug cartels into a cooperative but non-integrated global set of mega-networks that threaten failing states like Yemen or occupy ungoverned spaces in failed states like Somalia or the triborder area of South America. They also defy the international legal order by using the international legal system to their benefit.
Lawfare is a real and growing threat to countries guided by the rule of law. The late U.S. Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson was prescient when he wrote: It would be difficult to devise more effective fettering of the field commander than to allow the very enemies he is ordered to reduce to submission to call him to account in his own civil courts and divert his efforts and attention from the military offensive abroad to the legal defensive at home. 
219
In the last three decades the world has been visited by a "flock of black swans," those highly improbable, hard to predict, rare events of very highimpact 220 ranging from the collapse of the Soviet Union, the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks, the world-historical transformation of the Middle East, 221 the financial collapse of 2008, the Eurozone crisis, the growing challenge to national sovereignty and the convergence of terrorism, narcotrafficking, and transnational criminal organizations, to the rising challenge of an aggressive, nationalist, economically powerful China. Throughout this period the United States has sought to maintain its global leadership to the point that it is now viewed as a "weary policeman … in an age of austerity." 
222
223
226
227
228
229
230
231
... an M-X for conducting unconventional warfare, information operations, special reconnaissance, and direct action against future adversaries armed with advanced "anti-access" capabilities and possessing significant strategic depth. … A stealthy M-X would, for example, provide the only practical option for inserting SOF to conduct special reconnaissance and direct action missions in the interior of China where known offensive space control sites, ballistic missile garrisons and hide sites, and other high value targets are located. 
232
233
234
235
Strategy, operations, and tactics need to be balanced against pertinent law; not to further over-lawyer warfare but to make sure that operations and plans are conducted because they are necessary not because they happen to be legal. The end goal is to act wisely not just legally. 
1950
Flamer or Skywiper…it's a new cyberweapon," Security Affairs,May 28, 2012.  
Joint Special Operations University and the Strategic Studies Department body of knowledge about joint special operations. JSOU publications advance the insights and recommendations of national security professionals and the 
Special Operations Forces (SOF)
SOF community and defense leadership
JSOU is the educational component of the 
United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM)
MacDill Air Force Base, Florida
JSOU conducts research through its 
Strategic Studies Department
U.S. Air Force Special Operations School
Previously he was a fellow at the 
University of California (UC) at the Berkeley Center
Teaching and Study of American Cultures
UC Berkeley Graduate School of Business
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or