# ID: 7f263b28f0874eb2b7866d72fa456763
# Title: Avoiding Black Swans in Future Wars: How National Economics Could Dictate the Outcome of a Future Sino-American War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The economic implications of a protracted war between the United States and China promise a future fraught with uncertainties about the prospects of either military's abilities to win and preserve their state's strategic standing. The likelihood is high that a war between the United States and China would be long and costly, where the key to victory lies not in the ability to break any battlefield stalemate but rather in a contest between each state's economic endurance. Both China and the United States bring particular economic advantages and disadvantages that shape their pursuit of victory. Through the lens of each state's national economies, this research seeks to understand the strategic and operational implications of a future Sino-American war scenario set in the Indo-Pacific in 2036.
vi Acknowledgment I extend my most profound thanks to my Monograph Director, Dr. Daniel G. Cox, who, through his confidence in my abilities, gave me the room to maneuver to complete this research.
His mentorship and expertise have been critical in my path to becoming a better soldier and scholar. Additionally, I must thank Dr. Geoff Babb and LtCol Jacob Q. Robinson for providing their extensive expertise in Chinese affairs and US naval and marine doctrine, respectively. The quality of this research would be severely diminished without their input. Finally, I extend my love and thanks to my family and loved ones for their patience and support. Reading and critiquing rough drafts is necessary but unenviable work for which they sacrificed much in fulfilling their familial duties. Those mentioned above, through patient counsel, are the sources of any meaningful results herein. Any shortcomings, omissions, and errors are mine alone.          
The economic implications of a protracted war between the United States and China promise a future fraught with uncertainties about the prospects of either military's abilities to win and preserve their state's strategic standing. The likelihood is high that a war between the United States and China would be long and costly, where the key to victory lies not in the ability to break any battlefield stalemate but rather in a contest between each state's economic endurance. Both China and the United States bring particular economic advantages and disadvantages that shape their pursuit of victory. Through the lens of each state's national economies, this research seeks to understand the strategic and operational implications of a future Sino-American war scenario set in the Indo-Pacific in 2036.
In the US Defense Department's transition to great power competition, the military professional must avoid the hypnotic effects of conflicts such as the Gulf War that carry false promises of swift victories through decisive battles. US military planners and strategists must remember that wars between great powers are seldom short and cheap. This research seeks to understand, first, how the US and China's economies will determine each nation's ability to sustain such long-term operations and generate further discussion about how well prepared the US is for this challenge. Second, this research focuses on a scenario that falls outside of the US military's desire for the decisive battle, forcing readers to explore undesirable but more probable possibilities. Only by confronting these inconvenient truths can US planners soberly account for the US national security implications of China's expanding capabilities and strategic aims.
How We got Here China's Point of View China sees itself as a revanchist power, seeking to retrieve its great power position lost during the "century of humiliation" when Western colonial powers and eventually Japan and the US stripped its regional influence, wealth, and sovereignty.0 F 1 China's attempts to regain this regional hegemony pose a significant risk to world governance as its path to power would result in a multi-polar world defined by spheres of influence that would effectively end the US-led world order.1 F 2 Graham Allison's "Thucydides Trap" speaks to these risks, pointing out that in only four of the sixteen cases "when a rising power rivaled a ruling power" did the rivalry not end in bloodshed.2 F 3 G. John Ikenberry also argues that the most sweeping transitions between major powers tend to come after great wars, or what he terms "dramatic moments of upheaval," when the destruction of the old order allows a newly victorious power to revise the new ordering system.3 F 4
Fearing that the United States would attempt to protect its interests by leveraging its military alliance network and ability to project military power globally, China historically pursued a less threatening economically-focused path to power.4 F 5 Toward these ends, every Chinese administration since Mao deliberately placed military modernization last in priority for national resources to avoid perceptions of China as a rising military threat to the United States.5 F 
6
1
8
5
6
7
8
2
The United States seeks to maintain the current US-led world order established in the wake of World War II (WWII).1 1 F 
12
2F 13
15
18
19
14
15 Ikenberry,
After Victory,
163,
166,
[170]
[171]
[172]
18
19
However, not all unforeseen events are Black Swans, but rather failures to explore plausible future events when the needed information was readily available. One can more easily mitigate these self-inflicted Black Swans by imagining numerous plausible future scenarios that force one to confront otherwise unimagined eventualities. Using scenario planning tools, such as the Schwartz model, provides a systematic approach to achieving greater clarity to an otherwise foggy future. "Scenarios are not about predicting the future, but rather they are about perceiving futures in the present."1 9F 20 Once constructed, scenarios provide planners and decision-makers common reference points that reduce biases and allow them to confront a range of potential futures as time unfolds. This research hopes to shed light on some of these futures and reduce the impact of their strategic surprise.
To develop scenarios that are not just possible but also plausible and informative, planners explore the "critical uncertainties"2 0F 21 underlying the major "driving forces"2 1F 22 behind any possible future events.2 2F 23 For example, oil prices for an oil company are a driving force for its future decisions. The uncertainty is what might cause future oil prices to be higher or lower. By  military planners confront possibilities that are often acknowledged but receive little attention when pursuing the ever-elusive decisive battle.
Three sections make up this chapter: an analysis of US and China's military doctrine, a comparison of US and China's national economies, and the future war scenario. The first two sections provide the conceptual-level building blocks that inform the outcome of the third.
Military theory and doctrine inform how militaries want to fight, while the availability of national resources constrains those desires. Simply put, the scenario in the third section explores where each state's military theory meets its economic reality.
Section I: Doctrine China's Doctrine Historically, China's concerns for its territorial defense barely extended beyond its borders. Its military doctrine focused on its army and relied heavily on its vast territory and immense population size for defense. China's strategic ambitions have since grown further beyond its borders, requiring its military doctrine to grow in support of its regional desires. These extended aims require the Peoples Liberation Army (PLA) to achieve greater military power projection capabilities in war domains long neglected by the PLA, particularly the air, maritime, and international information domains.2 3F 
24
25
25
Together, these look to mitigate China's relatively weak naval and air forces while maximizing its geographic advantages. Mao's "lure the enemy in deep" strategy sought to allow an invading enemy to penetrate far enough into China's vast territory to overextend its lines of communication. The Chinese would then rely on the PLA, militia's, and regular citizens turned combatants to "engage an enemy in a protracted war of attrition."2 5F 
26
However, the waters of the East and South China Seas are not land and cannot be occupied and used in the same way. Guided by the PLA's belief in technology's integral role in modern warfare, known in China as the "informatization" of warfare, China increasingly looks to technological means to overcomes these limitations.2 6F 
27
China supplements these forces with a complex yet cheaper anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) network consisting of land and sea-based missiles.2 7F 
28
29
30
29 "Chinese military strategists also assess that AI applications will provide the basis for advanced cruise missiles; autonomous air, ground, surface and sub-surface drone systems; anti-artillery, air, and missile defense systems; and a range of C2 and other systems" (Burke et al., People's Liberation Army  Operational Concepts, 22). "The side with the algorithm advantage dominates war with human-computer hybrid operations and neural network decision-making, 'cloud brain,' and 'virtual warehousing' technologies and capabilities" (Burke et al., People's Liberation Army Operational Concepts, 21). 
30
There exists one potentially fatal difference from the "lure the enemy in deep" strategy.
Allied basing allows US forces to begin any conflict within China's recreated "territory" with 32 Earl H. Ellis, FMFRP 12-46: Advanced Base  
Initially stunned by the US swift and complete victory over Iraqi force in the 1991 Gulf War, the US adversaries quickly came to understand this new way of war.3 2F 
33
36
33
34
35
38
39
44
45
46
However, both the US and the world's financial systems have changed since WWII, leaving many old methods in doubt and new methods untested.5 3F 
54
55
In contrast, China potentially suffers from over-lending, having provided vast loans through foreign government bond purchases or often dubious direct loans to states the world over, particularly the developing world.5 5F 
56
Consequently, the world's total debt to China is likely higher.
In the event of war, the loss of debt held by enemy states, such as China's $1.1 trillion in US treasury bonds and potentially its $850 billion in Eurobonds, would be the least of China's worries.5 9F 
60
61
In the event of a major war, China is likely to recall some of that debt to pay for its war effort, forcing developing states already struggling with current payments to default. The 1982 58 Sebastian Horn, Carmen Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch, "China's International Lending Is Much Higher than Previously Known," 1 July 2019, accessed 5 September 2020, https://www.ifwkiel.de/publications/media-information/2019/chinas-international-lending-is-much-higher-than-previouslyknown/. 
59
60
61
62 Matina Stevis-Gridneff, "More of Africa Finds Itself in China's Debt," The Wall Street Journal, 25 July 2018, accessed 15 September 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/more-of-africa-finds-itself-inchinas-debt-1532549741.
global debt crisis provides some insight into the cascading events that might result from widespread defaults.6 2F 
63
63
The only trade relations at risk are those with South Korea and, to a lesser extent, Japan and India. Together these states only make up 9.9 percent and 10.7 percent of US export and imports, respectively. Of course, China is one of the US top trading partners, accounting for almost as much as the US imports from Mexico and Canada combined, and 7.2 percent of US exports. The loss of Chinese markets, coupled with major trade disruptions with South Korea, Japan, and India, would represent a relatively painful loss in minor revenue streams and production in the short to medium-term while domestic markets adjusted. 
China's secretive nature makes it difficult to ascertain through open-source research any meaningful detail about their stockpiling efforts or how long they could last in a crisis. For this text's purpose, however, it is reasonable to believe that China has taken similar steps to the United States to ensure adequate stockpiles ready for a time of war. Consequently, this scenario assumes that both states have similarly long-lasting stockpiles.
For China, two resources deserve special attention: fuel and food. China's geographic location, coupled with the fact that it is a major fuel importer with low ratios of arable land to population, presents China with potentially serious wartime vulnerabilities. China is the world's largest and second-largest consumer of coal and oil, respectively, both representing the majority of China's energy use.8 0F 81 However, most of these resources come from overseas. Despite maintaining the world's third-largest coal reserve, in 2009, China became a net importer of coal to keep up with its growing energy needs, getting most of its coal imports from overseas locations like Australia and Indonesia.8 1F 82 Fifty-five percent of China's oil also comes from overseas routes, mainly the Middle East8 2F 83 and another 15 percent from Russia.8 3F 84 81 China Power Team, "How Is China's Energy Footprint Changing?," China Power Project, 26 August 2020, accessed 18 September 2020, https://chinapower.csis.org/energy-footprint/.
82 Ibid.
83 US Energy Information Administration, "Independent Statistics and Analysis -China's Crude Oil Imports Surpassed 10 Million Barrels per Day in 2019," Energy Information Administration, 23 March 2020, accessed 18 September 2020, https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=43216.
84 US Energy Information Administration, "Independent Statistics and Analysis -China's Crude Oil Imports Surpassed 10 Million Barrels per Day in 2019"; China also consumed an average of 13.57 million barrels a day in 2019, but produced only 4.89 million barrels a day. US Energy Information Administration, "What Countries are the Top Producers and Consumers of Oil? -Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)," 1 April 2020, accessed 18 September 2020, https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs /faq.php?id=709. China could implement measures to limit the impact of being cut off from these foreign fuel sources, such as rationing, greater use of renewable energy, and drawing increasingly from more-easily accessible overland sources like Russia.8 4F 
85
86
87
88
China's expansionary aims in the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean region and the development of its A2/AD network acknowledge this vulnerability. Despite many skeptics, China believes that the South China Sea may contain the world's second-largest oil reserves, and securing these waters may alleviate some, but not all, of China's demand.8 8F 
89
China's efforts to control the Indian Ocean dubbed the "string of pearls strategy,"8 9F 90 is an otherwise fragile wartime strategy designed to use increased port access to expand the People's Liberation Army-Navy's (PLAN) operational reach and is not currently supported by China's A2/AD network which fails to project power beyond the first island chain.9 0F 91 Consequently, this scenario views China's reliance on imported oil as a critical vulnerability. The only hitch is that many regional US allies also rely on the same source of oil, potentially frustrating US efforts to blockade maritime-based oil shipments through the region. 
88
89
92
93
93
Though China would experience short-term food security challenges in a major war, this is not to say China would starve. Others argue that the Chinese can feed themselves if only they "will choose to do so."9 7F 
98
In the years following the Soviet Union's fall in 1991, the US defense budget fell precipitously.1 00F 101 A 1993 review by the Department of Defense (DoD) of the nation's defense 
95
98 Peng Gong, "China Needs No Foreign Help to Feed Itself," Nature News, 1 June 2011, accessed 18 September 2020, https://www.nature.com/articles/474007a. 
99
100
103
104
105
106
109
102
103
104
111
113
114
115
Informed by the legacy of its communist command economy, China views its defense industry in more expansive terms than the United States that includes the entire economy. Known in China as "military-civil fusion," Beijing is pursuing greater integration between the government and Chinese firms, particularly those that are state-owned, to achieve state aims.1 15F 
116
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
The US President's press conference was scheduled for 9:00 a.m. in Washington, DC, 10:00 p.m. Beijing's time. Despite both sides' unexpectedly poor performance in the war's first week, Beijing hoped the conference might contain some hint of the US willingness to negotiate peace and prevent further escalations. Instead, the US President echoed the American peoples' sentiments. Fueled by anger, Americans wanted to double down on a war that, to a largely internationally isolated public, seemed unprovoked. Confident in their anger, they believed that the full commitment of the world's most powerful military would ensure a quick victory. No one foresaw at the time that anger as the war's driving force would give way to desperation in the face of sunk costs, fueling the 2036 Sino-American War for another two and one-half years. 127 "[C]omponents of the weapon system may be distributed across multiple physical platforms. For example, a maritime patrol aircraft might detect an enemy ship and pass the location data to a nearby friendly ship, which launches a missile. Defense strategists refer to this as a battle network." Paul Sharre, An Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the Future of War (New York: W. W. Norton, 2018), 43. weapons1 29F 130 and weapons swarms1 30 F 131 ensure the immediate destruction of targets ranging from high payoff targets like aircraft carriers to regional military basing.1 31F 132 By week's end, this unprecedented form of algorithm-driven combat comes to an end with the precision munition stockpiles' exhaustion on both sides. This does not, however, spell the end of the war as the number of targets far exceeds the number of missiles needed to ensure their destruction.1 32F 
133
Lurking behind the headlines of large front-line casualty counts is a silent and unseen war raging in the information and space domains with far-reaching destructive and disruptive consequences for both societies and their militaries. The first strategic line of effort from both states is a war in the "cognitive space" advancing narratives designed to convince the world of their cause's legitimacy. Winning this war is critical to garnering global support and shaping the world after the war.1 33F 
134
131
132
133 David B. Larter, "As China Expands Navy, US Begins Stockpiling Ship-Killing Missiles," Defense News, 11 February 2020, accessed 5 December 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/naval /2020/02/11/as-china-continues-rapid-naval-expansion-the-us-navy-begins-stockpiling-ship-killingmissiles/. The DoD learned how scarce their precision munition stocks were when the US Tomahawk cruise missiles' stock ran out during the low-intensity Kosovo campaign between 1998-1999. Lawrence J. Korb, "Not Enough Cruise Missiles to Go Around?," New York Times, 6 April 1999, accessed 3 December 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/1999/04/06/opinion/not-enough-cruise-missiles-to-go-around.html; Jonathan Bergner, "Why the US Should Stock up on Tomahawk Cruise Missiles," Defense News, 29 May 2018, accessed 3 December 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/opinion/commentary/2018/05/29/whythe-us-should-stock-up-on-tomahawks/. 
134
135
Government targets include institutions such as the intelligence and defense communities and state economic institutions. Hacks against critical financial institutions, universities, and major firms ensure that the private sector is not spared. Further revealing the vulnerabilities of an increasingly digitally connected society, hackers strike everything from society-wide GPS capabilities to personal vehicles, causing widespread economic disruption. Though initially limited, non-governmental actors take advantage of the chaos to hack anything from personal social media and bank accounts to nuclear power plants. The home front, so easily reached by distant digital enemies, soon becomes a battlefront of its own as everyday life, so inextricably linked to the digital world, falls under attack. This unseen virtual war1 35F
136
137
138
139
140
As reports from the front lines begin rolling in back home, policymakers in Beijing and Washington debate the necessary degree of military and economic mobilization. Balancing the peoples' emotions, basic needs, and the conflict's non-existential nature, the United States decides on full, not total, mobilization.1 40F
141
142
China views the war as an opportunity to either eject the United States from the region or prevent a second century of humiliation.1 42F 
143
The United States immediately calls on its regional allies and partner nations to join in a coalition against China, restrict trade and investment with Chinese firms, recall any outstanding debts, and cancel all financial obligations. Simultaneously, China leverages its deep global economic entrenchment to compel states to do the same to the United States. Governments worldwide shut down stock exchanges to prevent fearful investors from causing a global depression. The United States and China, however, allow major firms to adjust investments to meet new wartime restrictions against investments that may even indirectly benefit the enemy.
Both states begin courting shared trading partners, particularly those militarily and economically important. For example, the benefits to South Korea's geographic and economic 
143 Kissinger,
On China,
58. 144 Ibid.,
[6]
[7]
16. 145
146 Jon Harper, "Eagle vs Dragon: How the U.S. and Chinese Navies Stack Up," National Defense Magazine, 9 March 2020, accessed 27 January 2021, https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles /2020/3/9/eagle-vs-dragon-how-the-us-and-chinese-navies-stack-up; Ian Livingston and Michael E. O'Hanlon, "Why China Isn't Ahead of the US Navy, Even with More Ships," Brookings, 10 September 2018, accessed 27 January 2021, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2018/09/10/whychina-isnt-ahead-of-the-us-navy-even-with-more-ships/.
proximity to a still rising China compete with the US decades-long commitment to South Korean security. South Korean leaders must juggle the impossible task of remaining on the fence between the two combatants demanding greater alignment. Chinese policymakers take a carrot and stick approach to court Seoul while limiting the war's expansion. They simultaneously deploy additional Chinese ground forces in striking distance of Korea while limiting strikes against US forces on the peninsula to the information domain, with kinetic strikes reserved for those deemed active participants in the war. The purpose of this latter aim is that as long as China respects the UN mandate of US Forces-Korea,1 46F 147 this simultaneously shows China's respect for international law and prevents the US from using these troops in the war. Beijing's carrot quietly promises that it will help South Korea reunify the peninsula in the event of a Chinese victory if South Korea ensures US forces remain within their UN role.
Conversely, the United States reaffirms its defense commitments to South Korea with the presence of US forces and their historical ties serving as compelling counter-narratives. The United States also promises additional naval and air forces to secure South Korea's SLOCs from Chinese disruption. Such an example demonstrates the difficulty for states who find themselves playing the rope's role in a tug-o-war between two major powers.1 47F 
148
148 Japan is critical to any US-led coalition. Without Japan, such a coalition would fail before it could form. China knows this and will look to cash in on years of diplomatic and economic courtship with Japan to ensure its failure. scope and scale of subsequent attacks. As months pass, the people back home revert to ways of living more familiar to their parents and grandparents. They use road maps for travel, watch cable news to avoid digitally-pushed foreign propaganda, and keep bank-certified paper records resembling old checkbooks as a means of insuring against the loss of digital bank records.
Meanwhile, back on the war front, US policymakers recognize that fatally crippling the PLAN and People's Liberation Army-Air Force (PLAAF) in a series of decisive blows is no longer possible and are forced to consider longer-term approaches. The US military strategy transitions to a blockade controlling the maritime chokepoints vital to China's economy. Military commanders immediately transition from an enemy-focused attrition approach to a geographically-focused approach requiring more traditional, close-in combat methods to seize key terrain throughout the region.
Critically, forward-deployed US forces remained and fought within China's A2/AD bubble during the first week's missile barrages to retain the US vital and growing international coalition and the basing provided. These positions of advantage allow allied air, naval, and marine forces to rapidly disperse at the operational-level while remaining tactically concentrated to achieve three vital military objectives without having to wait for reinforcing expeditionary forces.1 48F 
149
154
Despite the fierce nature of combat, both sides consider limitations to avoid uncontrollable escalation. A tacit agreement begins to form between the two belligerents where kinetic warfare, with some exceptions, remains mostly in Indo-Pacific waters. The allies focus on 152 US Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, 19.   153 Burke et al., 21-22.   154 US Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, 39-40. "Target-centric warfare, or TCW, is "described as a system rather than simply a concept-a 'complex, self-adapting system made up of multiple mutually affecting subsystems' that operate in an organizational structure guided by overarching objectives, missions and tasks (Dong, 2015, 8-9)." "TCW places a premium on information-sharing, delegated decision-making, and adaptable units capable of working in new environments." Burke et al., 17.  Chinese mainland targets such as ports, airfields, factories, oil refineries, and cyber-centers while avoiding targets that might add to the public's war fervor or seem to threaten the CCP's existence and unintentionally escalate the allies' otherwise limited aims. Towards this second aim, the allies exploit more covert means with less attribution, such as cyber, spies, and special operations forces, to cultivate homegrown threats and further drain China's security resources. Except for destroying the US missile and radar capabilities clearly acting outside of their UN-sanctioned role, the Chinese continue to limit their actions against US forces in Korea since simply containing these forces proves cheaper. China also deploys its few nuclear-powered submarines to the US West Coast with limited surveillance missions, preferring the less escalatory, nonkinetic IW strikes on US-based targets.1 54F
155
After several months of combat, it becomes clear to Chinese commanders that they cannot win the race for air and sea control. Instead, they turn to an offensive, months in planning for such an eventuality, designed to break the stalemate. The PLA concentrates its offensive on the more vital southern SLOCs while using interior lines of communication and economy of force efforts to mitigate risk to its eastern and northern flanks. But Chinese commanders seek a unique approach as the more traditional, kinetic-based operations failed to prevent the stalemate. This time, forces operating in the information domain will serve as the main effort, with air and naval forces acting as the exploitation force.
The Chinese have long viewed the US reliance on C4ISR to plan, coordinate, and conduct operations as one of its greatest strengths and weaknesses and that "system warfare" was Industrial Era combat. They otherwise become accustomed to daily cyber-attacks and limit their radio and digital communications to prevent detection and ensure survival. The need to defeat these sophisticated technologies only drives battlefield innovations such as mosaic warfare's use of wireless ad hoc networks1 59F
160
Though steadily rising, US replacement rates still fail to keep up with combat losses even as Congressional funding helps increase production. The United States must rely on greater allied contributions for fighting and materiel needs to offset the imbalance. Military commanders also implement greater centralized control to husband scarce munitions and hard to replace weapons platforms. These limitations lead to higher causality rates as commanders use more ground forces to make up for the technological shortages.
With commanding shipping and aircraft production capabilities,1 60F 161 China initially replaces losses as rapidly as they occur. China is not so concerned with its industrial capacity, but rather the blockade diminishing its critical resource stockpiles with every passing day. The allies understand this point and continue targeting China's production facilities to slow replacement rates to more manageable levels in the short-term while racing to increase their replacement rates to match China's in the long-term. In contrast, China adopts a short-term, high-volume production strategy to support their offensive and overwhelm the still weak allies. China's risk is that if their offensive fails, they will have spent large amounts of irreplaceable resources.
The economic impacts of the war are global from the first days. A recession sets in as markets worldwide adjust to new realities. The warring states find opportunities in these perils to seek economic advantage over the other. Except for the US Indo-Pacific allies, most states hedge against losing favor with the potential winner by refusing to align with either.1 61F 
162
163
Congress raised taxes early in the war when public opinion provided strong support.
These policies later become a political concern when many viewed them as targeting individual taxpayers and small businesses more than large, multinational corporations and their executives who retain their wealth offshore in the current tax environment.1 65F 
166
China experiences different revenue concerns. The CCP has long prevented its wealthiest members from hiding funds abroad, allowing for greater tax revenue streams.1 66F 167 Like the United States, China also sells war bonds to fund the war effort. China's greatest concern is instead the loss of revenue from international trade duties. Additionally, China's high demand and limited access to competing global markets leave it hostage to price hikes, driving further debt. To compensate, China calls in some debt from abroad, but these efforts yield disappointing results.
The global recession has left few states able to pay, and insisting on payment only forces states to choose between default or further alignment with the West. Not until months into the world's economic recovery does China receive any payments, but these remain meager as developing states' recovery trails stronger economies.
The US access to resources from abroad grows more advantageous with time. The US-led blockade strips China's economic demand from the global market, causing an oversupply and subsequent drop in prices of critical raw materials that greatly benefit the United States. China's economic troubles also cause its currency to weaken while the dollar strengthens, further enhancing the US purchasing power.1 67F
168
169
In contrast, China implements nationwide oil rationing, increased coal mining, and scheduled power blackouts as its remaining overland oil imports fail to keep up with national usage. Though still not enough to compensate, China's world-leading efforts in renewable energy US in Rankings of World's Richest People," The Guardian, 21 October 2019, accessed 27 December 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/business/2019/oct/21/china-overtakes-us-in-rankings-of-worlds-richestpeople.
help reduce China's overall reliance on other energy sources.1 69F 170 Despite China remaining a net importer of food in the run-up to the war, several factors help China address food shortages. First, China's population declined over the last couple of decades,1 70F 171 offsetting its modest arable landto-population ratio. Rationing and increased food imports from neighboring states also help.
Wartime imperatives contribute to China's increased adoption of genetically modified foods, with steps towards nationwide implementation promising greater relief in coming seasons. Finally, more efficient farming techniques further eliminate food concerns within the limits of available technology and expertise.
Phase III: 18 Months and Beyond-Military Stalemate and Resource Exhaustion Exhausted, both nations continue fighting within the confines of their resource-imposed limitations. The US military industry is no longer the bottleneck preventing timely combat replacements. For the rest of the war, air platforms and munitions production keep up with and eventually surpass loss rates. The replacement of naval platforms remains troubled as the development of capabilities needed for mass production requires years, though a focus on smaller and even remotely operated ships helps shorten the timeline.1 71F 
172
In a role reversal, Chinese production now fails to keep up with attrition rates. The allied blockade, attacks on Chinese production facilities, and China's failed offensive have conspired to reduce China's resources dramatically. Consequently, China relies increasingly on civilian vessels, its inferior coast guard, and Russian-bought aircraft to offset shortcomings. Despite China's failed offensive, both sides come away with an appreciation for the IW's ability to achieve success, albeit with different conclusions. Though the allies adapted quickly to China's IW-led offensive on the battlefield, it achieved great strategic-level success with low resource costs. Conversely, the allies focus more on IW's operational-level benefits after China nearly broken their blockade and now look to incorporate those lessons in their own planned offensive.
Encouraged by the role reversal of US and Chinese industrial production rates and China's losses in the last offensive, the allies develop plans to break the PLA's hold in the Indo-Pacific. Mimicking China's last offensive, the allies plan to execute a sweeping IW campaign to cripple China's digitally-integrated battle network while selling the appearance of a southern offensive. In reality, allied forces will exploit gains from the IW campaign with thrusts to China's North and East, where China is weakest.
The Chinese also find opportunity in their recent failures. In a new deception campaign, easily sold by virtue of being true, leaked Chinese communications emphasize its naval and air forces' weakness, further validating allied plans. Meanwhile, the People's Liberation Army-Army (PLAA) remains relatively fresh, having seen little wartime action outside of limited feints against US forces in South Korea. With allied forces in Korea long since lulled into a false sense of security, China believes that a joint PLAA and North Korean invasion will achieve strategic surprise needed to swiftly unite the peninsula and hold the fate of US forces hostage to a favorable negotiated peace. The now weak PLAN and PLAAF forces need only to disrupt allied efforts to relieve the peninsula long enough to ensure victory.
China's revenue concerns. However, some states do choose to pay as they look for good relations with China beyond the war. Altogether, without the funding and access necessary to procure critical resources, China's war efforts will eventually grind to a halt along with its production capabilities.
A long war between the United States and China tests their economies differently, with implications to their strategic and operational approaches. Both states find themselves in their own economic races. For the US, either a short or long war is most advantageous, with the period between these two possibilities fraught with uncertainty. Failing a more desirable short victory, the United States must prepare for a protracted war of attrition for which it maintains few men and materiel to prosecute with certainty. Victory's key then shifts from the military's ability to win to its ability to merely hold on, desperately buying time until the economy can produce war materials fast enough to keep up with losses. Until then, victory is precariously uncertain.
A prolonged war, though much more uncertain, may bring greater strategic rewards in victory. Every passing day of a blockade hurts China's economy and solidifies the US as the global economy's center. If the United States still loses militarily, though potentially catastrophic to the current world order, its enhanced economic position could serve as a springboard for a rapid strategic return. After all, it is often the loser that learns the most precious lessons from war.
The longer China is at war, the more uncertain is its future. The more rapid the victory, the greater the strategic reward, as China would maintain its globally-central economic role while simultaneously defeating the world's most powerful military. China's global power would be at its historic peak. A long war holds uncertain prospects for China. A successful US blockade and an inability to defeat the United States diminishes China's role in the global economy and leaves it vulnerable to enemies at home and abroad. Having already benefited from China's economic desperation, states like Russia might take further advantage of China's strategic vulnerability. The
World Bank, "United States Exports, Imports and Trade Balance by Country 2018," World Integrated Trade Solutions, accessed 16 September 2020, https://wits.worldbank.org /CountryProfile/en/Country/CHN/Year/2018/TradeFlow/EXPIMP/Partner/by-country. The United States finds itself in unique circumstances relative to China. Canada and Mexico, two of the US largest trading partners, share a border with the United States. The United States also enjoys unimpeded access to most of its other major trading partners through the Atlantic Ocean, such as the United Kingdom (UK), Ireland, European Union (EU) states, and
World Bank, "China Exports, Imports and Trade Balance by Country 2018," World Integrated Trade Solutions, accessed 16 September 2020, https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en /Country/CHN/Year/2018/TradeFlow/EXPIMP/Partner/by-country. Any 76 Ibid., 63-64. 77 US Department of Energy, "Strategic Petroleum Reserve,"
91  
91  
Economy, The Third Revolution, 201; Yoshihara and Holmes, Red Star over the Pacific, 7,  
11,  20-21.   11  Economy, The Third Revolution, 200.
Schweller argues that a state's first concern is "maintain[ing] their position in the system," particularly those that receive the greatest benefit from the current system. Randall L. Schweller, "Bandwagoning for Profit: Bringing the Revisionist State Back In," International Security 19, no. 1 (Summer 1994): 86, 100-101, doi:10.2307/2539149.   
Peter Schwartz, The Art of the Long View: Paths to Strategic Insight for Yourself and Your Company (Toronto: Doubleday, 1996), 36.
Critical uncertainties are found by "questioning your assumptions about predetermined elements." Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 115.
"Driving forces are the elements that move the plot of a scenario, that determine the story's outcome." Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 101-102.
Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 6.
Taylor M. Fravel, Active Defense: China's Military Strategy since 1949 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019), 113, 127.
Following the 1991 Gulf War, China realized it was far behind its peers in a new, technologically-driven way of war that China described as the "informatization" of warfare. China immediately took steps to catch up by incorporating these ideas into doctrine. Since then, China has made minor updates to these concepts, but they largely hold to the core idea of technology's critical role in warfare. Notable evolutions include Chinese doctrine calling for "integrated joint operations" through C4ISR to ensure the "application of information technology to all aspects of military" and, later, the need to develop long-range, precision weapons and further integrate cyber and space operations.Fravel, Active  Defense, 187, 219, 231.    
US Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win (Washington, DC: Defense Intelligence Agency, 2019), 65, accessed 11 February 2021, http://www.dia.mil /Portals/27/Documents/News/Military%20Power%20Publications/China_Military_Power_FINAL_5MB_2 0190103.pdf; US Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), ix, 72, 74-75, accessed 26
Alastair Gale and Shiho Fukada, "Marines Prepare for Rising Challenge from China's Military with Island Training," Wall Street Journal, 3 January 2021, accessed 23 January 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/marines-prepare-for-rising-challenge-from-chinas-military-with-islandtraining-11609689085?st=37353vpwttu4cea&reflink=article_imessage_share; Jim Lacey, "The 'Dumbest Concept Ever' Just Might Win Wars," War on the Rocks, 29 July 2019, accessed 26 January 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2019/07/the-dumbest-concept-ever-just-might-win-wars/; US Marine Corps, "Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO)," Concepts and Programs, accessed 26 January 2021, https://www.candp.marines.mil/Concepts/Subordinate-Operating-Concepts/Expeditionary-Advanced-Base-Operations/.
   46  Gale and Fukada, "Marines Prepare for Rising Challenge from China's Military with Island Training"; Lacey, "The 'Dumbest Concept Ever' Just Might Win Wars"; US Marine Corps, "Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO
)."47  The national debt is the total accumulation of the federal government's annual budget deficits. A deficit exists when a government spends more than it brings in and must sell bonds to make up the difference. It is important to note that, just as with a household, maintaining debt is not necessarily a bad thing. Whereas debt resulting from paying daily living expenses like groceries or vacations is not advisable,
Encyclopedia.com, "Financing, World War II," Encyclopedia.com, 3 October 2020, accessed 4   October 2020, https://www.encyclopedia.com/defense/energy-government-and-defensemagazines/financing-world-war-ii.
  53  Paul Davidson, "Americans Are Sitting on Record Cash Savings amid Pandemic and Uncertain Economy," USA Today, 10 August 2020, accessed 4 October 2020, https://www.usatoday.com/story /money/2020/08/10/saving-and-spending-americans-spend-their-record-savings-crisis/3319970001/.
Alyssa Ayres, "The China-India Border Dispute: What to Know," Council on Foreign Relations, 18 June 2020, accessed 17 September 2020, https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/china-india-border-dispute-whatknow.
Arthur R. Kroeber, China's Economy: What Everyone Needs to Know (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020), 3-4.
Kroeber, China's Economy, 4, 8; Richard McGregor, The Party: The Secret World of China's  Communist Rulers (New York: Harper Perennial, 2010), xxi.    
China Power Team, "Is China Leading in Global Innovation?," China Power Project, 25 August 2020, accessed 25 October 2020, http://chinapower.csis.org/china-innovation-global-leader/.
China's $4 trillion compared to the US $2.3 trillion. Irena Martinčević, "Mapped: China's Manufacturing Superpower vs. the World," HowMuch.Net, 9 April 2020, accessed 25 October 2020, https://howmuch.net/articles/map-worlds-manufacturing-output.
China Power Team, "Is China Leading in Global Innovation?";Kroeber, China's Economy:  What Everyone Needs to Know, 43, 58, 64; Erik Roth, Jeongmin  Seong, and Jonathan Woetzel, "Gauging the Strength of Chinese Innovation," McKinsey and Company, 9 February 2018, accessed 25 October 2020, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/gaugingthe-strength-of-chinese-innovation.
123 This is evident by China's ability to produce 96 percent of the world's maritime-based shipping. Jude Blanchette, Jonathan E. Hillman, and Maesea McCalpin, "Hidden Harbors: China's State-Backed Shipping Industry," Center for Strategic and International Studies, 14 October 2020, accessed 25 October 2020, https://www.csis.org/analysis/hidden-harbors-chinas-state-backed-shipping-
industry.124  China Power Team, "Is China Leading in Global Innovation?"
Sharre, An Army of None,
[55]
Banach, "Virtual War: A Revolution in Human Affairs"; Banach, "Virtual War and Weapons of Mass Deception"; US Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China, 74.
Banach, "Virtual War: A Revolution in Human Affairs"; Banach, "Virtual War and Weapons of Mass Deception."
Burke et al., 12.   
Engstrom, Systems Confrontation and Systems Destruction Warfare,[58][59][60] 
Charles Powell, "Saving Space from 'Star Wars'-Style Misperceptions," War on the Rocks, 14 July 2020, accessed 26 January 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2020/07/saving-space-from-star-warsstyle-misperceptions/.
140 Niall Firth, "How to Fight a War in Space (and Get Away with It)," MIT Technology Review, 26 June 2019, accessed 26 January 2021, https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/06/26/725/satellitespace-wars/; Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, Thomas G. Roberts, Tyler Way, and Makena Young, "Space Threat Assessment" (Report of the CSIS Aerospace Security Project, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC, March 2020), 8-18, accessed 26 January 2021, https://aerospace.csis.org/wpcontent/uploads/2020/03/Harrison_SpaceThreatAssessment20_WEB_FINAL-
min.pdf. 141 US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 4-05, Joint Mobilization Planning (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2018
), I-3, I-8.142  Smith, TheArmy and Economic Mobilization,[4][5] 717.   
Gale, and Fukada, "Marines Prepare for Rising Challenge from China's Military with Island Training"; Lacey, "The 'Dumbest Concept Ever' Just Might Win Wars"; US Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, 34, 37; US Marine Corps, "Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO)"; US Navy, Advantage at Sea, 13-14.
Nicolas LePan, "The Final Frontier: How Arctic Ice Melting Is Opening up Trade Opportunities," World Economic Forum, 13 February 2020, accessed 7 January 2021, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/02/ice-melting-arctic-transport-route-industry/.
Burke et al.,
13
"For communications, composable forces would likely rely on decentralized wireless networks, in which each force element or the commander would only need to communicate with one other force element; messages would then be transmitted through the network and routed to the appropriate participant" Wireless ad hoc networks (WANET).Clark, Patt, and Schramm, 
Blanchette, Hillman, and McCalpin, "Hidden  Harbors"; Virginia Harrison, "Can China's Plane-Maker Take on Boeing and Airbus?," BBC News, 28 April 2019, accessed 25 December 2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/business-47689386.
States often wait to see when a clear victor emerges and then begin aligning with that state to achieve greater placement in the newly emerging international system, and act known as "piling on." Schweller, "Bandwagoning for Profit," 95.
States often align based on their sense of the inevitability of what is to come, the so-called "wave of the future." Schweller, "Bandwagoning for Profit," 96.
David Dollar, China's Engagement with Africa From Natural Resources to Human Resources  (Washington, DC: Brookings Institute, 2016), 83, accessed 27 January 2021, https://www.brookings.edu /research/chinas-engagement-with-africa-from-natural-resources-to-human-resources/.
Russia will do what is within its power to ensure that a war between the US and China is long and draining. Though Russia may profit from China's need for raw materials and oil, it may avoid direct militarily support to China to avoid becoming embroiled. Russia's aim would be to profit as much as possible while promoting China's and the US' exhaustion, thus raising Russia's relative power.
Demonstrating that money has no national loyalty, Thomas Jefferson, speaking of America's merchant class, lamented their lack of patriotism during the War of 1812, stating, "merchants have no country. The mere spot they stand on does not constitute so strong an attachment as that from which they draw their gains." Founders Online, "Thomas Jefferson to Horatio G. Spafford, 17 March 1814," National Archives, accessed 5 January 2021, https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Jefferson/03-07-02-0167.
Tom Metcalf, "China's Rich Can Run from the Taxman, But Hiding Is Harder," BloombergQuint, 22 February 2019, accessed 27 December 2020, https://www.bloombergquint.com /china/china-s-rich-can-run-from-the-taxman-but-hiding-is-ever-harder; Rupert Neate, "China Overtakes
Under typical conditions, a strong US dollar can hurt developing economies as their purchasing power becomes increasingly limited, making purchases from other countries using the dollar much more expensive. The US would need to monitor the dollar in such a situation and take measures to ensure that the dollar does not hurt the global market.
Alexandra Twin, "World's Top 10 Oil Exporters," Investopedia, 3 September 2020, accessed 6 January 2021, https://www.investopedia.com/articles/company-insights/082316/worlds-top-10-oilexporters.asp.
the Outcome of a Future Sino-American War Approved by: //signed/30 MAR 21/DGC// , Monograph Director Daniel G. Cox, PhD //signed/27 MAR 21/JQR// , 
Seminar Leader Jacob Q. Robinson
__________________________________, Assistant Dean of Academics for Degree Programs Dale F
. Spurlin, PhD
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Once launched, the offensive places the allies in an immediate crisis with few remaining resources to support forces on the peninsula after the losses from China's last offensive. In a role reversal, Chinese forces now blockade the allies' desperate attempts to save their forces from destruction. The allies must strike with the resources on hand. However, forces in South Korea have long prepared for such an attack, and relatively strong economic links to the outside world throughout the war ensure that allied forces remain prepared. Allied forces need only delay the invasion long enough to break the fragile Chinese blockade.
Frontline developments renew prospects of further stalemate while previous economic trends continue. The US military industry finally keeps up production rates with combat losses, with prospects to soon surpass those numbers. Acquisition of less complex weapons requiring minimal training enable faster fielding and begin achieving limited payoff, though tech-heavy assets are still needed to overcome China's large force numbers and the vast distances of the front lines. In contrast, China's large population provides a substantial talent pool from which to draw combat replacements, and the limited complexity of Chinese weapons reduces training time.
Additionally, the short distances to the front lines require few technological leaps. However, China is fielding ever-fewer platforms and munitions as its access to needed raw materials diminish.
The US economy's global economic connectivity remains unimpeded, and its market share continues growing, with much of the global market's realignment irreversible. Ties between Africa, South America, the United States, and the EU grow tighter, particularly with industrialbased economies and those with critical wartime resources.
The US blockade continues to distance China from overseas markets, with overland routes excepted. Though these overland trading partners are numerous, they still cannot offset losses to China's overseas resources and trade revenue. The situation is increasingly clear to many debtor states that China's attempts to recall debt is unenforceable, which only compounds CCP, ever fearful of losing legitimacy at home, may only exacerbate China's precarious position if the CCP overreacts while attempting to control domestic threats. In short, China's strategic position presents it more paths of uncertainty and risk.
Readers may convincingly argue for different actions and consequences in this scenario.
What is important, however, is imagining the long-term economic implications or other driving forces of a potential Sino-American war. Indeed, this research is not finished without the completion and comparative analysis of the other three scenarios proposed earlier. Without a doubt, a protracted Sino-American war would be destructive and undesirable for the world.
However, the military professional must explore these possibilities to ensure that the country is prepared. Imagining plausible futures does just that by better preparing US and allied strategists to prevent war and ensure continued advantage in competition.