# ID: 7f4fd64896df40d2a64cf17c1f1881e3
# Title: Miracle on the Vistula: The Red Army's Failure and the Birth of the Deep Operations Theory of Annihilation
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In 1920, Soviet Russia and the newly independent Polish state fought a brief but intense war, one with immense repercussions for the strategic context of post-World War I Europe, and for the military art. The Red Army's failure to spread the Bolshevik revolution to the heart of the European continent forced a reevaluation of both the politico-strategic outlook and the military theories that would guide the world's first socialist state. The profound contributions to the military art made by Soviet theorists in the years following the war with Poland include the first discussions regarding the operational level of war and the concept of operational art, as well as the theoretical foundation for the Red Army's victory in World War II: the Deep Operations Theory of Annihilation. This monograph seeks to explore the impact of the war with Poland and its influence on the theoretical breakthroughs made by a small group of Red Army officers in the 1920s and 1930s. The Polish-Soviet War will serve as a single case study through which phenomena characteristic of later theoretical developments will be examined. Particular attention will be paid to the presence of elements related to successive operations, rear area operations, and a focus on the annihilation of the enemy through the use of shock armies. These will serve as the principal criteria for establishing a direct link between the experience of the Polish-Soviet War and the later development of Deep Operations theory.
Translated works of the Soviet authors of Deep Operations theory provided the majority of the evidence to this claim. These men used their experience against Poland as a primary case study though which they envisioned future warfare in Eastern Europe and the phenomena observed there would form the basis for their work on Deep Operations.
Comrades, we have been able to repel a more terrible enemy; we have been able to defeat our own landowners and capitalists, and we shall defeat the Polish landowners and capitalists too! -V.I. Lenin, Speech to troops leaving for the front, 5 May 1920 However, a simple assemblage of superior forces and materiel is not sufficient to defeat the enemy. It is mandatory that cooperation be established between all branches of the service deployed in the same area and at all echelons; the combat operations of troops in different areas must be coordinated.
- PU-36, Soviet Provisional Field Service Regulation   The undoubtedly difficult situation that resulted has not been a total loss to us. The war against Poland, or, to be more precise, the July-August campaign, has radically changed the international political situation.
-V.I. Lenin, Speech delivered at the Ninth All-Russia Conference of the Russian Communist Party, 22 September 1920   The interwar period bridging the two World Wars of the twentieth century saw tumultuous social change, drastic economic swings, and the rise of radical ideologies across the globe. Out of this seething caldron emerged an explosion of military innovation, leading to significant changes in theory, doctrine, and technology for virtually all of the great powers. Following the horror of the Great War, military professionals and statesmen alike attempted to come to grips with the phenomena and technology of modern warfare. Nowhere was this impulse more acute than in the fledgling Soviet Russian Republic and its successor, the Soviet Union. 1 Defeated on the battlefield by the Kaiser's army, torn apart by violent revolution, and subjected to years of debilitating civil war and foreign intervention, the military and political leaders who emerged from this chaos sought 1 Josef Stalin, "The Formation of the Union of the Soviet Republics" (report delivered at the First Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R. on December 30, 1922), accessed March 26, 2017, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1922/12/30.htm. The Soviet Russian Republic was established in the wake of the October 1917 Revolution by the Bolshevik (majority) Party, led by Vladimir Lenin. In December 1922 this entity was joined by three likeminded regimes to form the Soviet Union. So, in the case of the Soviet-Polish War of 1919-1921, the term "Soviet" represents only Soviet Russia. This conflict is also commonly referred to as the Russo-Polish war or Polish-Bolshevik War.
to develop the means to succeed on the modern battlefield and secure their homeland, and with it, the promise of the Bolshevik Revolution.
Much of what we believe characteristic of the Soviet state makes it hard to imagine it providing fertile ground for a vibrant, open, and transformative intellectual debate on warfare.
However, this is exactly what occurred in Soviet Russia during the period between the Russian Civil War and the late 1930s, where a veritable "storehouse of theoretical innovation" emerged. 
2
3
4
5
With both World War I and the numerous conflicts that combined to form the Russian Civil War fresh in their minds, one event in particular stood out as requiring detailed examination. Either lumped in as merely a component of the Russian Civil War, or forgotten altogether by later Western commentators, the brief but intense war between Poland and Soviet Russia from 1919-1920 was a seminal event for the individuals who would go on to reshape military theory. Indeed, the entire Soviet military enterprise would devote considerable time and effort to dissecting this conflict, including over 250 published studies of the war in the decade that followed and a prominent role assigned to it in the new "Conduct of Operations" course at the Red Army's Military Academy (later Frunze Academy). 
6
7
8
Tukhachevsky in particular, as the commander of the Western Front and senior Red Army officer in the field during the shocking reverse at the gates of Warsaw, recognized the need for introspection and the need to distill the critical lessons from this fluid but flawed campaign.
Delivering numerous lectures on the conflict and his experience in the years following the war, Tukhachevsky and his likeminded theorists were determined to understand what made the Polish War different from other contemporary conflicts, and to apply those lessons in a theory of warfare that would prepare the Soviet state for future wars.
9
Among the most important reasons for this view were the facts that: A) unlike World War I, this war could not be blamed on the hated Tsarist regime; B) unlike the various conflicts of the Civil War, it was an interstate rather than intrastate affair; C) despite these differences, it did share the environmental and geographical aspects of those other conflicts that exemplified warfare in the vast expanses of the Russian homeland. Taking these factors into account, there was no easy way to dismiss the Polish-Soviet War with a one-dimensional explanation using a prevailing theory of warfare. Given a recent conflict characterized by phenomena both indicative of the unchanging geography of Eastern Europe and of likely trends in future warfare, Tukhachevsky and his comrades took to their analysis with gusto.
While these characteristics made the Polish-Soviet War particularly appropriate for investigation, what is it about this conflict that made it serve as such a powerful catalyst to the development of the theories that would eventually become Deep Operations theory of annihilation? Here we see two elements that stand out. First, "this was fundamentally a war of movement," a fact recognized by many as one of the defining aspects of future war. 
10
11
While not a revolutionary concept, Triandafillov and Varfolomeev in particular realized that modern warfare would demand far more of these operations than previous conflicts, particularly regarding securing lines of communication and political influence operations in occupied areas.
The last criterion emphasized will be the concept of annihilation and the use of shock armies to achieve it. This idea engendered fierce debate in the 1920s and continues to be argued to this day. However, a review of the principal theoretical works produced following the war, culminating in the publishing of Provisional Field Service Regulation-36 (PU-36), which 11 M. Sakharov, "Problems of Strategy and Operational Art in Soviet Military Works, 1917-1940" (1965) in Selected Readings in the History of Soviet Operational Art, trans. Harold S. Orenstein (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Soviet Army Studies Office, 1990) 62. This piece was published during the fascinating period of rehabilitation of the images and ideas of those "non-persons" liquidated and erased by Stalin during the purges in the late 1930s. In it, Marshall Sakharov describes the importance of successive operations, the role of Tukhachevsky and others at the Red Army Academy in developing it, and the prominent role assigned to the analysis of the 1920 campaign in Poland.
established Deep Operations as the theoretical foundation of Red Army operations, reveals that the concept of annihilation is integral to the idea of Deep Operations and must never be separated from it. 12 To accomplish this central goal of annihilation, Soviet theorists focused on the design and use of combined arms shock armies, the precursors of which were used in 1920.
In pursuit of this examination, primary sources were used whenever possible.
Unfortunately, due to the linguistic limitations of the author and the early deaths of several of the period's most notable theorists (and the subsequent suppression of their ideas), this monograph relies heavily on extant translations of primary source material. Foremost among these are the translations of A.A. Svechin's Strategy, edited by Kent D. Lee, V.K. Equally useful are the groundbreaking analyses of Soviet theory and doctrine produced late in the Cold War, most notably by Bruce W. Menning, Jacob W. Kipp, David M. Glantz, Richard Simpkin, and David R. Stone. With others, these men played a critical role in bringing Soviet theory to the shores of the United States, and with it a newfound appreciation for operational art. 
12
Before exploring the Polish-Soviet War and the subsequent theoretical renaissance it set off in Russia, a review of the unique political and military situation the combatants found themselves in is worthwhile. While the conflagration that was the First World War consumed all of the European powers and several experienced significant upheaval following the war, Russia's abrupt exit from the war followed by a society-shaking civil war set it apart. This section will examine the Russian experience and how it led to the revolutions of 1917, as well as its role in shaping the strategic and operational theories that would blossom fully in the peaceful period following the Polish War. The Russian Civil War itself will also be discussed, providing examples of the Bolshevik theories of war and warfare that proved unsuccessful on the drive to Warsaw in 1920. Indeed, the Russians faced two Kuhnian crises requiring a theoretical "retooling": the failure of traditional military art in the World War and the failure of revolutionary theories in the war against Poland.
No examination of political-strategic context on the European continent in the early twentieth century can escape the looming shadow of World War I. This is true even today, where one hundred years after its conclusion it is surpassed only by the cataclysmic second round that began in 1939. Of all the major political, military, and societal implications of the war, none was as earth shattering as the collapse of European empires that had fought a grinding duel for three years across the Eastern European plains. The first of the imperial dominoes to fall was the Romanov dynasty in Russia. Catastrophic results on the battlefield, coupled with an inability to manage societal upheaval and economic pressure at home, may have made the Tsar's fall inevitable, but the speed, scale, and far-reaching consequences of the coming change was something even the most committed socialists scarcely believed possible.
Before the war, Russia was regarded as the most underdeveloped European power, albeit one with a mammoth army and a seemingly stable autocratic regime. This overwhelming potential force loomed in the background of all pre-war planning sessions and it is likely that Germany's rapid entry into the war was an attempt to get out ahead of the Russian "steamroller." 
13
14
For the fight against Germany, the Russian Northwest Front "seemed to have all the men and guns it needed," despite its secondary role. 
15
However, the insurmountable shortcomings of the Russian army's command and control, logistics, and leadership functions soon came to the fore, with disastrous results. The wily and opportunistic German tandem of Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff recognized and exploited the yawning gap between the Russian First and Second Armies and won one of the war's few decisive victories in remarkable fashion at Tannenberg. Not only had upwards of five divisions been destroyed amongst the Masurian Lakes, but it also was "a moral defeat…of the first order, and it seriously undermined the troops' faith in themselves and their commanders." 
16
17
18
Unlike their counterparts, however, they would be doing it as citizens of the world's first socialist state: a regime with unique theories of war and warfare, and a wary view of professional military men.
From 1917 to 1922, the Russian people experienced a period of rapid and dramatic sociopolitical change, played out in the background of a brutal civil war that "dwarfed all others of the twentieth century in scope and significance." 
19
16
18
19 David Bullock, The Russian Civil War: 1918-1922 (New York: Osprey, 2008), 4.  the Bolshevik Revolution that October, to the rise of the counterrevolutionary White armies and the full onset of the Russian Civil War, this period offers a view of a complex web of human interaction and misery unlike any other in history. A detailed examination of the Russian Civil War and the emergence of the Soviet Union is far beyond the scope of this monograph. However, an exploration of those events and ideas that shaped the new Red Army and its emerging theorists is necessary to understanding their actions in the war with Poland, as well as their later efforts to develop a theory that addressed the shortcomings of those it brought into the war.
Looking beyond the bewildering array of radical political groups vying for power (Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and Social Revolutionaries, etc.) and likewise past the ever-changing, inscrutable acronyms denoting the organizations that evolved into the labyrinthine Communist bureaucratic ecosystem, we find people with ideas. Big ideas such as "All Power to the Soviets!" and "Socialism in One Country," would have a powerful effect on the course of world history. 
20
The two figures at the helm of the socialist ship during this time were Vladimir Ilych Lenin and Leon Trotsky. It is almost impossible to envision the success of the revolution without the close partnership built between the respected theorist and political giant Lenin, and the tireless organizer and fiery orator Trotsky. While neither had any military experience to speak of, both would focus their keen intellects on the questions of what a Red Army should look like and how it should fight.
For these committed Marxists, World War I presented "an anomaly of such scope and power that their ideological assumptions could not but undergo change." 21 Curiously, Lenin found theoretical 
20 Ziemke, The Red Army 1918
-1941, 5, 154.
22
24
25
22
23
24
25
28
29
30
Other notable personalities emerging from the maelstrom of civil war earned their notoriety in similar ways, but would diverge drastically from the future Deep Operations team when it came to military theory and doctrine. These men would become known as the "Tsaritsyn Gang," after the city their defense of earned them their spurs. They coalesced around a dour party loyalist named Josef Stalin, who would emerge as Trotsky's greatest rival and Lenin's successor. The undeniably impressive exploits of future Marshals Budennyi and Voroshilov were transformed into herculean achievements through Stalin's ruthless control of the rear area and propaganda arms. Their emergent theory of warfare focused on the political reliability of the Red Army, the stability of the rear area, and operational mobility and decision through the use of the shock troops that made up the world's first Cavalry Army (konarmiya, or horse army). 
31
28
29
The Polish-Soviet War (alternatively the Russo-Polish or Polish-Bolshevik War) has been understandably overshadowed by the World Wars that came before and after it briefly captivated the western world in the spring and summer of 1920. It is often only mentioned these days as but one front in the greater Russian Civil War, a fact that makes distilling its unique characteristics that much more difficult. This war was not merely a continuation of the Red on White conflicts in which the Red Army had emerged triumphant, it was to be "its harshest test yet, while at the same time providing valuable lessons for the years to come." 
33
34
35
36
33
34
35
Army 1918
Army -1941, 118. 36 , 118. 36
37
38
39
37
38
40
42
43
40
41
42
43 Pilsudski, Year 1920, 240.
In this, he would not be entirely successful. Through July and early August, Western Front would drive Pilsudski's forces across the frontier and eastern Poland, leaving them situated along the Vistula in a last-gasp defense of the Polish heartland and capital. Pilsudski provides a vivid description of their advance, likening it to "a monstrous storm-cloud which nothing can hinder…that engenders despair and breaks the internal resistance of the individual and the mass." 44 However, despite being driven hundreds of miles and demoralized at the hands of a seemingly irresistible foe, the Polish army would regroup and reinvigorate itself, and launch a stunning counterattack when all seemed lost. Here we will see the cause of Tukhachevsky's later caution against assigning too much value to the decisive effects of breaking the adversary's psychological cohesion. 
45
46
44 Pilsudski, Year 1920, 142.
about its miniscule role and everyone else eager to point to it as the decisive factor. As it so often does, the truth likely lies somewhere in the middle and it would be foolish to completely dismiss the contributions of French General Weygand in particular, and the buoying effect of international support in general. 
47
These laurels would have to be wrested from Tukhachevsky and the seemingly unstoppable Western Front. Choosing to focus most of his forces on the area north of Warsaw, where the Vistula bends northwestward towards Gdansk (Danzig), Tukhachevsky sought to sever this key line of communication and envelop Warsaw. 
48
49
47
48
49
As Commander-in-Chief and Head of State, Pilsudski did not experience that same issues with adjacent commands, but he still had to impress his vision for a sweeping counterattack launched from the south on his subordinates. Choosing his most trusted leader General Smigly-Rydz and his old Polish Legion divisions to lead the counterattack, Pilsudski amassed five-and-ahalf divisions south of Warsaw, poised to strike north into the exposed flank of the Soviet Western Front. 
50
51
Brave and desperate rearguard actions and the inability of Pilsudski to maximize the opportunity for pursuit allowed substantial numbers of Soviet troops to escape, but it was clear that there would be no subsequent counterattacks coming from the east in 1920.
The strategic ramifications of the Polish victory in 1920 are plentiful. Soviet Russia's potential for exporting the Bolshevik Revolution suffered a monumental blow as unbounded 
50 Pilsudski, Year 1920, 170. 51
52
53
When a December 1920 issue of Pravda put forth the new slogan, "The fronts are quiet.
There is work to be done in the rear," the leadership of the Red Army set out to address their failure against Poland and the implications it had for their theories of war and warfare. 
54
53
54
Eager to capitalize on the experience and insight of their new crop of veterans, the Red Army set about the difficult business of establishing the educational and doctrinal development apparatus of a modern professional army. No longer fighting for the very existence of the Soviet state, many Red Army officers devoted themselves to examining the campaigns they had recently concluded, in the hopes that lessons would emerge that provided keys to unlocking the puzzle that was modern warfare. For the man who would emerge at the forefront of this intellectual exploration, Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Soviet campaign in Poland was the case "most relevant to the development of Soviet military art," and his efforts to dissect this event would bring several key concepts to light, while engaging the Red Army's most capable minds. 
55
The Soviet Way -Attrition or Annihilation?
The seeds for substantial theoretical progress were sown, but much work remained. The Treaty of Riga ended the war with Poland, allowing a chastened Soviet regime the opportunity to focus on consolidating its power and preparing for future war with the imperialist powers. Among the fundamental organizational and philosophical questions facing the Soviet and Red Army leadership were those regarding the size and composition of the army (militia vs. professional, mass vs. technology) as well as its grand strategic outlook (communism in one country vs. exporting the 
55
The attrition-annihilation debate consumed a considerable amount of intellectual energy and involved many of the foremost Soviet military minds of the early 1920s, but two figures emerged as the exemplars of this discussion: Svechin and Tukhachevsky. Both men were former Tsarist officers and aristocrats, however. Svechin had joined the Red Army as a voenspets (military specialist) brought on by Trotsky to help develop the fledgling Red Army, while the younger Tukhachevsky became a passionate party member early on and would use Svechin's aristocratic sympathies (real or imagined) as a bludgeon in their intellectual fencing match. 
56
57
58
57
58 Svechin,
Strategy,
243.
59
61
71
72
70
71
72
77
78
With the Red Army firmly focused on achieving victory through annihilation, and successive operations supported by significant logistics, signal, and political support from the rear established as the method through which to achieve this goal, all that remained was to determine the appropriate tool to employ in its pursuit. As with many of the other conceptual blocks that would become Deep Operations theory, the Red Army turned to the seemingly bottomless quarry that was the 1920 campaign in Poland for its building material. Tukhachevsky identified the task 
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
90
The Polish-Soviet War certainly deserves examination beyond its current perceived place as either bookend of the Russian Civil War or curious aftershock of the Great War. Looking past the considerable strategic and political implications of the Polish victory in 1920, this monograph has attempted to show that the characteristics and lessons learned from the conflict, particularly on the Soviet side, played a formative role in the development of the theory of Deep Operations for Annihilation. Most significantly, the conduct of Tukhachevsky's awe-inspiring advance towards the Vistula revealed the importance of two of the keys to Deep Operations (successive operations and shock armies) while Pilsudski's stunning counterstrike revealed its key weakness (inadequate rear operations). 
89
90
John Erickson, The Soviet High Command: A Military-Political History, 1918-1941,  
3rd ed.(Portland, OR: Frank Cass Publishers, 2001), xviii.3  The terms "Deep Operations" and "Deep Battle" are often conflated erroneously. In this monograph, "Deep Operations" will be used predominantly, with "Deep Battle" used only when discussing the purely tactical objectives it was developed to solve. To further complicate matters, various translations omit the modifier "of (or for) annihilation" that Isserson and others used to fully describe their theory. Here, "Deep Operations" will be used often without its modifier, but purely for convenience.4  Georgii S.Isserson, The Evolution of Operational Art, ed. and trans. Bruce Menning  (1936; repr., Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2013), 69.
Richard Simpkin, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii (London:  Brassey's Defence Publishers, 1987), 87.
Michael D. Krause and R. Cody Phillips, Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 2005), 243; Nikolai Varfolomeev, "Strategy in an Academic Formulation" (1928) in Selected Readings in the History of Soviet Operational Art, trans. Harold S. Orenstein (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Soviet Army Studies Office, 1990), 6.
Clarence A. Manning, "Battle on the Vistula: The Soviet-Polish Campaign of 1920," The Journal of the American Military Institute,Vol. 3, No. 1 (Spring, 1939), 25.    
Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 76.
Earl F.Ziemke, The Red Army 1918-1941: From Vanguard of World Revolution to US  Ally (New York: Taylor & Francis Books, 2004), 133.    
Manning, "Battle on the Vistula," 14.
Richard W. Harrison, The Russian Way of War (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press: 2001), 41.
Dennis Showalter, Tannenberg: Clash of Empires, 1914 (Dulles, VA: Potomac Books,  2004),Kindle, 130.    
Ibid., 132.   
V.I.Lenin, "The Chief Task of Our Day," in Collected Works, vol.  
27, 4th English Ed.  (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1972), 159-63, accessed 13 December, 2016, https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1918/mar/11.htm.27  Ziemke, The Red Army, 66.
V.I.Lenin, Collected Works, 4th English ed., vol. 30 (Moscow: Progress Publishers,  1965), 439-490.   
Manning, "Battle on the Vistula," 25.
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
With the destruction of enemy armies firmly established as the purpose of the Red Army, attention now shifted to the method through which this would be accomplished. Again, Tukhachevsky emerges as a central figure, with his 1920 offensive serving as a popular case study for the embryonic concept of successive operations. In his 1923 analysis of the Vistula campaign, he reconciles his belief in annihilation as the surest path to victory with the clear evidence suggesting that the pre-World War I decisive battle was no longer possible, noting that "a series of destructive operations conducted on logical principles and linked together by an uninterrupted pursuit may take the place of the decisive battle." 
63
A 1983 study conducted by a Soviet officer examining the development of the theory of successive operations noted that for the Red Army theorists of the 1920s the summer offensive launched by Tukhachevsky's Western Front "was taken as the most typical example of successive operations." 
65
63 Pilsudski, Year 1920, 240. 64