# ID: 7fc8a00e0cfd4e38bc207f3fb831b368
# Title: America's Three Domestic Threats and the Need for a Reform of Domestic Intelligence
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The United States today faces three big threats domestically: Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power competition (GPC), which can be characterized from a homeland security perspective as "great power incursion." Instead of focusing their efforts on a single threat, such as the Soviet Union during the Cold War, or Al-Qaeda right after 9/11, the current homeland intelligence structure consisting of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and state, local, tribal, and territorial (SLTT) law enforcement agencies now must focus attention on multiple threats simultaneously. Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, or great power incursion could target the American homeland at any one time, and present DHS, FBI, and SLTT resources may not be enough to effectively combat them all. Under these circumstances, this thesis examines the following research question: In light of these dynamic homeland security threats, is there a need for a new, purely domestic intelligence service in the United States? This thesis discusses these threats and analyzes the current DHS, FBI, and SLTT law enforcement postures toward them. The research conducted for this thesis suggests that the current domestic intelligence agencies are not able to address this new confluence of threats sufficiently. Although no single, new domestic intelligence agency is needed, significant reform is necessary.
As the United States adjusts to the changing international security environment, the threats to its security at home and abroad will continue to build. Since 9/11, Jihadist terrorism has been the focal point of defensive effort within the American homeland.
These dangers stemmed initially from Al-Qaeda due to their involvement in the 9/11 attacks. However, the Jihadist threat now includes both the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and lone-wolf actors who have undertaken recent acts of terrorism such as the San Bernardino and Pulse Nightclub massacres. 
1
3
5
7
While foreign terrorist organizations (FTO) like Al-Qaeda and ISIS could still attack the homeland, American lone-wolf Jihadist and Alt-Right terrorist attacks have been extremely successful in recent years. Furthermore, great power incursion is a reality that could hurt America's standing in the overall fight of GPC if it is not dealt with effectively. Essentially, these three threats could simultaneously target the American homeland at any one time, and DHS, FBI, and SLTT resources may not be enough to effectively combat them. Under these circumstances, this thesis answers the following research question: In light of these dynamic homeland security threats, is there a need for a new, purely domestic intelligence service in the United States?
As the United States maintains its position as a world leader, the threats against it will continue to mount. Currently, Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion present the DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies with formidable challenges.
As DHS focuses a lot of effort on border security and infrastructure defense. 
8
9
Additionally, the question of a purely domestic intelligence agency for the United
States is notable because America is one of only a few major countries not to have such an agency. The United Kingdom's Security Service or MI5
10
11
12
Even though the current American political climate does not support an agency dedicated to domestic intelligence, the new and emerging threats within the past five years call for the reexamination of the current domestic intelligence posture, and this thesis provides that examination. This research contributes to the discussion of examining American domestic intelligence, and provides evidence to support certain reforms such as a congressional and bipartisan commission to review the American homeland's current intelligence strengths and weaknesses toward countering the threats of Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion.
While this thesis provides three chapters dedicated to the threats of Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism and great power incursion, this literature review examines previous scholarly works about domestic intelligence that are relevant to policymakers who could be in charge of creating reforms based off the research provided in chapters II, III, IV, and V. It will first look at works focusing on the debates about civil liberties; then it will shift toward discussions about the United Kingdom's domestic intelligence agency, MI5, which is often described as effective. Finally, it will conclude with literature concerning the current United States domestic intelligence structure and recommendations to change it.
Although the United States appears to currently be in uncharted territory based on these three challenging threats, the debate on domestic intelligence is not new. The initial debate over national security vs. civil liberties was sparked by the Church Committee findings of 1976, in which Congress noted that both the FBI and CIA violated the constitutional rights of Americans through the surveillance of their activities. 
13
14
This dynamic that pits national security against its citizens' civil liberties is an essential debate for American democracy. Genevieve Lester argues that if a new domestic counterterrorism agency is to be formed, it must be transparent, and must conform to the current system of checks and balances that other government agencies abide. 
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
As Lester, Martin, and Baker have argued these important points about civil liberties, their ideas have also been countered. Erik Dahl counters Lester's claim of the "pendulum" by reasoning that balance between current security and civil liberty is actually not balanced, but rather heavily favors security. 
22
23
One of the most successful domestic intelligence agencies is the United Kingdom's (UK) MI5. Presently, the UK states the mission of MI5 is to "Keep the Country Safe, Now and In the Future." 25 By design, MI5 is supposed to be the vital link of intelligence gathering for UK's law enforcement. James Burch argues that one of the main reasons MI5 is effective is simply due to the UK's geography. 
26
27
28
29
30
32
Domestic intelligence within the United States is usually the responsibility of the FBI. However, the creation of DHS has blurred some of the jurisdiction lines. Richard
Posner argues that domestic intelligence needs to be given its own agency within the American government. 
34
35
37
38
39
40
41
Burch in his report argues that the key to success is not large-scale domestic intelligence change, but rather smaller scale changes that would improve the effectiveness of the intelligence system. 
42
This research centered on the three current threat areas in the order of Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion. Although Jihadist terrorism and GPC also occur against U.S. interests abroad, this research focuses on these three as domestic threats to the homeland. A chapter is devoted to the examination of each of these threats. First, the nature of the threats is examined, then the current DHS, FBI, and SLTT entities' postures toward these threats are discussed. Each chapter then concludes with analysis into how these postures can be improved.
Although many scholars have written about the need for improved domestic intelligence, most of these works were written soon after 9/11 and focus on how to defend American soil against Jihadist FTO operatives. While this threat is still important today, it has been joined by Alt-Right terrorism and great power incursion. Instead of only having to focus on a single threat such as the Soviet Union during the Cold War, or
Al-Qaeda right after 9/11, DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies now must focus attention on multiple threats simultaneously.
This thesis is organized into five chapters. Following this introduction, Chapter II addresses Jihadist terrorism. The third chapter discusses Alt-Right terrorism. The fourth chapter describes great power incursion. Chapter V reviews the findings of the previous chapters and provides recommendations for reforming for the current American intelligence system.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, elevated awareness of the threat of Jihadist terrorism to the forefront of American consciousness. Today, Americans still fear this threat in their everyday lives. In a recent poll, voters from both the Democratic and Republican parties still place heavy emphasis on their prospective candidates' policies toward combating Jihadist terrorism. 
44
45
The current Jihadist threat against the American homeland does not consist of one sole enemy, it is rather a blend of both foreign terrorist organizations (FTO) such Al-Qaeda or ISIS, and homegrown Jihadists. As Al-Qaeda and ISIS can target the American homeland, many of the recent attacks have actually come from American citizens who act as lone-wolf actors. This reality not only stresses the current intelligence structure, but also blurs the once conventional expectation of a Jihadist being an operative who enters the United States from overseas, like those on 9/11. Today, the American homeland must be ready for both of these Jihadist threats.
44 John Mueller and Mark G. Stewart, Public Opinion and Counterterrorist Policy (Washington, DC:  CATO, 2018), https://www.cato.org/publications/white-paper/public-opinion-counterterrorism-policy.
45 Mike Giglio and Kathy Gilsinan, "The Inconvenient Truth about ISIS," The Atlantic, February 14, 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2020/02/kurdish-leader-isis-conflict-iraq-iran/606502/.
In 2014, ISIS conquered large territories throughout Iraq and Syria. As the world looked on, massive cities and cultural centers such as Raqqa, Syria, and Mosul, Iraq, fell victim to its onslaught. 
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
Directly after the 9/11 attacks, the destruction of Al-Qaeda became the United States' top priority. After a decade of war against Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan and Iraq, American special operations forces in 2011 killed its leader, Osama Bin Laden. Since then, Al-Qaeda has fallen lower on Washington's list of priorities due to the resurgence of GPC and the arrival of ISIS. 
54
In 2018, the current leader of Al-Qaeda, Ayman al-Zawahiri, proclaimed that the United States remains the "First Enemy of Muslims." 
55
56
57
58
59
Although ISIS and Al-Qaeda can target the American homeland, the most recent and biggest threat of Jihadist terrorism has actually been from lone-wolf terrorists already residing in the United States. In a lone-wolf Jihadist attack, the terrorist often works alone, and has been inspired by the Jihadist ideologies taught by groups like ISIS and Al-Qaeda. This type of attack is thus classified as an "inspired" attack, in which the terrorist often pledges allegiance to the terrorist group before committing the atrocity. 
60
62
63
64
While the Jihadist ideology is still a very credible danger, its threat nature has changed significantly since 9/11. While Jihadism first appeared to be a threat posed only by FTOs, it is now one dominated by lone-wolf actors.
As the threat of Jihadist-terrorism continues, the domestic intelligence structure is vital to defend the American homeland against it. The four main entities critical in the 
As the scope of DHS's mission has increased over the years, the bulk of its intelligence and information gathering remains postured to combat the threat of FTOs such as ISIS and Al-Qaeda from carrying out directed attacks on the homeland. A key function described in DHS' current counterterrorism strategy is their ability to detect and stop terrorists before they are able to enter the American homeland. 
65
show the bulletin is FTO focused. supply and disseminate all intelligence materials that the rest of the department needs to protect the homeland. 
82
83
Before the founding of DHS in the months after 9/11, the FBI was the main line of effort against terrorism in the homeland. Today, that mission still continues, and has even expanded. According to a report, "the FBI's overriding priority is to protect America from terrorist attack." 
84
85
86
87
88
In addition to the FBI's internal Counterterrorism division and Intelligence branch, it is also the lead-agency for Joint-Terrorism Task Forces (JTTF). 90 A JTTF is described as the American homeland's "front line" against terrorism and consists of members from many different federal agencies. 
91
Office. 92
The most important national counterterrorism measure undertaken in response to 9/11 was the establishment of the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC). The Intelligence Reform and Prevention Act (IRTPA) of 2004 established the center as a focal point in the gathering of information on possible terrorist activities. 
93
94
95
96
97
Through analysis of both the Jihadist threat and the domestic intelligence posture against it, there are two major themes that need to be addressed. First, the intelligence reforms after 9/11 focus the majority of effort on keeping FTO operatives out of the country. Second, the nature of the threat has shifted from on that is FTO-centric threat to the majority of recent attacks being undertaken by lone-wolf actors.
This mission of not letting FTO operatives into the homeland can be seen in the establishment of both the NCTC and DHS. Even today, senior level policymakers still place emphasis on keeping terrorists outside of the American homeland. Based on the current National Strategy to Combat Terrorist Travel, the focus appears to still be on the identification and deterrence of terrorists coming from overseas. 
102
states it has a footprint in over 75 countries, 104 while the FBI maintains agents in more than 180 countries worldwide. 
105
While every Muslim in the United States is certainly not going to engage in Jihadist activities, the lone-wolf threat has been the most-deadly form of Jihadism since 9/11. Former Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano said in 2011, "one of the most striking elements of today's threat picture is that plots to attack America increasingly involve American citizens and permanent residents." 107 According to a New York Times report, since 2001, half of Jihadi terrorist attacks on the homeland were undertaken by men who were American citizens. 
108
109
110
This chapter has discussed the current threat of Jihadist terrorism, and the current intelligence structure the American homeland utilizes in order to defend against it. It then provided analysis into how the threat spectrum has shifted from FTOs to a bigger threat of lone-wolf actors. It then discussed some shortfalls within national strategy that fails to recognize this shift toward a lone-wolf Jihadist. As countering Jihadism is still a huge part of homeland security, it is only one of the three big threats facing the American homeland. The new threats Alt-Right terrorism and great power incursion will only continue to strain the homeland defenses and will be focused on in the next chapters. 
Another recently deadly threat is the rise of the Alt-Right within the homeland.
Even though terrorism has closely been associated with Jihadism in the post 9/11 world, there has been a rise in domestic terrorism associated with the Alt-Right across the United States. In fact, since 9/11, the Alt-Right has carried out three times as many attacks as Jihadist terrorists in the United States. 
111
112
The nature of Alt-Right terrorism, like Jihadism, is actually a very complex system that encompasses many different ideologies and organizations. As Jihadist terrorist groups like ISIS and Al-Qaeda utilize various dogmas to influence disenfranchised, or otherwise susceptible Muslims around the world, the Alt-Right movement follows a very similar tactic in the homeland. 
113
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
124
The unfortunate reality of the Alt-Right in the homeland is that the movement is inherently hard to track. As this section will discuss the Alt-Right hate groups of the Patriot Front, American Identity Movement, American Freedom Party, and the Right Stuff, these parties are unfortunately just a snapshot of the overall Alt-Right movement in the American homeland. The vast majority of the Alt-Right movement also takes place throughout the online domain. 
135
136
137
138
Freedom Party, and the Right Stuff. 
139
140
While the Patriot Front claims to be patriotic in their name, they fundamentally seek to destroy American liberal democracy as an extreme group. Their website claims that "Democracy has failed in this once great nation, now the time for a new Caesar to revive the American spirit has dawned." 
142
143
144
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
While the Patriot Front, American Identity Movement, American Freedom Party, and The Right Stuff are four of the biggest white nationalist organizations in the American homeland, they do not encompass all of the Alt-Right movement.
Unfortunately, there are many hate groups that comprise the Alt-Right, and this discussion was only able to address some of its main elements. As these groups push out racist and radical viewpoints online or in-person, their members or viewers of their content can become radicalized by their dogmas. The last and most critical analysis of the Alt-Right threat will be the study of its lone-wolf actors.
The current Alt-Right threat to the homeland has centered on lone-wolf attackers who commit atrocities based on the ideologies discussed above. While Alt-Right lonewolves such as Dylan Roof, Robert Bowers, and Patrick Crusius have become our greatest threat, experts have found that these lone wolves are actually not truly alone. In In fact, Dylan Roof, Robert Bowers, and Patrick Crusius all used either 4chan, 8chan, or Gab to publish their manifestos or reasons behind their attacks. According to Berger, the publishing of online manifestos became prevalent after the attacks in Norway undertaken by Anders Breivik. 
160
While the lone wolf may undertake the attack single-handedly, the motivation clearly been influenced by online extremist propaganda. Heidi Beirich refers to white nationalist websites such as Stormfront, another propaganda filled site, as a "den of lone wolves." 
161
162
163
With the emergence of Alt-Right terrorism in the recent years, the homeland's domestic intelligence structure is once again pivotal to saving lives and stopping the onslaught of needless violence. The main entities vital to the collection and analysis of intelligence on Alt-Right extremism are DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies. In contrast to Jihadist terrorism, the NCTC plays a lesser role because the Alt-Right threat is mostly a domestic issue.
DHS has made some important changes to its rhetoric and national level goals in response to the Alt-Right threat. Shortly after the El-Paso massacre in September 2019,
Violence which outlines not only their continued fight against Jihadism, but also the new threat of white supremacy terrorism. 
164
165
166
167
The most important federal entity in the fight against the Alt-Right is the FBI. As this new threat has emerged, the FBI, like DHS has made steps to acknowledge the growing threat of the Alt-Right. As recent as February 2020, current FBI Director Terrorism." 175 While this is certainly an important step, the nature of the current Alt-Right threat is forcing the FBI to fight the threat across three of its different and respective divisions, Intelligence, Counterterrorism, and Criminal Investigative. 
176
177
However, his target selection and published manifesto also made it a potential hate crime, which would then be under the jurisdiction of the bureau's Criminal Investigative division. 
178
179
180
In addition to its steps of improving information sharing between its various divisions, the FBI also asserts that in the face of Alt-Right terrorism, it will continue to 175 Hannah Allam, "FBI Announces That Racist Violence Is Now Equal Priority to Foreign Terrorism," NPR, February 10, 2020, https://www.npr.org/2020/02/10/804616715/fbi-announces-thatracist-violence-is-now-equal-priority-to-foreign-terrorism. rely heavily on its JTTFs that were discussed in the previous chapter. 
181
183
184
While the emerging Alt-Right threat is dangerous to the American homeland, an analysis of the current measures that DHS, FBI, SLTT agencies have employed is pivotal in understanding if these actions and implementations will be effective against the Alt-Right in the future. Even though DHS has recognized the Alt-Right threat to the homeland, new framework does not seem to provide sufficient measures to quell the threat. Similarly, while the FBI acknowledges the Alt-Right threat like DHS, it indicates that it still faces "significant challenges" to combat it. 
186
Law enforcement in the homeland has failed in preparing to counter the rise of the Alt-Right over the past few decades since 9/11. 
187
188
189
190
186 McGarrity and Shivers, Confronting White Supremacy.
While the framework has identified the need to defend against the Alt-Right, it still fails to address certain issues that are inherent to properly defending against it. One of the hardest realities posed by the Alt-Right is that the problem could be in every corner of the American homeland. The "threat environment" is not just one community, or one state, but is instead active in all 50 states. While every white citizen in the United States is certainly not a member of the Alt-Right, the possible threat environment is a daunting task. In fact, it is close to the same problem that Muslim majority countries such as Saudi
Arabia or the UAE have to wrestle with in order to stop Jihadist terrorism within the own borders. Essentially, the threat could be everywhere in the homeland. An American DHS also relies on SLTT agencies to be the front-line defense against the Alt-Right threat, but has apparently provided little intelligence support to these agencies in the past. According to a report, most information passed to SLTT agencies from DHS about previous Alt-Right threats have proven to be "vague and unhelpful." 
193
Like DHS, the FBI has acknowledged the Alt-Right threat, but also cites that the Alt-Right presents "significant challenges." 
194
195
There also appears to be disparity in the difference between hate crimes and domestic terrorism. While one attack could be both, this is not always the case. The FBI needs to come out with guidance on how an attack could qualify as one or another.
Lastly, the FBI has stood up domestic terrorism units at some of their field offices, but not all of them. 
196
Just as DHS and the FBI need better standards in dealing with the Alt-Right, so do SLTT agencies. While some SLTT agencies have Alt-Right specialized units, others do not. This is due to different issues such as funding, manpower, and priorities that affect .the different state and local departments. For example, the recent establishment of a R.E.M.E. unit by the NYPD is a historic step toward combatting the Alt-Right, but it is not the norm. Rather, it is a resource only afforded to a robust and well-funded SLTT like the NYPD. In 2018, the NYPD had a 5.6-billion-dollar budget, 197 and uniformed officer corps of over 34,000. 
198
This chapter discussed the nature of the Alt-Right threat facing the homeland, and then described the current posture employed to defend against it. The chapter then concluded with an analysis of the current posture. While hate groups like the Patriot Front or the American Identity Movement can be monitored, the American who holds radical Alt-Right beliefs could blend in with everyday society and escape law enforcement scrutiny. These last two chapters have shown that the methods employed by Jihadist and Alt-Right terrorists against the American homeland are actually extremely similar. While one young American could be radicalized online to undertake Jihad against his fellow citizens, another young American who lives down the street could be radicalized to undertake an Alt-Right attack. While the ideologies are different, the methods are the same, and both potential terrorists can easily blend in with American society. This increasing threat will continue to stretch the homeland's intelligence structure, and the recent rise of great power incursion will add another element to the challenge for homeland security, law enforcement, and intelligence.
The third and final element of the current threats facing the American homeland is the new threat of great power incursion. As Jihadist and Alt-Right terrorism will continue to target American citizens, great power incursion has a different nature that seeks to undermine American society and its institutions, rather than target its population directly.
While GPC between the United States, China, and Russia has become a global conflict in the past decade, this chapter will not discuss the contentious areas of the South China Sea, or the battlefields of Syria. Instead, it will solely focus on the threat both China and Russia pose to the American homeland itself. It will first explain the nature behind the great power incursion threat. Then it will discuss the current domestic intelligence structure designated to defend against it. Lastly, it will provide analyze how effective that intelligence structure is in addressing the threat.
As GPC has become a focal point in U. S. foreign policy throughout the past few years, the impact of the competition has actually begun to cross over into the American homeland in the form of great power incursion. This section will describe the threats that both Russia and China currently pose to the American homeland, and will illustrate how they are affecting multiple aspects of American society.
Ever since Allied victory in World War II, the Soviet Union or Russia today has been seen as the premier adversary in the world against the United States. Throughout the Cold War, almost the entire world was carved into American or Soviet spheres of influence in which both societies struggled for supremacy over the other. From ballistic missiles to Olympic Ice Hockey, to the race for space, everything was a competition. In fact, the Cold War really was the original GPC. According to the current State Department fact sheet, the United States has long sought to have a "constructive Doctrine. By targeting the political systems, the Russians could achieve "permanent unrest" within the American homeland and weaken it from within.
Although Russian election meddling appeared to be the first major display of Russian involvement in American homeland affairs since the end of the Cold War, it was not the only incident. In both 2016 and 2017, Russia launched massive campaigns to infiltrate American homeland critical infrastructure. 
217
218
219
220
The Russian election meddling and its cyber-attacks against the homeland's infrastructure are troubling developments. Not only will Russia continue to challenge the United States across the globe, but it also has interest in the targeting the American way of life. Unfortunately, Russia is not the only Great Power the United States has to confront.
As Russia seeks to cause chaos within an enemy state, China takes a much different approach in targeting the American homeland. Like Russia, China also views the United States as its most formidable adversary. While Russia knows it must weaken a state in order to succeed due to its relative decline in recent years, China instead pushes to defeat that state through reverse engineering of stolen material, and seeks to portray itself in a positive light to the world community. Rather than creating unrest with American homeland, China instead targets American academics and businesses in order to steal intellectual property (IP) and gain the advantage. 
221
222
The most recent and successful operation in IP theft against the American homeland has been China's "Thousand Talents Program." 
223
224
225
226
234
The recent great power incursion by Russia and China into American society adds the final and perhaps most important layer to the current three-pronged attack. Not only do the homeland's agencies have to combat Jihadist and Alt-Right terrorism, but they now also must confront the resurgence of Cold War style espionage as illustrated above.
This section will illustrate how the current homeland agencies of DHS, FBI, and SLTT law enforcement deal with the threat posed by Russia and China.
In terms of combatting the rise of great power incursion within the homeland, DHS appears to focus its efforts within its office of I&A and its Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). 
235
236
237
While I&A Cyber focuses on producing Cyber related intelligence, CISA takes a more hands-on approach in protecting the Cyber arena and infrastructure. Essentially, CISA has the lead for protecting any cyber network that is ".gov." 238 Any ".com" website can reach out and collaborate with CISA in order to enhance its own security, but is not mandated to do so. 
239
240
241
242
As DHS focuses on cyber protection and prevention, the FBI is the arresting authority of the federal government for cyber-crimes and espionage. The FBI also serves as the primary conduit for investigating a cyber-attack that has taken place against the homeland. 243 While the FBI certainly investigates and prosecutes private citizens for cyber offenses, it plays a vital role in stopping cyber espionage. Its posture starts with FBI's Cyber division located at FBI headquarters, which is tasked with addressing all aspects of cyber-crime as well as coordination with other federal agencies. 
244
245
246
254
255
256
While the FBI certainly has intelligence infrastructure in place to combat great power incursion, questions remain as to whether or not it is effective enough. For example, in a recent Fox News interview, Director Wray said that "over half of the FBI's
Great power incursion into American society is the last element of the current threat against the homeland, but has unique challenges that are inherently different from the previous analyzed Jihadist and Alt-Right Terrorism threats. While Jihadist and Alt-Right terrorism have shifted toward the lone-wolf American being the primary threat, great power incursion has centered on cyber-attacks and espionage from Russian and Chinese operatives. This analysis will discuss two weaknesses in the current domestic intelligence structure that can be easily be exploited by both China and Russia. First, while DHS's CISA and FBI Cyber have good capabilities for both cyber defenses and investigations, they lack overall authority in some of the nation's most critical infrastructure and economic systems. With over 85 percent of Critical Infrastructure being privately owned, it is the individual companies who are responsible for ensuring their own security, not DHS or the FBI. Second, great power incursion must not just be a priority for DHS and the FBI, but also must be one for the American public.
While policymakers and military leaders have recognized the great power incursion threat for a number of years, the private sector in the American homeland has lagged behind because of the financial opportunities China offers for individual American companies. However, as military systems are certainly targeted, the majority of Chinese and Russian cyber-attacks and cyber espionage happen against these privatelyowned companies. The biggest issue in proper defense against cyber-attacks and espionage is that civilian companies must ask DHS or the FBI for assistance. If this assistance is not asked for by the companies, it will not be received. For example, in light of the recent Chinese Coronavirus vaccine hacking attempt, CISA has put out a request to all American healthcare organizations to reach out CISA if they need assistance in protecting their systems. 
262
The other key element that can lead to further damage from great power incursion is the American psyche. According to an NPR report, swaths of American companies have actually turned a blind eye to China hacking their systems in the past. 
263
264
265
266
While American psyche has been detrimental in leading to IP theft from China in the past, a change in their psyche could actually help the FBI better defend against further espionage. Even though the FBI has other means of law enforcement such as undercover agents, or wiretaps, tips from the public can be a valuable piece to their decision making. 
267
268
The reality of great power incursion has unfortunately made the American homeland another battlefield in this struggle. While CISA and FBI Cyber are capable entities in infrastructure defense, their lack of full jurisdiction in defending the American private sector could lead to continued IP theft and cyber espionage.
269
to 2018 and 2019, most likely due to the Coronavirus pandemic,
273
The rise of China and resurgence of Russia into the global landscape is a reality that the United States also must face. As Great Power Competition (GPC) has involved overseas disputes such as China's South China Sea claims or Russia's annexation of Crimea, it has also entered the American homeland in the form of great power incursion.
Both Beijing and Moscow have proven the ability to target both American infrastructure and private companies in order to gain the upper hand. These attacks have taken place within the cyber domain as many infrastructure and private company systems have an increased reliance on cyber networks today. If these networks are not properly defended, both Beijing and Moscow could take advantage by either launching a malicious attack against them or infiltrating them to gain valuable intellectual property (IP). Lastly, while
Chinese students continue to study in the American homeland, there is an inherent risk that they could engage in possible espionage activities and bring information with them back to China.
This conclusion chapter will provide a brief summary of findings relating to the current Jihadist, Alt-Right, and great power incursion threats. It will then provide recommendations for how to better combat these threats in the future and offer a brief conclusion to the question of possibly needing a purely domestic intelligence agency posed early in Chapter I.
Since the 9/11 attacks orchestrated by Al-Qaeda, Jihadist terrorism has been at the forefront of both American homeland security and U.S. foreign policy. In initial response to the attacks, the Bush administration, with Congressional approval, made certain reforms that shape America's domestic intelligence structure today. These reforms included establishing the DHS, the NCTC, an Intelligence Branch of the FBI, and state and locally owned and operated Fusion Centers.
Through research into their current operations and missions, there is evidence that these entities were designed to prevent another tragedy like 9/11. These reforms appear to defend primarily against FTO operatives entering the American homeland. DHS's border security operations and the FBI's involvement in overseas affairs provide excellent examples of how the intelligence structure is focused outwardly in regard to Jihadist terrorism. 
274
While Jihadist terrorism used to mainly be carried out by FTO operatives like 9/11, there has been more Jihadist lone-wolf attacks in recent years. 
276
This thesis posed the question as to whether or not the United States should have a purely domestic intelligence agency like a British MI5 based upon the three biggest threats the nation faces today of Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion. Each threat was then dissected in chapters II, III, and IV. This thesis has shown that the intelligence apparatuses that help defend against each threat certainly have challenges. While DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies have different missions and trials, they all perform valuable functions against these three threats that will be needed in the future.
Even though an MI5 type model could be effective, the establishment of a purely domestic intelligence agency as a wholesale replacement of the current structure will be 282 Todd Lightly, "How a Chicago College Student."
283 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, "APT Groups."
too disruptive to the aspects of the current system that work well, such as CISA in regards to infrastructure defense. A new agency could also just add another element in the bureaucracy which will take time to evolve into something effective like DHS and the FBI. Time that the United States does not have. Instead, the best courses of action are as follows:
1. Commission Report, further reform laws to the current system could take place once the report in published like they were in 2004.
Homegrown Jihadists, Alt-Right terrorists, and great power incursion present significant threats the American homeland could face in the future. While the FBI is federal lead on counterintelligence and most counterterrorism efforts, this dominant role could encourage the FBI to become selfish with the intelligence that it has gained, and discourage it from sharing with other agencies. For example, the FBI's current stance on its Directorate of Intelligence is that it is a "national intelligence workforce within the FBI-a service within a service." 290 While this workforce is a full-fledged member of the U.S. Intelligence Community per the IRTPA, they are still accountable solely to the Attorney General due to being part of the FBI. By reporting to the Attorney General, FBI intelligence could be tempted to solely retain intelligence that relates to federal law enforcement, and fail to share it with other agencies such as SLTT precincts. The threats of Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion will certainly be fought at the federal level, but SLTT agencies will need to be as informed as possible.
To prevent any potential intelligence selfishness, the FBI's Directorate of Intelligence should become an independent organization, separate from the law enforcement side of the FBI. This stand-alone agency would not necessarily be a fullbore domestic intelligence agency like an MI5, but rather, will just ensure intelligence 289 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-458, 118 Stat. 3644  (2004). https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/ogc/ogc-related-menus/ogc-relatedcontent/irtpa-of-2004.
290 Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Intelligence Branch."
could aggressively partner with social media and technology firms to prevent possible online radicalization? Also, the vast majority of Jihadist and Alt-Right lone wolves appear to be young Muslim or white men who have become disenfranchised and angry with current society. Could DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies devote resources into more community engagement activities such as visiting more schools to prevent Alt-Right and Jihadist radicalization, or recruit more agents and officers from the American-Muslim community?
This thesis was written during a monumental time in world history and American homeland security. As of August 2020, the Coronavirus pandemic has claimed more than 160,000 Americans with no current end in sight. This current pandemic has proved that the United States still has areas to improve upon, such as health intelligence, or infection tracing. Additional research is needed into ways that DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies can help the CDC during a pandemic.
Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion are the three biggest threats the American homeland will face in the future. While they do not necessarily warrant an establishment of a purely domestic intelligence agency, these threats do require the current domestic intelligence apparatus be closely looked at and scrutinized by a bipartisan congressional commission. While homegrown Alt-Right and Jihadist terrorists will most likely perpetrate attacks in the future, great power incursion will also be an omnipresent reality as China and Russia will seek to undermine American society. The American domestic intelligence system must adapt to these threats.
123
123
fact, Alt-Right terrorism, like Jihadist terrorism requires certain catalysts to perpetuate radicalization. J.M. socialization
document
document
179 McGarrity and Shivers, Confronting White Supremacy. 180 McGarrity and Shivers, Confronting White Supremacy.
John Haltiwanger, "ISIS in America: How Many Times has the Islamic State Attacked the U.S.," Newsweek, December 11,
2017, https://www.newsweek.com/islamic-state-america-attacks-744497. 2 Vera Bergengruen and W. J. Hennigan, "We are Being Eaten from Within. Why America Is Losing the Battle against White Nationalist Terrorism," Time, August 8, 2019, https://time.com/5647304/whitenationalist-terrorism-united-states/. 3 Campbell Robertson, Christopher Mele, and Sabrina Tavensise, "11 Killed in Synagogue Massacre; Suspect Charged with 29 Counts" New York Times, October 27, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/27/us/active-shooter-pittsburgh-synagogue-shooting.html.; Jason Horowitz, Nick Corasaniti, and Ashley Southall, "Nine Killed in Shooting at Black Church in Charleston," New York Times, June 17, 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/18/us/church-attacked-in-charlestonsouth-carolina.html. 4 United States Senate, Report of the Select Committee On Intelligence United States Senate on Russian Active Measures Campaigns and Interference in the 2016 U.S. Election, Volume 2: Russia's Use Of Social Media With Additional Views (Washington, DC: Senate, 116th Cong.1, 2018), 4, https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Report_Volume2.pdf.5 Dustin Volz and Timothy Gardner, "In a First, U.S. Blames Russia for Cyber Attacks On Energy Grid," Reuters, March 15, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-russia-sanctions-energygrid/in-afirst-u-s-blames-russia-for-cyber-attacks-on-energy-grid-idUSKCN1GR2G3.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Cyber Crime," accessed June 14 2020, https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/cyber.
The Security Service, "What We Do," accessed November 4, 2019, https://www.mi5.gov.uk/whatwe-do.
11 Canadian Security Intelligence Service, "Home," accessed November 4, 2019, https://www.canada.ca/en/security-intelligence-service.
html. 12 Erik Rosenbach and Aki J. Peritz, Domestic Intelligence (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Kennedy School of Government, 2009), https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/domesticintelligence.pdf.
Kate Martin, "Domestic Intelligence and Civil Liberties," The SAIS Review of International Affairs,  24, no.1 (Winter 2004): 8, https://search.proquest.com/docview/231327340/fulltextPDF/1441B87820314B1DPQ/1?accountid=12702.
Martin, "Domestic Intelligence and Civil Liberties,[8][9] 
David Remnick, "Telling the Truth About ISIS and Raqqa," The New Yorker, November 22, 2015, https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/telling-the-truth-about-isis-and-raqqa
City of New York Police Department, "Counterterrorism," accessed March 11, 2020, https://www1.nyc.gov/site/nypd/bureaus/investigative/counterterrorism.page.
City of New York Police Department, "Counterterrorism."
Anne Arundel Country Police Department, "Homeland Security and Intelligence Unit," accessed March 11, 2020, https://www.aacounty.org/departments/police-department/homeland-security/.
White House, National Strategy to Combat Terrorist Travel (Washington, DC: White House,  2018), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/NSCTT-Signed.pdf.
Risa Brooks. "Muslim 'Homegrown' Terrorism in the United States: How Serious Is the Threat?" Quarterly Journal: International Security, vol. 36. no. 2. (Fall 2011): 11, https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/files/Muslim%20Homegrown%20Terrorism%20in% 20the%20United%20States.pdf.
Matt Lewis, "What the Alt-Right Has Learned From Al-Qaeda," Daily Beast, August 21, 2017, https://www.thedailybeast.com/what-the-alt-right-has-learned-from-al-qaeda.
Department of Homeland Security, Strategic Framework, 13.   
Watkins, "N.Y.P.D. creates Special Unit."
Twitter, "Privacy Policy," accessed 25 August 2020, https://twitter.com/en/privacy#:~:text=Twitter%20Privacy%20Policy&text=Twitter%20is%20public%20an d%20Tweets,not%20to%20use%20your%20name.
McGarrity and Shivers, Confronting White Supremacy.   
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, "APT Groups Target Healthcare and Essential Services" Alert (AA20-126A) May 5, 2020. https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/AA20126A.
U.S. Cyber Command, "Focus," accessed 25 August 2020, https://www.cybercom.mil/About/Mission-and-Vision/. USCYBERCOM based on its mission focus will collaborate with domestic partners, but focuses mainly on support to Combatant Commanders.
Jones, Doxsee, and Harrington, "The Escalating Terrorism Problem in the United States."
I would first and foremost like to thank 
Dr. Erik Dahl
Dr. Cristiana Matei
Continuing Challenge.," 2014, https://www.theiacp.org/sites/default/files/2018," July 18, 2019, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/ntas/alerts/19_0718_ntas-bulletin_0.pdf 79 
Department of Homeland Security, "National Terrorism Advisory Bulletin
Department of Homeland Security, "National Terrorism Advisory Bulletin
Department of Homeland Security, "National Terrorism Advisory Bulletin
Racist Violence is Now Equal Priority to Foreign 168 Department of Homeland Security
Strategic Framework
13
This thesis has examined the top three threats the American homeland faces today. Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion present formidable challenges and obstacles for the current homeland intelligence structure.
While the coronavirus pandemic is the most recent threat to public health, and is the top priority of many state and local governments as this thesis was being completed, Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion could be around for decades to come.
While coalition forces have weakened ISIS and Al-Qaeda in Iraq and Syria, a recent UN report submitted to the Security Council expressed that in early 2020, ISIS launched increasing attacks in Iraq and Syria. 
270
defense official stated that there has been an "uptick" in ISIS activity and violence in the region. 
271
This regained legitimacy, theoretically, could lead to a rise in both ISIS-inspired or ISIS directed attacks against the American homeland in the future.
While the Jihadist threat is still credible against the American homeland, the vast gained by the FBI is available also to DHS, Fusion Centers, and SLTT agencies. This agency will also be the responsibility of both the Attorney General and the Director of National Intelligence with its own director needing to be congressionally confirmed. The American homeland will need all of its first responders to be as informed as possible to effectively deal with all of these threats together. No agency can win this battle alone.
While great power incursion has seen traditional forms of espionage such as physical IP theft by Chinese agents, the majority of the threat appears to be coming from the cyber domain. Although CISA and FBI Cyber have good capabilities to defend against future cyber-attacks, they can only be involved in the private sector through a company's individual request for their assistance, or after a known crime has been committed. In order for these private sector companies to align with federal priorities, future legislation should mandate that CISA personnel become imbedded with private company cyber defense teams help to provide expertise and federal guidance. Not only would this federal assistance bolster the defensive capabilities of that private company, but it also could enhance the dialogue between CISA and the private sector. Furthermore, by CISA personnel being attached to a private company, CISA and DHS headquarters could find out quickly if a cyber-attack took place against it. For example, if Apple fell victim to a Chinese cyber-attack, the CISA agents attached to Apple could quickly inform their internal chain of command at CISA about the events. This is better than the current system in which CISA would not know about the attack unless it was notified by Apple personnel. Rather than an "every company for themselves" mentality against Chinese or Russian hackers, a more collective defense in which CISA plays a larger role could be a good strategy.
While the three threats of Jihadist terrorism, Alt-Right terrorism, and great power incursion will be difficult threats in the future, further research is needed into ways that the lone-wolf attacks undertaken by Americans which are based off Jihadist or Alt-Right ideologies could possibly be prevented. Is there a way that DHS, FBI, and SLTT agencies