# ID: 7fcaa4a38c4448638e12eae5f11889e3
# Title: Understanding the Enemy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
+Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
I thank the faculty and staff of The Joint Advanced Warfighting School, Joint Forces Staff College. Dr. Bob Antis, thank you for your guidance, support and dedication to my efforts. This is in large part because of you. Monica, Arena, you are the best.
To MG Byron S. Bagby, Commandant, and Dr. Laura McCluney, Academic   Dean. Thanks for the inspiration and keeping the light shining on the path I walked to success.
I send many thanks to someone who must remain "below the radar". It was your generosity, care, concern, and morale support that allowed me to focus and not worry about life's other concerns. I thank you from the bottom of my heart.
I would be remiss if I did not thank my good friends Cassandra White and Lona Ichikawa. Thanks for the fun and laughter you gave to keep me motivated. I truly needed it.
To my family thank you for the love and support you provided me. To my Mom and Dad, Beverly and Daniel Vibudulu I am eternally grateful. Thanks for the wonderful example you set. To my grandmother Ruth White I send special recognition. For the last ninety-three years you "hung in there" with me. This is for you.
The years between 1990 and 2005 saw a marked increase in fundamentalist Islamic hostilities against America and the West; America and her allies were under attack, at home and abroad. The suicide" bombings" of the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and Flight 93 on February 26 th , 1993; the suicide bombing of the USS Cole, while harbored in the Yemeni port of Aden in which 17 sailors died and 39 were wounded; the August 7, 1998 U.S. embassy simultaneous car bomb explosions at the United States embassies in the East African capital cities of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania and Nairobi, Kenya where 257 people were killed and over 4,000 wounded; the September 11th attacks on U. S. soil in which over 3000 were killed and wounded; and, the July 7 th London train bombings that killed 56 and injured over 700 were the result of the outgrowth of miscommunication and lack of understanding between East and West; between secular, democratic nations of the west and a small fundamentalist Muslim movement based in the east.
War had been declared upon America and her allies in February, 1998 as a call to jihad by Osama bin Laden, leader of the Islamic terrorist organization al Qaeda. On September 11, 2001 that war was brought home to Americans, ushering in a new era in American warfare: the "Global War on Terrorism." Spurred by the horror of September 11 th , President George W. Bush declared a "Global War on Terrorism" against those who would see America and her democratic ideals destroyed. The U.S. Department of State has identified terrorist organizations in the war on terror largely as militant Islamist groups such as al-Qaeda and its affiliates 1 as the primary threat to the U.S. The National Security Council, in the War on Terror or "Long War" has the stated goal of "ending international terrorism; preventing terrorist groups from carrying out attacks and posing a threat to America and its allies; spreading freedom and liberal democracy; and putting an end to state sponsorship of terrorism in so-called rogue and failed states." 
2
3
In the aftermath of 9/11 the U.S. government (USG) initiated and continues military offensive operations as the primary course of action in attempting to win the Iraq war and through its' success, victory in the global war on terrorism. However, staying the course is not effecting the war's end quickly enough; there are those who do not believe victory in the Iraq War by and of itself will lead to victory in the global war on terror. According to the Iraq Study Group, terrorism in Iraq after the fall of Saddam Hussein could grow; a chaotic Iraq could provide a still stronger base of operations for terrorists who seek to act regionally or even globally. 
4
5
According to the National Strategy for Homeland Security, July 2002: "For more than six decades, America has sought to protect its own sovereignty and independence through a strategy of global presence and engagement. In doing so, America has helped many other countries and peoples advance along the path of democracy, open markets, individual liberty, and peace with their neighbors. Yet there are those who oppose America's role in the world, and who are willing to use violence against us and our friends. Our great power leaves these enemies with few conventional options for doing us harm. One such option is to take advantage of our freedom and openness by secretly inserting terrorists into our country to attack our homeland. Homeland security seeks to deny this avenue of attack to our enemies and thus to provide a secure foundation for America's ongoing global engagement." 
6
7
Iraq is seemingly dissolving into civil war while Western military gains made in Afghanistan are eroding as the Taliban slowly re-gains authority. The trial, sentencing, 
5
6
Inc, Washington, D.C. 2006, p. 57. 7
Terrorist activities worldwide continue, with New York and London as primary targets.
According to Georgetown University Professor Bruce Hoffman, "the enemy has been dispersed but is now more lethal, better trained, and is more unpredictable than ever. Al Qaeda has achieved an autocatalytic capability to generate cells sympathetic to the movement. The CIA officially confirms this analysis and warns that Iraq has abetted a global rise in radicalism." 
8
The thesis of this paper is: To win the "War on Terrorism" aka the "Long War", the U.S. and West must design a response which incorporates study and understanding of the historical roadmap and developments leading to the resurgence and re-embracing of Islam, evolution of anti-Western sentiment, and the overall regional dynamics and culture that shape Muslim ideology. This paper will show why military efforts alone cannot win the war against terrorism as it is a tactic, not an enemy; why the West must also incorporate other elements of national power; diplomatic and information for success; and argue the need for a holistic approach to understanding Islam and the re-embracing of Islam by Muslims worldwide.
The methodology used in arguing this thesis consists of analysis, synthesis, and recommendation; and conduct literature review and analysis to highlight the need for cultural awareness and understanding. The author analyzes three case-studies of nationstates with a Muslim majority. The three case-studies analyzed are:
• The creation and decline of Yugoslavia
• The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan This paper will highlight a historical review of Islam, the global use of nationalism, or colonialism, the accepted term pre-World War II, and a look at United States strategic political policies within the region. It recommends first, understanding of Islamic culture and religious significance to Muslims, as within Islam, religion is the core of one's identity, and second, diplomacy and political dialogue with key Muslims worldwide as the solution to the growing threat of Islamic "fundamentalism" against the United States and the West.
"The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish by that test the kind of war on which they are embarking; neither mistaking it for, nor trying to turn it into, something that is alien to its nature." --Carl Von Clausewitz, On War
According to Dictionary.com, terrorism is defined as:
1. The use of violence and threats to intimidate or coerce, esp. for political purposes. 2. The state of fear and submission produced by terrorism or terrorization. 3. A terroristic method of governing or of resisting a government.
9
Merriam-Webster's Dictionary On-line defines it as:
• The systematic use of terror especially as a means of coercion. 
10
• (Threats of) violent action for political purposes.
11
The commonality of these three definitions is the defining of terrorism as a verb, rather than a noun. Terrorism is not defined as a person; a terrorist is. Analyses of terrorism-and ascriptions to its causes and remedies-are hampered by an absence of any agreed-upon definitions…As a consequence, casual and arbitrary invocations of the term terrorism tend to serve the interests of the speaker. 12 Terrorism, after all is a tactic, not an enemy; taken literally, a "war on terrorism" is closer to a "war on strategic bombing" or a war on "amphibious assault" than it is to orthodox war aims or wartime grand strategies as one normally makes war on an enemy, not a method. 
13
14
15
The Muslim fundamentalist does not kill for personal gain; that is one of the tenants of jihad: one does not take illegal booty. 
16
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
In a thirty-two minute speech President George W. Bush gave at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, July 2004, he declared no less than six times that "the American people are safer" as a result of invading Iraq.
28
29
30
That they are free to do more than wonder when the next attack against them will occur.
The U.S. and West may well be safer as a result of the Iraq War; it is possible Operation Iraqi Freedom could have led to a direct disruption of Al Qaeda operations worldwide. However, as Iraq's involvement in the events of September 11 th 2001 remains doubtful, the question stands was and is Iraq a player in the war on terror. The United States still lacks a clear focus for waging the war on terrorism. There is no overarching view of the terrorist threat and no top-to-bottom plan to combat it. 
31
32
33
34
32
33
34
35
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is a man of few regrets, but he has acknowledged that he had second thoughts about the Bush administration's often-used phrase "the war on terror" to describe the U.S. military endeavors in Iraq and Afghanistan. Asked by conservative commentator Cal Thomas what he would have done differently during his often-stormy, almost six-year tenure as President Bush's defense chief, Rumsfeld replied: "I guess I don't think I would have called it "the war on terror." Rumsfeld continued: "The word "war" conjures up World War II more than it does the Cold War, and it creates a level of expectation of victory and an ending within the 30 or 60 minutes of a soap opera. And it isn't going to happen that way." he said. Terror is a weapon of choice for extremists who are trying to destabilize regimes and impose their will in the hands of a small group of clerics, their dark vision on all the people that they can control." 
36
37
The United States government went to war against Iraq as it deemed Saddam Hussein a potential threat to U.S. borders and national interests. Numerous intelligence reports stressed Saddam Hussein as attempting to acquire WMD capabilities, and willing to use them. Analysts surmised the reason for Saddam refusing to allow UN weapons inspectors into the country, between 1998 and November 2002 (despite Security Council Resolution 687), was he had reconstituted Iraq's prohibited WMD programs. 
39
Stanford, California, 2004, p. 22. 38 Ibid., p.23. 39 Ibid., p.27.
41
42
43
44
40
Woodward, Plan of Attack, Simon & Schuster Paperbacks, New York, New York, 2004, p. 92. 41
Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 37. 43
44 Ibid.,
p. 39.
45
47
48
49
Although it seems obvious, it is important to remember that the 9/11 attacks were not carried out with any assistance from Saddam Hussein. None of the nineteen hijackers 
45 Bob Woodward, Plan of Attack, Simon & Schuster Paperbacks, New York, New York, 2004, p. 434. 46
Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 39. 47 Ibid., p. 40. 48
49
were Iraqis. Iraq had not been linked to the planning, financing, or execution of those attacks. The former regime was not known to support or provide safe harbor to al Qaeda, as the Taliban regime did in Afghanistan. 
50
1. "Our nation is more secure" This statement presumes that Iraq (like the Taliban regime in Afghanistan) was a correct target in the war on terrorism to dismantle the al Qaeda network. Moreover, the paradigm used to define terrorism is nations using "terrorism as a means of political expression." It was later determined the government of Iraq did not sponsor al Qaeda; therefore it did not fit this particular paradigm. While the Taliban government did support al Qaeda, it is privatized terrorism, sponsored by bin Laden and independent of any one nation-state. 51 The bipartisan Iraq Study Group recommends new and enhanced diplomatic and political efforts in Iraq and the region, and a change in the primary mission of U.S. forces in Iraq that will enable the United States to begin to move its combat forces out of Iraq responsibly. The study group believes these two recommendations are equally important, reinforcing one another. The group also states if the Iraqi government moves forward with national reconciliation, Iraq will have an opportunity for a better future, terrorist will be dealt a blow, stability will be enhanced in an important part of the world, and most importantly, America's credibility, interests, and values will be protected. terrorism. Continuing to keep the U.S. and the U.S. military as the face of change in Iraq rather than the face of Iraqis themselves is worse than not directing our attention against the al Qaeda threats. It allows the inevitable unintended consequences of those actions, such as the events at Abu Ghrab prison, military forces accused of the torture and killing of Iraqi civilians and other alleged negative events to create anti-American sentiment; the first step toward growing a terrorist. Not all will convert; but as the U.S. remains in the country the potential for converts readily exists. Aggressive U.S. military tactics may, in fact be necessary to deal with Iraqi insurgents and terrorists but may do more to create terrorists. 
55
56
57
58
59
Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 47. 56
58
59
information strategy of making it all one fight. Let's not talk about bin Laden's objectives-let's talk about your objectives. How do we solve that problem?" 
60
61
62
63
Past administrations have employed a range of measures to combat international terrorism, from diplomacy, international cooperation, and constructive engagement to economic sanctions, covert action, protective security measures, and military force. The application of sanctions is one of the most frequently used anti-terrorist tools of U.S. 
60
64
65
66
67
68
65
66
67
University, 2004, p. 59. 68 Ibid., p.57.
69
71
1. reducing vulnerabilities 2. deterring terrorism 3. responding to terrorism 4. preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
In each area responsibilities were assigned to the departments and agencies of the government. 
72
73
76
77
• The maintenance of American military primacy;
• The embrace of preventative war as a supplement to traditional deterrence;
• The war on terrorism;
• Democracy 78
The Strategic Studies Institute, part of the U.S. Army War College and the strategic level study agent for national security issues tells us that public discussion of American interests changed dramatically after 9/11 but the interests themselves have changed little if at all. 
79
Government has always sought to secure for its people a set of basic objectives:
• The protection of their lives and personal safety, both at home and abroad
• The maintenance of the nation's sovereignty, political freedoms, and independence with its values, institutions, and territory intact.
• Their material well-being and prosperity Similar phrasings can be found in most pre-9/11 American strategic documents; security of the homeland and the population hardly emerged as interests in 2001. In September 2001, the President announced that the nation was at war-and public statements since then have repeatedly echoed that formulation. Yet the nation's key strategic documents have continued to treat threats in the same generic, unspecific, peacetime-like sense that they had done prior to 2001. This lack of threat specificity makes true strategic thought difficult. Wartime strategy is normally concerned with identifying enemy weaknesses or centers of gravity and crafting a design to strike at them. Weaknesses and strengths are specific to the parties, however-no two actors are identical. Sun Tzu's oft-cited injunction to know one's enemy is all about the need to fit one's strategy to the particulars of one's enemy and his specific vulnerabilities. This is impossible when official strategic documents do not identify the enemy but instead frame policy in terms of broad categories of challenge-types without naming actual challengers. 81
To Beat Jihadists, Know Thy Enemy. 
82
83
82
83
"The new strategy I outline tonight will change America's course in Iraq, and help us succeed in the fight against terror. That the Iraqi elections of 2005 were a stunning achievement. We thought that these elections would bring the Iraqis together -and that as we trained Iraqi security forces, we could accomplish our mission with fewer American troops. But in 2006, the opposite happened. The violence in Iraqparticularly in Baghdad -overwhelmed the political gains the Iraqis had made. Al-Qaeda terrorists and Sunni insurgents recognized the mortal danger that Iraq's elections posed for their cause. And they responded with outrageous acts of murder aimed at innocent Iraqis. The situation in Iraq is unacceptable to the American people -and it is unacceptable to me. Our troops in Iraq have fought bravely. They have done everything we have asked them to do. Where mistakes have been made, the responsibility rests with me. A successful strategy for Iraq goes beyond military operations…It is clear that we need to change our strategy in Iraq. One important issue discussed was that regime change in Iraq may not enhance regional stability. It was felt that Iraq would likely be unstable and this instability may spread if not properly managed. The country could fragment along religious and/or ethnic lines. In a sense, a western-style democracy may not engender long term stability without considerable stabilization, preparation, and long-term sustainment. 
87
88
89
Despite all the lives lost and ground gained (and lost) America is no closer to winning or ending the war than it was in the months following 9/11. In order to win this war, to secure the homeland and assure U.S. allies and coalition partners that it can and prosperous, self-defending democracy, while defeat means civil war-and the metrics that matter most are thus measures such of elections held, Iraqi security forces trained, or electricity generated. Such a victory creates a demonstration effect in which Iraqi democracy catalyzes political change elsewhere in the region, removing the underlying cause of Islamist terrorism; a defeat, by this logic, would produce region-wide chaos that would undermine, not facilitate, the larger war on terror. 
90
The United States must build a new international consensus for stability in Iraq and the region. In order to foster such consensus, the United States should embark on a robust diplomatic effort to establish an international support structure intended to stabilize Iraq and ease tensions in other countries in the region. This support structure should include every country that has an interest in averting a chaotic Iraq, including all 90 Tommy Franks, Stephen Biddle, Peter Charles Choharis, John M. Owen IV, Daniel Pipes, Gary Rosen and Dov S. Zakheim, National Interest Online, Is This Victory", November 10, 2006, accessed January 2007. 
91
92
93
94
92
Books, 2006, p. 44. 93
94
The Bush Administrations' reactions to September 11 were fast and furious, much in the vein of "shock and awe" tactics defined by military doctrine. According to Louis Fisher, Congressional Research Service, the terrorist attacks of 9/11 forced a major redistribution of political power within the Unites States, shifting unprecedented authority to the presidency, the military, and the law enforcement community, and attracted broad support for U.S. military action in the destruction of Al Qaeda and its networks. In the war against Iraq however, the United States government could gather only the support of a handful of allies. 
95
99
However, Iraq cannot be addressed effectively in isolation from other major regional issues, interests, and unresolved conflicts. To put it simply, all key issues in the Middle East-the Arab-Israeli conflict, Iraq, Iran, the need for political and economic reforms, and extremism and terrorism-are inextricably linked. 
100
• Assumed fighting and winning a traditional war was the main objective.
• Allowed its political arrogance to lead to political short-sightedness.
• Misjudged the will of the American people to fight the long war.
America misjudged global public opinion. The right of a state to protect itself against aggression was not borne out in Iraq as Iraqi aggression against the U>S. was not proven; 99 Ibid., p. 94. 100 James A. Baker and Lee H. Hamilton, Co-Chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report, The Way Forward-A New Approach, Vintage Books, New York, 2006, p. 44.  America lost that IO campaign, ultimately viewed as the transgressor by Muslims worldwide.
The second war in Iraq began after the fall of Saddam. It was not the traditional war shown on CNN in '91 and again in 2003. It is the war of ideals, the clash of civilizations long simmering within the region. As long as Hussein remained in power, Iraq posed a small threat to American citizens and American national security. He kept his atrocities against the Iraqi people within Iraqi borders. Because events in Iraq have been set in motion by American decisions and actions, the United States has both a national and moral interest in doing what it can to give Iraqis an opportunity to avert anarchy. 
101
On Friday 29 December 2006 Saddam Hussein was executed for crimes against the Iraqi people. His U.S. human rights lawyer said Saddam received an unfair trial while in American custody and was executed against U.S. and international law. This execution was denounced world wide as barbaric, and in no way leading to a peaceful Iraq; instead, it would lead to more civil unrest and violence. Denounced by the countries of Russia and Libya, who themselves have questionable civil rights records, the Vatican, India, and many other countries and human rights organizations, President Bush still declared the trial fair and that he (Saddam) received the justice he denied to the Iraqi people; that it was an important milestone in Iraq becoming "a democracy' and an ally in 101 James A. Baker, Lee H. Hamilton, Co-Chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report, The Way Forward -A New Approach, First Vintage Books, 2006, p. 2. the war on terror. Pakistan, an Islamic ally in the U.S.-led war on terror, a leader of a coalition of six religious parties said Saddam had not received justice. 
102
The impression being reinforced in the Middle East, therefore, was that the war on terror was, at its core, an anti-Muslim and anti-Islamic exercise fought to strengthen the west's position in the strategically important Persian Gulf region, and also to ensure Israel's long-term security by eradicating any remaining sources of opposition to its presence and policies in the region. 
103
America is fighting a war on terrorism; a war against a tactic, with Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda thrown in. However, they are but the tip of the iceberg in this war.
Killing or incapacitating bin Laden and destroying the Al Qaeda network does not guarantee the end of hostilities. Overcoming the Iraq insurgency or withdrawing U.S. and coalition forces from Iraq does not guarantee a Western victory. The (1) Arab-Israeli conflict and (2) resulting Islamic Jihad dictate continuation of the war. To win The Global War on Terror, secure the homeland, and defend in depth, the U.S. government must understand the "who" in who is the enemy and the "why" in why this surge in terrorist attacks. The enemy is al Qaeda surely. The enemy is also the cultural divide between the east and west, due to the lack of productive communication. The west needs more linguists trained in Middle Eastern languages. It also needs more Foreign Area Officers with the cultural education and training on regional history and affairs. It is wise to know and understand one's enemy. Once the U.S. and west puts these practices into place, better understanding of what causes terrorist attacks will develop. From this, the U.S. and east will be better postured to embrace each others policies and standards, decreasing the need for terrorism.
It must adopt a national security strategy aimed at acceptance of the idea that Islam is not the enemy; that Muslim culture is not adverse to democratic ideals; and demonstrate itself as a true friend to the Muslim majority who welcome U.S. efforts to stabilize the Middle East. The U. S. government must be seen as not only a friend to Israel, but also willing to work towards a solution acceptable to Muslims, Arabs, and Israelis' in the region. To do less leaves America and its' allies vulnerable to the proliferation of terrorists-in-waiting who perceive jihad against United States ideology and "democracy" in particular as not only acceptable but the final solution. America grew from humble beginnings, expanding coast to coast while adopting an isolationist posture as a strategy to prevent succumbing to threats plaguing the rest of the world. The events of December 7 th , 1941 ended forever America's isolation, thrusting American into its' global role as the superpower and leader of democracy, a role from which it can and will not shrink but must embrace to ensure the protection of the American people and their materiel prosperity. 
105
104
105
106
107
Samuel Huntington, author of the "Clash of Civilizations" writes, "the most obvious, salient, and powerful cause of the global religious resurgence is precisely what was supposed to cause the death of religion: the process of social, economic and cultural modernization that swept the world in the second half of the twentieth century". 
108
In an interview conducted with ABC new correspondent John Miller in May 1996, Osama bin Laden answers the question, "What is the meaning of your call for Muslims to take arms against America in particular, and, what is the message that you wish to send to the West in general?
Bin Laden: "The call to wage war against America was made because America has spear-headed the crusade against the Islamic nation, sending tens of thousands of its troops to the land of the two Holy Mosques over and above its meddling in its affairs and its politics, and its support of the oppressive, corrupt and tyrannical regime that is in control. These are the reasons behind the singling out of America as a target. And not exempt of responsibility are those Western regimes whose presence in the region offers support to the American troops there. We know at least one reason behind the symbolic participation of the Western forces and that is to support the Jewish and Zionist plans for expansion of what is called the Great Israel. Surely, their presence is not out of concern over their interests in the region. ... Their presence has no meaning save one and that is to offer support to the Jews in Palestine who are in need of their Christian brothers to achieve full control over the Arab Peninsula which they intend to make an important part of the so called Greater Israel."
109
Today's Islamic world seems riddled by schizophrenia that confounds most Western observers. Celebrations in the Arab street after the attacks of 9/11 are juxtaposed against solemn official statements by Arab governments in support of the socalled war on terror. In order to delve into the mind of the faithful, one must come to terms with an identity phenomenon that strongly resides within the broad and transnational Islamic milieu; that the Muslim world writ has, in modern times, been profoundly traumatized. The trauma comes primarily from four main influences:
• impact of European colonialism
• blunt reality of military and scientific impotency vis-à-vis the West
To understand Islam one must understand that Islam is not a religion separate from Muslim culture. Islam is the foundation of the Middle East, as inseparable from Muslim culture as the heart from the body. Perceived attacks by the West upon the Islamic religion are viewed as attacks upon the body. We cannot forget the swell of Muslim anger due to the Pope's (innocent) word's about Islam. Muslims who were previously Muslim mainly in name only renewed their religious oaths to Allah and Islam and, angry at the perceived disrespect to Allah and Islam united against the West. perception of impotency is not limited to the military sphere alone; it also applies to science and technology. In short, there are no Muslim computers, cars, aircraft, electronics, or hospitals in the Western world. 
113
It is only within the context of the previous three factors, colonialism, secularism, and impotence that this fourth (successes) and last one begins to take shape. The Middle East tried to, somewhat fashion itself in a secular manner, adopting elements of Western culture. Women took off the veils; countries became more mainstream, secular Muslim rather than fundamental practitioners of Islam. The 1967 Six-Day war symbolized the final failure of Egypt's Nasser's Pan Arabist nationalism. But it also signaled an end to the legitimacy of the secularist experiment. The Arab states were decisively defeated by Israeli air and ground forces, sustaining over 20,000 killed and 50,000 wounded, while the Israelis suffered 779 dead. The 'big lie" of the time and widely debated today was the Israeli victory was covertly supported by both British and American military forces. The major outcome of the "Arab-Israeli" war was the loss of Arab lands to the Israelis and the displacement of Arabs from their homelands. To the extent that the Muslim identity ever received legitimacy from the secularist model, the defeat in 1967 signaled its' demise.
The faithful began to rescue their identity with a deliberate and steady revival of 
Islam. 114
113 Ibid., p. 1114 114 Ibid. p. 115.
115
According to bin Laden, "When it comes to Muslims, there is testimony from westerners and Christians who testified to the deaths of hundreds of thousands of our children in Iraq and Bosnia. America every time makes a decision to support them (Christians) and prevent weapons from reaching Muslims, and allow Serbian butchers to slaughter Muslims. Every action solicits a reaction. It is a punishment that fits the crime." 
116
Finally, the surge in Muslim population growth has generated a large population where fifty percent are youth under the age of 18, unemployed and disaffected who become recruits to Islamist causes. 
117
115 Ibid. p. 95. 116 Ibid. p. 211. 117
families. The educated middle-class is also ripe for induction into the terrorist ranks; not due to a lack of financial means but a desire to see Islam return to its prior preeminence.
The Arab-Israeli conflict is critical to U.S. strategic interests because of America's close relationship with the state of Israel and precarious relationships with key Arab states from which oil is exported. The global impact of middle eastern oil production is experienced daily. Fluctuating oil prices strike at the heart of capitalist countries-the consumer wallet. The U.S. has a stake in peace between the two parties.
However, in order to secure peace, both sides must feel regional freedom without which there can be no peace. The United States has demonstrated its commitment to Israel, always stating the right of the Israeli state to exist. The U.S. National Security Strategies of 2002 and 2006 both illustrate America's commitment to an independent and democratic Palestine, living beside Israel in peace and security. 
118
119
120
Doubleday, 2002, p. 107. 121 Ibid., p. 118.
The social diasporas have exploded, and assimilation has become more difficult. 
127
128
129
130
Nationalism, for use in this thesis is defined as the basic form of self-identity which a group of homogenous or non-homogenous peoples will seek solidarity with.
Nationalism is loyalty to the state; culture, religion, and one-time history take second place to the state. The weak link in these new and artificial nation-states is nationalism itself. Nationalism is usually forced; it requires putting one's traditional cultural heritage and identity second to paying homage, and taxes to the new state, usually a state newly created as a result of a victory in war. Those too weak to win are now forced to serve a nation to which they, the day before owed no allegiance or maybe even had a commonality. The end of World War I with the defeat and national humiliation of Germany and the harsh terms of the Treaty of Versailles, and the defeat of the Ottoman Empire and the abolishment of the Caliphate, led to a great division of lands, nations, and peoples in Europe and the Middle East. 
131
Nationalism itself has not necessarily always been a negative. Historically it has existed in Western Europe and Russia for hundreds of years. Germany, France, and Great Britain are examples of where nationalism worked, after years of colonialism and the great powers letting go of their colonies. The United States also exists in a nationalistic form; it has "sovereignty" over the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, and for many, the District of Columbia, for example.
Nationalism could, from some vantage points, be described as a positive force. It is hard to argue against independence for colonial peoples. Prior to 1914, this was in effect the case of many European nations as well as those peoples subject to European empires beyond that continent's boundaries. As we shall see, when considering the origins of nationalism itself, many of the states that received independence in 1918 had existed previously in some form. 
132
133
134
Turkey is obsessed with Europe. A century ago, the Ottoman Sultans who sought to reform the decaying empire looked to Europe as the source of enlightenment and progress. Later Attaturk, the first President of the country emulated all things European, from law and politics to music and dress, as he laid down the foundations of the new Turkish Republic. Modern Turkey joined every European and Western organization possible, starting off as a founding member of the Council of Europe in 1949, becoming the only Muslim country in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization 133 Ibid. p. 25. 
134
135
of Security and Cooperation in Europe, and entering the European Economic Community as an associate member. 
136
137
138
140
In 2005 the European Union accepted Turkey as a candidate for union membership. However Turkey is still under the microscope in determining acceptance.
Turkey has placed itself in a prickly situation, waiting on acceptance from Europeans who to date still are not yet willing to accept the country as an equal as it attempts to loosen its ties to its Muslim heritage for European acceptance. This is a stellar achievement for Turkey and Muslims worldwide, anxiously awaiting the outcome.
Denial into the E.U. could further distance Turkey, pushing it further towards a more fundamental Islamic posture and away from the west. The United States must continue to influence Europe that Turkish membership in the union is mutually favorable. This will continue favorable political ties with turkey, allowing the U.S. to retain Turkey as a strong regional ally.
Nationalism is the current favored form of cultural identity in North and South America and some emerging African nations. But it does not always work nor work well.
Yugoslavia-When Marshal Tito ran Yugoslavia, he maintained stability throughout the county; people might actually have considered themselves Yugoslavs, though they also thought of themselves as Serbs, Albanians, Bosnians, or Muslims, Orthodox Christians, or Catholics. But after he died, the old order collapsed, the lid popped, and nobody thought of himself as Yugoslav. All of a sudden, this person is a Serb. That person is an Albanian. That one is a Bosnian. That one is a Muslim. A Croat. Eastern Orthodox. Catholic. Suddenly, identity issues became central to the political dynamic…religious identities, ethnic and tribal identities. 
141
142
143
"What made someone a Croat was the fact that he or she was a Roman Catholic; just as what made someone a Serb was membership, however attenuated, in the Orthodox Church. Not that actual religious devotion mattered all that much either in Croatia or Serbia. What counted, once the nationalist myth making had been successful, was the way in which religion was put to use." 
144
145
Nobody (there) today calls themselves a Yugoslav. He answers the question: when institutions and control fail, when no single power can dominate a society, what is left?
Stripping away a very fragile national identity will drive people into the strongest remaining communal identity.
146
Iraq-In the Middle East, nationalism is a more recent concept. The bringing together of somewhat like peoples under one flag in the region was generally accomplished using either shared religion or culture as the standard. In Iraq, being Sunni, Shiite, Kurd, or Christian, took second place to being Iraqi, not willingly but forcibly under the rule of Saddam Hussein.
The Middle East has been claimed by each religion as the "Kingdom of Heaven", or "Kingdom of God", since the advent of the Twelve Tribes of Israel. It is here that human life began in the Garden of Eden, as believed in all three major religions. It is here that Jews, Christians, and Muslims studied and prayed and lived peacefully amongst each other for hundreds of years. However, the peace would not last as each religion came to believe it should be the sole landlord in the region, based on their interpretations of their Holy Scripture, The Holy Bible, Qur'an, or Torah. Islam enjoyed a large degree of success during the conquests of the seventh and eighth centuries, and it continued to prevail during the periodic local invasions that followed during the ninth and tenth centuries (the conquest of Sicily and southern Italy, for example, and the conquest of Crete). In the tenth century however, Normans in southern Italy, with the encouragement of the papacy attacked their Muslim neighbors, conquering that region and the island of Sicily. The papacy saw the spread of Islam in Western Europe as a threat to its' own survival, the very survival of Christianity itself. Muslims also responded to the Mongols and Crusades with the full flower of the mamluk system, a permanent standing army unique to Islam, which imported slaves from Central Asia and Africa. During this period, Ibn al-Nahhas al-Dumyati, a jihad theorist wrote the Mashari al-ashwaq ila masari al-ushshaq, detailing the moral legitimacy of civilian causalities in the war against infidels and that jihad is obligatory at all times.
Abu Bakr al-Kasani, one of the great codifiers of Muslim law during this same period defined jihad as devoting exertion. In the legal realm it is used as part of a process leading to a call directed to infidels by Muslims who will eventually fight and win and establish Islam in a dominant position. Ibn Qudama al-Maqdisi, a Hanbali jurist listed seven essential characteristics of who can participate in jihad. The first three are absolute: the person must be Muslim, post-puberty or mature, and third, intelligent, not insane. Ibn Quadama, of critical importance states that it is no longer required to openly declare war upon Christians and invite them to Islam prior to the commencement of hostilities; this has been sufficiently done and there is no further need to make it. For Ibn Qudama, it is self-evident that Muslims are in a permanent state of war with Christians. 
152
In 1095 Alexius I Commenus, the new emperor of Byzantium, fearful the Seljuk Turks might seize his capital at Constantinople, appealed to Pope Urban II for military assistance. The Turks, (inhabitants of what is known today as Turkey), had invaded the Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire, decisively winning battles and "restoring" the Holy lands to the descendants of the Prophet Mohammad. In the early 11th century the Fatimid caliph Hakim began to persecute Christians; pilgrimages were cut off and pilgrims traveling to the Holy City were robbed and beaten. He also despoiled the Holy Sepulcher. Persecution abated after his death in 1021, but relations remained strained and became more so when Jerusalem passed in 1071 from the comparatively tolerant Egyptians to the Seljuk Turks, who in the same year defeated the Byzantine emperor Romanus IV at Manzikert. The sacred places of the Roman Catholic Church were profaned or destroyed
153
The message was received by Pope Urban, who on November 27, 1095 at the Council of Clermont declared not a "bellum iustum" or "Just War", but a "bellum sacrum" or "Holy War" against the Muslims occupying the Holy Land. The battle cry of the Christians, he urged, should be 'Deus volt' [God wills it].
"Although, O sons of God, you have promised more firmly than ever to keep the peace among yourselves and to preserve the rights of the church, there remains still an important work for you to do. Freshly quickened by the divine correction, you must apply the strength of your righteousness to another matter which concerns you as well as God. For your brethren who live in the East are in urgent need of your help, and you must hasten to give them the aid which has often been promised them. For, as the most of you have heard, the Turks and Arabs have attacked them and have conquered the territory of Romania [the Greek empire] as far west as the shore of the Mediterranean and the Hellespont, which is called the Arm of St. George. They have occupied more and more of the lands of those Christians, and have overcome them in seven battles. They have killed and captured many, and have destroyed the churches and devastated the empire. If you permit them to continue thus for awhile with impurity, the faithful of God will be much more widely attacked by them. On this account I, or rather the Lord, beseech you…to carry aid promptly to those Christians and to destroy that vile race from the lands of our friends. I say this to those who are present, it meant also for those who are absent. Moreover, Christ commands it. All who die by the way, whether by land or by sea, or in battle against the pagans, shall have immediate remission of sins. This I grant them through the power of God with which I am invested. O what a disgrace if such a despised and base race, which worships demons, should conquer a people which has the faith of omnipotent God and is made glorious with the name of Christ! With what reproaches will the Lord overwhelm us if you do not aid those who, with us, profess the Christian religion! Let those who have been accustomed unjustly to wage private warfare against the faithful now go against the infidels and end with victory this war which should have been begun long ago. Let those who for a long time have been robbers, now become knights. Let those who have been fighting against their brothers and relatives now fight in a proper way against the barbarians. Let those who have been serving as mercenaries for small pay now obtain the eternal reward. Let those who have been wearing themselves out in both body and soul now work for a double honor. Behold! On this side will be the sorrowful and poor, on that, the rich; on this side, the enemies of the Lord, on that, his friends. Let those who go not put off the journey, but rent their lands and collect money for their expenses; and as soon as winter is over and spring comes, let hem eagerly set out on the way with God as their guide." 
154
The Islamic Call to Jihad Muslims have fought internal wars for centuries, not always jihad. Among Muslims, who acknowledge the associations of jihad with warfare, most would define the term jihad as warfare authorized by a legitimate representative of the Muslim community for the sake of an issue that is universally, or near universally acknowledged to be of critical importance for the entire community against an admitted enemy of Islam.
156
157
158
Osama bin Laden's call on 23 February 1998, for a jihad against America and the West fits these parameters: "The Arabian Peninsula has never --since Allah made it flat, created its desert, and encircled it with seas --been stormed by any forces like the crusader armies spreading in it like locusts, eating its riches and wiping out its plantations. All this is happening at a time in which nations are attacking Muslims like people fighting over a plate of food. In the light of the grave situation and the lack of support, we and you are obliged to discuss current events, and we should all agree on how to settle the matter. No one argues today about three facts that are known to everyone; we will list them, in order to remind everyone:
• First, for over seven years the United States has been occupying the lands of Islam in the holiest of places, the Arabian Peninsula, plundering its riches, dictating to its rulers, humiliating its people, terrorizing its neighbors, and turning its bases in the Peninsula into a spearhead through which to fight the neighboring Muslim peoples. If some people have in the past argued about the fact of the occupation, all the people of the Peninsula have now acknowledged it. The best proof of this is the Americans' continuing aggression against the Iraqi people using the Peninsula as a staging post, even though all its rulers are against their territories being used to that end, but they are helpless.
• Second, despite the great devastation inflicted on the Iraqi people by the crusader-Zionist alliance, and despite the huge number of those killed, which has exceeded 1 million... despite all this, the Americans are once against trying to repeat the horrific massacres, as though they are not content with the protracted blockade imposed after the ferocious war or the fragmentation and devastation. So here they come to annihilate what is left of this people and to humiliate their Muslim neighbors.
• Third, if the Americans' aims behind these wars are religious and economic, the aim is also to serve the Jews' petty state and divert attention from its occupation of Jerusalem and murder of Muslims there. The best proof of this is their eagerness to destroy Iraq, the strongest neighboring Arab state, and their endeavor to fragment all the states of the region such as Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Sudan into paper statelets and through their disunion and weakness to guarantee Israel's survival and the continuation of the brutal crusade occupation of the Peninsula. "As inconsequential as it may sound, it is a profound difference. For instance, instead of having a secular authority --our president is our Commander in Chief in a just war --in a holy war we have a sacred authority --the pope is our commander. In Islam a Fatwa has to be signed by a Caliph or a Sheik. The promise of eternal salvation, absolute assurance if you day, that was from Pope Urban. As a matter of fact, Pope Urban said 'Deus vult!' or 'God wills it!' and people basically shrugged their shoulders. There wasn't a lot of response initially. But then he said, 'If you go and kill the infidel, you will be forgiven immediately --Paradise.' There is fundamentally, no difference between bin Laden, in that case, and the Crusades." 161 "The third distinction that I would point out is that in a holy war there is no difference between combatant and soldier. That's why we make battlefields in our culture and our history because of 'just war'. But not in my culture. We hide in the mosque. We hide in the daycare center. Because everybody is Mujah Hadin. What about the Muslims who were in the World Trade Center Towers? As Mullah Omar put it, they were unknown and unwilling Mujah Hadin. They received the same promise. There's an al Qaeda Web site that glorifies the nineteen bombers, but it also says in Arabic, 'and to those who purchased heaven with their blood on the planes,' because again, there were Muslims on the planes, and there were Muslims in the Towers." 162 "The final distinction between 'just war' and 'holy war' is that you are fighting to kill the infidel instead of convert the infidel. In a 'just war', every warrior wants peace. In a 'holy war', every warrior wants victory. All Islamic eschatology is based on what we are going through right now." 
163
164
161
162
163
A new diplomatic offensive is required, proposing regional and international initiatives and steps to assist the Iraqi government in achieving certain security, political, and economic milestones. Achieving these milestones will require at least the acquiescence of Iraq's neighbors and their active and timely cooperation would be highly desirable. 
169
and Israel returning the Golan Heights. Finally, the United States must give priority to the situation in Afghanistan, due to the renewed threat posed by the Taliban. 
170
As the new diplomatic offensive provides the proper external environment, Iraqis must take the difficult steps necessary to promote national reconciliation, establish security, and make progress on governance. Because of the security and assistance it provides, the U.S. has a significant role to play; however, only the government and 
"It is the policy of the United States to seek and support democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world…The goal of our statecraft is to help create a world of democratic, wellgoverned states that can meet the needs of their citizens and conduct themselves responsibility in the international system. This is the best way to provide enduring security for the American people. America is at war. This is a wartime national security strategy, required by the grave challenge we face -the rise of terrorism fueled by an aggressive ideology of hatred and murder, fully revealed to the American people on September 11, 2001. This strategy reflects our most solemn obligation: to protect the security of the American people…And we are fighting alongside Iraqis…a new ally in the war on terror in the heart of the Middle East. We seek to shape the world, not merely be shaped by it; to influence events for the better instead of being at their mercy. To accomplish its' desired end state, the U.S. geo-political process must understand:
"This is not a clash of civilizations. If anything, this is a clash between Western civilization and the revolutionary religion of Islam. It is not a war between Christianity and Islam-mainly because the Unites States and other Western countries do not represent pax Christiana. To the contrary, the predominant "religion" of the West today is secularism. It is not Clausewitzian war, in which war is said to be the extension of politics. It is religious war, initiated by the historical, religious imperatives of Islam. The conflict is a war between the ideas of Western democracy and those of revolutionary Islam. The enemy is the revolutionary Islamic vanguard, and it obtains its support from the ressentiment felt among followers of transnational Islam. The enemy is driven and sustained by an ideology rooted in the historical doctrines of Islam, is certain of Allah's divinely pre-ordained victory, and is imbued with an ideology that begins and ends with the Qua'ran and the Prophet Mohammad. In other words, this is a religious war." 
174
To underestimate the perceptions of many Muslims, who are encouraged by 
Following a 74 Ibid. p. 178. 75 Ibid. p. 181. 76
80  
80  
137 Ibid. p.149. 138 Ibid. 139 Ibid. p. 149.
US Department of State; List of Foreign Terrorist Organizations. October 11,
Foreign Policy Research Institute, Assessing the Long War, FrankHoffman, January 5, 2007   
Dictionary.com., dictionary.reference.com/.   
Merriam-Webster's On-Line Dictionary., www.m-w.com/.
Cambridge Dictionaries On-Line, accessed December 2006, available at dictionary.cambridge.org/., December 2007.
Adam Garfinkle, Editor, A Practical Guide to Winning the War on Terrorism; Hoover Institution Press Publication, Stanford University,Stanford, California, 2004, p. 16.   
Stephen D. Biddle, American Grand Strategy After 9/11: An Assessment, Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA 2005, p. 6.
Adam Garfinkle, editor, A Practical Guide to Winning the War on Terrorism;, Hoover Institution Press Publication, Stanford University,Stanford, California, 2004, p.  
 15  Stephen D.Biddle, American Grand  Strategy After 9/11: An Assessment, Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA 2005, p. 6. 16 David Cook, Understanding Jihad, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, 2005, p. 22. 17 Ibid., p. 142.
Caleb Carr,  The Art of Knowing the Enemy, The New York Times article,December 21, 2001, p. 39.   
General Tony Zinni, Tony Koltz, The Battle for Peace: A Frontline Vision of America's Power and Purpose, PALGRAVE MACMILLIAN, New York,
2006, p. 114.  20  Terry Eagleton, Holy Terror, Oxford University Press, New York, 2005, p. 2.
Adam Garfinkle, Editor, A Practical Guide to Winning the War on Terrorism; Hoover Institution Press Publication, Stanford University,Stanford, California, 2004, p. 4-5.   
Terry Eagleton, Holy Terror, Oxford University Press, New York, 2005, p. 2.   
Ibid.   
Ibid., p. 40.   
Adam Garfinkle, Editor, A Practical Guide to Winning the War on Terrorism; Hoover Institution Press Publication, Stanford University,Stanford, California, 2004, p. 15.   
Ibid., p.17.
Ibid., 
Charles Pena, Winning the Un-War, A New Strategy for the War on Terrorism, Potomac Books, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. xxiii.
Ibid., p. xxiii.   
Ibid.   
Charles Pena, Winning the Un-War, A New Strategy for the War on Terrorism, Potomac Books, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 1.
Cal Thomas, It is Not a War on Terror, 28 December 2006, thinkprogress.org/2006/12/12/rumsfeld-iraqterror/, available December 2006.
The White House, President Bush Addresses United Nations General Assembly,
September 23, 2003
Charles Pena, Winning the Un-War, A New Strategy for the War on Terrorism; Potomac Books, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 48.
Christopher Catherwood, Why the Nation's Rage, Killing in the Name ofGod, Rowman, Littlefield  Publishers, Inc., Lanham, MD 2002, p. 72.   
Frontline Interview; Hunting bin Laden: Who is bin Laden, www.PBS.org, May 1998.
Major Stephen P. Lambert, U.S. Air Force, The Sources of Islamic Revolutionary Conduct, Joint Military Intelligence College, p. 107.
Ibid., 
Ibid., p.
The White House, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, September 2002, p. 10.
Ibid. p. 11.   
General Tony Zinni, Tony Koltz, The Battle For Peace, A Frontline Vision of America's Power and Purpose, PALGRAVEMACMILLIAN, New York, New York, 2006, p. 60.   
Ibid., p. 60.   
Why the Nations Rage, Killing in the Name of God, ChristopherCatherwood, Rowman & Littlefield  Publishers, Inc. Lanham, Maryland, 2002, p. 47.   
General Tony Zinni, Tony Koltz, The Battle For Peace, A Frontline Vision of America's Power and Purpose, PALGRAVEMACMILLIAN, New York, New York, 2006, p. 61.   
Christopher Catherwood, Why the Nations Rage, Killing in the Name ofGod, Rowman & Littlefield  Publishers, Inc., Lanham, Maryland, 2002, p. 25.   
 
Ibid. p. 151.   
General Tony Zinni, Tony Koltz, The Battle For Peace, A Frontline Vision of America's Power and Purpose, PALGRAVEMACMILLIAN, New York, New York, 2006, p. 61.   
Christopher Catherwood, Why the Nations Rage, Killing in the Name ofGod, Rowman & Littlefield  Publishers, Inc. Lanham, Maryland 2002, p. 133.   
Ibid.   
Ibid. p. 134.   
Ibid.   
General Tony Zinni, Tony Koltz, The Battle For Peace, A Frontline Vision of America's Power and Purpose, PALGRAVEMACMILLIAN, New York, New York, 
Ibid. p. 112.   
Guy Maclean Rogers, Alexander: the Ambiguity of Greatness, Random House, Inc. New York, NewYork, 2005, p. 10-11.   
David Cook, Understanding Jihad, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California,  2005, p. 49-50.   
David Cook, Understanding Jihad, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California,  2005, p. 54-61.   
Lebanon and the Crusades, www.cedarland.org/crusleb.html.
Paul Halsall, Internet  Medieval Source Book, (c) Jan 1996, www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/urban2a.html.
Natana J. Delong-Bas, Wahabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad, Oxford University Press, New York, NewYork, 2004, p. 273-274.   
Understanding Jihad, David Cook, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, 2005, p. 3.
Natana J. Delong-Bas, Wahabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad, Oxford University Press, New York, NewYork, 2004, p. 196.   
Adam Robinson, Bin  Laden; Behind the Mask of the Terrorist, Arcade Publishing, New York, NewYork, 2001, p.143.   
World Islamic Front, Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders, 23 February 1998, viewed January -April  2007.   
David Cook, Understanding Jihad, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, 2005, p. 2.
Ibid. p. 44.   
 
Ibid., p. 59.   
Ibid., p. 60.   
The White House, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, March 2006, prologue.
First, I must give thanks to my Lord, 
Jesus Christ
OMB No. 
0704-0188 AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10
Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy
Joint Forces Staff College
According to Major Stephen Lambert, USAF, "The Sources of Islamic Revolutionary Conduct", the first external challenge to Muslim identity came in the form of European colonialism. It challenged Islam's long-term historical imperative, threatened the ultimate unity of Allah and law to the rest of the world. Traditionally Islamic society viewed European culture as barbaric and inferior. Perhaps the greatest impact of European imperialism was that the withdrawal of French and British colonial influence left a disorganized power vacuum that was haphazardly filled by secular Arab regimes and the newly emerging state of Israel (in which the British were key players along with the creation of the modern state of Saudi Arabia.) The second notable pressure leveraged against Muslim identity has been secularism. In the wake of European colonialism and World Wars I and II, secular governments came to power throughout the Muslim world, rejecting Islam's historical, political, and religious imperatives. 
111
112
122
123
124
125
126
At one time-especially in Europe-a nation-state was defined as the geographical domain of a specific ethnic group or tribe-Italians, Germans, French, Saddam Hussein controlled his nation through the use of terror, maintaining stability in the country for twenty-seven years. As a result, America and her allies had little to fear of threats from Iraq. Though far from a stable society, the United States effectively contained Saddam's misdeeds inside of Iraq's borders. The cost of containment was more acceptable than intervention. However, removal of Hussein from power allowed the Sunnis and Shias free reign to engage in what is now spoken of as civil war. U.S. military forces are mired in an ever-worsening insurgency. Civil war is growing while disorder and chaos grow even more entrenched. 
147
The Middle East has a long and varied history. It has been home to Islam, Judaism, and Christianity for thousands of years. It is considered the holiest of lands as it is the birthplace of Jesus and the Prophet Mohammad, and home to the holy cities of Mecca, Medina, and Jerusalem. In AD 610, the Prophet Mohammad founded the religion of Islam. In the first century AD, Jesus founded the Christian religion. In approximately 1800 BCE, Abraham began the oldest monotheistic religion, Judaism, in the land of Canaan, now known as the State of Israel. Therein lays the problem. community of Muslims. Such boundaries place jihad squarely within the ideal of a "just war" familiar to Christian theologians, as distinct from the concept of "holy war". 
165
166
167
In December 2006, the bipartisan Iraq Study Group released its one hundred and forty-two page report, "The Way Forward -A New Approach". 