# ID: 815f5692d44a42128c15cf3faecf5557
# Title: The Korean Way of War: Within the Framework of the Strategy of Annihilation and Attrition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph attempts to identify the Korean way of war by analyzing Korean military history through the framework of the strategy of annihilation and attrition. The paper assumes that Korea, a small state surrounded by strong neighbors during the last 5,000 years, was able to protect its identity, language, and culture due to its own way of war. Such a way of war was established and has been shaped by the interaction of various elements of Korea's strategic context. These elements range from geography, economic resources, history, civil-military relations, socio-political context, and strategic culture. On the contrary to the dominant discourse about achieving a quick and decisive victory within the Republic of Korea Army, such a victory does not seem to fit in the Korean historical context. Historical cases have proved that optimistic wishes of quick and decisive victory often became a delusion that was alien to reality on the ground. The author, thus, hypothesizes that the way of war Korea has pursued throughout history is tied to the strategy of attrition and not the strategy of annihilation. Such awareness is the foundation on which the development of the future Korean way of war must reflect.
is required to adapt to this changing environment. At the heart of this adaptation is always the issue of 'how to fight' in order to effectively respond to various security threats of the present and future. Before asking a question of how we should fight, I thought we should ask how we have been fighting first. If there has been our own way of conducting wars and one can identify the elements that have influenced the formation of such a unique way of war, those elements should not be overlooked in developing our own way of war for the future. Therefore, I have written this monograph with the intention that the research that identifies the ways of war in the past can be a bridge between the present and the future.
Given this, firstly, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Mr. Eric Price whose disciplined guide helped me maintain my focus throughout the research and writing. I would also like to thank my seminar group leader, Colonel Diehl, for his full support and understanding my difficulties as an international student writing this monograph in a second language.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to the ROK Army for supporting me to study in the United States for a valuable time of two years. When I return, I will have to do my best to apply the lessons learned here and to contribute to strengthening the security of my mother nation. Finally, I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to my beloved family, Bogeun, 
The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish by that test the kind of war on which they are embarking; neither mistaking for, nor trying to turn into, something that is alien to its nature. This is the first of all strategic questions and the most comprehensive.
-Carl von Clausewitz, On War
In 2017, the Republic of Korea (ROK) Ministry of National Defense (MND) announced that the new wartime operational plan of the ROK military would pursue a quick and decisive victory to annihilate the enemy regime. 
1
Indeed, the American way of war in the modern era can be characterized as the pursuit of quick and decisive victory as manifested in 
Wars in 1991 and
2003. 2
2 Max Boot, "The New American Way of War," Foreign Affairs, July 1, 2003, accessed August 12, 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2003-07-01/new-american-way-war.
the strategy of annihilation became characteristically the American way in war." 
3
4
6
7
3
4
5 Samuel P. Huntington, American Military Strategy (Berkley: Institute of International Studies, University of California, Berkeley, 1986), 15, 33. 
6
7
of the development of ROK and US relations since the end of World War II. In 1946, the United States assisted the ROK in establishing its constabulary force, which became the foundation of the modern ROK military. Immediately after its establishment in 1948, the modern ROK military experienced the Korean War, which necessitated the quick modernization of the military in response to the North Korean threat during the Cold War era. In this early phase of the modernization process, US support and aid were crucial. 
8
Pursuing a quick victory, however, is not merely a product of US influence. Because of its geographical proximity, Korea has been interacting with China for a long time, absorbing its ancient philosophy and culture. Several foundational philosophies such as Confucianism, Taoism, and legalism affected Korea. Sun-Tzu's theory of warfare, as a crystallization of these ancient Chinese philosophical ideas, had also been deeply embedded in Korean military thought.
According to Kwangsoo Kim, Sun-Tzu's Art of Warfare was spread on the Korean Peninsula during the three kingdoms of Koguryo, Baekje, and Silla on the Korean peninsula in the first century. 
9
victory, not the protracted engagement." 
10
The problem, however, is that achieving quick and decisive victory through the annihilation of the enemy has never been easy. Many historical cases have often proved that optimistic wishes of quick and decisive victory became a delusion that was alien to reality on the ground. At the dawn of the Mexican War in 1846, James K. Polk, the US President, and his staff had expected a short war, which, however, lasted almost two years and resulted in thousands of casualties. 
11
12
13
11 Peter Guardino, The Dead March: A History of the Mexican-American War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017), 205.
12 Holger H. Herwig, "Germany and the "Short-War" Illusion: Toward a New Interpretation?" The Journal of Military History. 66, no. 3 (July, 2002): 682. 
13
If so, should Korea's approach to war be continued to develop in the direction of pursuing a quick and decisive victory? Is it only a wishful hope or a feasible goal to pursue a quick and decisive victory through annihilation of the enemy? If we cannot pursue this strategy, what are the alternatives? What kind of way of war has Korea been pursuing? Ultimately, what is the Korean way of war? This study has begun to seek answers to these questions.
Given this, this monograph attempts to identify the Korean way of war by analyzing Korean military history. 
15
This paper, however, does not intend to reveal whether the Korean way of war is simply a strategy of annihilation or attrition. The study will evaluate wars throughout Korean history, using the strategic framework of ends, ways, and means. 
16
In addition, this paper will examine the elements of strategic context upon which the Korean way of war has been reflected throughout history. As Peter L. Berger and Thomas Lukeman argue that knowledge, which includes military thoughts, are socially constructed, the process of embedding military thoughts in institutions and their members' perception is also closely influenced by the social environment. 
17
Thus, this study relies on qualitative research to identify the Korean way of war from a social and historical point of view. However, due to the nature of the topic, vast amounts of data are required to define a Korean way of war while space is necessarily limited. Therefore, this study intends to establish the conceptual framework for the long-term research that will continue.
Given this point, this paper will be organized in the following manner.
First, chapter one addresses the concept of a national way of war. Based on the preliminary research, it seems that the concept of a way of war is more action-oriented than merely military thought. Also, it seems that the conceptual scope of approaching the way of war only from the dimension of military strategy may be reduced.
Therefore, in the second chapter, the paper conceptually defines the way in which a state conducts its war and examines the implication of defining a national way of war. The second chapter also introduces Hans Delbruck's concept of annihilation and exhaustion, including a long-standing discussion on the strategy of annihilation and the strategy of exhaustion, or attrition, as its primary conceptual framework. The research identifies the criteria that distinguish This chapter will also examine the influence of different elements of strategic context, such as socio-political elements, economic resources, geography, and so on, in formulating the Korean way of war. Lastly, this paper will discuss the implication of defining the Korean way of war, suggesting further research requirements.
The first part of this chapter addresses the concept of a national way of war, introducing previous and ongoing discussion about defining a national way of war and its implications. Since resources on how Korea conducts its war are scarce, this part presents the methodology of how the national way of war hypothesis has been proved or criticized over time and space. Then, the second part of this chapter introduces Hans Delbruck's concept of annihilation and exhaustion. This part expands the scope of discussion from Clausewitz's theory of strategy to the contemporary framework based on Delbruck's theory.
Part 1: What is way of War?
The process of defining a national way of war requires an understanding of the distinction between the universal nature of war and the particular characteristics of war. That is, while there is a common nature of war across time and space, each war has unique characteristics reflecting its own time and space, especially those of the countries involved. Clausewitz mentions the universality and particularity of war in the very first chapter of On War. While Clausewitz defines the universal nature of war as "an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will," he also wrote, "the war is more than a true chameleon that slightly adapts its characteristics to the given case." 
18
19
21
Given this, one can infer that each war can be understood in its particular context and that the way each nation performs war can also be defined in the particularity of its context. Therefore, in order to define the manner in which a war is carried out by a state, it is necessary to identify the continuity of these distinguishing features, if any. In addition, identifying the variables that have affected such distinguishing features and continuity should be followed. Above all, it is important to understand the dynamic interplay of a national way of war and the variables that affect it and vice versa.
Discussions on national ways of war have been extensive, based on a wide variety of perspectives. These existing discussions have also dealt with various causal factors that determine a national way of war. In addition, various claims have been made about how these causal variables play a role in the relationship between continuity and particularity of the national way of war.
The concept of a national way of war dates from the 1930s when Basil H. Liddell Hart published the British Way in Warfare. 
22
From its awakening in the Elizabethan age to the Napoleonic wars, Liddell Hart argued, British University of California, Berkeley, 1986), 15, 33.  historic practice was based on economic pressure exercised through sea-power. 
23
24
In Liddell Hart's description, the national way of war is a state's practice of strategy in war. Such an attempt to identify the British way of war became a model for others in defining their own national way of war afterward. 
25
In his classic work The American Way of War, Weigley viewed American war history since the American Revolutionary War to define US strategy in the history of warfare. Weigley argued that, in order to understand the way America has conducted its warfare, one must consider the practical application of strategic thinking in the war the United States has been pursuing. 
26
27
As a result, the destruction of an enemy's armed forces became the leading principle as American military and economic capability became great enough to make the destruction of an enemy's armed forces an object worth contemplating. Weigley's approach that a national way of war is the practice of strategy shaped by environmental variables was not much different from that of Liddell Hart.
Apart from the credibility of Weigley's claim, his work became the starting point of academic discussions that subsequently identified the American way of war. Max Boot contended that America's military has practiced more than one way of war. Unlike Weigley, Boot argued that the US military has been involved in small-scale wars such as the Boxer Rebellion, the Philippine Insurrection, and interventions in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Somalia. 28 These small-scale wars contributed to the rise of the United States as a world power, thus, should be a tradition, the American way of war. Meanwhile, Eliot Cohen argued that the conflict in Kosovo revealed a distinctive new American way of war. Reflecting the age of high tech, low politics, and public 
26
29
Echevarria further argued that American strategic thinkers tend to bifurcate and separate the military professionals and policymakers. That is, while military professionals concentrate on actual fighting, policymakers focus on the diplomatic struggles. The new American way of war, thus, should be able to turn combat success into favorable strategic outcomes. 
30
In a similar vein, Robert M. Citino surveyed Prussian and German war-making within the broad context of the seventeenth century to the twentieth century. According to Citino, there are distinct and continued characteristics of the German way of war. First, the German way of war had developed to be an aggressor rather than a defender. Due to its geostrategic condition, surrounded by strong neighbors such as Austria, France, and Russia, Germany had to be proactive to take initiative. Second, the German way of war also pursued the enemy's flank or rear to achieve a decisive victory through annihilation. As demonstrated in the Franco-Prussian War, the 29 Eliot A. Cohen, "Kosovo and the New American Way of War," in War Over Kosovo: Politics and Strategy in a Global Age, edited by Andrew J. Bacevich and Eliot A. Cohen (New York: Columbia  University Press, 2001), 38-62. 
30
31
The complexity of understanding a national way of war lies not only in its broad context but also in its changing dynamics of context. As the state and society are open systems, traditional characteristics of a state can evolve into new characteristics with external influences over time.
Therefore, identifying a national way of war should take into account not only the history of military strategy applied in the war but also the context of political and social history that has changed due to political and external influences.
Walter Pintner in his description of the evolution of Russian military thought argued the Russian way of war has developed based on the interaction between two schools of thought. one hand, the Russian national school, represented by the Peter the Great, Alexander Suvorov, and M. I. Dragomirov, adopted the Frederician model that put emphasis on loyalty and morale.
The national school recognized the defense in depth as part of the Russian tradition. On the other hand, pro-western theorists and practitioners including Colonel A. A. Neznamov believed that the goal of war remained the destruction of the enemy in a quick and decisive battle. Pinter further argued that Russian social and political transformation in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries along with humiliation in the Crimean War and Russo-Japanese War affected Russian strategic thought. That is, while the interaction between Russia and the West served as the two pillars, Russian strategic thinkers had to grapple with the threefold problem of the glorious Russian military past, the depressing contemporary experiences, and their wish to gain worldwide recognition. 
34
China has also developed its unique way of war over a long time, interacting with its broad and changing contexts. To understand the evolution of China's way of war, it is necessary to understand the major changes in ancient, pre-modern, and modern Chinese society. Ancient Chinese military thought, which is the basis of China's way of war today, reflects the chaotic political situation of the Spring and Autumn period. Chinese foundational philosophies such as Confucianism, Taoism, and Legalism had already been formed around 700 BC. Since then, the contention of the 'Hundred Schools of Thought' has provided theoretical foundations of Chinese military thought reflected in seven military classics: Sunzi Bingfa, Wuzi, Simafa, Six Secret Teachings, Weiliaozi, Three Strategies of the Duke of Yellow Rock, and Questions and Replies between Tang Taizong and Duke Li of Wei 35 Especially, Sunzi Bingfa, the Art of Warfare, crystallized these philosophies and provided the basis of China's way of war.
Sun-Tzu regarded the military as a means for achieving the objective of grand strategy and emphasized that using military force is not the best way. Thus, he claimed, "to win a hundred victories in a hundred battles is not the highest excellence; the highest excellence is to subdue the enemy's army without fighting at all." 36 In this regards, Sun-Tzu's guide for warfare was to focus on establishing a strategic advantage (Shih). Such lessons were the reflection of the political and social contexts of the mentality of the Spring and Autumn period when rulers often indulged in military adventures with irrationality. 
37
38
The task of identifying a national way of war needs to consider how the periodic strategists and military thoughts interact with not only the broad, but also changing and evolving, contexts of politics, society, economy, and history of the time. Recent studies have explored the continuity and particularity of these broad contexts by applying the concept of culture.
Victor Davis Hanson, in his book The Western Way of War, argued that Western dominance derives from its culture, which prioritized and exploited technological advancement.
Hanson argued that the origins of the Western way of war originated in the ancient Greek infantry battle. "Like the classical Greeks, who employed no reserves, flank attacks, or rear guard," wrote Hanson, "American [Western] thinkers have given more importance to the immediate application of power against the enemy than the arts of maneuver and envelopment." 40 He expanded his claim by examining the wars from the ancient Greek to Vietnam. Hanson argued that the underlying values of Western culture such as rationalism, individualism, and civic duty led to its significant advantages, in terms of technological dominance, military organization, discipline, morale, initiative, flexibility, and command. 
41
40
Isabel V. Hull explained the evolution of the German way of war within the more holistic context of its 'military culture.' Military culture, by her definition, is "a way of understanding why an army acts as it does in war." 
42
43
44
Hull's approach to defining the German way of war within the more comprehensive context of military culture resonates with recent studies. Scholars recently pay more attention to strategic culture and its impact on the national way of war. In addition to the natural condition, military and economic capability, history, and social and cultural aspects, these scholars argue that the strategic thought and behavior of any nation stems from its distinct 'strategic culture.' Jack L. Snyder, who first proposed the concept of strategic culture, defined strategic culture as "the sum total of ideas, conditioned emotional responses, and patterns of habitual behaviors that 
(New York: Doubleday, 2001), 20-22. 42
43
46
In the immediate aftermath of the Vietnam War, according to Lawrence Sondhaus, mainstream strategists did not pay much attention to Snyder's strategic culture approach. They thought strategic culture provided a too broad and somewhat ambiguous analysis in explaining a national strategy. Mainstream opinion, thus, advocated a realist approach such as that of Kenneth Waltz who paid little attention to national identity and culture. These realists argued that actors' behavior is shaped by their tendency to form or reform the balance of power. 
48
45
46 Snyder,
The Soviet Strategic Culture,
38. 47
48
49
In a similar vein, Colin Gray further extended the utility of culture in defining a national way of war. In his response to The American Way of War, Gray raised a question about Weigley's claim that there has been a dominant American way of war. 
50
51
Gray's strategic culture, however, is unlikely to be a tool for predicting the way war would be conducted in the future. Gray's argument was against the relatively simple approach that the American way of war was either fixed or changing according to its given circumstances. 
49
50
51
In a similar vein with Sondhaus, Gray was also vigilant in predicting the future way of war in the framework of strategic culture. However, it is still useful to understand and analyze the strategic culture by claiming that the way of conducting future warfare will not be easily changed within the framework of strategic culture.
In sum, as mentioned above, many scholars from different perspectives have identified various causal factors that shaped and determined the national way of war. These previous studies have some implications in defining the Korean way of war. First, in order to discuss how Korea conducts war, it is necessary to understand the unique characteristics of Korean society, in which the Korean way of war has been shaped. These characteristics include geography, military capabilities, economic resources, history, and social and cultural dimensions, especially strategic culture.
It would be not difficult to identify the national way of war that is revealed as an outcome. However, the fact that various causal factors affect shaping and formulating a national way of war means that a holistic approach is needed. Analyzing the various causal factors and their interactions will likely pose challenges in identifying a national way of war within the broad and complex contexts. There may be various analyses as to why the national way of war is the result of specific causes. Different analyses would depend on which variables are weighted.
Second, this research is by no means intended to predict how Korea should conduct war in the future, based on this complex context. The defined Korean way of war, of course, would provide a useful framework for explaining past and present strategies, as Sondhuas claimed. This identified Korean way of war, however, cannot predict how Korean military should perform in the future since the complex context, in which the way of war is shaped, would change over time as well. Considering its contextual character, the national way of war is hardly bound by a traditional way of war. In this context, Alexander Andreevich Svechin emphasized the evolution of military art and warned against any effort to create closed systems on the basis of past combat experience. The Korean way of war should shift in response to stimuli from contextual changes.
In short, a way of war is an evolving concept within an open system. However, the final implication and the most important point is that, as Gray pointed out, the determination of current policy makers and strategists to shape the military transformation for the future can not be completely free from the way war has been conducted in the past. It is because the Korean way of war is a reflection of the interplay of various elements from the past to the present. The proper focus of a way of war study is the study of those tendencies shaping future war. 
52
Existing research suggests that the way a war is carried out by one state must be defined and understood in the complex and changing context of the state. However, most scholars agreed that the national way of war is a strategy that is applied to the execution of the war by the state.
Then, what is the strategy? Answering this question would require an in-depth discussion, and there could be different approaches in defining the strategy. Nonetheless, as mentioned earlier, this study attempts to extend the debate on strategy and the national way of war, starting from Hans Delbruck's strategy of annihilation and the strategy of attrition.
Delbruck argued that the nature of strategy leads to the two basic forms of all strategic actions, the strategy of annihilation and the strategy of attrition. According to Gordon A. Craig, the majority of military thinkers in Delbruck's day believed that the annihilation of the enemy's forces accomplishes the aim of war and is the end of all strategy. 
53
54
Moltke. 57
58
Clausewitz's phrase, however, as Liddell Hart pointed out, invited misinterpretation more than most. Although Clausewitz emphasized that the destruction of the enemy's forces is the ultimate aim in war, one needs to examine how Clausewitz reached his conclusion. Clausewitz wrote that the ultimate goal of the war is to be controlled by political objective and probability and that "the value of this [political] object must determine the sacrifices to be made for it in 
54
55
56 Ibid, 99. 
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
59
60
61
65
67
The strategy of annihilation has been pursued by numerous theorists and practitioners. In America, Dennis Mahan, educated in France and the leading teacher at West Point, produced his own theoretical instruction entitled Composition of Armies and Strategy that provided fundamental elements of the French combat method. 
68
69
As mentioned earlier, it was in Prussia, which later became Germany, where the strategy of annihilation began to sprout. Moltke, influenced by Clausewitz, argued that, given the geostrategic position of Germany, it must achieve a quick and decisive victory. Moltke admitted that war is a continuation of policy by other means, however, once the war began, political advisors and their consideration should play no role in military strategy. 
70
75
The freedom of military leadership from political restriction, that Moltke argued, was opposite to Clausewitz's dictum. The military and political strategy must go hand in hand. As mentioned earlier, despite the fact that Clausewitz prescribed the destruction of the enemy's force as the ultimate aim of war, he did not exclude the other forms of strategy that could achieve the political objective.
Delbruck returned to the Clausewitz dictum and argued that the strategy must be conditioned by the political aim. He realized that such annihilation was impossible in reality and that a different strategy ruled the field for a long time. This second form of strategy Delbruck defined Ermattungsstrategie, the strategy of exhaustion or attrition. 
76
73
74
75
76
77
Delbruck further described the strategy of attrition in which "the generals decide from moment to moment whether he is to achieve his goal by battle or by maneuver, so that his decisions vary constantly, so to speak, between the two poles of maneuver and battle, now swinging toward one pole and then to the other."
78
The strategy of attrition, Gordon Craig wrote, was neither a mere variation of the strategy of annihilation nor an inferior form. 
79
In addition, according to Delbruck, great generals in history had been proponents of the strategy of attrition. Among them were Pericles, Belisarius, Wallenstein, Gustav Adolphus, and Frederick War, translated by Walter J. Renfroe, Jr wrote this as the strategy of attrition. Russell Weigley in his book the American Way of War wrote either the strategy of attrition or exhaustion. However, as this paper points out later, attrition and exhaustion has different connotation today.
the Great. 
80
Unfortunately, in the late nineteenth century and twentieth century, the German officers who believed the strategy of annihilation was the only correct strategy rejected Delbruck's concept of the strategy of attrition. In Delbruck's context, Ermattungsstrategie meant longer duration and indirect means other than combat. 
81
82
One might already have acknowledged, however, that adopting Delbruck's annihilationattrition/exhaustion model confuses definitions of terminology today. While the strategy of annihilation is consistent in its meaning in various texts, Ermattungsstrategie, the strategy of exhaustion or attrition is not. Modern scholars differentiated these terms-attrition and 80 Ibid, 342. 
81
82
84
85
Echevarria clearly distinguishes the meaning of the two terms. Attrition strategy, according to Echvarria, means reducing an enemy's physical capacity to fight while exhaustion strategy entails wearing down the enemy's willingness to do so. 
86
87
88
1
While a quick and decisive battle attracted many military theorists and practitioners, attrition and exhaustion sound like bad words. Their reputation, however, is ill-deserved through history. Napoleon suffered in Spain because he faced an enemy that employed a strategy other than annihilation. Clausewitz wrote, "Inability to carry on the struggle can, in practice, be replaced by two other grounds for making peace: the first is the improbability of victory; the second is its unacceptable cost." In this sense, it was clear that with their markedly unequal strength, the Spanish insurrection chose the second option in the hope that the enemy would tire.
Spain's La guerrilla was, in Lawrence Freedman's expression, geared to an Ermattungsstrategie, strategy of attrition or exhaustion. 
89
89
conventional battles in which their bravery, honor, and marksmanship would win a war within a day or few hours. Mexican guerilla warfare that was aimed at exhausting American forces presented a different challenge to the volunteers' psyches. 
90
In sum, it seems that the strategy of annihilation has the following characteristics in terms of ends, ways, and means. The military theorists and practitioners often sought solely for an unlimited military end, the destruction of the enemy's main force. Napoleon, Jomini, Du Picq, Grant, Moltke, Schlieffen, and Ludendorff were the proponents of the strategy of annihilation. To them, a quick and decisive victory was almost the only way, and battle was the only means to achieve such ends. In addition, the strategy of annihilation was also apolitical. That is, the political goal was often negated by the military-dominated decision making process. In the battlefields, however, they saw the ambitious beginning of the strategy of annihilation often transition to the strategy of attrition. That was the reality and history.
On the other hand, the strategy of attrition and exhaustion emerged from the failure of the strategy of annihilation. The aim of an attrition/exhaustion strategy is subjugated to the political aim and is limited. In the strategy of attrition and exhaustion, battle, characterized by maneuvering and firepower, is not a means of achieving military strategic goals, but rather involves the use of other military means or instruments of national power. These strategies are also based on more realistic assumptions that war is less likely to be concluded in a short period.
In particular, we have witnessed a number of wars, such as World War I, in which the war that started with the strategy of annihilation for both sides transitioned to the war of attrition and 
90
exhaustion.
Of course, this does not mean that an attrition or exhaustion strategy is the only realistic alternative. The strategy of annihilation clearly provided its achievement over time as a paradigm, and, as mentioned earlier, no modern nation hopes to continue the war for a long time. What is important is, according to Lawrence Freedman, "to be flexible when deciding upon a strategy, to attend to the political realties of the time, and to not rely on a military strategy that might be beyond practical capacity."
91
This chapter examines the Korean way of war in Korean history through the lenses of annihilation and attrition and the criteria of ends, ways, and means. This chapter looks at the major wars on the Korean peninsula since the Goryeo dynasty and also addresses how the elements of strategic context played a role in the formation of a certain way of war. First, Goryeo is the dynasty that unified most of the Korean peninsular territories occupied by the two Koreas today. Built after the fall of Goryeo, Chosun is the most important pre-modern dynasty in understanding modern Korea. In addition, the latest war on the Korean Peninsula, the Korean War, is a turning point in the history of modern Korea.
Part 1: Mongol Invasion to Goryeo
The Goryeo dynasty was established in 918 and lasted until it was replaced by the Chosun dynasty in 1392. Considering almost 500 years of Goryeo history, it would not be easy to see all elements of strategic context mentioned in the preceding chapters. However, some important features that characterize the Goryeo period should be considered in identifying the Goryeo way of war.
First, the international order of Northeast Asia during the Goryeo era frequently transitioned power. The Tang Dynasty of China was periled in 907 and the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period began. Then, the Song Dynasty took over the fragmented era in 960. The division of states in Chinese helped the Goryeo dynasty to establish its foundation without the intervention of foreign powers in its early period. 
92
92
were mostly conditioned by the political situation in China. 
93
95
96
Since these border clashes with the outer tribes such as the Khitans and Jurchen almost from the beginning, military affairs of the Goryeo dynasty were of great importance and the armed forces were constantly being strengthened. At the time, the military forces were composed of two armies and six divisions stationed in the capital along with the various district units. 
97
93
94
95
96
Korea,
151. 97 Ibid,
98
99
Indeed, as the international situation was being transformed, the tension between the military and civilian officials grew significantly. While Jurchen established the Jin dynasty in 1115 and threatened Goryeo and other neighbors, serious factional strife was developing in the Goryeo government. 
100
In 1170, the success of a military coup brought important political and social changes to Goryeo. As the military coup triggered political instability, the impoverished peasantry, slaves, and monks rebelled, hoping to redress their own grievances and to further their own interests. 
102
98
99 Ibid, 152.
100 Ibid, 154.
101 Ibid, 156-7. 
102
103
The Mongol invasion of Goryeo, started with the first invasion in 1231, continued intermittently for almost thirty years until the conciliation between Goryeo and Mongolia in 1259.
In August 1231, Mongolia attacked Goryeo by sending an army on the pretext of the murder of the Mongolian envoy to Goryeo. This was the first time Mongolia invaded Goryeo, but Mongolia had previously sent troops to Goryeo in 1218 to defeat the Khitans who had fled to Goryeo. 
104
The Mongol army, led by Sartai, came to Goryeo in August 1231 through the northern border along the Yalu River. At the time, the Goryeo consisted of three armies; the first battle took place between the Goryeo army and the Mongolian army in Dongseon, Hwangju. In this battle, the Goryeo army was surprised by the attack of 8,000 Mongolian soldiers but eventually won the battle, supported by the peasants. The Gorye army, who defeated the Mongols in the Battle of Dongseon, went to Anbuksung, a military base in the northern part of the country.
However, overwhelmed by the Mongol cavalry attack, the Gorye army lost. In this battle, the majority of the army was killed or wounded. The Mongol army, after winning the Battle of Anbuksung, advanced to Kaegyoung and Chongju. As the Mongolian army was stationed in the 103 Ibid, 340. 
104
105
Afterwards, general Choi, who was a de facto ruler of the time, discussed the transfer of the capital to Ganghwa Island in order to cope with the Mongolian army, which was considered weak in maritime capability. 
106
Again, the Mongols occupied all of the territories north of the Han River. Although it withdrew after Sartai had died in the battle, the Mongol invasion continued intermittently. There were four separate attacks between 1253 and 1257. The Mongols demanded the re-transfer of the capital, the investigation of households, the establishment of transportation bases, the provision of grain, and the installation of Mongolian administrative institutions. Meanwhile, the sixth invasion continued unexpectedly over a long period of time. In this regard, pacifists, who advocated reconciliation with Mongolia rather than fighting against it, emerged in opposition to the Choi's military regime.
As the war became prolonged, the Goryeo dynasty and Choi regime, again, were divided internally. As Choi's regime collapsed, the political power returned to the king, and a hardening treaty was signed between Goryeo and Mongolia.
In accordance with the demands of Mongolia, the Goryeo dynasty relocated the capital to Kaegyoung. In this process, Goryeo's Special Patrol Troops, called Sampyolcho, who were veterans of the military regime and led the uprising against the Mongols, refused to obey the royal order to disband their units. They declared to continue to fight against the Mongols and the Goryeo dynasty, if necessary. The resistance continued until February 1273 when the Mongol and Goryeo coalition attacked Jeju island and crashed the Sampyolcho. 
107
Goryeo's military strategy in the war against the Mongols seemed to be defensive and reactive. Indeed, as noted above, Goryeo was extremely weak in defending the border, due to the unstable domestic political situation. The major military elites became the private forces of the ruling class. As a result, the capital was seized during the first invasion in 1231; the entire country was devastated-it could not even conduct a single well-organized counterattack. It seemed that there was no coherent military strategy at all. It is worth noting, however, that Goryeo continued resistance for more than 30 years against the Mongol invasion, which had an absolute advantage in terms of number and power.
Even though Mongolia constantly forced the surrender, the Goryeo military regime and the whole population resisted without giving in to it. Thus, the basis of persistent resistance is closely related to the Goryeo way of war. The Goryeo's military strategy shown during the Mongol invasion was to attrit a superior enemy for a long time. As mentioned earlier, Goryeo built walls along the border and strengthened regional defenses in order to prepare for frequent invasions of the Khitans and Jurchen in the past. From this fortified defensive position, the enemy's attack was checked. The offensive was conducted according to the situation. In other words, if the enemy attack was prolonged and the supply was reduced accordingly, the defenders transitioned from the defense to the offense to exploit an opportunity. During the first invasion of the Mongols in 1231, for instance, Pak So of Guju province effectively defended against the Mongolian army even though it attacked for more than thirty days and nights. He even attacked out of the fortification when the enemy's offensive was weakened. 
108
Goryeo's prolonged attrition strategy was not solely implemented by the regular forces.
Almost the whole population of Goryeo, including civilians, slaves, and even monks, resisted the invasion of Mongolia. Even when the elite armed forces of the aristocracy class surrendered or retreated, some slaves and soldiers resisted the Mongols until the end. In fact, it was a monk Kim Yun-hu, a skillful archer who shot and killed the Mongolian general Sartai. 
109
108
109
110 Nahm,
Korea,
77.
Although Sampyolcho led by Pae Chungson was called the rebels, the uprising of Sampyolcho against the Mongols has been recorded as a symbol of resistance to invaders to this day.
In short, the Goryeo resistance against the Mongol invasions was mostly reactive, and it may be difficult to see a consistent military strategy applied. In fact, Goryeo's resistance was not organized and was sporadic. However, it is also unreasonable to explain the basis of persistent resistance at the regional level and the driving force of the fact that the Goryeo regime had not surrendered for thirty years simply as a reaction to the situation. Park Hwilak noted that Goryeo's military strategy is derived from the Goguryeo's Cheongyaippo. 
111
The invasion of Japan in 1592, known as the Imjin War, and the subsequent seven-year war was one of the most tragic experiences in the Korean peninsula's history. Hundreds of thousands died and the entire country was devastated. When Chosun was invaded by Japan, there are many similarities with the situation of Goryeo during the Mongol invasion. It failed to recognize the changing international situation, and factionalized domestic politics overlooked strengthening the national defense.
The situation of the Korean peninsula in the 16th century could not be considered separately from the situation in mainland China. China's situation affected not only the foreign relations of the Korean peninsula but also the economics. The Ming dynasty had the utmost importance in shaping the politics and economics of the Chosun dynasty. After the Mongols had been driven out, the Ming dynasty was founded in 1368. The new Ming rulers continued to demand tribute from the Chosun Dynasty. In return for Chosun's submission, the Ming would provide a monopoly on Chosun's trade with China. 
112
113
On the other hand, unlike the Ming Dynasty, Chosun maintained relations with Japan on an equal basis. On many occasions, Japanese piracy, which began in the early thirteenth century, was troublesome and required the Chosun court to coordinate with the Japanese. 
114
115
116
117
In the 16th century, the military power of Chosun began to weaken. This is closely related to changes in the socio-economic situation. As central control of the Choun court loosened over time, the aristocracy increased their possession of private land, a symbol of wealth. At that time, land was the means that the king gave to control the aristocracy. Thus, land had to be provided to maintain control over the aristocracy. 
118
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
While Chosun was plagued by domestic factionalism, the international situation was changing rapidly. During the sixteenth century in Japan, Toyotomi Hideyoshi unified the warring states and sought internal political consolidation. Hideyoshi pursued the goal of invading the Ming with Chosun as a stepping-stone to overcome the domestic political situation. 121 Some of the Chosun envoys dispatched to Japan at that time noticed Hideyoshi's intention to invade and suggested that Chosun should be prepared. The Chosun court, however, was mired in consumptive factional strife that blinded itself to the rapidly changing international situation.
The Course of War On April 13, 1592, when the Japanese army landed in Busan with the vanguard of Konishi Yukinaga and Soo Yoshitoshi, Chosun was not ready for war at all. The Japanese army 
119
120
121
122
123
The Japanese army marched to the north rapidly. In the capital city of Hanyang, modern Seoul, the Chosun court did not know of the Japanese invasion for four days. As a temporary measure, the king dispatched General Lee Il and others in an attempt to block the advance of the Japanese Meanwhile, the Chosun navy led by Admiral Yi Sun-sin was having rather more success than the army. Yi Sun-sin, one of the great heroes of Korean history, had developed the turtle ship, the first iron-clad in history. 
124
122
123 Ibid, 271. 
124
ships sank a large amount of troop and supply ships. 
125
On the ground, Korean hatred of foreign invasions began to manifest itself through strong resistance of the people. Confucian scholars, Buddhist monks, and guerilla forces rose up all over the country. No Japanese troops were safe from guerilla attacks, and Japanese lines of communication were under constant threat. The Ming also sent troops to help the Chosun.
Pyongyang, once fallen to Japanese occupation, was retaken by the Ming army in January 1593.
Through all these difficulties, the Japanese agreed to peace negotiations with the Ming.
While Choson was excluded from the process, the Ming and Japan proceeded to negotiate a peace agreement. However, neither side would agree to any implication that it had been defeated. The negotiation process dragged on for years.
In 1597, Japan resumed its attack with some 150,000 troops, but could not get beyond the southern provinces. During the second invasion by Japan, Admiral Yi Sun-sin led the Chosun navy, which disrupted the enemy's line of communication effectively. Until Toyotomi Hideyoshi died in August 1598 and the Japanese army withdrew, the combined forces of Chosun and Ming effectively blocked the offensive of the Japanese army.
The impact of the war was enormous. Chosun completely collapsed, resulting in economic disruption and corruption of the bureaucratic organization. The amount of land under cultivation had been reduced to less than a third of the pre-war amount, which resulted in a serious lack of grain. 
126
125
Korea,
271. 126 Ibid,
273.
During the invasion of Japan, the military situation of Chosun was not much different from that of Goryeo during the Mongol invasion. At the beginning of the Chosun Dynasty, the basis of the centralized military system was established, and the conscription system for the entire nation was implemented. Since the sixteenth century, however, the military became localized and the conscription system was disrupted. This was due to the weakening of the centralized power and the empowerment of the aristocracy derived from factionalism in domestic politics. The conflict between civilian officials and military officers still existed as in the Goryeo period.
Civilian bureaucrats had a great influence on most policy decisions, even though there were more military personnel involved in the military decision-making process.
Along with the growth of the aristocracy, changes in the economic and social structures were another cause of weakening military power. The accumulation of the private property of nobles and the failure of land distribution required a corresponding increase in the workforce, which resulted in a lack of human resources to fulfill the duty of national defense. Due to the lack of human resources, the Chosun regime imposed a commuting system, an appointment of reserves and tax payments to exempt the armed forces. However, these did not have a great effect due to the prevalence of corruption caused by the disruption of social discipline. Also, the use of reserve resources was not adequate to prepare for a massive enemy surprise due to the slow mobilization rate.
The military strategy of the Chosun Dynasty was based on Cheongyaippo, occupancy and defense of strategic locations by exhausting the enemy. However, this defensive strategy has not been successful because it has fallen to the attack of a large enemy's army bypassed the defended locations. Thus, the military strategy of Chosun failed to effectively cope with the invasion of the Japanese army, which caused the tragedy of transferring the capital again due to the rapid maneuvering of the enemy. Chosun, however, did not surrender easily despite its weakness and failure to respond to the Japanese invasion. The Chosun naval forces made great achievements in disrupting the offshore supply lines of Japan on the southern coast. Admiral Yi Sun-sin led the Chosun navy to constantly inflict damage, which played a major role in slowing down the advance of the Japanese army. In particular, Japan faced difficulties in supplying and receiving grain due to the disruption of the marine line of communication. Furthermore, the entire population of Chosun was at the forefront of the military and resisted the Japanese invasion. In particular, despite their inferior numbers and equipment, the nationwide uprisings of guerilla units forced continued damage to the Japanese troops. The guerrilla army, consisting of scholars, monks, and peasants, gradually weakened the Japanese forces. Like Goryeo's war against the Mongols, Chosun's approach to exhaust the enemy eventually led the Japanese army to hasten to seek a peace treaty to conclude the second invasion. Thus, as the Goryeo's war against the Mongols, the war against Japan was 'a total war' that used all the means available not only to the regular military but also to the entire population to alter the enemy's intention by forcing long-term damage to the enemy. 127 127 Tracing back to German general Erich Ludendorff's Der Totale Krieg, total war denotes warfare that mobilizes all of the resources of society including civilian resources and that includes noncombatants involvement in a war. As the two Koreas established their respective political regimes, the division of Korea became official. At the United Nations (UN) General Assembly in November 1947, the UN formed a temporary Korean Commission and decided to hold a general election for the two Koreas under its supervision. 
131
128 Nahm,
Korea,
The military balance between the Soviet Union and the United States on the peninsula changed as Koreans built their own governments. After the establishment of the government, North Korea immediately demanded the withdrawal of foreign troops on the peninsula, and in response, the Soviet Union withdrew its troops in October. However, the Soviet Union, unlike the US, had geographical proximity. That is, it could deploy its troops anytime and sooner than the US after its withdrawal. In the south, the ROK government requested the US forces to continue stationing in South Korea. As a result, the US military withdrawal was delayed, but in June 1949, the US withdrew most of its troops and left only about 500 military advisors. 
132
133
134
135
136
In such chaotic circumstances, criticism against the first president Rhee and his administration grew along with fragmentation within domestic politics; Communist activities in the South gave great impetus to the promotion of democracy in South Korea. The communists in South Korea instigated rebellions throughout the country. The incidents in Jeju Island, Yeosu, Sunchon, and South Cholla Province resulted in tens of thousands of deaths. The defeated rebels fled into the mountains of Chiri and continued guerilla activities. Thus, the ROK military had to deploy its troops to the south to suppress the communist-led mutiny while facing real threats in the north.
The situation of the ROK military was no better than the other parts of society. The ROK National Defense Forces were formed in August 1948. Army and Navy headquarters were established in November 1948. The Korean Marine Corps and the Air Force were formed in 1949. As the government established a conscription system, all men above the age of twenty were conscripted for two years of military service. Facing North Korean threats, the ROK government was anxious to expand its military readiness, but a lack of funds retarded the process. Some 134 Ibid, 374. 
135 Nahm,
Korea,
380. 136
137
The Korean War broke out on June 25, 1950, and lasted almost three years until the armistice was signed on July 27, 1953. The war took place across eighty percent of the entire country from the Nakdong River in the south and the Yalu River in the north. The Korean War could be distinguished in four major stages: the North Korean offensive; the United Nations counterattack; the Chinese army offensive and the UN counterattack; and stalemate. 
138
139
137 Nahm,
Korea,
374. 138
140
141
During this phase, the operations plan of the United Nations' forces was to advance to the limit of advance linking Chongju and Hungnam. 
142
143
At the end of October, the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) had attacked UN 
140 Nahm,
Korea,
391. 141
142
143
144
Like the wars analyzed in the previous chapters, the ROK did not have a coherent military strategy that could be called a Korean way of war. After the liberation from Japanese colonial rule, the Korean Peninsula was a place where the geopolitical interests of the two superpowers, the US and the Soviet Union, collided. Backed by these external powers, the domestic political factions were divided over the rule of the Korean peninsula. The chaotic domestic political situation and the poor economic and social conditions hampered strengthening national defense.
Consumptive factional strife blinded Koreans to the rapidly changing international situation. Despite the North Korean threat posed, the lack of capital and resources poised the army for a lack of readiness. Moreover, the guerrilla activities of the communists in the rear area scattered the even scarce troops. Therefore, when North Korea made a surprise attack, the forces in front were defending a too broad frontal line with insufficient troops.
In this situation, at best, the military strategy was maintaining the defensive line or delaying enemy attacks. Front units defended strategic locations utilizing terrain and natural obstacles, which were not effective against enemies that were rapidly bypassing or attacking with massive forces. As in the Goryeo and Chosun dynasties, the capital city had to be escaped and the ROK army continued to withdraw. The shape of the war so far was not much different from the preceding wars of ancient dynasties.
The difference from the previous wars, however, was the participation of the international community led by the United States. While the ROK troops were struggling, delaying the enemy's advance, and inflicting damage on the enemy, the United Nations combined forces were reinforced. The ROK launched unprecedented offensive operations as part of the United Nations' forces. Despite the intervention of the PLA, the ROK was able to restore its lost territory to a large extent. The ROK military offensive employed a strategy of annihilation that pursued the destruction of enemy power through maneuver and firepower that was not seen in the previous two wars. However, it is difficult to explain the counterattack of the UN forces at the time as a consistent strategy of the ROK military. The ROK military was part of the United Nations forces, and the commander of the United Nations Command held the operational control of the ROK military.
On the contrary, the ROK military operated more independently during the stalemate.
The military strategy at that time was an attrition strategy that forced the enemy to bleed to the maximum extent in order to shape favorable conditions before signing the peace treaty. 
145
In short, although South Korean President Lee Seung-man may have claimed the destruction of North Korean forces and regime and the reunification of the Korean peninsula, the ROK military power at that time was inferior and incapable in all aspects of troop and equipment 
145
This chapter concludes the research on the three major wars in Korean history, identifying the Korean way of war. At this point, it is worth revisiting the research questions.
What is the way Korea conducted its war and how has such a unique way has formed? The three wars analyzed in this paper had occurred over a period of several hundred years. Although three wars took place, confined within the specific space of the Korean peninsula, the dynasty or state that ruled the Korean Peninsula at the time were different from each other. 
146
Identifying these particularities and continuities has significance in understanding the Korean way of war.
First, in the three wars analyzed above, the geopolitics of the Korean peninsula is an important strategic context. This is not to say that the geography of the peninsula itself forms a specific way of conducting a war. While geography is a constant physical reality, geopolitics is the strategic value within the geography. Geopolitical interest can change slowly, depending on the situation. Thus, according to Jakub Grygiel, geostrategy, which is the geographic direction of state foreign policy, should be aligned with the underlying geopolitics. 
147
In this regard, the Korean Peninsula has provided strategic advantages as a gateway to the ocean for the continental powers such as China, Mongolia, and the Soviet Union. On the contrary, for maritime forces such as Japan and the United States, it has provided strategic advantages to block or advance into the continent. Therefore, the massive wars on the Korean peninsula should find cause in terms of the international geostrategic dimension surrounding the Korean peninsula rather than merely the domestic factors. In other words, wars on the Korean Peninsula have always been seen an invasion or, at least, the intervention of foreign forces.
The invasion or intervention of such external powers had a great influence on a dynasty and a state that existed on the peninsula in terms of the domestic political situation. In other words, the domestic politics of the Korean peninsula has always been divided by conflicts of forces that sympathize or oppose external forces. Domestic politics, of course, have an intrinsic feature that conflict with various causes such as ideology, political interests, power struggles, and personal animosity. Thus, it is a flawed claim that the intervention of external forces is the sole cause of the division of domestic politics. However, as we have seen, the various factions within a dynasty or a state were exploited by external forces to maximize their internal political leverage. Such an internal division made it difficult to form a consistent and coherent national or military strategy.
In addition, the conflict between the military and the civilian sectors was also an element of this domestic political split. The research on three major wars demonstrates that the military, civilian bureaucrats, and politicians were against each other before the wars. In the Goryeo Dynasty, civilian bureaucrats almost ignored the military, which led to the military coup in 1170 before the Mongol invasion. In the Chosun Dynasty, it was civilian officials who led and decided military policies even though the proportion of military personnel was larger. These conflicts and gaps in civil-military relations were far from Samuel Huntington's modern concept of objective control. The military did not have room to focus on the military profession. Neither did the civilian officials support them. A lack of unity among these groups seriously hampered forming a consistent and coherent national and military strategy.
Thus, in the absence of a coherent military strategy, the readiness of the military was lacking as well. As mentioned earlier, during the invasion of the Mongols, Goryeo was forced to withdraw without a single organized counterattack, which was also the case during the invasions of the Japanese and the North Koreans. In three wars, the dynasties and a state of the Korean peninsula were inferior to enemies in all aspects, including manning, equipment, level of training, and the ability to sustain a war. The enemy has always taken the initiative in war. In such a situation, it was actually impossible to annihilate the enemy. There were not many military options to choose from in such a situation where an enemy could not be destroyed. A military strategy applied at the time of Goryeo, Chosun, and the ROK was to preoccupy defensive positions in order to preserve combat power and to gradually enforce damage on the enemy. During the Mongol invasion, it took almost forty years. At the time of Japan's invasion, it was seven years. During the Korean War, the North Koreans continued to suffer damage for three years until they reached a peace agreement. Of course, as shown in the Korean War, Koreans also pursued the destruction of the enemy through maneuvers and firepower, which was done at the tactical level. At the level of strategy, the dynasties of the Korean peninsula achieved the ends of recovering their pre-war status through long-term attrition rather than a decisive battle against superior enemies. Thus, the dynasties and state of the Korean peninsula were able to cope with the annihilation strategy of enemies prevailing in maneuver and three wars a in this paper. Thus, the current trajectory the ROK military is pursuing is distant from the strategy of attrition/exhaustion. Nonetheless, one should be vigilant about the prediction, using a simple approach that the way of war is either culturally mandated or merely changing in response to its circumstances.
Military practitioners, as Gray wrote, should not harbor that the way of war can be fixed or radically altered. 
148
149
148
149 Huntington,
American Military Strategy,
13.
14 James F. Schnabel, Policy and Direction: the First Year. United States Army in the Korean War (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2011), 212.
In-Bum Chun, "Korean Defense Reform: History and Challenges," Brookings, October 31, 2017, accessed September 6, 2018. https://www.brookings.edu/research/korean-defense-reform-history-andchallenges/.
The Korean way of war herein after denotes the way of war for the Republic of Korea and its preceding dynasties. Democratic People's Republic of Korea's way of war is out of the scope of this research.
This does not mean that Strategy is merely about ends, ways, and means. How to define a strategy is beyond the scope of this research, and it requires examining a quite amount of study to deepen the understanding of strategy. The author sees the strategy as the evolving concept according to its circumstance. However, again, due to the limited space of this paper, this study adopts the definition of Arthur F. Lykke's "Defining Military Strategy = E + W + M" in 1989.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War. Edited and translated by Peter Paret and Michael Howard (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1976), 75, 89. 19 Colin Gray, The Strategy Bridge: Theory for Practice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 24-27. 20 Samuel P. Huntington, American Military Strategy (Berkley: Institute of International Studies,
Huntington, American Military Strategy, 13.   
Basil Henry Liddell Hart, The British Way in Warfare (London: Faber and Faber Limited,  1932), 37.
Liddell Hart, The British Way in Warfare, 39.    
Sondhaus, Strategic Culture and Ways of War, 2.   
Paret, Craig, and Gilbert. Makers of Modern Strategy, 374.   
Timothy L. Thomas, "China's Concept of Military Strategy," Parameters 44, no. 4 (Winter 2014-15), accessed January 3, 2018, http://www.css.ethz.ch/en/services/digital
Alexander A. Svechin, Strategy, edited by Kent D.Lee (Minneapolis, MN: East View  Publications, 1927), 24.    
Paret, Craig, and Gilbert. Makers of Modern Strategy, 341.   
Delbruck, History of The Art of War, 
Delbruck, History of The Art of War, 109.    
Paret, Craig, and Gilbert. Makers of Modern Strategy, 341.   
Freedman, Strategy, 108.   
Andrew C. Nahm, Korea: Tradition and Transformation-A History of the Korean People (Seoul: Hollym Corporation, 1996), 90.
Han, The History of Korea, 167.   
Nahm, Korea, 88.   
Han, The History of Korea, 219.    
Ibid, 221.   
Ibid, 330.    
Han, The History of Korea, 500.    
Nahm, Korea, 
Han, The History of Korea, 374.    
Nahm, Korea, 377.   
Ibid,[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13] 
In order for this study to be more persuasive, it is necessary to study the continuity of Goryeo, Chosun, and the Republic of Korea, and the process of forming a Korean identity.
Jakub Grygiel, Great Powers and Geopolitical Change (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University  Press, 2006), 23.   
Facing the rapidly changing international situation and the advanced science and technology that evolves day by day, the 
ROK Army
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
firepower through a strategy of attrition/exhaustion.
The achievement of the prewar status through the application of this attrition strategy is not to say that it was simply because the Koreans were always inferior to the enemy. As we have seen before, the application of this attrition strategy was not a national strategic approach but rather a manifestation of resistance of the entire population. In the Goryeo Dynasty, while the regular army withdrew a great number of people, it was common people such as and monks that fought against the Mongols. In the Chosun Dynasty, the self-organized troops constituted not only the regular armies but also commoners. As such, the massive wars on the Korean peninsula have all taken the form of a total war, which has led to the voluntary resistance and participation of the whole population. This is a considerable difference when compared to contemporary Western wars.
Predicting The Korean Way of War Does this imply that the strategy of attrition or exhaustion is Korean way of war? The answer is yes and no. As analyzed in this paper, unlike the many other nations' way of war, at least, three wars on the Korean Peninsula always led to a total war that involved almost entire populations across the whole country. In this regard, the Korean way of war was not merely military thoughts expressed in action but the way of a nation's survival. Such a unique way was a product of the interaction of elements of particular contexts that continued throughout Korea's history. Considering this, the Korean way of war in the past was close to the strategy of attrition or exhaustion. However, it does not connote that the strategy of attrition or exhaustion is or should be the Korean way of war in the future. Despite its certain continuity mandated by relatively fixed elements such as peninsular geopolitics and fragmented political culture, the Korean way of war has been changing. Contemporary political circumstances and rapidly developing technologies should be considered in assessing an evolving Korean way of war. It is hard to imagine that the current Korean military would conduct a war not that different from the