# ID: 818998c5f9844da99f158fc209b4c59f
# Title: Missiles for Asia?: The Need for Operational Analysis of US Theater Ballistic Missiles in the Pacific
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Treaty is in doubt.
• China's rapid military modernization could threaten U.S. forces.
• Theater ballistic missiles offer some potential benefits.
• But the benefits must be weighed
The U.S. Department of State concluded in 2014 that Russia has violated the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, raising doubts about the treaty's durability and questions about how the United States should respond. 
1
The INF Treaty prohibits conventional and nuclear-armed land-based ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges between 500 and 5,500 km (United States of America and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 1987). The treaty represented three major firsts for U.S.-Russian arms control: It was the first agreement between the two powers to reduce their nuclear arsenals, the first time the two agreed to eliminate an entire category of nuclear weapons, and the first agreement to include intrusive on-site inspections as part of the verification procedure. Within four years of signing the treaty, the two powers had destroyed 2,692 intermediate-range ballistic-and cruise-missile systems. 
2
3
The present policy of the United States is to bring "Russia back into compliance with the treaty" (Gottemoeller, 2014). 
4
5
In any case, dealing with the treaty issues will take time, likely years. In the interim, the United States should rigorously analyze a number of possible courses of action to follow in the event that negotiations fail. 
6
This call for analysis should not be interpreted as an argument for withdrawing from the treaty if a military benefit can be found. The U.S. commitment to arms-control treaties must rest on more than whether it can identify a military benefit from leaving. Furthermore, the fate of the treaty is not up to the U.S. Army. The U.S. Army can and should, however, have a fully developed analysis of how conventional TBMs could contribute to the Pacific in case conditions change and the National Command Authorities request options.
In the more than two decades since the signing of the INF Treaty, the international security environment has changed. Of particular concern to the United States has been the rapid military modernization of the People's Republic of China (PRC). While the People's Liberation Army (PLA) does not have the global power-projection capabilities of the U.S. military, it can contest U.S. power in areas close to China's borders. The annual report on Chinese military power from the Office of the Secretary of Defense summarized:
The People's Republic of China . . . continues to pursue a longterm, comprehensive military modernization program designed to improve the capacity of its armed forces to fight and win short-duration, high-intensity regional contingencies. Preparing for potential conflict in the Taiwan Strait, which includes deterring or defeating third-party intervention, remains the focus and primary driver of China's military investment. (Office of the Secretary of Defense, 2014, p. i)   China's "counterintervention" doctrine and capabilities could pose a particular threat to U.S. forces in a range of potential conflicts, including a Taiwan Strait scenario (Shlapak et  al., 2009). 
7
8
9
In a post-INF Treaty environment, the United States would be free to develop and field a range of land-based missiles, including land-based TBMs, GLCMs, and land-based antiship cruise missiles with ranges between 500 and 5,500 km. The potential of adding conventional land-based TBMs would represent the largest change to U.S. capabilities. 
10
Fielding conventional land-based TBMs in the Pacific region would offer many potential benefits. The arguments for fielding land-based TBMs can be organized around two main themes, the second of which includes four proposals for how the United States could use TBMs:
• gaining leverage over China to expand arms-control agreements • gaining an important new military capability to prevail in high-intensity conflict against advanced adversaries, such as China, which could include using TBMs -to impose costs on China -to suppress Chinese air bases -to make extensive attacks on Chinese transportererector-launchers (TELs) -as long-range "snipers" to disrupt targets of opportunity.
This section examines each argument in turn, summarizes challenges to each, and wraps up with some concluding observations.
Some have argued that, by leaving the INF Treaty, the United States could develop its own conventional TBMs to threaten China, thereby motivating it to negotiate limits on INF missiles (Montgomery, 2014b). At their core, these arguments recognize that it would be difficult to convince China to give up a military capability if the United States does not give something up in return, hence the need to build its own missiles (if only to bargain them away). These arguments can also have some similarity to a strategy of competitive risk taking: Increase the risk of escalation by deploying offensive strike weapons in the hopes that the adversary will blink first and come to the negotiating table . 12 There is some precedent for this; during the 1980s, Russian fear of the Pershing II's ability to strike Soviet leadership targets with very little warning played a role in Russian willingness to negotiate the INF Treaty.
While this threat may have worked against the Russians in the 1980s, it might not necessarily work in the contemporary security environment. In Northeast Asia, the threat of U.S. conventional TBMs might cause China to rethink its reluctance to consider any arms-control limits on TBMs, but other reactions are at least equally plausible. While the threat the Pershing II MRBM and the BGM-109G GLCM posed helped bring the Soviet Union to the negotiating table, it is debatable whether a similar threat would bring China to negotiations. First, China has demonstrated little interest in engaging in arms-control negotiations and could react in many different ways. Second, regional security dynamics complicate any potential arms-control negotiations. A major complication stems from the nested security dilemma of Pakistan, India, and China. China could argue that it would be unreasonable to expect it to reduce its MRBM and IRBM forces when other regional powers-notably India-possess a growing inventory of IRBMs that can threaten China. 
13
These hypothetical reactions illustrate a broader point about the unique historical, geographic, and military context of the INF Treaty. By circa 1980, the United States and the Soviet Union had reached parity in their strategic nuclear forces. Each side already had multiple means of holding its opponent's homeland at risk before both sides started fielding large numbers of MRBMs and IRBMs in Europe. The fact that the Soviet Union and United States were so far apart geographically enabled a distinction between "strategic" intercontinental-range weapons and shorter-range "theater" weapons. This distinction meant that eliminating INF missiles from their inventories did not alter the larger strategic balance, since each retained a robust capability to annihilate the other's homeland.
In other parts of the world, the distinction is not so neat. India does not need ICBMs to annihilate Pakistan, and China does not need them to annihilate India. For these countries, "theater" weapons can be the same as "strategic" weapons, and INF missiles cannot neatly be separated from the rest of the force structures without fundamentally changing the overall regional military balance. For this reason, attempting to make the INF Treaty multilateral is actually more akin to making the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty multilateral, which would be exceptionally challenging. 
14
For all these reasons, attempts to craft new multilateral arms-control agreements concerning TBMs face serious challenges, even if the United States fields its own INF missiles as a bargaining chip.
Ballistic missiles have many desirable characteristics as strike weapons. Ballistic missiles can be survivable (based in silos or loaded on mobile launchers); their high speed makes them very responsive; they are difficult to intercept; their technology development risk is lower than for other technologies for highspeed precision strike; and a potentially large number can be based on land.
Land-based missiles have multiple basing modes to ensure their survivability. Modern silos can be very hard, requiring very accurate and destructive weapons to attack them successfully. 
15
The fact that the Soviet Union and the United States were so far apart enabled a distinction between "strategic" intercontinental-range weapons and shorterrange "theater" weapons. In other parts of the world, the distinction is not so neat.
exceptional accuracy. Another way to ensure the survivability of land-based missiles is to make them mobile. The U.S. Pershing II MRBM and the Russian SS-25 (RS-12M Topol) ICBM are examples of nuclear-armed missiles deployed using mobile TELs. Even with air superiority and support from special operations forces on the ground, it can be very difficult to find and attack a skilled TEL force. During the Gulf War, Iraqi TELs were able to continue firing TBMs at Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrain despite a concerted allied effort to locate and destroy them (Keaney and Cohen, 1993, p. 88). While the Iraqi rate of fire initially fell in the face of allied attacks, it rebounded during the final weeks of the conflict, and the Iraqis were still able to fire several missiles a day during some of the final days of the war (Keaney and Cohen, 1993, p. 84). A postwar assessment concluded that "there is no indisputable proof that Scud mobile launchers-as opposed to high-fidelity decoys, trucks, or other objects with Scud-like signatures-were destroyed by fixedwing aircraft" (Keaney and Cohen, 1993, pp. 89-90).
Ballistic missiles travel at high speeds and can cover intercontinental distances in roughly 30 minutes. Furthermore, with solid fuel or storable liquid propellants, they can be maintained on alert for extended periods (assuming proper maintenance and support). These characteristics mean that ballistic missiles can respond quickly to attack urgent or time-sensitive targets.
The high speed of ballistic missiles also makes them difficult to intercept. When attempting midcourse interception of a missile, a defender must contend with a wide range of potential countermeasures, including decoys, chaff, and electronic countermeasures (Speier, McMahon, and Nacouzi, 2014). During the terminal phase of flight, the high speed of even a nonmaneuvering reentry vehicle makes it a challenging target for an endoatmospheric interceptor. Maneuvering reentry vehicles capable of making very high g maneuvers would be even more challenging (Yengst, 2010).
Given the experience of the U.S. defense industrial base, building a new ballistic missile would involve less technical risk than building some alternative high-speed strike systems. The United States developed and fielded the mobile and highly accurate Pershing II in the early 1980s (Polmar and Norris,  2009, p. 177). 
16
Land-based missiles can have quite large magazines. Landbased missile forces do not have the size and weight restrictions that a submarine hull or a bomber airframe imposes and can have numerous reloads at hand. 
17
Some analysts have argued that the Army needs to regain some of the long-range strike capabilities it lost with the elimination of the Pershing II to be prepared to counter the growing threat of adversaries with advanced A2/AD capabilities. This concept would involve creating a constellation of forward-deployed, mobile land-based ballistic missiles on the territory of U.S. allies and partners (Thomas, 2013). 
18
a tempting target for preemption during a crisis. Proponents argue that the latent threat of these long-range land-attack missiles would drive rivals to spend resources on expensive missile defense systems.
While ballistic missile defenses can be quite expensive, 19 that is not the only way China could react to a TBM threat. It could decide to focus more on an offense-dominated strategy to blunt the ability of the TBM force to attack China. This might be quite difficult, given how difficult it is to target mobile ballistic missile launchers, but it has some precedent in the PLA's concept of the Joint Anti-Air Raid Campaign, in which attacks on an enemy's air bases are a key part of preventing air attacks on the Chinese mainland. 
20
21
22
While mobile missiles can be quite survivable, that survivability depends on dispersal, which places a premium on precrisis access. If U.S. TBMs are not already in a survivable posture when a crisis erupts, they could present China with a window of opportunity that it might feel compelled to exploit before it closed, lest the TBMs survive to later be used against China. If the United States needed to deploy its land-based TBMs into the region during a crisis, air and sea ports of debarkation would be key vulnerabilities for China's A2/AD capabilities to target. These considerations would make it important for U.S. TBMs to already be based in the region before a crisis developed, making permanent peacetime access a critical component of this concept. As of 2015, it is difficult to identify any countries in East Asia that would be willing to host new U.S. offensive forces aimed at China. However, if China continues to act assertively on its periphery, some of its neighbors might be motivated to take more decisive balancing actions. 
23
One of the challenges the United States faces in a potential conflict with China over Taiwan is the imbalance between the number of aircraft that China and the United States could each bring to bear. By way of illustration, China has about 30 air bases within 1,000 km of the center of the Taiwan Strait that it could use during a contingency, while the United States operates only a single U.S. Air Force base (Kadena) and a single Marine Corps air station (Futenma) within that range. The United States can augment these locations by projecting airpower from aircraft carriers and from more-distant air bases, but U.S. aircraft could still find themselves fighting outnumbered, especially if the PLA uses precision ballistic-and cruise-missile attacks to disrupt sorties from U.S. carriers and air bases. One proposed response is for the United States to use ballistic missiles to damage runways and destroy PLA Air Force aircraft on the ground to suppress their sorties and reduce the number of times that U.S. pilots would have to fight outnumbered (Shlapak et al., 2009, pp. 131-133). Such a mission would require a substantial number of ballistic missiles; a single salvo to attack the runways and parking ramps at each of the 40 Chinese air bases in the Nanjing and Guangzhou military regions would require approximately 600 conventional TBMs (Shlapak et al., 2009, p. 132). This alone is more than twice the number of Pershing II MRBMs the United States fielded in the 1980s. If it were to follow this path, the United States would likely want substantially more than 600 TBMs so that it could reattack Chinese air bases (runways and damaged aircraft can be repaired, and destroyed aircraft replaced) and other key targets. These missiles, based on dispersed mobile launchers for survivability, would require significant areas to operate in, as well as security forces, communications infrastructure, and logistics support. These deployment areas could be restricted to U.S. territory (e.g., such Western Pacific islands as Guam and the Northern Marianas), which would require longer-range and more-expensive TBMs, or could include partners and allies (such as Japan and the Philippines), which would require shorter-range TBMs but make the force dependent on political access. 
24
25
A subset of those who advocate developing land-based ballistic missiles do so for the explicit purpose of suppressing China's ability to launch ballistic missiles (Ryan, 2007; Stokes and  Blumenthal, 2011). They argue that "the only real defense [against precision TBMs] is offense," so the United States needs conventional TBMs to attack infrastructure supporting Chinese missiles and to responsively attack Chinese TELs after they have fired but before they can relocate (Stokes and  Blumenthal, 2011). Logically, these attacks would need to come early in a conflict to improve the survivability of U.S. forces and would need to be extensive to significantly affect China's large ballistic missile inventory. The proposals for this mission came in short opinion pieces, so there are no further operational details about how its proponents envision implementing this concept.
These brief discussions do not show an appreciation for how difficult it can be to find and destroy elusive targets, such as TELs. The difficulty can be illustrated through analytic examples and historical analogy.
Successfully attacking a TEL-even when possible to detect where it was when it launched a missile-heavily depends on strong intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities (Vick et al., 2001, pp. 57-81). A TEL can begin moving soon after it has launched a missile, meaning that the target location error around a detected missile launch increases as a square of the TEL's speed. For example, if a TEL can start moving at 20 kph the moment that the United States detects a missile launch, it could be anywhere within a 35-km 2 circle after 10 minutes (Vick et al., 2001, p. 73). Even if the TEL has to wait for 5 minutes after launch before it begins to move, it could be anywhere within a 9-km 2 circle after 10 minutes. Given this target location error, one concept for TEL hunting from stand-off proposed employing a hypersonic air-launched missile to deliver small loitering subsonic submunitions with sensors that could search the area for the TEL (Vick et al., 2001, p. 68). A TBM could be an alternative way to deliver such submunitions, but the success of the mission would still depend heavily on the quality and timeliness of the ISR cue and on the command and control latency involved in transmitting that cue to the TBM battery. The success of this concept would also depend on the difficult task of developing and procuring significant numbers of autonomous loitering submunitions. An operational analysis of this concept would need to account for the technical risk, the cost, and the realistic sensor capabilities of such submunitions.
A highly motivated and competent adversary can do a great deal to complicate the challenge of finding elusive ground targets. Advanced integrated air defense systems can make it very difficult for ISR aircraft to loiter over TEL operating areas. Counterspace weapons, whether nonkinetic dazzlers and jammers or kinetic antisatellite weapons, can challenge space-based ISR systems. Employing decoys, camouflage, concealment, and deception can increase the number of false targets that the searcher has to track and investigate. An advanced nation, such as China, has the capability to employ all these methods to protect its mobile ballistic missiles. 
27
29
So far, this discussion has treated the choice between TBMs and ALCMs as an either-or decision. The final concept (long-range sniping attacks) discussed below explores the potential utility of adding a limited number of TBMs in the larger U.S. portfolio of strike systems.
The final operational concept for employing land-based TBMs examined here differs from the preceding three concepts. It envisions basing Pershing II-class conventional MRBMs in the First Island Chain (e.g., Luzon and Kyushu) to exploit fleeting targets of opportunity and help enable joint strikes on heavily defended targets. Because they are survivable, are ready to launch on short notice, can arrive quickly at their targets, and can penetrate many defenses, TBMs are very attractive for these sorts of missions. With timely ISR cuing and a mix of payloads, a land-based TBM force could potentially engage a range of targets: large strike packages forming on air bases, airborne units assembling for assault, regional command posts coordinating maneuvers, integrated air defenses, or IRBMs preparing for launch. 
30
The concept could alternatively be carried out by hypersonic ALCMs that used their high speeds to attack fleeting targets quickly. This alternative would require the U.S. Air Force to keep a bomber or arsenal plane on orbit outside China's air defenses, waiting for a cue. That creates an opportunity cost (the bomber would spend a great deal of its time simply waiting for a call and could have been conducting another mission), but the marginal cost of even a high-performance long-range cruise missile is likely to be less than that of a land-based MRBM (the ALCM concept would also avoid the need for additional infrastructure and support equipment). Some key metrics to use in evaluating the utility of this capability would be how many U.S. Navy-launched Tomahawk cruise missile or U.S. Air Force bomber sorties carrying JASSM-ERs could be replaced by a given force of land-based conventional MRBMs. Another key parameter would be how many and what types of fleeting opportunities might develop during a given scenario.
If attacking fleeting targets is a joint capability gap, then an analysis of alternatives could determine what mix of new capabilities could best fill the gap. Land-based TBMs would be a promising candidate, but they would have to be assessed relative to other approaches, including hypersonic air-launched missiles and sea-launched high-speed missiles. The latter two capabilities might be roughly comparable, would not be subject to existing arms-control limitations, would not generate new Adding TBMs to the U.S. arsenal is not sufficient to overcome the challenge of successfully engaging elusive ground targets.
manpower and infrastructure costs, and would not require new access agreements.
A number of arguments have been advanced in favor of the United States fielding its own conventional TBMs, including potentially gaining leverage over other countries to expand arms control and adding a new capability to the U.S. force structure. While each argument has strengths, they all face enduring questions that they must answer before they can be judged as truly compelling. It is not clear at present that fielding new strike systems will necessarily bring other countries into arms-control negotiations rather than provoke other reactions, such as an intensification of the emerging arms race. While land-based ballistic missiles have some attractive capabilities (including speed, lethality, and responsiveness), no compelling analytic demonstration has yet shown that they are the best way to add a new operational capability to U.S. force structure. In particular, arguments to use land-based TBMs to attack elusive ground targets must address the serious ISR challenge of finding and tracking such targets.
Ballistic missiles are a fundamentally expensive way to deliver high explosives. When fighting extended high-intensity wars, it is cost-prohibitive to rely exclusively on expendable delivery vehicles rather than on reusable aircraft. 
31
The preceding section discussed the potential benefits of deploying TBMs to the Pacific region and identified some unanswered questions about their utility. This section considers two other issues, each of which captures potential downsides of deploying TBMs. First, there is the issue of depending on countries in the region to host the TBMs. Second, TBMs might aggravate U.S.-China tensions and undermine crisis stability.
Given the range of land-based MRBMs and IRBMs, the United States would have to base them in theater, which would likely require access permission from another country. In some regions, such as the Middle East, sensitivities about the presence of large numbers of U.S. forces could constrain the number of countries that would be willing to allow the United States to deploy land-based missiles during peacetime. In the Western Pacific, hosting U.S. missiles would likely be viewed as signaling membership in an anti-Chinese coalition, something for which no Asian states have demonstrated an appetite so far. 
32
The Western Pacific offers a potential advantage because it is the only theater in which the United States owns territory. The United States could conceivably base conventional IRBMs on Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, but the comparatively small area of these islands (together they total approximately 1,000 km 2 , less than 1 percent of the operating area
The United States would ideally like a force posture that can credibly deny adversary objectives without providing any incentives for preemption while reassuring the adversary that the United States will not launch its own preemptive attack.
of Iraqi Scuds in 1991) would make it challenging to ensure survivability through mobility alone. Silos or hardened shelters would be alternatives, but they would be more expensive.
While regional politics make it difficult to identify any country that would be willing to host U.S. TBMs today, that might change if China's behavior continues to threaten its neighbors. These and other uncertainties imply that access challenges are not necessarily impossible to surmount, but any analysis of the potential operational benefit of fielding land-based TBMs must account for this dependency and the potential limits it creates.
A framework Forrest Morgan developed suggests that TBMs would have, at best, a mixed influence on crisis stability (Morgan, 2013). Mining the literature on deterrence, escalation, and crisis stability, as well as series of historical cases, he identified three key attributes for a weapon system to contribute to structural stability and three key attributes for a weapon system to productively contribute to crisis management. Structural stability refers to the degree to which the geostrategic environment (including geography, disposition of military forces, and the technology and doctrine of the forces) fosters or impedes crisis stability when a crisis develops (Morgan, 2013, p. 24). 33
To bolster structural stability, a weapon system would ideally be sufficiently potent to deter conventional attack, minimize U.S. vulnerability to surprise attack, and mitigate the adversary's perceived risk of the United States mounting a surprise attack (Morgan, 2013). These three attributes are natural results of deterrence theory: The United States would like a force posture that can credibly deny adversary objectives without providing any incentives for preemption while reassuring the adversary that the United States will not launch its own preemptive attack.
To deter attack, the United States could rely on nuclear deterrence, which primarily involves threats of punishment, or conventional deterrence, which primarily relies on persuading a challenger that the United States could deny it the benefits of aggression (Morgan, 2013, pp. 27-30). As discussed earlier, arguments for conventional TBMs state that they would contribute to conventional deterrence. Conventional deterrence tends to be more dynamic than nuclear deterrence because the potency of conventional weapons is so much less than that of nuclear weapons. Morgan concluded that a small force of roughly 100 conventional ICBMs and SLBMs alone was not powerful enough to pose a credible conventional deterrent (Morgan, 2013, pp. 46-49, 117-123). He did not, however, consider the contribution land-based TBMs could make in improving the overall potency of U.S. conventional forces. He thus did not assess the effects of the interaction between a conventional ballistic missile force and the rest of the U.S. conventional strike portfolio. 
34
If the TBMs were already deployed in theater and dispersed or hardened, they would not be vulnerable to a surprise attack. If, however, the TBMs were not routinely dispersed or if they had to deploy into the region during a crisis, they might be vulnerable to a surprise attack. A very destabilizing scenario would be one in which the TBMs were rushed into the theater and were temporarily vulnerable at their air and sea ports of debarkation. 
35
The final criterion poses the largest structural stability challenge to the notional land-based TBM force. TBMs present a classic security dilemma: To hedge against a surprise attack during a crisis, the TBM force must be kept at a high state of readiness. 
36
37
38
This framework suggests that the contribution of landbased TBMs to structural stability is, at best, mixed. They could bolster the potency of the U.S. conventional strike portfolio by adding a complementary capability and, if appropriately postured, can minimize vulnerability to a surprise attack. Their major shortcoming lies in their poor ability to reassure rivals that they will not themselves be used to wage a surprise attack; in fact, they could stoke destabilizing fears of surprise attacks. 39
To facilitate control of a crisis, a weapon system would ideally be flexible, responsive, and capable of signaling (Morgan,  2013). These attributes flow from the desire to be able to defuse a crisis on terms favorable to the United States. Flexibility is desirable so that the weapon can be used in a wide range of scenarios and provide leaders with a broad range of options. Given uncertainty over where a crisis will erupt and the need to moderate the operational tempo during a crisis, weapons need to be responsive. Finally, weapons ought to be able to communicate capability, resolve, and restraint.
The flexibility of TBMs is constrained by the types of payloads that they carry. It is possible to design a range of TBM warheads for a variety of missions. Area-effect munitions, unitary penetrators, and even maneuvering reentry vehicles capable of homing on moving targets are all possible. 40 These payloads could be designed so that they could be changed in the field as the mission demands, which could add some flexibility, but it would likely still be less than the diversity of payloads that an aircraft could carry.
Land-based TBMs have poor responsiveness if they are not already in a theater; it would likely take a significant amount of time to deploy a substantial land-based TBM force. 
41
Deploying TBMs could send a strong signal of capability and resolve. However, as discussed above, it is more difficult to signal restraint with TBMs without making them vulnerable. For example, one could unload a number of TELs and park them in an open area to attempt to signal restraint, but an adversary could interpret that in many ways other than what the United States would intend. At one extreme, an adversary could view a small number of displayed TELs as a bluff using a trivial amount of the total U.S. force. At the other, displaying a larger proportion of the total force might present an adversary with a window of opportunity too rare and valuable to ignore. 
42
In summary, land-based TBMs have some desirable capabilities for crisis management. They can offer a somewhat flexible and responsive military capability if deployed in theater while also signaling U.S. resolve. However, TBMs are weaker in responding to rapidly emerging contingencies in theaters where they are not deployed and in being able to signal restraint during a crisis. Restraint becomes particularly important during limited wars between nuclear-armed powers (Morgan, 2012). It would be necessary to approach weapon systems that perform poorly on the signaling-restraint criterion very carefully when considering them for use in a crisis involving the United States and China.
The concerns raised in this section all involve hypothetical negative consequences; it is difficult to say with certainty what the actual consequences would be of the United States fielding conventional TBMs in Asia. Given the severity of some consequences of the potential future pathways, however, prudence requires that defense policymakers frankly consider the range of possible futures to have as clear an understanding as possible of the risks of deploying these forces. Deploying new land-based ballistic missiles could start an action-reaction cycle between the United States, Russia, China, and other states, the ultimate outcome of which would be very difficult to predict.
Part of a comprehensive assessment of the potential effect of fielding land-based ballistic missiles must include considering the stability and crisis management implications of these weapons. While they can deliver a great deal of combat power, they are fundamentally expensive, are slow to deploy into a region, and-given the potent threat they pose-make it difficult to reassure adversaries that they will not be used in decapitating surprise attacks. They also would likely require regional access, which would require negotiating new access agreements with U.S. allies. Fielding TBMs could aggravate the larger U.S.-China strategic and political relationship, perhaps provoking more Chinese spending on nuclear capabilities.
One of the benefits of arms-control agreements is that they can make defense planning simpler by taking certain options off the table and providing warning about the development of a potential adversary's capabilities. Ending arms-control agreements makes things fundamentally more complicated because more futures become possible. This is not to say that it can never make sense to discard an arms-control agreement; it does mean that it can be very difficult to see beyond the horizon of the agreement's end.
Despite Russian violation of the INF Treaty, this report has argued that it is too soon for the United States to decide to withdraw from the treaty. A reasonable way forward would be first to establish whether a strong case can be made for the operational value of conventional land-based ballistic missiles. 
43
Establishing the military value of land-based ballistic missiles will require a thorough operational analysis of the potential effectiveness of a land-based TBM force against a range of missions in a variety of scenarios. The operational analysis must also consider alternative means of accomplishing the missions (including sea-based ballistic missiles and sea-launched cruise missiles or ALCMs) and highlight key assumptions and dependencies that affect the effectiveness of the TBM force. The dependence of different strike capabilities on political access uncertainties and ISR requirements are particularly important factors in this analysis. This analysis would also need to examine the manpower requirements for the postulated TBM force and how the Army could meet that demand given its coming manpower reductions (Tice, 2014). The cost of support facilities must also be included. If the analysis identifies a military requirement, the effort should also consider whether U.S. partners and allies in the Pacific would be capable of developing their own conventional TBMs or whether a U.S. capability would be essential.
If a strong analytic case can be made for the operational value of a land-based TBM force, the next step would be to The characteristics of TBMs make it difficult to reassure adversaries that they will not be used in surprise attacks on leadership or other sensitive targets, potentially undermining structural stability and crisis management. The United States has determined that the Russian Federation is in violation of its obligations under the INF Treaty not to possess, produce, or flight-test a ground-launched cruise missile (GLCM) with a range capability of 500 km to 5,500 km, or to possess or produce launchers of such missiles. (U.S. Department of State, 2014, p. 8)   The report goes on to state that "[i]n 2013, the United States raised these concerns with the Russian Federation on repeated occasions in an effort to resolve U.S. concerns. The United States will continue to pursue resolution of U.S. concerns with Russia" (U.S. Department of State, 2014, pp. 10). 
2
3
4
5
8
9
10
11 For example, Kelly et al. (2013) examined the potential value of land-based antiship cruise missiles in the Western Pacific with ranges up to 200 km. Such systems would not violate the INF Treaty. There are emerging (and, as of mid-2015, undocumented in the public debate) arguments that there might be value in fielding a land-based version of the Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile. With a range of roughly 1,000 km, this missile would violate the treaty if based on land (Jane's Defence International, 2014). Given the nascent nature of these arguments, this report could not adequately represent or evaluate them. To be compelling, arguments for a land-based Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile will need to provide supporting operational analysis akin to that required by the arguments for land-based TBMs.
12 To be clear, proponents (such as Montgomery 2014b) do not advocate provoking a crisis to gain an advantage. 
13
14 Alexi Arbatov provides an excellent overview of the challenge of multilateral arms control in Ochmanek and Sulmeyer (2014, pp. 175-186). 
15
16
17 While this discussion focuses on the potential benefits of land-based TBMs, sea-based TBMs would have many of these benefits, with the exception of inventory size because of the space constraints of submarine hull designs. 
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26 RAND colleague Fred Timson estimated that the average unit procurement cost of the Pershing II MRBM was about $9 million (in 2009 dollars), or about $10 million in 2014 dollars. Analysis based on cost and quantity data from Nicholas (1981-1988).
27 PLA writings on Second Artillery operations display great concern about protecting its missile forces from concerted attack by a highly capable adversary: "Owing to the important position and function of the Second Artillery conventional missile units in modern campaigns, it has thereby been decided that they will be targets for enemy key point strikes . . . resulting in an extremely harsh battlefield environment" (Yuliang, 2006, p. 725). 
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36 Jervis (1978, pp. 169-170)
37
38
39
40
41
42
43 Colby (2014) and Lewis (2014a) have also made this point. 
44
The United States has already begun to study potential military options should Russia refuse to return to compliance. Brian McKeon,
Thanks go to many colleagues. 
Terry Kelly
James Bonomo
David Frelinger
Joel Predd
Stacie Pettyjohn
Forrest Morgan
Richard Betts
James Quinlivan
Jerry Sollinger
MAJ Morgan Plummer
policy fails to revive the INF Treaty.
The Department of State's finding that Russia is in violation of its obligations under the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty has led some to call for the United States to withdraw from that treaty and, freed from its restrictions, to develop theater ballistic missiles as a counter to Chinese power in the Pacific. This report, based on research during 2014, argues that any such step is premature. The fate of the treaty is not up to the U.S. Army, but it can and should have a fully developed analysis of the potential operational benefits that conventionally armed theater ballistic missiles could offer in the Pacific, as well as the limitations.
This research should interest U.S. Army leaders, strategists, and policymakers concerned with force planning, force development, nonproliferation, and arms control. The findings and views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Army or the U.S. Department of Defense.
This work was sponsored by the Office of the Under Secretary of the Army and was conducted within the RAND Arroyo Center's Strategy, Doctrine, and Resources Program. RAND Arroyo Center, part of the RAND Corporation, is a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the United States Army.
The Project Unique Identification Code (PUIC) for the project that produced this document is HQD146848.
Questions and comments about this research are welcome and may be directed to the author at 703-413-1100, x5316,or Jacob_Heim@rand.org.
Jacob Heim is an associate policy analyst at the RAND Corporation. He has conducted strategic assessments and defense analyses for a range of sponsors, including Pacific Air Forces, Headquarters U.S. Air Force, and the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy. His research interests include the military balance in the Western Pacific, U.S. Air Force overseas force posture, wargaming, and the challenge posed by anti-access, area-denial capabilities. In addition to RAND reports, he has published in Air and Space Power Journal, The Washington Quarterly, and SAIS Review. His previous experience includes serving in government as an analyst supporting the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy and Force Development and as a senior operations research analyst with the MITRE Corporation.
This document and trademark(s) contained herein are protected by law. This representation of RAND intellectual property is provided for noncommercial use only. Unauthorized posting of this publication online is prohibited. Permission is given to duplicate this document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse in another form, any of our research documents for commercial use. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit www.rand.org/pubs/permissions.html.
For more information on this publication, visit www.rand.org/t/rr945.
© Copyright 2016 RAND Corporation Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data is available for this publication.
ISBN: 978-0-8330-9045-4
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world safer and more secure, healthier and more prosperous. RAND is nonprofit, nonpartisan, and committed to the public interest. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors. R ® is a registered trademark.
ARROYO CENTER