# ID: 81eb2670f90940e68e5aeee1ff30ca03
# Title: Simultaneous Contrast: Examining the Use of American National Power
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
The principal deduction from this study is that this does not appear to be something which can be solved by adjustments in doctrine, organization or training.
Truly meaningful, relevant, theories of war cannot simply be plucked from thin air, regardless of the contingencies of the time.
The American way of war is just that -American.
It cannot be ignored, or happily adjusted.
But the US cannot allow the current paradigm to continue.
So what is the answer?
Looking back at the detail of American foreign policy in the sixty plus years since the US ended World War Two as the world's greatest power reveals a number of compelling observations.
First, the principal inclination of America and its citizens is to allow the prosperity of individuals to expand, and foreign policy is entirely in the context of domestic will.
Second, took place while America's greatest threat was the finite concern of nuclear attack by a Soviet Union, controlled paradoxically by the security blanket of Mutually Assured Destruction.
Other problems could be dominated by genuine economic hegemony.
The real worry for the country now should be that the current overextension is being watched by a China playing a careful waiting game while steadily increasing economic influence throughout Asia, Africa and Latin America, by a newly authoritarian Russia with an aggressively nuanced policy of using the supply of energy to potentially control its neighbors, by terrorist groups able and willing to use both themselves and America's own technology as weapons, and by adversarial countries from Venezuela to North Korea who witness the draining effects of open-ended American military commitment with undisguised glee.
All of these, in a position of inferiority, have been forced into an understanding of the techniques required by General Smith's war amongst the people.
As a result, the American military is fundamentally unsuited to the practicalities of defending the country against the real threats of Twenty-First Century warfare.