# ID: 82d40e30070b41408598a910c8efdb00
# Title: China's quest for global primacy: An analysis of Chinese International and Defense Strategies to Outcompete the United States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
In Chapter Seven, we explore in more detail a posited Chinese international strategy for competing with the United States.
Regarding major powers, the posited strategy seeks to ensure that the United States and Europe remain divided in their approach to China while Russia cooperates closely as a junior partner.
The Asia-Pacific region remains a priority area, and the strategy envisions Beijing weakening U.S. alliances, expanding its own network of client states, renovating and leading regional multilateral institutions, and deepening the region's integration into a Chinese-led economic, political, and technological order.
Beijing regards the developing world as a key constituency for its international leadership, and the strategy posited here aims to build a network of client states across Eurasia, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America.
China's success in establishing itself as a principal arbiter in Middle Eastern affairs, as the main sponsor of Africa's economic development, and as a major partner in Latin America could result in a severe weakening in the strategic position of the United States as a global leader and undercut its position in the Indo-Pacific theater as well.
In the multilateral domain, the strategy envisions a broad effort to shape rules, norms, and agendas to favor the interests of China and its clients at the expense of the United States.
Beijing's global governance strategy similarly aims to bolster China's influence and delegitimize that of the United States in appropriate venues.
For each section of this chapter, the authors have proposed objectives for the 2035 time frame that could guide the development of relevant criteria against which China's progress could be assessed.