# ID: 834b3cab1c9c472fae6218369f5f9109
# Title: Organizing for Irregular Warfare Implications for the Brigade Combat Team
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The Army ended up trying to fight the kind of conventional war that it was trained, organized, and prepared to fight instead of the counterinsurgency war it was sent to fight. 1
During the final years of the Soviet Union, a theoretical discussion commonly known as the revolution in military affairs (RMA) began. Despite consistent U.S.
involvement in irregular conflict, many of the influential authors of the 1990s imagined ways in which the U.S. could use information technologies and emerging weapon systems to dominate future battlefields. Assessments of the capabilities required for stabilization and counterinsurgency operations were largely ignored. After U.S.
invasions, the rapid collapse of the Taliban regime in 2001 and the Baath Party in 2003 seemed to further solidify assumptions regarding "rapid decisive operations" and the power of information technology. However, defense planners' enthusiasm quickly waned as the difficulties of post-conflict stabilization operations became apparent.
Meanwhile, the United States Army launched a restructuring plan in 1999 described as "the most comprehensive transformation of its force since World War II." 
2
3
Divisions and brigades are intended to be tailored to their specific environment with augments from support brigades. Supporters of transformation applaud the flexible and strategic mobility the new concept provides. Some critics note the loss of traditional combat power in the new design compared with its predecessor due to a reduction in the number of maneuver battalions and firepower-based platforms. Others see the brigade modularity plan as a necessary and evolutionary step; but advocate far more reaching organizational changes if the Army is to be properly prepared for twenty-first century threats. These diverse philosophical camps are largely derived from varied opinions of technology's potential and different assumptions regarding the future threat environment.
In the wake of the Cold War and the rising tide of destabilizing influences in societies worldwide, U.S. Army ground forces can expect to continue performing a myriad of tasks. These include conventional maneuver combat operations, providing military support to security, stabilization, transition, and reconstruction operations (SSTRO), assisting foreign nations counterinsurgency (COIN) efforts, and rapid response humanitarian operations. The threat of regional aggressor states, states that sponsor international terrorism, inter-state rivalries, and intra-state violence impact the United States' concern for its own, and other states' national security, economic stability, and human rights.
Unwilling to combat U.S. military forces or its allies directly, future adversaries will continue to embrace asymmetric means. They will focus their operations in cities
where close terrain provides cover and the populace provides them information and concealment. 
4
4
governance at all levels. Known historically and generally as small-wars, military operations other than war, low-intensity conflict, and more recently as irregular warfare (IW); these operations may follow military invasions, be used to prevent weak states from collapsing, or to oppose insurgencies and terrorists in partner states.
Since the end of the Cold War, the U.S. military has been conducting foreign interventions approximately once every two years with the duration of each mission rising, and the scale of objectives increasingly expanding. 
5
7
5
6
ARVN. 7
8
9
Recently, Department of Defense Directive 3000.05 tasked the Army to rebalance its training and readiness focus between stability operations and conventional combat. This emphasis should force the majority of Army ground forces to question their responsibilities to perform this critical task. Yet, the Army claims the current BCT modular construct is "more than adequate to address the demands of stability operations" and is as aptly prepared for counterinsurgency as it is traditional combat operations. 
10
11
These recent policy documents prod the conventional Army to accept a greater role in counterinsurgency and foreign internal defense. While some argue it's already performing these tasks in Iraq and Afghanistan,
12
13
One of these is the possibility that the military (and more specifically, the Army) will fail to adequately "prepare and organize GPF (general purpose forces) for extended regional and global IW." 
14
15
The Army's modular-brigade design being implemented today is a necessary, but incremental step that fixed strategic-mobility problems and institutionalized operational successes from the 1991 Gulf War. Today's "transformation" does not properly prepare the Army for twenty-first century conflict. 
16
These modified units-named within this paper as security and development brigades to distinguish them from their predecessors-would be focused on defeating guerrilla fighters, controlling (and protecting) populations, and conducting initial indigenous governance and economic capacity development.
Numerous benefits accrue by creating more autonomous, multifunctional units with the current infantry brigade combat teams as their foundation. They will have an enhanced ability to participate in steady-state multi-national partnerships and bilateral foreign internal defense (FID) operations. They will still be full-spectrum capable (in fact, establishing and maintaining a secure environment through offensive and defensive operations is still the most critical requirement), but the units would be designed with stability operations as a core mission. These units would be no more "specialized," than a heavy brigade is for conventional warfare. This would provide a more balanced, but still tailorable force structure.
Intelligence, civil-affairs, and information operations specialists should be integrated elements of battalion and company headquarters. Military police capabilities should be expanded and also integrated into infantry battalions, but differentiated from infantry in their functions. Civil engineers and construction units should be created and integrated into security and development brigades. Having non-combat related specialists organic to the units will promote greater unit effectiveness than the current adhocracy established by the brigade-modular design.
Selected Stryker brigade combat teams, Airborne, and Air Assault brigade combat teams tailored for strategic missions such as rapid deployment and forced-entry requirements would remain in their current design. The heavy brigade combat teams would continue to be America's dominant force in major conventional operations, conflict in open terrain, and as necessary, resourced to conduct urban and populationfocused operations. Limited numbers of support and functional brigades would maintain stand-alone capabilities, providing theater support and capable of detaching subordinates units to heavy brigade combat teams as necessary. Others would be absorbed into the security and development brigades. This proposal could be an incremental step. Should experimentation data and testimonies attest to the new design, similar capability designs could be implemented within heavy and Stryker brigade combat teams.
The proposed force structure would still allow security and development brigades to conduct conventional offensive and defensive operations where its small unit proficiency would be necessary to defeating an adversary in a close fight, or utilizing standoff joint air, man-portable, and indirect weapons against distant enemies. These capabilities are essential to traditional and irregular conflict, but they are not sufficient to insuring victory in today's operational environment.
This paper will progress as follows. Chapter II describes changes to the United States' threat environment and the evolving national security policies that are attempting to address those changes. Threat assessments should drive defense policies and capability assessments. Capability requirements should drive the military's force structure. This process is often overlooked during political and organizational resource competitions. Chapter III seeks to discern what assumptions and intentions led to the Army's current force design, and examines the obvious gap between the capabilities inherent to the Army's current force design (based on outdated assumptions) and those directed by more recent policy documents. Chapter IV explores a wide array of policy and structural alternatives from a variety of military analysts. Their proposals contribute to ongoing defense discussions, but have critical shortcomings, or simply do not offer enough detail from which to make meaningful policy recommendations. In many cases this paper does not refute their ideas, but builds on them. Chapter V uses organizational theory to demonstrate that recent changes in the United States' strategic environment suggest a need to create further specialization within the force structure, and those specialists should be integrated into lower-level tactical units. Those theoretical underpinnings are then complemented with historical insights, Army doctrine, contemporary articles, presentations, and interviews to evaluate the capability and capacity of tactical units conducting irregular warfare to conduct intelligence operations, security operations, and civil-military operations. While Chapters II and III discuss strategic-level policies, this chapter analyzes tactical-level capabilities. Lastly, Chapter VI outlines a design proposal as a consideration for defense planners to modify the current modular-brigade design.
The scope of this thesis is limited to non-permissive environments where enemy forces employ asymmetric techniques, amongst civilian populations, in an effort to counter the technological and resource superiority of U.S. forces and their allies. In such an environment, the BCT force structure becomes a significant determinant of the capabilities of the Army to conduct numerous irregular warfare tasks. After describing an overall capability gap in U.S. defense posture, this paper pays specific attention to intelligence, security, and civil-military dimensions at the brigade and below levels of organization.
Modifications in these areas are critical to the Army's performance in irregular conflicts. Adjusting the Army's tactical force design to account for these changes would have operational-level implications, the extent of which is not fully explored within this paper. However, this analysis is based on an assumption that the Army's ground force structure should be built from the bottom up, congruent with strategic threat assessments and national security policies. This paper is limited to irregular environments, but its recommendations could be adapted with minimal impact to the Army's ability to conduct major conventional operations.
This paper does not represent an all-inclusive study of the Army's role in national security. Nor does this study account for inter-agency applications of national power and influence. Economic incentives and diplomatic initiatives should obviously precede any foreign intervention by the United States. When military force is necessary, there is a growing awareness that military actions must be complemented with increased civilian agency capacities. Numerous conferences and studies are already exploring ways of better integrating those capabilities throughout all stages of military operations.
Similarly, there is a necessary and well accepted movement to identify education and training deficiencies within the Army's workforce. For example, foreign-language training is being encouraged and the Army is promoting increased academic opportunities in economics, political science, public policy, and international relations.
All of these initiatives are to be complimented. Yet, while necessary, they may not be sufficient to properly transform the Army.
Understandably, this paper will have its critics. Extensive financial and political capital has already been expended on the current design and its personnel, materiel, doctrine, and base realignment implications. Although the Army has launched numerous studies to analyze the effectiveness of its current design for irregular warfare, an overemphasis on traditional combat operations, external influences, and internal resistance still hinders honest assessments of future force capabilities. 
17
18
17
18
Boozell stated that there is "no analytical data that says the 'full-spectrum BCT' can't do it all." This lack of empirical data allows senior military decision-makers to stave off criticism of the current design. However, he also admited that irregular environments do not "lend themselves to zeros and ones" acknowledging the difficulty of establishing the kind of quantitative, predictive analysis Cold War planners were accustomed to, and the military's modeling software is programmed for. He asked, "How do you plug in cultural differences, and social ties? How do you measure voting processes and political reconciliation? What military capabilities are needed? None of that computes." Rather than dismiss this study for its lack of quantitative evidence, it is my hope that it can be used as a model for further simulation and field testing. 
19
For example, manning requirements as proposed in this paper, should be derived from rational capability assessments rather than permitting current limitations and personnel policies to constrain capability analysis and force structure alternatives. A purely rational threat-based assessment is rarely used for policy and resource allocation decisions. Branch parochialism, a rigid promotion system, cultural resistance, and defense procurement initiatives contribute to create a divisive system where force structure decisions are made as a result of extensive bargaining and compromise. An Army colonel working force modernization issues for infantry brigade combat teams underscored this point when asked about the potential for increasing the number of battalions per brigade, given an anticipated increase in overall Army force size. He 
19
quickly stated, "it's not going to happen, that wouldn't increase the number of Flag (referring to General officer) positions." 20 Instead, the Army has attempted to transform its force design within an antiquated promotion system and hierarchy. The challenge is to replace the rigid promotion timelines and criteria with more flexible performancebased models needed for an updated BCT structure.
Lastly, some readers may criticize this study as a model for "fighting previous wars," as it is weighed heavily with supporting evidence from Iraq, and to a lesser degree, Afghanistan. Iraq and Afghanistan may not provide a perfect blueprint for future operations; however, they are likely to be far more representative of future conflict than past conventional war assumptions and experiments used to validate the current force structure design. The Army cannot afford to ignore the operational lessons of recent history. Successes from the Gulf War resonated throughout the 1990s while military difficulties elsewhere were largely ignored. Continued transformation and change are needed to keep Army ground forces relevant in the future.
There exists a dizzying array of terms to describe today's military operations. For example, operations in Iraq and Afghanistan are often described by a variety of names such as post-conflict stabilization operations, counter-insurgency operations, and stability operations, highlighting the difficulty of clear naming conventions. This paper draws from sources that use many terms interchangeably to include: irregular warfare (IW), low intensity conflict (LIC), small wars, peace-keeping, counterinsurgency (COIN), stabilization and reconstruction (S&R), post-conflict stabilization, military operations other than war (MOOTW), nation-building, stability and support operations (SASO), and military support to stability, security, transition, and reconstruction (SSTR) operations.
While the military attempts to articulate doctrinal differences between these terms, they are used interchangeably by academia, policy makers, civil government agencies, and non-government organizations. Although they carry recognized connotations, there is no 
20
21
22
24
22 DoD, IW JOC, 7.
23 DoD, IW JOC, 4.
24 According to the IW JOC, "insurgency and counterinsurgency are at the core of IW," while "FID is thus the external support component of counterinsurgency," and "SSTRO are an essential component of counterinsurgency campaigns (8)." It is currently not defined in the Joint Publication or Army terms references but encompasses a broad spectrum of operations other than major combat against a conventional, state enemy. Many of these operations have an operational focus that is inherently political, not military, while tactical operations focus on the population. For further discussion regarding the current doctrinal debate over Irregular War see, Chief Warrant Officer 4 Jeffrey L. Hasler, "Defining War: New doctrinal definitions of irregular, conventional and unconventional warfare," Special Warfare Journal, March-April (2007): 19-25.  capabilities that this paper attempts to identify with this study are similarly applicable to all three missions within the larger term of irregular warfare. This paper may interchange some terms due their associations from varying sources, but will attempt to keep doctrinal terms in line with Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, 
25
26
We imagine the brewing threats of 'Perfect Storms' of failed governments, ethnic stratification, religious violence, humanitarian disasters, catalytic regional crises, and the proliferation of dangerous weapons. We see lagging economies, unintegrated and disenfranchised populations, transnational crime, illicit sub-national power structures, and destabilizing bulges of uneducated and unemployed youth. 
28
growing bifurcation within the defense community between those that see U.S. 
27
28 Remarks at the Joint Worldwide Planning Conference, Edelweiss Conference Center Garmisch, Germany, November 30, 2005, as quoted in the IW JOC, 9.  involvement in irregular war as something to avoid at all costs and therefore not taken seriously; and those that acknowledge the difficulty, but necessity to properly prepare for these conflicts.
The paramount issue facing defense planners is not what sort of missions the United States military would like to conduct or avoid. But, discerning what missions it will have to perform, and performing those missions well.
Future adversaries from non-state actors to regional threats will likely utilize irregular strategies to oppose U.S. military strengths. Even if the United States' Army continues to weigh its resources against the potential rise of a conventional competitor, the Army must not only prepare for major combat operations, but the post-conflict stabilization requirements that would follow. Unlike the relatively stable environments of post-conflict Italy, Germany, and Japan, the likelihood of post-conflict instability will continue to exist in the foreseeable future. 
29
In the 1990s while the U.S. military continued to train against Soviet-based doctrine, a quiet but growing audience began to question the nature of future threats. 
30
29
32
34
Published almost concurrently with Hammes' earlier work, Robert Kaplan's "Coming of Anarchy,"
36
32
33 "4 th Generation Warfare" was coined by Thomas X. Hammes, "The Evolution of War: The Fourth Generation," Marine Corps Gazette, September, 1994, http://www.d-n-i.net/fcs/hammes.htm. 
34
35
more attention then it was once given. To understand conflict over the next fifty years, he stated, "one must understand environmental scarcity, cultural and racial clash, geographic destiny, and the transformation of war." He cites a world population booming from 5.5 billion to more than 9 billion, the depletion and/or degradation of natural resources, and population movements that will breed crime and fuel existing hatreds such as those described by Samuel Huntington. 
37
38
Russia or China in central Asia will unlikely display symptoms of the linear, high-tech, platform-based combat that shaped current resource and organizational imperatives.
As the economic gap grows between information-age states and many preindustrial societies, citizens of the latter will become more inclined to rebel against weak or corrupt states and other sources of injustice. 
39
42
43
45
However, the visions of Van Creveld, Kaplan, Hammes, and others have finally become established policy. Today, one of the most commonly used diagrams found throughout current DoD policy documents and presentations is the following quadrant chart (see Figure 
1
Most of the national security policy documents today call for the military, namely the Army, to be better capable of combating irregular opponents. However, a frequent caveat within defense policy documents is that the military cannot sacrifice its ability to deter, and if necessary conduct major conventional combat operations. Though necessary, this has led to peripheral changes to the Army's force design, providing marginal enhancements to better its performance at stability operations without giving up its ability to do what it does best-large scale conventional combat operations. While procurement budgets may be finite, force structure options are not necessarily a zero-sum game. The potential need exists to make the Army, or major elements of it, optimal for irregular conflict, while remaining capable of conducting conventional operations overseas.
Critics of the Army's present-day philosophical emphasis on counterinsurgency and stability operations point towards Iran, China, North Korea, and Russia as potential conventional threats to be wary of in the future. Numerous strategists and military leaders see irregular warfare as a passing fancy. They believe difficulties in Iraq are the ghosts of poor planning and idealized foreign policy-mistakes never to be made again.
One senior defense planner called counterinsurgency "passe," saying it would be a once- terrorist tactics against the U.S. and its allies' interests abroad. 
53
Hammes is adamant about this last point:
Every potential opponent has observed the Gulf War, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and operations in Afghanistan. They understand that if the United States is provided clear targets, no matter how well fortified, those targets will be destroyed. Just as certainly, they have seen the success of the Somalis and the Sandinistas. They have also seen and are absorbing the continuing lessons of Chechnya, Bosnia, Afghanistan, and Iraq. They will not fight with conventional means. 
54
55
56
October 26, 2006. 57
59
As demonstrated in Iraq, war does not end when the last enemy tank is destroyed. The U.S. cannot hope for future armistice treaties. The Army must truly institutionalize tactics, doctrine, and organizational lessons being learned in Afghanistan and Iraq today.
The 9/11 attacks and post-invasion difficulties in Iraq and Afghanistan have awakened the U.S. government to the realities of twenty-first century threats. This has resulted in numerous policy changes and national security directives that encourage further changes within the Army beyond "transformations" initial blueprint.
The 2005 National Defense Strategy encouraged defense planners to redefine past conceptions of general purpose forces, noting: "our [U.S.] experiences in the war on terrorism points to the need to reorient our military forces to contend with such irregular challenges more effectively." 
61
59
60
61
for a host of emerging threats. The QDR notes that "U.S. forces are primarily organized, trained, educated, and equipped for traditional warfighting," acknowledging the need to maintain such functions in the event of major conventional warfare. However, the QDR also recognizes that military forces are not as capable of conducting protracted IW in the current or envisioned threat environments and recommends "rebalancing general purpose forces" to improve their capability to operate against adversaries who are attempting to, or already have mobilized their populations against us. 62 Specifically, the QDR recognizes the need for "multipurpose forces to train, equip, and advise indigenous forces; deploy and engage with partner nations; conduct irregular warfare; and support security, stability, transition, and reconstruction operations." 
63
65
The 2006 QDR addresses this gap. In the 2006 edition, the "lesser" types of contingencies became the focal point and "decisive" campaigns were replaced with an emphasis on "distributed, long-duration operations." The ability to compete in conventional campaigns became overshadowed by a desperate need to develop 62 DoD, IW 
JOC, 11;
DoD, QDR 2006
. 63 DoD, QDR 2006, 23. 64
65
66
ability to coordinate efforts with civilian agencies abroad, oftentimes in a supporting capacity. However, until significant reforms are made throughout the inter-agency, the least bit of which is a legal mandate to serve in hostile assignments when directed (similar to the Uniformed Code of Military Justice), service members will have to expect to carry the propensity of effort in a hostile or semi-permissive environment. The question is whether they are prepared to do so?
The 
The previous chapter discussed traditional and irregular threat concepts under consideration by military planners. It outlined strategy and policy changes that should be the impetus for the Army's force structure decisions. This chapter describes the Army's current force structure and shows how it came to be. First, an overview of the revolution in military affairs (RMA) discussions and their theoretical underpinnings establish a foundation on which to better understand the assumptions that led to the Army's current modularity design. Second, an overview of the more current transformation planning and policy documents will articulate the intent behind the Army's latest organizational design, the brigade combat Team (BCT). A description of the BCT design will identify capability gaps when the BCTs are tasked to conduct irregular operations such as counterinsurgency and stability operations.
Post-Cold War changes in international relations, a changing threat environment, echoed similar concepts of speed, precision, and information superiority in his 1998
Proceedings article that popularized the term "network-centric warfare" (NCW). 
78
On October 12, 1999, Army Chief of Staff General Eric K. Shinseki announced the formal initiation of the Army's transformation plan.
To adjust the condition of the Army to better meet the requirements of the next century, we articulate this vision: 'Soldiers on point for the nation transforming this, the most respected army in the world, into a strategically responsive force that is dominant across the full spectrum of operations.' With that overarching goal to frame us, the Army will undergo a major transformation… 79
The transformation plan had three elements: the legacy force, objective force, and interim force (see Figure 
4
80
Cebrowski credited the term "network-centric warfare" to a speech given by the Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Jay Johnson, (U.S. Naval Institute Annapolis Seminar and 123d Annual Meeting, April 23, 1997).
79 Dennis Steele, "The Army Magazine Hooah Guide to Army Transformation," Army Magazine, 2001, http://www.ausa.org/PDFdocs/Hooah_Guide_web.pdf. "Full-Spectrum" at this point referred to a spectrum of conflict, from low intensity threats to high intensity ones. This was later changed to refer to a spectrum of operations, including stability, offensive, and defensive actions. 
80
procurement was seen as a way of balancing the risks of an uncertain future strategic environment and the possibility that future technologies would fail to meet planners' expectations. Early planners envisioned two decades of development that would result in a futuristic objective force around 2020.
The legacy force consisted of the Army's traditional heavy and mechanized infantry forces that would be sustained and continually modernized with new technology.
Maintaining this force was seen as a hedge against the rise of potential near-peer competitors and would continue to be the nation's muscle in major combat operations requiring the mobility, survivability, and firepower of heavy armor. The legacy platforms could also serve as platforms for new vehicle mounted technologies. 81 81 To this day, FCS experiments have mostly been conducted on the M1 and M2 variant vehicles because of significant power and weight requirements. Already, discussions of a revolutionary homogeneous future force in 2020 are being replaced with an acknowledgement that legacy platforms will be part of the force structure for much longer. Furthermore, the creation of the Maneuver Warfare Center of Excellence at Fort Benning, GA, between 2006-2016 will combine the Army's infantry and armor training programs. While this provides for greater training synergies focused on traditional combined-arms maneuver battlefield, it may encourage education programs tailored to vehicular platforms, and lessen the infantry's needed focus on irregular threats and population-focused operations.
The interim force was the short-term focus of transformation, designed to consist of interim brigade combat teams (IBCTs) 82 that would fill the gap between light and heavy forces. They offered greater mobility, survivability, and firepower than light units, and could self-sustain for longer periods of time; but were designed to be light enough to be rapidly transported by aircraft. This force was advertised as being "full spectrum capable." 83 While IBCT conversions were first initiated to fill strategic mobility and initial entry gaps identified during Operation Desert Shield, it also stood out as being particularly suited for small-scale contingencies, especially those in urban terrain.
The objective force was designed to be the gateway to the future. "The Objective Force will combine the deployability of light forces with the lethality, tactical mobility, and survivability of heavy forces." 84 Replacing Force XXI, 85 the Future Combat System (FCS) family of vehicles, weapons, and sensors, was its focus. This system was advertised as being a fully networked Army of soldiers with enhanced capabilities, armed platforms that are lighter but stronger than today's vehicles, unmanned ground and air vehicles, and a network of manned and unmanned sensors.
The Army's transformation was accelerated by the Secretary of Defense, Donald
Rumsfeld, following the attacks of September 11th. He issued the Department of Defense's Transformation Planning Guidance in April 2003 stating:
82 Name later changed to Stryker Brigade Combat Teams (SBCTs) after the wheeled vehicle used as the units' primary mobility platform.
83 "Full spectrum capable" previously referred to the spectrum of conflict from low intensity to high intensity. The term has since been redefined to indicate a spectrum of operations that transitions between offense, defense, and stability operations capabilities. The term has been sufficiently watered down and all units are now considered "full spectrum capable."
84 Alan Vick, David Orletsky, Bruce Pirnie, Seth Jones, The Stryker Brigade Combat Team, Rethinking Strategic Responsiveness and Assessing Deployment Options (Santa Monica: RAND, 2002). 
85
86
87
88
Largely influenced by Cebrowski's popularized notions of warfare, Rumsfeld's guidance for the military's transformation was depicted as "fundamentally joint, networkcentric, distributed forces capable of rapid decision superiority and massed effects across the battlespace." 
89
The roots of this proclamation, and its obvious shortcomings, can be seen in Breaking the Phalanx. Macgregor recognized the need for adaptable war fighting structures that must conduct a wide array of missions and discounted the "creation of new OOTW-specific [Operations Other Than War] military structures and training." 
91
92
Throughout the RMA and transformation discussions, an implicit assumption was that soldiers trained and units specifically organized for close conventional combat could 90 DoD, Transformation Planning Guidance, 4. 
91
92
In constructive computer simulation exercises designed to "validate" the new design, near perfect intelligence permitted centralized targeting of large conventional forces such that long-range rocket artillery, Apache helicopters, and other fires compensated for the division's reduction in combat power. The new division was "smaller" yet "more lethal" because the assumption of dominant knowledge gave the unit "situational understanding. 
93
In addition to testing scenarios and strategists' assumptions, a lack of emphasis on stability operations should not be surprising given its portrayal in the Army's previous doctrinal literature. FM 3-0, Operations, is the Army's flagship how-to-fight manual. 
94
In stability operations, close combat dominance is the principal means Army forces use to influence adversary actions. In all cases, the ability of Army forces to engage in close combat, combined with their willingness to do so, is the decisive factor in defeating an enemy or controlling a situation. 
95
93
94 Department of the Army, FM 3-0, Operations (Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office,  June 2001). This manual is currently under revision. The updated version, Full-Spectrum Operations, places greater emphasis on stability operations than its predecessor. 
95
operations, the Army has painfully realized that it is rarely sufficient to achieve sustainable battlefield success. In response to the problems facing troops in Afghanistan and Iraq, the Army published a manual on counterinsurgency in December of 2006. 
96
97
98
98
the "rubric of transformation." 99 While the DoD has made adjustments to its post-9/11 training strategies and doctrine, its basic organizational structure at the tactical level remains wed to antiquated defense strategies. Today's transformation is not wrong; it's just not enough.
A New Direction?
While Shinseki used the 1999 AUSA conference to initiate the Army's transformation to a more expeditionary force, Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates used the same venue on October 10, 2007 to budge the U.S. Army in a different direction than his predecessor. 
100
Army soldiers can expect to be tasked with reviving public services, rebuilding infrastructure and promoting good governance…all these socalled 'nontraditional' capabilities have moved into the mainstream of military thinking, planning and strategy, where they must stay.
A recent Army Times article further highlights the disconnect between the current operating environment and the force-mix available to meet its demands. 101 
99
100 For quotes and commentary from his presentation, see Julian E. Barnes and Peter Spiegel, "Rethinking the U.S. Army," Los Angeles Times, October 10, 2007; Barnes, "Gates Urges Funds for a Smarter Army," Los Angeles Times, October 11, 2007; Lolita C. Baldor, "Gates Envisions an Army Remade to Fight Future Wars," Seattle Post-Intelligencer, October 11, 2007; and David S. Cloud, "Gates Says Military Faces More Unconventional Wars," New York Times, October 11, 2007.  101 Michelle Tan, "Deciding Who Goes, Where and When," Army Times, October 14, 2007.
Commander's in Iraq and Afghanistan are increasingly requesting "designer units," force requests tailored to their current environments. According to Colonel Edge Gibbons,
As [the] theater has matured, the additional capabilities required often don't match existing Army inventory for certain niche capabilities that are required based on the operating environment…It decreases readiness of the Army because it's breaking units. For every designer unit we make, that's one or more units that we break to meet that requirement.
While the Army touts the flexibility of the current modular design, it is ill-suited to meet the demands of its current theaters. Instead of adjusting the Army's force structure to embrace mission tailoring and modularity as advertised, FORSCOM is discouraging the use of "designer units." Instead of changing the force mixtures available, the Army seems to be telling commanders in the field, "make do with what you have." Regardless of the scale of today's conflict, the Army should better tailor its force design to the current operating environment, assuming (as Secretary Gates does) that this will be more indicative of future conflict then previous assumptions foretold.
Thus far, early planning assumptions and operational imperatives of the Army's "transformation" have been examined. The next section will be a descriptive overview of the Army's modular brigade concept.
The • Modular brigades can "plug and play" with different corps and division HQs.
Units are decentralized, leader-enabled command and control.
The brigade combat team (BCT) is organized to include stability operations capabilities. 
103
104
105
• Either a functional or multi-functional modular brigade will augment the BCT to enhance capabilities.
The brigade combat teams are the principal tactical units of the modular Army.
They are designed specifically for major combat operations: "Their core mission is to close with the enemy by means of fire and maneuver to destroy or capture enemy forces, or to repel their attacks by fire, close combat, and counterattack." 106 While optimized for major, conventional combat, they are reportedly "capable" of conducting stability operations, and with augmentation can be tailored for a wide variety of missions.
Although  
5
106 Army, FM 3-90.6, 2-1. The manual explicitly states, "BCTs are optimized for MCO (major combat [read conventional] operations)."
107 Army, FM 3-90.6, A-1.
108 Army, FM 3-90.6, viii. The interim naming conventions were designed to prevent force designers from leaning on past references as the Army was trying to reduce top-level layers of command (see DoD, Transformation Roadmap, 3-5). Since publication of the Transformation Roadmap, the Army has replaced its abstract naming conventions of Unit of Action (UA), Unit of Employment (UEx), and Unit of Employment (UEy) with the legacy naming conventions of Brigade Combat Team and Division. All levels of command from Company to Corps present in the prior system are maintained in the new one. Also, Stryker Brigades, named after the vehicular platform for which it was designed, have gone through a series of naming conventions to include "interim," "initial," and "medium" brigades.
109 Army, Guide to Modularity, Chapter 1.  The heavy brigades are explicitly designated as a hedge for major combat operations until FCS/Objective Force technology has matured. While there are critical applications for tanks in certain aspects of IW, armor is generally not the ideal force choice for population-focused operations. Although there are specific applications for heavy forces that will be explored later, the HBCT will not be the focus of this analysis.
Instead, the Stryker and Infantry BCTs will provide the comparative baseline for further structural changes necessary to serve the Army's irregular warfare requirements.
The Stryker brigades were designed to fill the strategic gap that existed between light and heavy forces. This gap was described earlier when the 82 nd Airborne drew a line in the sands of Saudi Arabia during Operation Desert Shield. Light forces offered rapid, strategic mobility but didn't have tactical mobility or reliable staying power once deployed. Heavy forces had the protection and firepower to combat conventional enemies, but took too long to deploy. On October 12, 1999, General Eric Shinseki initiated the transformation process to field medium-weight brigades that could deploy worldwide within four days. 
114
• It doesn't have the protection or firepower of the HBCT, but more so than the IBCT.
It is easier to deploy than the HBCT, but requires more aircraft than an IBCT.
The infantry brigade combat teams are the manpower-intensive units within the Army's force structure. Limited in organic mobility, their primary method of movement is by foot, making the infantry ideally suited for population-focused interactions.  The IBCT is composed of approximately 3,400 soldiers organized into two infantry battalions, a reconnaissance squadron, a fires battalion, a brigade special troops battalion (BSTB), and a brigade support battalion (BSB). The BSTB and BSB are slightly smaller, but organized similarly to their respective battalions as described in the HBCT.
According to the Army, functional and multi-functional support brigades can augment division and corps headquarters, or integrate necessary specialists into combat brigades so the brigades may be specifically tailored to a given mission. The multifuntional brigades were designed to support various levels of command.  
Similar to the aviation and artillery multi-functional support brigades, the functional support brigades are grouped by branch-specific single function capabilities.
They are similar in design to the previous force structure's division support brigades.
The planned type and numbers of functional support brigades are listed in Figure 
10
According to a recent briefing, "As a general rule, functional support brigades are assigned, attached, or OPCON to a theatre-level command or Army HQ and support theater-wide operational requirements." 119 However, as a secondary purpose, these brigades are available to "provide reinforcing tactical capabilities to the brigade combat teams and the modular support brigades." 120 
119
120
So far this description has provided an operational overview of the modular brigade concept. To understand capabilities below the brigade level, this chapter will now turn to three functional areas especially relevant to irregular warfare: intelligence; security; and civil-military operations such as information operations (to include public affairs and psychological operations), civil affairs, and civil engineering. These three areas provide the guiding framework for the remainder of this study's analysis and recommendations.
Brigades are now staffed with a sizeable intelligence staff and an  Capabilities allow brigade-level intelligence staffs to access national intelligence databases from DIA, CIA, and other agencies. Previously this capability was reserved for the division level. 
122
2004
The newly designed MI company consists of approximately 120 personnel. 
123
Typically, it has three dedicated two-man HUMINT teams (out of a brigade of approximately 3,500 soldiers), and two prophet SIGINT collection systems organic to its task organization. The SBCT brigade's MI company is similar to others already described except its number of HUMINT teams is more robust and the UAV platoon is embedded with the RSTA squadron (see Figure 
11 above
124
As part of the Army's modular design, the infantry brigades lost a maneuver battalion, gaining a reconnaissance squadron with half the manpower in its place. On a traditional battlefield, the reconnaissance squadrons are designed to be the "eyes and ears" of the brigade commander, collecting intelligence so he can conduct effective maneuver by his infantry or armor battalions. The IBCT reconnaissance squadron consists of 304 soldiers organized into a headquarters troop and three recon troops of approximately 70 soldiers (as compared to a 600 to 700 soldier maneuver battalion). Two of the troops are motorized using armored HMMWVs, while one is a dismounted recon troop. The reconnaissance squadrons are mostly manned by enlisted scout specialists (19D) in lieu of infantrymen (11B) and their officers are predominantly armor officers (see Figure 
12
123 Army, Guide to Modularity, 7-8, 7-9.
124 Army, FM 3-21. 
31, 18. 125
A battalion of approximately 600 to 700 soldiers only has seven to eight dedicated intelligence personnel assigned (see Figure 
14
Tracking current operations, preparing intelligence reports, directing subordinate collection efforts, conducting pattern analysis, developing and updating extensive social network diagrams, screening detainee, questioning informants, and conducting counter-intelligence operations provide the section more work than it can typically accomplish. There are no trained intelligence specialists below the battalion level although most units operating today have assembled out-of-hide, informal information processing and analysis teams.
Figure 
14
Security is the cornerstone for all other aspects of stabilization operations and counterinsurgency. Therefore, the ability of military units to secure terrain, capture and kill enemies, and guard populations is still the dominate activity for military units operating in hostile environments. The Army's ability to distribute firepower and move to a position of advantage over conventional enemies is called maneuver. Tanks, Stryker vehicles, and foot soldiers are all designed to dominate in certain environmental and threat conditions as described earlier. Irregular warfare is no different. The type of soldiers and vehicles used to accomplish this purpose must be carefully analyzed.
The 129 Known as Light Medium Tactical Vehicles (LMTVs) or their earlier models, the "5-ton" and "2½ton" trucks. They were designed for rear area troop and supply transport. Recent operations in Iraq and Afghanistan have displayed the vulnerability of these vehicles. In combat zones, they have been largely replaced with variants that have cab and side armor, but the troop carrying compartment is still uncovered. Soldiers are extremely vulnerable during transport. For example, seven soldiers from the 82 nd Airborne were killed on September 10, 2007 when their LMTV overturned after a wheel blew. New vehicles are being tested and the MRAP (to be explained later) is finally being fielded in increased numbers. 
130
The Stryker infantry battalions consist of three rifle companies with three rifle platoons each. Each company also has a mobile gun system platoon (MGS),
131
The Stryker RSTA squadron is larger than the light version with three troops of vehicle-mounted recon companies, an organic surveillance and sensor troop, and three chemical reconnaissance vehicles. The SBCT also has an anti-tank company that provides stand-off against enemy armor with three platoons of three Stryker anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) vehicles.
The new BCTs were designed with a military police (MP) platoon of approximately 25 soldiers (out of the brigade's approximate 3,500). This platoon serves many roles, but as chapter five will show, its exact function has been a source of frequent disagreement. The MPs perform numerous duties to include:
• maneuver and mobility support consisting of checkpoints and traffic control for large-scale troop movements • area security for the brigade headquarters • law enforcement operations internal to the brigade • internment resettlement and detainee operations • police intelligence operations Additionally, the brigade has a provost marshal (PM) assigned for planning and coordinating military police operations.
Brigade headquarters are designed to allow flexible staff organizations tailored to the BCT commander's leadership style and the unit's mission. Typically, the BCT staff organizes into six functional and integrating cells. They are as follows: operations; sustainment; command, control, communications, and computers (C4); intelligence;
information operations; and civil-military operations (see Figure 
16
132
Figure 
16
The S-7 is the brigade's coordinating staff officer to ensure information operations are integrated into the planning process. He works with other principal staff members to plan deception, psychological operations, and disseminate information to the local populace. Most brigades rely on ad hoc cells to fuse information operations themes and plans, or utilize the field artillery commanders as "effects coordinators," who are tasked with this duty.
The S-9 is the only civil affairs officer organic to the brigade. He is responsible for advising the brigade commander and operations officer on the relationship between the brigade and the civilian population. Additionally, the S-9
integrates attached civil affairs units into the brigade and assists them in the establishment of civil-military operations center(s).
Currently, the only active duty civil affairs units reside in Special Operations Command. The civil affairs community has proposed to increase its size by adding a fourth company to each battalion, creating the manning positions for a standing civil military operations center (CMOC) in each company, and increasing the overall force by over 188 teams. 
133
17
134
Functional specialists would plan and coordinate specific areas of stabilization. Also, a conceptual civil information management cell would collate information regarding population demographics and infrastructure to establish an operational-level common operating picture.
The 
This chapter was an ambitious attempt to present the pivotal moments of the RMA discussion, and more specifically, the Army's recent "transformation" concepts.
Even a cursory review highlights the obvious incongruence between "transformation's" initial assumptions and its current rhetoric. Difficulties in Iraq and Afghanistan have 
135
136 Army, FM 3-90.6, A-8.
shaken transformation discussions from their technologically-centric roots. 
137
138
While the Army was beginning to implement its brigade modularity conversions, post-invasion difficulties in Afghanistan and Iraq were becoming all too apparent. As a result of September 11, 2001 and the military excursions that followed, a flurry of books, articles, and studies on grand strategy, counterinsurgency, stability operations, advising, investing more in the "human workforce." While the Army contends that its current general purpose, "full-spectrum" force accounts for the demands of stability operations, other analysts disagree and provide a wide array of policy and structural alternatives to consider.
Thomas Barnett's books seek to explain the growing interdependence of globalization, financial markets, and the military. In order to expand economic opportunities and social development to the underdeveloped areas of the world, Barnett advocates for the U.S. to adopt a preemptive dual-strategy of applying military pressure and development incentives in states along the Core-Gap divide. 
147
148
149
150
147 Thomas Barnett, The Pentagon's New Map (New York: Penguin Group, 2004). Barnett divides the world's nations into two definitive categories. The "Functioning Core" (Core) nations are modernized, have effective communications networks, and are connected through economic interdependence. The world's "Non-Integrating Gap" (Gap) is not integrated into the rest of the world and as such is unable to reap the benefits of globalization. Barnett surmises that countries in the Gap will continue to be defined by poverty, inter-state and intra-state violence, and human rights calamities until they are connected to the Core countries. Connectedness will allow the free exchange of "mass media, ideas, capital, goods, technology, and people". 
148
149 This military service would be poised to combat hostile militaries, remove governments that threaten world stability, and defend other Core countries. It would encompass most of the Air Force, Navy, heavy armor and artillery from the Army, and missile defense as described in Barnett's follow on book, Blueprint for Action (New York: Berkley Publishing Group, 2005). 
150
James Ellsworth supports the need for SSTR capabilities in the Department of Defense, but differs from Barnett's call for a separate cabinet-level agency. 
151
Binnendijk and Johnson make a compelling argument for military reform. Their ideas are well founded, yet the arbitrary number of two S&R divisions would offer marginal assistance to large-scale, sustained contingencies. In the absence of large contingencies, these forces would likely maintain an operational tempo exceptionally high as compared to conventional forces reserved for major combat. Binnendijk and Johnson are correct in identifying some of the skill sets that are required during stability operations such as civil affairs, military police, medics, and construction engineers.
While these skills are essential to sustained irregular operations, they are predominately found in the reserves where mobilization may be constrained by political infighting and collective training might prove difficult. Furthermore, the DoD's propensity to place these capabilities predominately in the reserves has not changed with the new force design.
Charles Barry advocates for a similar theatre-level stability operations Joint Task Force composed of military police, civil affairs, engineer, and medical battalions integrated into joint stability operations brigade-level task forces. 
153
18
157 Watson, 11.  specific forces. Guerrilla threats and insurgent movements will threaten the civil initiatives of stabilization if not properly met with adequate security forces. These 
One of the most recent, and specific proposals to altering the Army's force structure has been presented by Andrew F. Krepinevich, Nadia Schadlow, and Marin J.
Strmecki. 
159
158
159
The proposal recommends the creation of Military Assistance and Advisory Groups The Army Action Plan for Stability Operations includes a recommendation to assess Krepinevich's ideas. 
160
According to the Army G-3/5/7, "the roles of the MAAG are being largely subsumed by the JTF…the mission of the FLAGs has been addressed through modularity in the BCT and CSB structure and full spectrum operations doctrine… [and] those programs outlined for execution by the CORDs have been subsumed by the CA, USACE, and the interagency."
161
Yet, for all its ingenuity, Krepinevich's concept yields questions about coordination. Similar to Barry's proposal, each of these organizations would have people working in the same geographical areas. Ad hoc working groups, fusion cells, liaison officers, and committees would have a difficult time coordinating operations in a given area.
Stove-piped, compartmentalized units would likely discourage effective information sharing, collaboration, and unity of effort.
Thomas Hammes not only articulates an acute assessment of the future threat environment, his book emphasizes the need for a force structure that embraces future unpredictability and is organized with greater built-in flexibility. 
162
Maintaining force structure balances to excel against guerrilla street fighters and mechanized conventional enemies. 
162
163
164
• Easily deployable and prepositioned expeditionary forces.
Large infantry and military police units to "secure and pacify both heavily populated areas and remote areas" after the conventional fight is over.
Hammes further notes that the infantry units must be "capable of operating as small units to patrol, outpost, and finally to live with and advise counterpart units of an indigenous force." • Robust intelligence sections with an "emphasis on HUMINT and cultural intelligence rather than technical intelligence."
Increased numbers of civil affairs capable of operating joint, interagency, and in hostile environments. They must be able to handle critical governmental service functions and transition these functions to other agencies and indigenous offices.
Forces must be networked, flexible, and able to operate on commander's guidance without direct command and control.
While the idea of transformation is evolving, the Army's organizational structure below the brigade level is not. Many theories have been proposed to enable the United States to conduct more effective stability and counterinsurgency operations. These authors make sound arguments for change and provide generic theoretical models.
However, they propose a radically-bifurcated force structure that could lessen the Army's strategic flexibility and create unnecessary (and costly) force redundancy; they do not offer enough detail from which to make acute recommendations for the Army's restructuring at the tactical level; or their concepts promote highly-compartmentalized functional groupings that would require tedious and centralized collaboration to properly integrate diverse capability effects. Because these analysts are providing conceptual designs for strategic or operational levels, the subtleties of ground combat are ignored.
Most of the proposals for bifurcations in force structure that establish specific cabinets, joint commands, or divisions designed exclusively for stability operations, ignore (or at least marginalize) the hostile threats involved in these fragile environments. Some of the studies mistakenly suggest a sequential approach to military operations with clear transitions between combat forces and stabilization forces within specific time and spatial divides. The divide between combat operations and stability operations is not as clear as in the days of uniformed symmetric battles between conventional forces, often ending in symbolic and internationally recognized surrender agreements. Even with "security augmentation," many of these proposals do not place enough emphasis on proper security and population control, a critical condition to further political, economic, and civil development. 
165
Secretary Gates' military assistant, Lieutenant General Peter Chiarelli and the current Secretary of the Army, General Casey, reportedly reject any proposals for plans that discuss optimizing any portions of the Army for irregular warfare. 
166
The next chapter will begin to explore these opportunities. 
165
166 Peter Spiegel and Julian E. Barnes, "Rethinking the U.S. Army," Los Angeles Times, October 10, 2007. See also, LTG Peter W. Chiarelli and Stephen M. Smith, "Learning from our Modern Wars: The Imperatives of Preparing for a Dangerous Future," Military Review, September-October (2007). Chiarelli states, "We simply don't have the resources to divide the military into 'combat' and 'stability' organizations. Instead we must focus on developing full-spectrum capabilities across all organizations in the armed forces."
There's much more of a recognition within the Department of Defense that transformation has to be cultural transformation, organizational transformation, transforming the kind of skill sets that we have. But…I'm not sure that I see it actually being carried out to the extent that it ought to be. 
167
169
170
Then, two broad conceptual issues of organizational design are applied to the Brigade 169 DAMO-SSO, Army Action Plan, xx. The plan establishes the Stability Operations Division (DAMO-SSO), organized under the Army G-3/5/7 Strategy, Plans, and Policy Directorate, as the Army lead for improving stability operations (SO) capability. The plan outlines a series of tasks such as recommending reviews of doctrine, specialized training programs, and staff capacities for SO planning. 
170
171
Combat team: specialization (also known as task differentiation) and integration of capabilities. Related closely to integration are discussions regarding degrees of centralization within an organization. Lastly, these concepts will be applied to the three critical areas of analysis identified earlier in the paper: intelligence operations, security and mobility, and civil-military operations.
To fight effectively under conditions of uncertainty and complexity, organizations must be flexible and agile. Flatter, or less hierarchical organizations are, in general, more capable of operating in uncertain environments than hierarchical organizations. Diverse capabilities at lower levels of command, to include all-service and all-arms, will increase the effectiveness, albeit not the efficiency of the force. 
172
173
In his seminal book, The Structuring of Organizations, Henry Mintzberg described numerous frameworks for organizations dependent on the amount of standardized work or skills necessary, levels of formalization, and the amount of training required for its operational employees. 
174
172
axes as depicted in Figure 
19
175
Additionally, the environment can be viewed along an axis measuring the work an organization performs on a scale between simple and complex, corresponding to the diversity and difficulty of tasks being performed. Greater complexity usually drives organizations to decentralize authority and resources while encouraging greater skill specialization. When the environment is stable and tasks are simple and predictable, vertical coordination allows greater predictability and resource efficiency through standardized work processes. When the environment is dynamic and an organization's work becomes more complex, its employees must be able to communicate laterally, mutually adjusting off each other's successes and setbacks. Top-down directives work poorly in this environment. 
176
177
174 Henry Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations (New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1979).
175 Diagram modified from its original source: Eric Jansen, "Mintzberg Model," (PowerPoint presentation, organizational theory course, Department of Defense Analysis, Naval Postgraduate School, October 14, 2006). 
176
177
As outlined in Chapter II, the external environment has changed. Over the last century, the United States Army has explicitly prepared itself for state-versus-state warfare on linear battlefields. 
178
Resources and authorities should become more decentralized.
Irregular warfare requires an extensive list of new tasks to individual soldiers and leaders as well as collective proficiencies of the units. that "situational understanding was best at the lowest levels."
180
In an online article, Captain Jeremy Gwinn states "in today's military, the requirement to conduct tasks far outside traditional specialties is an accepted reality."
181
As a former company commander, he recommends "companies and platoons develop specialized capabilities organically. This is the primary level of activity in counterinsurgency and the level where tactical wins or losses contribute to the strategic outcome." Gwinn recognizes the significant role CA, HUMINT, PSYOP, and other specialized units can play: "men and women in these units are specifically trained and absolutely critical to success." However, he cautions that specialized teams are not always available and his soldiers "probably know the area and the people better than anyone else." He offers numerous techniques for tasking selected soldiers to perform specialized duties such as serving as a "political and cultural advisor." His suggestions exemplify the creative and adaptive spirit of the Army's small-unit ground forces; but they should be given the resource support to do their jobs more effectively.
Greater individual technical abilities and cognitive aptitudes are required as tasks become more complex. This demands greater task specialization with individuals requiring increased education and training in their respective areas of expertise. As militaries have modernized, specialization has consistently been integrated at lower echelons of command. An infantry company commander should have a firm understanding of fire support and mobility and counter-mobility operations, yet he has a designated fire support officer and a combat engineer squad leader that advise him on their respective capabilities. Company and battalion units require similar combined-arms integration with population-focused specialists.
Historical case studies, contemporary military doctrine, and a host of academic The modular BCT does feature some organic military police, intelligence collection, signal, and combat engineer assets that were not previously organic to combat brigades. However, the current design of these units represents a minimalist approach, barely capable of accomplishing the tasks necessary to support combat operations-let alone the additional tasks required for stabilization. 
185
Tightly controlled, top-down forms may work well in simple, stable situations but fail badly in more fluid and ambiguous ones. 
186
Furthermore, years of counterinsurgency study demonstrate the importance of small unit operations and intelligence work over large-scale conventional operations during irregular conflict. 
187
184
188
Battalion-sized and smaller unit operations are often most effective for countering insurgent activities. Counterinsurgents need to get as close as possible to the people to secure them and glean the maximum amount of quality information…Brigades are usually synchronizing headquarters…The sooner counterinsurgents can execute small-unit operations effectively, the better. 
189
188 Long,
[62]
[63]
Counterinsurgency,
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
Joint Urban Operations JIC,
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
192
193
194
Martin Van Creveld describes, "two basic ways of coping with uncertainty, centralization and decentralization." 195 He outlines numerous implications for the organization of successful combat units. One refers to command authorities. It is "the need for decision thresholds to be fixed as far down the hierarchy as possible, and for freedom of action at the bottom of the military structure." Another is for decentralized 
192
193 
Van Creveld,
Command in War,
274. 194
195 Van Creveld, Command in War, 274.  resources: "the need for an organization that will make such low-decision thresholds possible by providing self-contained units at a fairly low level." 
196
197
While this observation has merit and is shared by many, it seems there could also be an organizational issue. If brigade staffs are overwhelmed by shear volumes of information they're attempting to process and analyze, the staffs may need to be increased, placing an even larger demand on managerial skills. One military intelligence officer said his brigade integration and analysis cell had to sort over 700 pages of information "coming in from every direction" in a 12-hour period. …if there was a common trend it was for micro-management, with many hours devoted to daily briefings and updates. Planning tended to be staff driven and focused on processes rather than end effect. The net effect was highly centralized decision-making…it tended to discourage lower level initiative and adaptability, even when commanders consciously encouraged both. 199
These staffs are expected to process and analyze large amounts of information, synchronizing complex operations across a large geographic area. While senior-level effectiveness is critical, an alternative may be to decentralize greater responsibilities to lower commands.
If exercising central control over limited resources is one way of maximizing cost-effectiveness, distributing those resources among subordinate units may, by virtue of eliminating much of the need for planning, coordination, and internal communications, be another…distributing the resources may often be the more effective way to maximize cost-effectiveness. 
200
199 Alywin-Foster, "Changing the Army for Counterinsurgency Operations," MR, 6-7. 
200
A turbulent environment requires greater decentralization of authority and resources.
Increased complexity within the operating environment requires an increase in the number and diversity of tasks required of units and individuals.
While increased education and training curriculums can broaden leader skill sets (and should be aggressively pursued), training time is finite. The operating environment demands an increase in specialization.
These diverse capabilities should be integrated at lower levels of authority, allowing localized tailoring, while maintaining the means to coordinate across lateral and functional divides.
The remainder of this chapter will examine three functions essential to Army combat units conducting irregular warfare activities-intelligence operations, security and mobility, and civil-military operations. Each functional area will be examined to discern what degree of specialization is required and how those functions should be integrated to make the Army's tactical units more effective at conducting operations in irregular environments.
Because all echelons collect and use intelligence, all staffs are heavily involved in analysis. Units are simultaneously intelligence producers and consumers…battalion staffs often do not have the personnel to collect patrol debriefs, analyze incoming information from multiple sources, produce finished intelligence products, and disseminate products to appropriate consumers. In many cases brigade intelligence sections may also be inadequate for a COIN environment…There are also instances when analysts can be beneficial at the company level. 
201
202
202
Army intelligence manning allocations and processes are indicative of its legacy design. Information has traditionally been gathered through centrally controlled systems.
It was disseminated through a series of briefings and reports where the enemy situation was boiled down to an overlay of red symbols and numbers. Imagery and signals intelligence was critical to identifying the disposition, location and strength of enemy combat units and command nodes. When fighting conventional foes on linear battlefields, human intelligence was often limited to detainee questioning and the rare occurrence where civilians could provide current information on enemy troop movements. Population centers and their inhabitants were to be avoided.
Enemy situational templates were developed through a top-down process of collection and analysis with limited bottom-up refinement. Battalion intelligence specialists were often relegated to information conduits. In addition to technological methods, specialists trained in reconnaissance and surveillance collected information on the enemy situation and reported it to a staff that consolidated the "common operating picture." The staffs then sent this information to the maneuver units tasked with destroying the enemy elements. This process resulted in a present-day intelligence organizational structure that looks like an inverse pyramid. 
203
While the Army has embraced the mantra of "every soldier as a sensor", the current intelligence structure has only seen slight incremental changes from its Cold War predecessor. The 2004 Transformation Roadmap recognizes numerous changes necessary to an intelligence framework originally designed to provide top-down 
203
information to maneuver units in linear battle; yet none of these solutions have been implemented below the brigade-level. Some of these solutions include: 
204
As noted in Chapter III, there are no technologies or intelligence personnel organic to maneuver platoons or companies, while the battalion headquarters is unchanged and under-manned with a small intelligence staff of approximately six to eight personnel. 
205
Reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition (RSTA) squadrons boast intelligence and maneuver integration offering a possible exception to stove-piped intelligence structures. Yet, these capabilities are confined to a separate battalion within a maneuver brigade. This is indicative of an organization still defined by linear battlespace. The Guide to Modularity states, "the reconnaissance squadron should be used in a security role only when that cannot be avoided." 207 However, on the contemporary battlefield, this battalion is often given its piece of terrain identical to the other maneuver battalions, with each having similar tasks.
204 
DoD,
Transformation Roadmap,
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
206
207 Army, Guide to Modularity, 7-9.
There are numerous problems with the availability and allocation of current intelligence personnel and resources. (1) There are not enough specialists at lower command levels to process and properly analyze the extensive amounts of information being collected by the maneuver units. This information is bottle-necked at the battalionlevel. ( 
2
(3) Intelligence received by special collection units at brigade and higher levels may not be actionable, or even relevant without the contextual information a more localized maneuver commander or embedded analyst would have.
In irregular conflict, vast amounts of information are gathered at the lowest levels by soldiers walking the streets, and platoon, company, and battalion-level leaders who have daily contact with the population. Their observations and conversationsconducted during patrols, chance encounters, and planned meetings-provide critical human intelligence. Metz and Hoffman summarize this notion in their call for additional intelligence personnel at lower levels within the military's hierarchy: 
208
Counterinsurgencies are traditionally dispersed operations with units being responsible for given areas of terrain and population over an extended period of time.
Information has localized and sometimes timely context. Guerrillas may hide within the population, but not from it. Enemy situations often vary from neighborhood to neighborhood and town to town. Therefore, analysts must possess a detailed understanding of a given area's terrain, demographics, and population. For this reason, information must be processed and analyzed (at least initially) close to the point of collection and then passed to adjacent units.
In a recent survey of 109 combat-experienced company commanders, the "wartime experience" that ranked second-most challenging was developing their own "company-level intelligence cell or processes." 209 One of the company commanders surveyed stated:
Our battalion has the best S-2 I have ever worked with, yet higher intel still fails us daily. It's the nature of the war. In order to stay in touch with what is going on, I have always devoted hours daily to figuring out the terrain (people) in my sector. It's a challenge to develop my subordinates and my command post to appreciate the importance of company-level intel processes, but we have developed some good ideas on how to battle this monster. 
210
211
212
216
217
218 Lieutenant Colonel Chris Gibson, "Battlefield Victories and Strategic Success: The Path Forward in Iraq," Military Review, September-October (2006): 47-58.
While tactical units are developing information for their designated areas of operations, higher echelons must still fuse it into operational intelligence. 
219
Populations and enemy insurgents are not constrained by U.S. unit boundaries.
Collective databases and higher-level analysis should provide critical synthesis, and cross-reference intelligence from military units, host-nation security forces, other U.S. government agencies, and intelligence organizations. Yet, the higher one goes, the less familiar staffs are with the subtle intricacies of a given area and population.
A recent RAND study on counterinsurgency discussed the necessity for all-source intelligence coordination at every echelon of military command, recommending intelligence centers at each level of organization from the village and neighborhood, to the national level. 
220
Ollivant and Chewing believe unnecessary legal restrictions prevent seasoned leaders from tasking willing cohorts into gathering sensitive information. 
221
[Transformation] is enabling the tactical force with network connectivity so that [the] smartest people can collaboratively attack any problem from any location in the world. Do we still need MI assets and analysts forward? Absolutely! Does the analyst need to be standing in your tactical operations center in order to provide critical input as part of your collaborative team? Absolutely not! 222 Without a doubt, reach-back capabilities are already improving intelligence sharing. Yet, digital intelligence networks' databases are only as good as the quality of the information entered into them. The information must be continuously updated to remain relevant, and that has to be done by those who walk the streets. However, specialists can help refine unfiltered information before it overwhelms the system, and quickly identify information gaps. Databases and information management is another often-cited area of concern for practitioners of counterinsurgency with experience in Iraq and Afghanistan. Gibson stresses the usefulness of census data and detailed population databases. 
224
Attempting to update that information and continuously refine linkages between individuals is a full-time job. An online OPED by a returning soldier fumed at the lack of available common intelligence databases that could enable tactical units to laterally share information. "Multiple reporting chains, proprietary databases, and top-down solutions hinder our ability to understand our enemy," wrote Eric 
England. 225
226
The current design runs counter to Army doctrine, historical insights, and comments from the field. The following chapter will provide a detailed recommendation for creating enhanced intelligence capacities within company and battalion units. For now, the attention will turn to security operations-the necessary foundation for development and the establishment of an environment that allows accelerated transitions to civil and legitimate host-nation authorities.
Whatever weapon dominates the battlefield, there will always be times and places where vehicles cannot travel, shells and missiles cannot reach, and electronic sensors cannot sense. There will moreover, always be men who, for reasons of poverty or strategy, prefer to fight their battles at the retail rather than the wholesale level. For this reason, there will always be a place for first-class infantry. 227
The population is the center of gravity in irregular warfare. 
228
226
227
visible size of units and the amount of space they occupy) can accelerate resistance movements. While most security work must be done on foot, protected mobility is still critical. Soldiers will need to balance mobility, firepower, and survivability, while recognizing that "sometimes, the more force [that] is used, the less effective it is." 
229
The current Army structure is separated by a heavy, medium and light divide.
Each type of BCT is distinguished primarily by its mobility platform (or lack thereof).
According to the Army's Guide to Modularity, "all BCTs can execute full spectrum operations"-able to operate in any threat situation, geographical region, and task environment. 
230
231
232
229
230
231 Army, Guide to Modularity, figure 6-1, 6-2. Some analysts believe the Stryker Brigades were designed for stability-type operations as well as rapid mobility.
232 Six SBCTs out of 48 programmed Brigade Combat Teams. This allocation has changed little since General Shinseki and Secretary Thomas E. White's announcements during the 2002 AUSA Convention. Four SBCTs were originally allocated for Geographical Combatant Command requirements, one to reallocate an armored cavalry regiment capability to the XVIII Corps, and one to the National Guard as a strategic reserve. See Dennis Steele, "Realizing the Army Vision," ARMY Magazine, December 2002, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3723/is_200212/ai_n9156918/print. vehicles to promise every soldier a seat, SBCTs maintain a large signature and logistics requirements as compared with the lighter IBCTs. Forced-entry operations and major combat requires rapid mobility (both strategic and tactical) for the entire task force, but sustained operations permit smaller, modular pools of vehicles to support localized troop patrols. Furthermore, the SBCTs still lack the capacity for proper low-level intelligence operations and the many non-combat aspects of irregular warfare.
Heavy brigades make up forty percent of the active Army's BCTs. 
233
234
235
While many armored units have adapted themselves to counterinsurgency, the old adage "if your only tool is a hammer…" may apply. During the first six months of operations in Ramadi, the 1 st Brigade, 1 st Armored Division fired over five-hundred 120mm main gun rounds. Noting his unit was a "hammer," and everything looked like a "nail" to his soldiers, Colonel MacFarland eventually mandated that a major or above had to approve the use of a main gun round. 
236
that "tanks crush infrastructure" and his units' outposts became "swamps" due to broken water and sewage lines. 
237
238
Conversely, most of the infantrymen interviewed wished they had more vehicles offering greater mobility and increased protection from mines, improvised explosives, and small arms. While they believed dismounted operations were essential to interacting with the public, a lack of vehicles limited their flexibility to react to attacks and conduct protected rapid movements of troops for selected operations. Alternative medium-weight vehicles are now under development to fit the immediate needs in Iraq. 
239
In the next chapter, this paper will offer a standard force design to balance the demand for mobility, survivability, and firepower necessary for security duties, with the need for U.S. units to maintain a small signature and logistics tail. This lessens the population's resentment towards foreign troops and allows greater flexibility and autonomy for units operating in persistent irregular conflicts.
"The primary frontline COIN force is often the police-not the military." 240 This statement recognizes the significance of developing local security organizations that are accountable to government institutions and woven into the fabric of the environment in which they serve. However, many analysts equate "community policing," or "police operations" in a counterinsurgency as analogous to a requirement for more military police Patton argues that the MPs niche' is law enforcement and detainee operations. He cites Panama as a stability operation where "military forces were required to maintain law and order, sustain or restore basic services and nurture the development of new domestic civil institutions until they are prepared to take over these roles." Among his numerous recommendations, Patton believes each BCT should have a dedicated MP company with platoons available to support battalion commanders in investigation procedures, law enforcement, and detainee operations. This proposal will become the basis for recommendations further outlined in the next chapter.
Recognizing current and future "full-spectrum" operations concepts, the Army Stability Operations Action Plan calls on the engineer community to "ensure the proper skill sets are developed and available to meet the Army's and the Nation's needs." 
245
Guerrilla fighters of today, and potentially conventional adversaries of the future, 
So far this chapter has focused solely on U.S. Army capabilities. Yet, one of the most critical steps following a U.S. foreign intervention is building, or strengthening, already established indigenous security forces capacity. More importantly, U.S.
partnerships and multi-lateral exercises can provide preventive training opportunities to strengthen foreign militaries and police units, precluding some situations that would demand direct U.S. military ground combat. The necessity for building effective indigenous security force capacity during stability operations and counterinsurgency is rarely disputed; but, the method of organizing for this task is. Operations in Iraq and
Afghanistan have witnessed dedicated advisory teams, special operations teams, informal assistance, and formal partnerships between U.S. and indigenous security units.
A thorough analysis of foreign unit training and leader advising is beyond the scope of this paper; however, one can not discuss irregular warfare without addressing  Critics are quick to point out that every advisory mission will be different. The existing capabilities (and short-falls) of the host-nation forces, scope and scale of U.S.
involvement, and political situations may require vastly different skill sets by individual advisors or advisory teams. When the U.S. presence in Iraq and Afghanistan eventually subsides, permanent advisors will have difficulty sustaining their skill proficiencies.
How those proficiencies would differ from those already existent in SOF is another issue.
More important than a standing advisory force may be a competitive advisory selection process and tailored training as needed. Some of the more renowned advisors in recent history did not come from a standing organization, but possessed innate personality traits and existing skills that were critical to their efforts. 
257
Besides intelligence and security operations, stability operations and counterinsurgency demand other skills and capabilities directed towards the population and indirectly, against U.S. enemies. In a recent Military Review article, Lieutenant 254 DAMO-SSO, Army Action Plan for Stability Operations, 6.
General Peter W. Chiarelli acknowledges numerous organizational changes the Army should explore-"…as the Army and Marine Corps increase their active-duty end strengths, we should consider increasing the number and adjusting the proportion of specialized units such as civil affairs, engineers, information operations, and others that play critical roles in stability operations." 258 His comments echo those of other analysts and studies presented earlier in this chapter. 
259
Information operations (IO) must be synchronized through all levels of operations to maintain communication consistencies. 
260
Units must "develop common, multi-echelon themes based on and consistent with host nation government policies and the operation's objectives," according to U.S. doctrine. 
261
At the tactical-level of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the desire to "sustain unity of message," often results in an overly-restrictive approval process. An over-emphasis on consistency, unity, and coordination leads to messages perceived by the local public as 
258
259
Krepinevich,
Watson,
Binnendijk,
Barry,
and others. 260
261 Army, FM 3-24, Counterinsurgency, 5-8.  vague, watered-down, or of no particular interest. Information operations strategies must not only provide "common, multi-echelon themes," but offer information specific to local areas.
IO are tailored to address the concerns of the populace of specific areas. IO should inform the public of successfully completed projects and improvements, including accomplishments in security, infrastructure, essential services, and economic development. 
262
265
To overcome what was an ineffective and usually counterproductive attempt for IO/PSYOP agencies at higher levels of command to centrally control themes and messaging, we were compelled to initiate a more tailored IO process. We developed products that incorporated relevant themes and messages far more specifically for the diverse groups and micropopulations in our area of operations.
Besides training implications, Baker suggested the creation of an IO working group at the brigade level consisting of PSYOP and CA attachments, an intelligence officer, engineer officer, and the brigade fire support officer. Baker discouraged further decentralization of themes and product development due to the risk of "IO fratricide," citing an example of conflicting battalion messages following an operation.
266
267
the Army "establish mechanisms through which USACE contracting capabilities can be used to support bottom-up, small scale solutions to economic and infrastructure problems." 
271
272
While maneuver commanders are becoming increasingly aware of the benefits of closely integrated lines of operations, maneuver forces lack specialized individuals and teams that can assist in developing host-nation governing capacity and serve as catalysts for economic growth.
Historically, civil affairs specialists were essentially liaisons between military units and the civilian community. Legacy civil-military structures were oftentimes based on linear battlefields where civil affairs specialists followed in the wake of military 271 DAMO-SSO, Army Action Plan for Stability Operations, 18. 
272
273
274
In Afghanistan and Iraq, provincial reconstruction teams (PRTs) have received a great deal of attention as the latest civil-military concept. Although common in name, the teams do not have a unifying structure, manning requirements, or mission. They represent continued ad hoc units established to conduct focused reconstruction programs and governance development. While PRTs in Afghanistan operate mostly in permissive, or semi-permissive environments, many of their Iraqi counterparts have been "embedded" into brigade combat teams as part of General Petraeus' counterinsurgency 
273
274
strategy. This program acknowledges the reality of irregular conflict-military and civil objectives are explicitly interdependent at all operational levels. Military activities and civil-military duties do not easily differentiate into separate organizations. Having combat units and disconnected PRTs serving in the same area creates functional stovepipes that are ineffective, if not counterproductive, to operations. Integrating the civil specialists and maneuver commanders at every echelon promotes increased unity of effort. 
275
Although civil development methodology and civil affair's training are fields of study in their own right, this paper is more concerned with the integration of civil affairs specialists and maneuver units. Ollivant and Chewing state, "the commander responsible for the security of a specific area must also be able to determine reconstruction priorities and control assets responsible for their implementation."
276
Like many tactical commanders, they see money as influence with the local population.
But money must be used wisely. Development projects and labor programs must be tied to information operations, security requirements, and intelligence. It must be sustainable by the locals and have a positive effect on economic growth. Unsustainable projects, with ribbon-cutting ceremonies as their end-state, should be avoided.
Many of the officers interviewed for this study agree with Ollivant and Chewing's belief that multiple lines of operations must be integrated at the lowest reasonable levels.
Others question the suitability of decentralized civic action. General Chiarelli supported specialized task forces and units dedicated to each particular line of operation relying on division-level headquarters to synchronize these efforts. 277 General Petraeus also organized his division's staff officers and non-maneuver commanders across functional boundaries within Mosul in 2003. 
278
But generally speaking, higher-level decision-makers lack a detailed enough understanding of local-level nuances, to properly determine what mix of capabilities to employ in a given area with any precision. A senior commander's desire for efficiency through brigade and higher functional grouping results can lead to less effective operations.
Geographical grouping with integrated functional capabilities can better respond to local needs. Obviously, some top-level oversight will be necessary to determine resource priorities.
Planning and prioritization may require higher levels of synchronization, but the details of execution must be maintained with lower-level commanders. Functional grouping of civil projects allows better synchronization for technical programs that transcend unit boundaries. Utility distribution is a good example of programs best aligned with functional specialists working at higher levels. However, localized, sustainable programs, particularly those that are labor-heavy, should be supervised by corresponding geographically-aligned maneuver units. Future force projections will not be limited to firepower. U.S. Army units must have the capability to provide critical services amidst conflict.
Discussions and analysis of the Army's force structure often take place at the strategic policy level. Military capabilities are measured by large units and expensive equipment platforms-interchangeable cogs in the military machine. Many scholars discuss capabilities as theoretical concepts without a nuanced understanding of groundlevel operations. In an irregular environment, it is not just a question of how many troops, but what kind of troops, their training proficiencies, and the methods they employ.
Planners must carefully consider the rapidly expanding number of tasks and technologies soldiers and officers are expected to master. A greater number of specialists will be necessary at every echelon to account for the diverse intelligence, security, and civilmilitary components of population-focused operations. Accoring to Colonel Patton, "while attachments can fill requirements (augments from support and functional brigades), they can never replace the bonds of trust and confidence that come with organic affiliation." 
280
This chapter details a mosaic of capabilities that must be integrated with maneuver combat units at tactical levels for effective operations in irregular conflicts. It is a conceptual model tailored for irregular environments, but still capable of contributing to the Army's full spectrum requirement. This proposal does not counter the current "transformation" design-it adds to it. Organizational "boxes" can always be arranged to provide leaders particular capabilities to conduct essential missions. Some leaders see these boxes as interchangeable components-merely ingredients to task organize into ad hoc units. However, in irregular warfare, this combination of specialists should form a network of relationships and complementary proficiencies that are better strengthened through consistent structural integrities and collective training opportunities.
A.
According to the current FORSCOM Commander, the one point of consensus from "Unified Quest 2007"
281
282
These campaigns have historically required a large number of troops. However, what is even more essential is the type of troops needed and the need to increase unit effectiveness in irregular environments on a per capita basis. This dynamic suggests a greater number of the high-yield specialties common to IW campaigns should be in the active force, and closely integrated with maneuver units at all echelons. Combined arms warfare must be expanded to include specialized capabilities that are not historically included in maneuver concepts. These capabilities should be integrated with maneuver units at battalion and company levels, optimizing most light infantry battalions for irregular environments. Maintaining a sustained effort over a long duration and the importance of team integrity, begs a force structure that institutionalizes a close relationship between intelligence, combat, and civil-military specialties. The remainder of this chapter will further explain and justify these proposals. This model is designed to integrate necessary specialists at the small-unit tactical level. The Army's force structure as a whole should be built bottom-up, using this or a similar model as a starting point. Operations in Iraq and Afghanistan and the force capability requests of geographical commanders allow for more precise operational testing and analysis.
"Conducting aggressive ISR operations and pushing intelligence collection assets and analysts to the tactical level, sometimes as far as company level, therefore benefits all echelons. It strengthens local intelligence, enhances regional and national reporting, and bolsters operations at all levels."
284
The Army Action Plan for Stability Operations recommends the Army develop intelligence systems "at appropriate levels" and "enhance the capability of the Army to plan, prepare, execute, and assess HUMINT operations in support of full spectrum operations."
285
The previous chapter argued that integration of intelligence specialists and operators must occur at lower levels within the military's hierarchy. During irregular conflict, an extensive amount of information is collected from the bottom-up and analysis should parallel that process. FM 3-24 states "effective operations are shaped by timely, specific, and reliable intelligence, gathered and analyzed at the lowest possible level and disseminated throughout the force."
286
23
Besides voice intercepts, tactical signal technologies have evolved into a positioning weapon allowing close integration with maneuver units to make arrests Knowlingly, further analysis and testing is required. However, the immediate necessity to increase the capacity of company and battalion intelligence capabilities should not be underestimated. Intelligence is absolutely critical to conduct precision, population-focused operations in an irregular environment. This is an area that needs the most immediate and revolutionary change within the Army's current force design.
The notion that…the Army de-emphasize its strong suits (heavy units, massed firepower, high technology) in favor of stripped-down light infantry units was bound to encounter strong resistance from the Army leadership.
289
Infantry units are best suited for most security duties in irregular environments, able to conduct extensive foot patrols and interact face to face with the populace. They are able to teach most foreign (and usually less technology-centric) armies and police forces security operations. Unfortunately, they often lack necessary vehicles for troop transport, quick reaction forces, command and control, road-blocks, and additional firepower when necessary.
Although Stryker BCTs were designed to interface those needs, it is rare that entire brigades would have to be mobile at a given time during a persistent conflict. This questions the efficacy of sustaining such large fleets. Even during forced-entry operations, Strykers are only designed to protect a toe-hold until Heavy BCTs (the force of choice for major combat operations) can arrive. Balance is necessary to make armored wheeled vehicles, such as Strykers and new variants such as the MRAP readily available to infantry units without overwhelming them with maintenance, costs, and logistics requirements. The strategic desire to maintain a small military signature in many countries of interest, and space concerns for units operating out of small fire bases or austere environments, limits the optimal number of vehicles for tactical units conducting protracted operations against an irregular threat.
More Stryker brigades is not the feasible answer. But more Stryker-like capabilities should be made available to all infantry brigade combat teams. A modular approach to support those units with adequate protected transportation and firepower is Similarly, the role of reconnaissance units should be re-examined. Battalion motorized companies and brigade RSTA battalions are the remnants of legacy designs suited for linear battlefields. Imagery, manned and unmanned overhead surveillance, signals intelligence, and human collection has filled the role these units were designed to perform. Joint fires, artillery smart munitions, and man-portable anti-tank weapons are quickly replacing the requirements for vehicle-mounted, direct-fire anti-tank weapons.
Instead, vehicles are better utilized in an irregular, non-linear fight as modular transportation, gun, and surveillance capabilities available to all infantry battalions.
Reducing the size of reconnaissance squadrons in infantry brigades to a motorized company would free up vehicles and maintenance personnel to be redistributed throughout infantry units as described previously. As additional Stryker, MRAPs, and eventually, FCS-variant vehicles come on line, a greater number of HMMWVs can be replaced.
Pushing HUMINT or law enforcement personnel to the battalion level and below can improve TAREX and DOCEX by tactical units...units must be able to receive intelligence collected from the documents, equipment, and personnel they capture in enough time to exploit it. 
290
development brigade company commanders, complemented by specialists in fields such as intelligence, engineering, and communications offers a suitable training team for large indigenous units. Similarly, bi-lateral and multi-national partnerships can be facilitated at other levels as well. Companies and battalions, consisting of experienced leaders, certified through a comprehensive "Advisor Course," and supported with specialized soldiers, would be successful at operating independent of higher headquarters for distributed FID missions.
In addition to increases in intelligence capacities, this section proposed numerous changes to enhance the combat-related capabilities of infantry brigade combat teams conducting irregular warfare activities, particularly in a persistent urban environment (see Figure 
26
296
Civil Affairs teams should establish a formal partnership with maneuver units and be participants in regular collective training. Civil affairs specialists should be subject matter experts in contract proposals, civil development, economic growth, and governance capacity-building. According to Chewing and Ollivant, "civil affairs soldiers should be attached to the maneuver commander, acting more as staff proponents and subject-matter experts than as primary actors." 297 Most of the maneuver commanders interviewed described the CAT-A teams as limited by the strength of one individual. The team leader conducted project site visits, met with local community members, and worked government and economic development issues. In some cases, the other team members simply served as a driver, gunner, and assistant for the team leader. Instead of autonomous teams, CA specialists should serve as integrated advisors to maneuver leaders and their staffs. As needed, they can be used as senior pay agents, project managers, and NGO intermediaries serving as the administrative headquarters and quality control for contracts with local entrepreneurs. Battalion CA members should act as liaisons between the brigade's CMOC, B-Team, and inter-agency representatives.
Companies should have civil affairs specialists serving as CMOC liaisons, advisors to the company commander, and project managers. The CA officer should also be able to assess and advise local governing bodies.
Construction engineer unit capacities need to be increased, and their capabilities expanded. Civil and heavy engineers who are able to support force protection and civil affairs initiatives are in high demand. The future environment suggests a growing demand for engineers, both mobility and construction, and a need for greater technical specialization.
Instead of constructing and breaching wire obstacles, combat engineers need to become increasingly more specialized in a greater number of technical skills to include 297 Chewing and Ollivant, "Rethinking Conventional Forces in COIN," 57. 
The evolutionary changes that have been posed herein are not, for the most part, based on technological solutions. They are human-capital intensive investments in the current force structure. The Army needs to transform its skill sets and organizational forms with the same effort it is investing in future weapon systems, vehicles, and hardware. Expanding the capacity of numerous "non-combat" related specialties and increasingly integrating multiple dimensions of military expertise at lower levels within the military hierarchy will help units conducting sensitive, population-focused military operations become more effective. However, increasing job positions and changing organizational structures is not enough. Many of these specialties, such as IO, CA, MP, and engineers, must make significant capability adjustments (through profound changes in their training and educational curriculums) to ensure the right skill sets are materializing within the Army.
Irregular conflicts demand a higher caliber of leader at every level. The combined arms fight is rapidly expanding to include specialists and units beyond combat arms.
Management challenges increase with larger and more diversified units as proposed in this paper. Meanwhile, the age and years of experience for most company commanders is decreasing due to accelerated promotion timelines, fast command turnovers, and postcommand staffing requirements. A careful examination of the Army's promotion system is beyond the scope of this paper. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that more education, training, and preparation are needed by many company-level leaders to truly excel in the contemporary battlefield. This takes time, perhaps the most difficult resource to generate.
To manage the diverse capabilities and increased capacity of specialists advanced in this paper, infantry companies should be led by a senior captain (O-3), or junior major (O-4). They would be assisted by a captain (O-3) operations-executive officer and potentially, former platoon leaders as intelligence or effects planners (refer back to Figure 
21
299
Expanded opportunities for education, non-operational time and delaying the coveted company command position may encourage junior officers to stay in longer. An incremental retirement package beginning prior to the current twenty-year mark could provide a financial benefit to those who would otherwise separate. Increasing the number of platoons in a company, companies in a battalion, and battalions in a brigade as proposed, would flatten the command structure and reduce the number of headquarters, thereby reducing requirements for captains and majors on senior command staffs.
Defense planners could take personnel and organizational change one step further by cutting an entire layer of hierarchy out of the Army's force design. This would be truly transformational. Macgregor proposed the idea of decentralizing the Army's force design and making it more flexible through the creation of combat groups. 300 He reduced the brigade and division headquarters to one level of command. Groups (which could be designated as regiments) would consist of six to eight maneuver battalions (twice the size of today's brigades), led by a general officer and larger staff. The Groups would in turn, report to a corps-based Joint Task Force. In addition to greater flexibility in an increasingly dynamic environment, colonels (O-6) would be able to broaden their understanding of national security by serving in inter-agency and foreign military positions, seeking greater educational experiences, and further enhancing their knowledge of economic systems, governance, and strategic communications prior to assuming command of a combat group.
A further decentralized command structure, led by more experienced officers, would provide the tactical flexibility necessary in complex and politically sensitive conflicts. There are solutions to meeting the manning requirements of today, and those suggested by this proposal. The question is how much the Army is willing to part from its legacy personnel and promotion requirements to ensure combat units have the manpower they need.
Combined-arms concepts must progress beyond traditional maneuver and firepower assessments. By increasing the dedicated capacity of intelligence personnel, 
300 Macgregor,
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[76]
[77]
[78]
[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]
[83]
[84]
[85]
[86]
The United States, a military and economic hegemonic power, has been humbled by low-tech guerrilla fighters in Afghanistan and Iraq. Future conflicts will likely include similar types of enemies, socio-economic variables, and political conditions. In the muddied waters of stability operations and counterinsurgency, face-to-face interaction with the population is necessary. Information and situational awareness is gained from the bottom up, and more rapid and lateral communications are necessary. Flexible, agile forces, decentralized and dispersed throughout an area for extended periods of time, are essential. Military efforts should be focused on securing the population, developing indigenous security forces, promoting economic growth, and assisting in the development of viable political systems. Acknowledging security as paramount, firepower should be used sparingly, while intelligence, information operations, and civil affairs should be employed exceedingly more. The Army's force structure should reflect this paradigm shift.
Despite rhetoric to the contrary, the Army's current organizational structure is optimized for combined arms maneuver warfare against conventional enemies. Its current hierarchy stems from the Napoleonic Era, and its organizational design has remained relatively unchanged since the U.S. prepared for war with the Soviet Union throughout the latter half of the twentieth century. 301 Firepower and mobility have been the hallmarks of warfare, embraced by the Army and exemplified in the helicopter attacks and tank battles of Operation Desert Storm.
Since the majority of military operations are executed at the lowest levels of command (while following operational and strategic guidance), alternative models for 
301
force structure must consider how essential counterinsurgency and stabilization tasks can be optimally performed at those levels (platoon, company, and battalion). As shown in Chapter IV, scholars and policy makers who have proposed adaptations to the Army's force structure are lacking this level of organizational analysis and detail. Alternative organizational models need to be designed and field-tested. These models can then be evaluated in the context of irregular warfare and conventional combat operations. A new, more adaptive, full-spectrum force may emerge from the analytical testing, or further support for greater specialization may become evident. The security and development brigade concept could simply serve as a testing ground for capability increases to all brigade combat teams. Nevertheless, previous assumptions about the utility of forces designed for "rapid decisive operations" performing optimally in counterinsurgency and stabilization tasks need to be further examined.
The U.S. military can continue to expect increased participation in irregular environments. Its participation may be in a partnered capacity to limit conflict in allied weak states; as a contributing participant in multinational operations; or, as a unilateral effort when a threat is eminent and critical U.S. interests are vital. Witnessing the difficulties in Iraq and Afghanistan, there are many critics who negate the need for taking a profound look at the U.S. military's current capabilities. They do not see a capability gap, but a problematic foreign policy. One critic of the Iraq War stated: "Militaries are built to fight and win wars, not bind together failing nations." 302 That same mentality has survived within the institutional Army despite operations in Vietnam, Lebanon, Somalia, Kosovo, Bosnia, Afghanistan, and Iraq. The nature of warfare has changed beyond traditional classifications, and post-conflict stabilization and transitions will always be inextricably linked to warfare. Less, the U.S. continues to risk "losing the peace" and further empowers its potential adversaries. Foreign policy is fickle and Americans are often quick to forget (or misunderstand) history's lessons. Despite its track-record, the Army must be capable of succeeding in any environment should national interests (and those of her Allies) be at stake. 
302
The Army continues to promote the maintenance of a "full spectrum" generalist force, able to conduct offensive, defensive, and stability operations. It negates any concepts of "specialized forces," dismissing the fact that the Army is already specialized to the degree that is has heavy, Stryker, light, functional, and multi-functional support brigades. Internal to brigades, battalions and companies have unique capabilities. While each type of brigade is capable of conducting full-spectrum operations across the spectrum of conflict, they are designed for particular threat environments, terrain conditions, and task specialties. Based on evidence collected from interviews, presentations from subject matter experts, archival analysis of the contemporary battlefield, historical insights, and organizational theory, this paper proposes numerous conceptual, and more detailed structural recommendations to the Army's force structure.
A majority of the SBCTs and IBCTs should be converted into security and development brigades (SDBs), optimized for stability operations in irregular environments focused on controlling (and protecting) populations, defeating guerrilla fighters, and conducting initial indigenous governance and economic capacity development. The units would still be full spectrum capable (in fact, establishing and maintaining a secure environment through offensive and defensive operations is critical), but they would be designed with stability operations as their core task. These units would be no more "specialized," than a heavy brigade is for conventional offensive and defensive warfare.
The security and development brigades would have three infantry battalions and a reconnaissance company instead of a squadron. As described in Chapter VI, they would be organized as follows:
• Infantry companies would be led by a major, or qualified senior captain.
His headquarters would have a small, but highly-trained support team of intelligence and civil-military specialists such as all-source analysts, HUMINT collection specialists, UAV technicians, civil affairs, and information operations specialists. Instead of young, newly trained initialentry soldiers, these specialists would be former maneuver NCOs and officers who conducted specialty skill transfers.
Infantry companies would have an organic motorized platoon consisting of medium-weight vehicles such as the MRAP, Stryker, FCS, or other variant of armored vehicle that could be tailored to missions for troop transport and crew-served weapon employment. Additional armored combat vehicles could be resourced by the battalion's transport company or higher-level modular units.
The infantry battalions would have four companies, a reconnaissance platoon, and a main gun (or attached armor) platoon.
The battalion staff would have significantly increased intelligence capacities, information operations and public affairs specialists, and dedicated civil affairs.
Battalion capabilities would also be enhanced with an organic MP platoon, specializing in investigative procedures, detainee handling, and biometric technologies. A dedicated number of women would be included in the MP unit.
The battalion would have a construction and assessment platoon, led by a civil engineer and composed of trade-craft specialists.
The battalion would have a mobility platoon consisting of explosive ordinance disposal (EOD) and demolition specialists, and military dog teams.
Mobility squads, military police squads, civil affairs, and construction engineers could be attached to companies as directed by the battalion commander.
Non-combat specialists would belong to a functional chain of command for home-station technical training. During combat operations, this chain of command would provide functional advising and staff support to brigade and higher echelons.
Selected Stryker brigade combat teams, Airborne, and Air Assault brigade combat teams tailored for strategic missions such as rapid deployment and forced-entry requirements could remain in their current design. The heavy brigade combat teams would continue to be America's dominant force in major conventional operations, conflict in open terrain, and as necessary, resourced to conduct urban and populationfocused operations. Limited numbers of support and functional brigades would maintain stand-alone capabilities. They would provide theatre support and detach sub-brigade units to heavy brigade combat teams as necessary.
The proposed force structure would still allow security and development brigades to conduct conventional offensive and defensive operations where its small unit proficiency would be capable of defeating an adversary in a close fight, or utilizing standoff joint air, man-portable, and indirect weapons against distant targets. These tactics are as essential to irregular operations as they are conventional ones. However, they are not sufficient to properly protect a given population, defeat or marginalize guerrilla fighters, train indigenous security forces, or promote the development and stability of an area before or after conflicts occur. Besides surge capabilities, an additional benefit of creating more autonomous, multi-functional units with higher rank, education, and experience levels is their ability to participate in steady-state multi-national partnerships and bilateral foreign internal defense operations.
Manpower required for this restructuring would be derived from "flattening" the command and control system by increasing the number of maneuver companies per battalion, battalions per brigade, and reducing the number of brigade and higher headquarters. Reconnaissance squadrons would be reduced to troop size allowing manpower and equipment to be reallocated to company vehicle platoons. Fewer brigades would be available for rotational pools, but fewer brigades would be necessary. The numbers would be negated by enhanced effectiveness on a per-capita basis.
Evidence from practitioners of counterinsurgency operations in Iraq and Afghanistan suggest that command relationships, intelligence, and specialized capabilities within the brigade combat team are still confined to a steeply hierarchical and top-down driven organizational structure. Battalions and their subordinate maneuver units have remained largely untouched, lacking critical skill capabilities for populationfocused operations. Despite the Army's proclamation of "the most comprehensive transformation of its force since World War II," 303 this study challenges the notion that incremental steps taken by current modularity initiatives are bold enough to allow Army ground forces to properly prepare for, and face the future challenges of conducting irregular operations in the twenty-first century.
303 Army Transformation Office, 2004 Army Transformation Roadmap.
Quadrennial Defense Review, directing the military to better prepare for irregular conflicts such as counterterrorism, counterinsurgency, stability operations, and foreign internal defense. The Joint Staff's recent operating concepts establish conceptual frameworks for the future operating environment between 2015 and 2027. These policies and concepts should become the Army's analytical foundation for force structure decisions. In subsequent chapters, this paper will assess whether the Army is responding with appropriate organizational adaptations.
In 1994, Congress directed a review of the "current allocations of roles, missions, and functions among the Armed Forces." 41 Their commission's report indicated the possibility of peace operations increasing in frequency and intensity, and as such, the need for appropriate U.S. capabilities.
In 1994, Congress directed a review of the "current allocations of roles, missions, and functions among the Armed Forces." 41 Their commission's report indicated the possibility of peace operations increasing in frequency and intensity, and as such, the need for appropriate U.S. capabilities.
• Irregular challenges from state and non-state actors employing methods such as terrorism and insurgency to counter our traditional military advantages, or engaging in criminal activity such as piracy and drug trafficking that threaten regional security.
• Irregular challenges from state and non-state actors employing methods such as terrorism and insurgency to counter our traditional military advantages, or engaging in criminal activity such as piracy and drug trafficking that threaten regional security.
divided into the heavy (HBCTs), Stryker (SBCTs), and infantry (IBCTs) brigade combat teams.
divided into the heavy (HBCTs), Stryker (SBCTs), and infantry (IBCTs) brigade combat teams.
The HBCT is tank-centric. As such, it is considered the Army's premier fighting unit to conduct major combat operations. It places a premium on mobile protected firepower balanced with dismounted infantry. The HBCT is particularly suited for the following operational environments:
The HBCT is tank-centric. As such, it is considered the Army's premier fighting unit to conduct major combat operations. It places a premium on mobile protected firepower balanced with dismounted infantry. The HBCT is particularly suited for the following operational environments:
133 LTC Ritchie Moore and LTC Michael Warmack, "Civil Affairs Transformation," (134
133 LTC Ritchie Moore and LTC Michael Warmack, "Civil Affairs Transformation," (134
Hans Binnendijk and Stuart Johnson 152 provide assertions shared by many analysts that U.S. technological changes have led to a transformation of forces focused on "rapid decisive operations," requiring a subsequent transformation to be able to properly conduct stabilization and reconstruction operations. Binnendijk and Johnson see a transition of warfare from slow buildups and long wars with large numbers of troops and hence, large numbers of troops available for occupation during civilian led nationbuilding; to short wars with fast buildups, smaller numbers of troops and a gap with few forces available to conduct stabilization and reconstruction (S&R) after major conflict. 151 152 Hans Binnendijk and Stuart Johnson, eds., Transforming for Stabilization and Reconstruction Operations (Washington D.C.: National Defense University Press, 2004).
154  
154  
appropriately suited for stability operations, counter-insurgency, and other forms of irregular warfare. There are explicit references in the Transformation Roadmap and Guide to Modularity that the BCT is aptly suited for stability operations, although these claims have been widely disputed within DoD and from outside critics. According to a recent Congressional Research Service report, the Army "asserts that Army modular forces deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan in comparison to non-modular brigades, have proven to be equally as effective in conducting combat missions, more capable in conducting stability operations, and far better at interacting with other Services' forces."
appropriately suited for stability operations, counter-insurgency, and other forms of irregular warfare. There are explicit references in the Transformation Roadmap and Guide to Modularity that the BCT is aptly suited for stability operations, although these claims have been widely disputed within DoD and from outside critics. According to a recent Congressional Research Service report, the Army "asserts that Army modular forces deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan in comparison to non-modular brigades, have proven to be equally as effective in conducting combat missions, more capable in conducting stability operations, and far better at interacting with other Services' forces."
187 Austin Long, On "Other War," Lessons from Five Decades of
187 Austin Long, On "Other War," Lessons from Five Decades of
Former battalion commander Christopher Gibson states, "experience has shown that effective targeting should be, in the main, driven by intelligence garnered by troopers interacting respectfully and empathetically with the populace." 218 He advocates for numerous organizational reforms at lower levels. He calls for an overdue necessity to redistribute intelligence assets stating, "companies and battalions plainly need more intelligence analysts." He specifically recommends that there should be tactical HUMINT teams and a dedicated interrogator at the battalion level, and intelligence
247  
247  
Two companies of military police should be allocated to infantry brigade combat teams. They would be led by the brigade MP, who should be a major. One company, the MP battalion support company, would allocate platoons to maneuver battalions while the MP brigade support companies would remain under the discretion of the brigade commander. The squads should be smaller, but manned with more senior MPs than currently designed. They would primarily serve as advisors and technical specialists, and less as maneuver squads (see Figure
Two companies of military police should be allocated to infantry brigade combat teams. They would be led by the brigade MP, who should be a major. One company, the MP battalion support company, would allocate platoons to maneuver battalions while the MP brigade support companies would remain under the discretion of the brigade commander. The squads should be smaller, but manned with more senior MPs than currently designed. They would primarily serve as advisors and technical specialists, and less as maneuver squads (see Figure
U.S. Joint Forces Command, Joint Warfighting Center, Irregular Warfare Special Study(Washington D.C.: Department of Defense, August 4, 2006), http://merln.ndu.edu/archive/DigitalCollections/IrregWarfareSpecialStudy.pdf. This study was intended to be an analysis of the 2006 QDR's use of the term irregular warfare, its doctrinal implications, and larger implications for Joint Forces. Citing the IW Roadmap's call for "US GPF to train, equip, and advise large numbers of foreign security forces," it references Multi-National Security Transition Command (MNSTC) as evidence the concept is already being implemented. Similarly, the IW Special Study notes CENTCOM's participation in Iraq as evidence of GPF performing COIN. These simplistic observations seem to state, "we're already doing it," without explicitly acknowledging the Quadrennial Defense Review's intent of better training, organizing, and preparing GPF for these tasks in the future.
U.S. Special Operations Command and Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Irregular Warfare Joint Operating Concept, Version 1.0 (Washington D.C.: Department of Defense, September 2007), http://www.fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/iw-joc.pdf.
"General purpose forces," is a term used to indicate non-Special Operations Forces within the Army. They are also commonly referred to as "conventional forces." This term is misleading as it suggests the Army is a monolithic force. Many "conventional" units have the potential to perform irregular operations.
DoD, IW JOC, 37.    
The Army's current restructuring plan is commonly termed "transformation."
Department of Defense, Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, 2001.
Department of the Army, Field Manual 1-02, Operational Terms and Graphics, Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, 2004.
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Robert D. Kaplan, "The Coming Anarchy," The Atlantic Monthly, February 1994, http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/prem/199402/anarchy.
Samuel P.Huntington, "The Clash of Civilizations," Foreign Affairs, vol. 72, no. 3 (Summer 1993), http://www.alamut.com/subj/economics/misc/clash.html.
Examples derived from Andrew Krepinevich, Nadia Schadlow, and Marin J. Strmecki, "Stability, Security, Transition, and Reconstruction Operations: Meeting the Challenge" (PowerPoint presentation dated March 7, 2007, emailed to the author). Similar examples can be read in Metz and Hoffman, "Restructuring America's Ground Forces: Better, Not Bigger."
Known as "relative deprivation," it is in part, due to "rapidly rising expectations, nourished by images of affluence and democratic lifestyles spread by the international mass media, have fueled feelings of deprivation among vast populations." See, Fathali M. Moghaddam, "The Staircase to Terrorism, A Psychological Exploration," AmericanPsychologist, vol. 60, no. 2 (February-March 2005), 161-169. See also, Marc Sageman, Understanding Terror Networks (Philadelphia: University of PennsylvaniaPress,  2004).
Commission on Roles and Missions, Directions for Defense Report, 2-19.
See, George Bush, National Security Presidential Directive/NPSD 44, December 7, 2005, http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/nspd/nspd-44.html. This memorandum was issued to improve "coordination, planning, and implementation for reconstruction and stabilization assistance for foreign states and regions at risk of, in, or in transition from conflict or civil strife." It is largely viewed as a catalyst for developing an interagency approach to stabilization operations. The document assigns lead to the State Department for stabilization and reconstruction activities, creating the office of the Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization (S/CRS).
See, DoD, QDR 2006; BG Andrew B. Twomey, "Cost of Modern War," (PowerPoint presentation dated January 5, 2006); and DoD, IW JOC, 11.
Paraphrased from, Office of the President of the United States, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington D.C.: March, 2006), 44; and The Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Capstone Concept for Joint Operations, v 2.0 (Washington D.C.: Department of Defense, August, 2005), 6, http://http://www.dtic.mil/futurejointwarfare/concepts/approved_ccjov2.pdf.
See, Thomas X. Hammes, "Fourth Generation Warfare Evolves, Fifth Emerges," Military Review,  May-June (2007), 14-23.   
See, Gabriel Weimann, Terror on the Internet (Washington D.C.: United States Institute of Peace Press, 2006).
This list includes both U.S. and our adversary's "activities." Terrorism and criminal activities are explicitly listed as being "used by our adversaries." (See Figure2).
Walker, "Army Force Structure and Implementation of Directive 3000.05."
This is a compilation from, Army, Guide to Modularity and Army, FM 3-90.6, A-7, A-9.
Army,, A-4 provides emphasis-"do not underestimate its (logistics) requirements."
Army, Guide to Modularity, Chapter 8. These numbers are according to the published 2004 MTOE. Although subtle changes are ongoing, they provide an overview.
Army, As opposed to major combat operations against a conventional enemy, "small scale contingencies" are more synonymous with today's vernacular-irregular warfare. However, small indicates a limited scale of conflict. As discussed before, irregular warfare is not limited to "small" conflicts, or those "low" in intensity.
This is a compilation from the Guide to Modularity and FM 3-90.6, A-7, A-9.
As stated earlier, the numbers used are from Walker, "Army Force Structure and Implementation of Directive 3000.05."
Also known as the Reconnaissance Surveillance Target Acquistion (RSTA) Brigade.
An 8-wheeled armored fighting vehicle with a 105mm tank gun. It is not intended to conduct tank on tank warfare, but easily provides the firepower of a tank, without the infrastructure damage in an urban environment if needed.
Army,
[2]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[2]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
General Campbell, FORSCOM Commander, recently lamented that, "modernization was inappropriately tied to FCS." Comments, Infantry Warfighting Conference, September 18, 2007, Fort Benning, GA.
Julian E. Barnes, "Gates Urges Funds For A Smarter Army," Los Angeles Times,October 11,  2007.   
Department of the Army, G-3/5/7, Strategy, Plans and Policy Directorate, Stability Operations Division (DAMO-SSO), Army Action Plan for Stability Operations, Army Campaign Plan Decision Point 105 (Washington D.C.: Department of the Army, August 2, 2007), 13. The document states: "follow-on analyses should address the issue of specialized versus full spectrum BCTs for select SO tasks, to include concepts of Military Assistance and Advisory Groups, Forward Liaison and Assistance Groups, Security Training and Equipping Groups, and Civil Operations, Reconstruction, and Development Support Groups."
Walker (NDU take-home CD), slide 87.
Lee G.Bolman and Terrence E. Deal, Reframing Organizations (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,  2003), 61.
Owens, "Counterinsurgency Comeback," Wall Street Journal, September 6, 2007.   
Comments by Colonel John Nicholson, former commander of 3 rd Brigade, 10 th Mountain Division (presentation at the Infantry Warfighting Conference on September 19, 2007, Ft. Benning, GA).
Jeremy Gwinn, "Organizing for Counterinsurgency at the Company and Platoon Level," Small Wars Journal, August 2, 2007, http://www.smallwarsjournal.com/blog/2007/08/organizing-forcounterinsurgen/. Gwinn outlines other concerns such as the possibility that soldiers "become reduced to just pulling security for the attachments while they do their jobs." The availability of specialized units shouldn't prevent all soldiers from being involved with civil affairs, information operations, or intelligence gathering, it simply helps direct their efforts.
Steven Metz and Frank Hoffman, "Restructuring America's Ground Forces: Better, Not Bigger."
Interviews with CPT Ray Mattox, MAJ Morgan Southern, CPT Bob Gregory, 1LT Kyle Phillips, and CPT Nick Clemente.
Army, 
See Army, 
Armored Division, (presentation at the Infantry Warfighting Conference,September 19, 2007, Ft. Benning,  GA).238  Armor units are technology centric and manpower short. An armor platoon consists of 16 personnel compared to a 39-person infantry platoon. An armor company consists of 67 personnel, compared to an infantry rifle company's 141. Source: Army, Guide to Modularity, C-6, D-7. Armor has been used in dismounted operations, but at a much more limited scale than infantry units. Armor units are limited in personnel, but are maintenance, logistics, and cost heavy.239  The exact number of vehicles is unknown to the author. According to Anne Flaherty, Associated Press, "Pentagon seeks $198B for wars," The Monterey County Herald, September 27, 2007, A3, Department of Defense's supplemental funding request for 2008 included $11 billion for an additional 7,000 Mine Resistant Ambush Protected Vehicles (MRAP), in addition to the 8,000 MRAP vehicles already budgeted and planned for fielding bringing the total allocation to 15,000 vehicles. Another source, "Pentagon Requests Additional MRAP Funds," ARMY Magazine, September 2007, 8, identified the total number of MRAPs in service at 500, with 6,415 additional on order. The military reportedly delayed largescale production of an armored-HMMWV replacement because it did not expect the longevity of operations in Iraq and wanted to protect funding for "leap-ahead" capabilities under development such as the Marine Corps, Joint Light Tactical Vehicle program, or the Army's Future Combat Systems family of concept vehicles. See, Peter Eisler, Blake Morrison, and Tom Vanden Brook, "Pentagon Balked at Pleas from Officers in Field for Safer Vehicles," USA Today, July 16, 2007, 1.
Colonel David L.Patton (ret), "Put the 'Police' Back in Military Police," ARMY Magazine,September 2007, 11-18.   
 Army Action Plan for Stability Operations, 18.   
A notorious example of "IO fratricide" allegedly occurred in Afghanistan as reported by Bradley Graham, "Alleged Desecration of Bodies Investigated," Washington Post, October 21, 2005, A16. According to the article, a tactical psychological operations team and their parent infantry unit burned the corpses of two insurgents and then taunted other enemy fighters in an attempt to bait them into attacking. The desecration of bodies created a large blowback throughout the international community; however, it is an exception to otherwise moral, legal, and appropriate information operations being conducted by tactical units throughout Iraq and Afghanistan. Proper training and leadership can prevent most abuses.
A similar recommendation was made by General Chiarelli when he stated, "public affairs officers should be assigned down to the battalion level and even company level for certain missions, and when they are, we need to give them latitude to publish new releases quickly and the support they need to overcome mistakes." Chiarelli and Smith, "Learning from our Modern Wars," 12.
See, Kristin Hagerstrom, PRT team leader, and Major Lee Suttee, USMC Civil Affairs Chief, (State Department briefing via satellite, August 24, 2007), http://www.state.gov/p/nea/rls/91450.htm.
Ollivant and Chewing, "Rethinking Conventional Forces in COIN Operations," 57.    
Chiarelli and Michaelis, "Full Spectrum Operations," 16.   
Kirsten Lundberg, "The Accidental Statesman: General Petraeus and the City of Mosul, Iraq," Student case study, C15-06-1834.0, Kennedy School of Government Case Program, Harvard University, 2006.
Moore and Warmack, "Civil Affairs Transformation." Also, Boozell interview.   
Patton, "Put the 'Police' Back in Military Police."
Sponsored by the Army and Joint Forces Command (JFCOM), Unified Quest is the Army's "premier wargame" to study future warfare. See http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2006/04/mil-060418-arnews01.htm.
General Charles Campbell, FORSCOM Commander, (Remarks at the Infantry Warfighting Conference, September 18, 2007, Fort Benning, GA).
Defense Science Board, 2004 Summer Study, Transition to and from Hostilities (Washington D.C.:  Department of Defense, 2004), vii, http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/2004-12-DSB_SS_Report_Final.pdf. This study is often referred to as being the impetus for DoDD 3000.05.
Army, Counterinsurgency, 
 Army Action Plan for Stability Operations, 12.    
Army, Counterinsurgency, 
Army, Counterinsurgency, 
See, "Army Looks for NCOs to Serve as Human Intelligence Collectors," Army News Service, March 28, 2007, http://www.army.mil/-news/2007/03/28/2440-army-looks-for-ncos-to-serve-as-humanintelligence-collectors.
  289  Krepinevich, The Army in Vietnam, 36.
Army, Counterinsurgency, 
 Army Action Plan for Stability Operations,
10.
A Special Operations officer who wished to remain anonymous, described his unit's extensive use of military dog-teams in Iraq and Afghanistan during patrols and house raids. He believed the dogs offer viable alternatives to initial entry soldiers confirming or denying the presence of explosives and enemy personnel. (Interview with the author, May 5, 2007).
This diagram only reflects changes as discussed in this section. It does not account for other capabilities already existing within the IBCT that haven't been discussed such as artillery, mortars, medical units etc.
Lieutenant (USN) JustinPerry, civil engineer, (interview with author, October 15, 2007). See also, https://www.seabee.navy.mil/index.cfm/4135 for further information.
This promotion structure would be similar to U.S. Army Special Forces where O-4s command companies and then serve as battalion and group staff officers.
reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
Transformation Roadmap
3-2
Over the past decade, the United States has made major investments in the combat efficiency of its forces. The return on investment has been evident in the dramatic improvement in war-fighting demonstrated from Desert Storm to the Kosovo air campaign to Operation Iraqi Freedom. There has been no comparable increase in the capacity of U.S. armed forces or of U.S. civilian agencies to conduct post-combat stabilization and reconstruction operations. 
139
215
213
2006
214
215
Even though the functional and multi-functional modularity brigades are intended to augment the BCTs, the number of active duty civil-military specialists is marginal and accessing the reserves often proves politically untenable. If counterinsurgency and stability operations are to be protracted efforts, it does not make sense to have the assets most likely needed in these types of operations where they are unavailable. Further analysis and experimentation should consider disbanding some of the functional and multi-functional support brigades, using these capabilities to optimize modified infantry brigade combat teams for irregular conflict. Remaining functional and support brigades can "plug and play" into higher headquarters or augment heavy brigade combat teams when they are called upon to conduct stability missions. The HBCTs will continue to be the Army's hedge against major conventional threats that may arise. In the meantime they should be carefully placed in rural and border areas, supplement light infantry with sub-brigade units of armor, and become a main effort in extremely high threat areas. This proposal does not discount the necessity to tailor forces through operational task organizing, nor the requirement to maintain limited functional and support unitsespecially in highly-technical duties such as aviation, air-defense, or general support transportation and logistics functions. But, it establishes a new baseline from which to structure tactical units and reshape the Army's force-mix from the bottom-up.
An infantry company, assigned to a security and development brigade and optimized for irregular warfare, consists of four maneuver platoons and an eight-vehicle motorized platoon. Normal attachments would consist of an MP squad specializing in investigative procedures, detainee handling, and biometric technologies; a mobility squad with EOD and demolition specialists; and a military dog team. Construction engineers would be available from the battalion's construction and assessment platoon. The company headquarters would be expanded to include an intelligence section, civil affairs specialists, and an information operations (to include PSYOP and public affairs) team.
Majors or qualified senior captains would have to lead this expanded company. See In lieu of a traditional combat engineer platoon, the modified mobility platoon would consist of explosive ordinance disposal and demolition specialists and military dog teams.
See Figure 
21