# ID: 83cf9db813c742f798e6b049063587bb
# Title: The Forgotten Service: Determining the US Army's Role in Shaping American Strategy in the Asia-Pacific Region
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The Asia-Pacific region is rapidly emerging as a major focus of American interest. Since America's acknowledgement of Asia???s importance in the 2010 National Security Strategy, the United States has sought means and developed methods with which to enhance engagement in the region. Regional organizations, dialogues, and diplomacy are among the methods the US employs. The role of American armed forces in the region is to support these important activities.
The undersigned certify that this thesis meets master's-level standards of research, augmentation, and expression. region is home to some of the world's fastest growing economies: China, India, and Indonesia to mention a few. At the same time, Asia-Pacific contains the world's largest populations, and the world's largest militaries. Defense spending in Asia is projected by this institute, the IISS, to surpass that of Europe this year, and there is no doubt that it will continue to increase in the future." 1 Given these developments, the Asia-Pacific region is rapidly emerging as a major focus of American interest. Since America's acknowledgement of Asia's importance in the 2010 National Security Strategy, the United States has sought means and developed methods with which to enhance engagement in the region. Regional organizations, dialogues, and diplomacy are among the methods the US employs. The role of American armed forces in the region is to support these important activities. As Panetta observed, the United States ascribes to a set of rules that include "the principle of open and free commerce, a just international order that emphasizes rights and responsibilities of all nations and a fidelity to the rule of law; open access by all to their shared domains of sea, air, space, and cyberspace; and resolving disputes without coercion or the use of force…Backing these principles has been the essential mission of the Untied States military in the Asia-Pacific for more than 60 years and it will be even a more importance mission in the future." 2 Thus, American military involvement will be incorporated in the nation's new strategic vision for the region, and it is imperative that the nation obtains all it can from each of its armed services.
As the United States rebalances to the Asia-Pacific region, current strategies focus on the contributions of air and sea-based capabilities articulated in the Air-Sea Battle concept. But while America looks toward the Pacific and sees a vast area of ocean and air, Asian nations view themselves regionally and primarily as land-based powers. This is particularly important because over half the world's population lives on the Asian continent. Given the cultures of Asian nations and America's military history in the Asia-Pacific theater, we should not neglect the 1 Leon E. Panetta, "Remarks by Secretary Panetta at the Sangri-La Dialogue in Singapore," (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2012), http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=5049. 
2
potential contributions of the US Army to Asian-Pacific strategy. It is also important for the Army to think seriously and critically about how it can best contribute to furthering America's strategic interests in the region.
The emerging Air-Sea Battle (ASB) concept centers primarily on the issue of access, specifically addressing how to counter China's growing anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) capabilities. Cognizant of burgeoning military technologies and the ability for near-peer competitors to exploit them, the United States finds itself in a position in which it must ensure its ability to maintain and strengthen its influence in a region possessing growing global stature and importance. According to a 2010 Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSBA) paper, the United States has a clear strategic choice, either "to risk a loss of military access to areas vital to its security -and those of key allies and partners to whom it is committed by treaty or law -or to explore options that can preserve the stable military balance that has seen the region enjoy a period of unparalleled peace and prosperity." 3 For the near future, ASB is the US armed services' answer to addressing A2/AD challenges.
The manner in which ASB will tackle the problem of access involves the concerted application of technology and military systems.
According to the DOD's Air-Sea Battle Office, "The ASB Concept's solution to the A2/AD challenge in the global commons is to develop networked, integrated forces capable of attack-in-depth to disrupt, destroy and defeat adversary forces (NIA/D3). ASB's vision of networked, integrated, and attack-in-depth (NIA) operations requires the application of cross-domain operations across all the interdependent warfighting domains (air, maritime, land, space, and cyberspace, to disrupt, destroy 
3
and defeat (D3) A2/AD capabilities and provide maximum operational advantage to friendly joint and coalition forces." 
4
Such a narrow perspective can lead to the neglect of other important security needs of the Asia-Pacific region. In 2009, with the Asia-Pacific in mind, Defense Secretary Robert Gates requested the Navy and Air Force to develop a concept to address the access challenges present in the region. 
5
Americans tend to look at the Asia-Pacific region from the perspective of the country's west coast. From there, America looks outward and sees a large expanse of ocean and air. Looking at a map bolsters this perspective, as the color blue dominates the area. Adding to this conception, this ocean-air perspective seems to end where land borders appear, thereby failing to acknowledge the existence of the land at the other side. This is unfortunate because people live on land. It is upon the land in which Asian strategies originate. It is in the human domain that human interaction and engagement exist. The sea and the air are important primarily to the extent that they influence life on land.
While sea and air forces must have a significant role in America's new strategic vision, political and military leaders cannot afford to neglect the role of land forces in a region in which armies possess the greatest military influence over national affairs. 
6
Asian states have a history of their forces playing an influential role in domestic and international politics, an aspect that continues today. Throughout the region, the armed forces are crucial actors in not only domestic and international affairs, but also in state and nation building, political domination, maintaining order, and ensuring international security. 
7
8
10
In Air Power and Armies, John Slessor echoed Corbett about the importance of complementary military action. He asserted that ground and air assets should to be nested in a larger strategic context in which "each must be applied in such a way as to make the best use of, and create the best opportunities for the other." 12 For Slessor, the combined forces primary objective in a continental campaign "will be the defeat of that army-or at least its expulsion" to a distance that gives depth for air defense. 
13
14
9
10
11
12 J.C. Slessor, Air Power and Armies (Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press, 2009), 82. 
13
14
army, which includes reconnaissance and observation for the army and direct attack by the air force-both directed to the same end." 
15
To be successful in the Asia-Pacific region, the Untied States must integrate and synchronize the contributions of all the armed services.
Each service possesses its own capabilities with which to address particular aspects of the Asia-Pacific theater. Access and coverage problems are real and require real solutions. The concept of Air-Sea Battle argues that air and maritime assets are best tailored to address these access and coverage concerns. At the same time, a human contact and engagement problem also exists. This is where land component assets may best contribute. The solutions to these challenges lie in shades of purple. Only by marrying the specialties and experiences of all the services in the region can the United States best serve its interests.
But in order for this to happen, the US Army needs to determine how it can best meet the America's Asia-Pacific requirements.
The research question may here be stated as follows: "What role should the US Army play in shaping American strategy in the Asia-Pacific region?"
This question is particularly important in the case of America's withdrawal of ground combat forces from Iraq in 2011 and Afghanistan in 2014 and its reluctance to engage in protracted ground wars during a time when the nation shifts its attention to Asia and the Pacific. As the Army looks toward a defining narrative for its contributions to achieving American interests, it is important for the United States and the Army to remember its past and the characteristics that have always existed in the region and in American warfare. The Army has always played an important role in US engagement in Asia and the Pacific. There needs to be an understanding why the Army's role has been significant and if there are reasons to assume otherwise during America's rebalance to the Pacific. This is vital if assuming that China will continue its current trajectory of economic, military, and political growth while North Korea remains a volatile, dangerous regime intent on becoming a viable nuclear power.
To find the answer, this thesis first reviews the US Army's historical legacy in the Asia-Pacific, from its occupation of the Philippines in the early 20 th century to its contemporary roles a century later. While Chapter Four provides an analytical evaluation and institutional review. It examines similarities and differences between past and present actions and motivations in the region, as well as the causes of those similarities and differences. It then discusses the implications of these similarities for the United States and its armed services. Information and conclusions from the preceding chapters will provide the source material for this analysis.
Chapter Five assesses America's requirements for its Army in the The Americans returned Aguinaldo to the Philippines via steamer 
3 Linn, The Philippine War, 1899
-1902
, 8. 4 Linn, The Philippine War, 1899
-1902
, 8. 5 Brian McAllister Linn, The Philippine War, 1899
-1902
(Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2000)
6
7 Linn, The Philippine War, 1899
-1902, 5-6.
8
9
10
13
18
19
July 1902, fighting continued for several more years, especially against the Muslim insurgents in the southern islands known as the Moros. 
20
Clausewitz put it, "every attack has to take into account the defense that is necessarily inherent in it, in order clearly to understand its disadvantages and to anticipate them." 21 Second, while naval forces are necessary to project power in the Pacific, they have only limited influence ashore, particularly for protracted operations. For that, one needs an army.
Following the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, Americans were eager to join a war that had been going on for years. After launching its surprise attack, Japan was certain to be a Pacific, each command conducted its own operations with its own ground, air, and naval forces. 
22
19
20
23
24
25
42
43
In January 1945, MacArthur's 6 th Army, 7 th Fleet, and 5 th Air Force invaded the Philippines' most populous island, Luzon. While the 7 th Fleet and supporting 3d Fleet suffered high losses as a result of Japanese kamikazes, the major portion of the land campaign took six months of hard fighting. The capture of Manila was particularly brutal. The 6 th Army suffered 10,000 casualties while killing over 100,000 Japanese. 
44
45
The General Headquarters of the Far East Command was responsible for the military forces in Japan, Okinawa, and 
Korea. 46
51
52
American experiences in the Pacific during WWII highlighted two important lessons. The first was that staging areas require the capture and holding of ground, demanding offensive action that can be bloody and hard-fought against a well-entrenched enemy. For this, the combination of various armed service components working toward accomplishing an objective is essential. As Corbett observes, "It may be that the command of the sea is of so urgent an importance that the army will have to devote itself to assisting the fleet in its special task before it can act directly against the enemy's territory and land forces; on the other hand, it may be that the immediate duty of the fleet will be to forward military action ashore before it is free to devote itself wholeheartedly to the destruction of the enemy's fleets." 
53
61
62
63
Army, was approximately half the size of a battalion combat team from the 21 st Infantry Regiment of the 24 th Infantry Division when it arrived near Osan on 5 July. 
64
58 Stewart,
ed.,
American Military History,
Volume II,
224. 59 Stewart,
ed.,
American Military History,
Volume II,
224. 60
61
62
63
64
73
67
War, 1950
War, -1953." 68 ." 68
69
70
71
72
War, 1950
War, -1953." 73 ." 73
-2012 Defense Strategic Guidance
The Asia-Pacific region provides security challenges and concerns not only for the United States, but also for regional actors themselves.
China, Russia, South Korea, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and Australia all have geopolitical interests in the region. The security concerns and interests of the regional actors reach into the heart of those states' military and domestic interests. Understanding the security concerns of the regional actors is thus essential for America to develop its policies.
There are several common security concerns of Asia-Pacific states.
Terrorism, border and territorial disputes, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the growth of cyber threats all warrant attention.
At the same time, transnational threats are attracting as much attention as military threats. Domestic concerns are prevalent with the majority of ASEAN countries, which compels them to look both inward and outward.
Similarly, China and Russia are just as concerned with maintaining internal stability as they are with their geopolitical standing.
Looking outwardly causes several regional actors to be concerned with two states in particular, China and North Korea. If any states have the potential to cause conflict by either deliberately provocative action or action that is misinterpreted as being provocative, these are they.
Chinese growing, economic, political, and military assertiveness creates apprehension among other actors about both its demonstrated capabilities and its at times opaque interests. North Korea's nuclear capabilities and its stockpiles of other weapons of mass destruction make it a threat to regional stability. Together, China and North Korea represent the two greatest threats to American interests in the Asia-Pacific. These threats, however, also provide the US opportunities to strengthen alliances and promote stability. In other words, China wants others to see it as not seeking hegemonic power, but to view the US as the state that will destabilize the region through its interest in the Asia-Pacific. Explaining its actions, China states that it needs to "safeguard its national unification, territorial integrity and development interests." 
5
Among them are China's territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests; Japan's claims over the Diaoyu/Senkaku islands; Taiwan as "the biggest threat to the peaceful development of cross-Straits relations"; and natural disasters, security accidents and public-health incidents. 
6
Promoting an idea of diversified armed forces capable of carrying out multiple roles, China has developed policies and principles that guide the employment of its armed forces:
Safeguarding national sovereignty, security and territorial integrity, and supporting the country's peaceful development. This is the goal of China's efforts in strengthening its national defense and the sacred mission of its armed forces, as stipulated in the Constitution of the People's Republic of China and other relevant laws. China's armed forces unswervingly implement the military strategy of active defense, guard against and resist aggression, contain separatist forces, safeguard border, coastal and territorial air security, and protect national maritime rights and interests and national security interests in outer space and cyber space. 'We will not attack unless we are attacked; but we will surely counterattack if attacked.' Following this principle, China will resolutely take all necessary measures to safeguard its national sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
7
Given the North Korean regime's lack of engagement with the international community, it remains an enigma to many outsiders. Its with the other five either retired or executed. 
9
10
North Korea consistently seeks to legitimize itself as a regional power through showcases of bravado. Shortly after taking power, Kim's regime engaged in a number of provocations against South Korea to include the successful launching of a satellite into space, the country's third nuclear test, cyber attacks against South Korean banks and television stations, and the firing of artillery in South Korean coastal waters. 12 Direct threats to attack Guam, Okinawa, Hawaii, and the American mainland followed. 
13
15
As demonstrated during its hosting of the 2014 Winter Olympic emphasizes protecting the country and its population against acts of terrorism, ethnic and religious extremism, and international crime to include drug trafficking. Nevertheless, while demographic decline and international migration are concerns, there is reluctance to address the issue with Russia's neighbors such as the former Soviet republics and  Military District. Expanding the area of authority of the former Far Eastern Military District, the new district places control over the entire border under a single military command. 
20
21
The ROK is not only a key US ally in the Asia-Pacific, but it also Viewing North Korea as its most direct threat, the ROK states its intension to "eliminate the enemy's will to carry out provocations through a concept of active defense," while addressing any acts of provocation with a "swift, accurate, and thorough response within our sovereign rights of self-defense." 
32
Bolstering the ROK's self-defense capabilities and upholding the ROK-US Alliance to promote stability and peace on the peninsula are coupled with engagements with neighboring countries to "maintain peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula." Acknowledging the ROK's close proximity to China, Russia, and Japan has resulted in the ROK's seeking opportunities to conduct mutual exchanges and cooperation to achieve regional peace and stability.
Its shared border with North Korea and history of war with its northern neighbor is an overbearing issue in maintain South Korea's stability. Despite the constant threat from North Korea, the ROK has prospered over the past 60 years. Its goal is to continue to do so.
The  China over the South China Sea. 
36
37
War era has brought peace to the ASEAN member states. To these countries, traditional security threats in the region come from the Korean Peninsula, the Taiwan Straight, and the South China Sea. 
38
39
41
Australia is a strong US partner in the region and one of the foundations of renewed American interest in the Pacific. It is a partnership forged and solidified during the Pacific campaigns of WWII.
Australia's geographic location places it in a position where it is keenly aware of the regional and international relationships it must develop and maintain. Australia's largest trading partner is China, and it is currently beginning a multi-million dollar construction project to accommodate the rotation of US Marines. 
42
In 2013, the Australian government released Strong and Secure: A Strategy for Australia's National Security. This national security document, Australia's first, outlined the Pacific actor's key security interests and provided former Prime Minster Julia Gillard's vision for "A unified national security system that anticipates threats, protects the nation, and shapes the world in Australia's interest." 
43
45
46
47
48
49
50
Mirroring the concerns of other regional actors, flashpoints include the Korean Peninsula, the Taiwan Straight, the East China Sea, and the 48 Australian Government, Strong and Secure, ii. 
49
50
South China Sea. 
51
78
79
Regime collapse could lead to proliferation of these weapons as opportunities to introduce WMDs into the black market increase.
Preventing the proliferation of these weapons will be a high priority for the US and its allies. As stated in the Defense Strategic Guidance, "The proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons technology has the potential to magnify the threats posed by regional state actors, giving them more freedom of action to challenge US interests." 80 Containing North Korea's WMD stockpiles and eliminating these weapons will be a time-intensive and methodical endeavor requiring specialized skills sets, equipment, and personnel.
North Korean provocations of South Korea could also lead to military conflict. Given the ROK's assertion that it will retaliate against future aggression, hostilities on the Korean Peninsula have the potential to draw in global and regional actors quickly. If such an incident occurs, the people of South Korea will be those most affected.   There is potential for the US to influence the level of support China and Russia provide to North Korea. While remote, given China and Russia's interests in maintaining stable conditions on the Peninsula, especially its border areas, there may be cleavages to exploit. This is where emerging relationships may help. For example, John Delury, a historian at Yonsei University in Seoul, observes, "The most overlooked development in northeast Asia is the rapid strengthening of China-South Korea relations." 86 This is significant, particularly in light of Beijing's complicated relationship with Pyongyang since North Korea's third nuclear test in February 2013 and Kim Jong-un's execution of his uncle, Jang Song-thaek, who had built a strong relationship with China. 
87
88
Korea. 89
90
The security interests of the Asia-Pacific region transcend borders and continents. WMD proliferation, border disputes, piracy, cyber threats, and terrorism are just a few of the challenges facing states with interests in this dynamic region. The security interests of China, North Korea, Russia, Japan, South Korea, ASEAN, and Australia all vary depending on national histories, proximity to other key regional actors, and ideas of territory. China seeks to increase its global stature and modernize its armed forces while assuaging fears of Chinese hegemony. North Korea's actions show a regime taking steps to maintain its power, using bellicose acts to garner international attention and gain recognition as a nuclear power. Russia is looking inward at the same time it is demonstrably asserting itself in its perceived sphere of influence. Japan's focus is on threats from North Korea and China as it seeks nonproliferation of WMD and shows concern over territorial disputes.
South Korea sees North Korea as the greatest threat to its economic and political rise. The ASEAN member states view cooperation and collaboration as essential in limiting disputes and preventing regional conflicts. Australia seeks to secure its sovereignty, protect its people, and foster an environment of regional stability. Understanding how these key Asian-Pacific actors view the region helps the United States put its own interests into context. America's overall national interests are security, prosperity, values, and international order. Acknowledging the growing influence of the Asia-Pacific in the 21 st century, the US has stated its intention to rebalance its international stance toward the region. At the same time, several American interests lay within the region's boundaries. To help facilitate access and influence within the Asia-Pacific, the US seeks to continue its already-close relations with regional partners and foster new alliances. Two main states of concern are North Korea and China. North Korea's status as a nuclear power concerns the US as it seeks to keep the rogue state's ambitions under control, while ensuring it adheres to international obligations. At the same time, the US has several questions regarding China's intentions as it emerges as a regional power.
China and North Korea represent the greatest threats to US interests in the region. As China continues to rise, it is America's greatest long-term threat. While reluctant to engage in outright conflict, China is becoming sufficiently aggressive to raise questions regarding its intent in the region. Its rising economic and military power, combined with political assertiveness are sources for increased tensions.
In the short term, North Korea posses the greatest threat to regional stability and US interests. It flagrantly violates international norms and frequently engages in provocation. North Korea's threat derives from an unpredictable, unstable political regime; a nuclear capability combined with an active WMD program; and a long tradition of hostility between itself and South Korea.
The threats to American interests in the Asia-Pacific also offer opportunities to further US regional goals. These opportunities are: 1) using the fear of a rising China to enhance existing alliances with Japan, South Korea, ASEAN countries, and Australia; 2) using China's need for continued economic expansion and maintenance of domestic stability to embark on a long, arduous process of converting it from a competitor to a partner in the region; and 3) using North Korea's erratic, dangerous behavior to a) solidify the US-ROK-Japan relationship and b) detach Russia and China from its alliance system.
The contemporary security needs of Asian-Pacific actors display their perceived position in the region and the direction they wish to go.
Experience dictates several of these interests. For the US to understand better what steps it should take in the region to further its interests, it should know the similarities and the differences between the past and today.  
Echoes from the past reverberate. While Asian prosperity and the characteristics of security concerns may have changed, elements of American ideals and practices hold steady. America remains concerned about Chinese and Russian actions in the region, as well as their perceptions of US regional engagement. At the same time, the region's geography remains unchanged as it did during America's engagement in the region during the 20 th century. Perhaps more importantly, the nature of security remains eternal and is reflected in the beliefs of regional actors. Developments in technology and tactics fail to alter the basic elements of conflict management and state motivation. In 2011, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, writing on the importance of the region to US interests, highlighted that the "most important tasks of American statecraft over the next decade will therefore be to lock in a substantially Today, the US is taking several steps to alleviate those fears. One is to maintain regional alliances, assuring diplomatic cooperation. The anchors for US engagement in the Asia-Pacific are treaty alliances with Japan, South Korea, Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand. With the exception of Thailand, these alliances have been forged through previous US experiences in the Pacific. As Secretary Clinton observed, "They have underwritten regional peace and security for more than half a century, shaping the environment for the region's remarkable economic ascent.
They leverage our regional presence and enhance our regional leadership 
Honor can manifest itself in the perception of one's worth. It is the belief that a group of peoples or national identity is deserving of certain stature or destined for greatness. There are several past examples of honor motivating state behavior and influencing security in Asia and the Pacific. A resurgence of American national greatness materialized during the McKinley and Roosevelt administrations, leading to US expansion into the Pacific in an attempt to bring "order out of chaos". 
4
5
6
7
8
9
Interest encompasses a state's quest for security and prosperity. Like attempts to counter Soviet and communist influence during the Cold War, the US is actively engaging regional actors to increase its security. Recent American policies toward ASEAN countries, for instance, are attempts to counter ASEAN countries' traditional ties with China and are designed to gain control of the Asian Rimland, an area some experts believe will be the location of Washington's and Beijing's struggle for Asian dominance. 13 Also, American efforts to limit the effects of Chinese A2/AD capabilities, the patrolling of Asia's sea lanes, and increased military presence and bilateral military exercises all work to maintain a concept of national security that originated after WWII. Today, economic interests in the region continue and are a source of engagement. "Harnessing Asia's growth and dynamism is central to American economic and strategic interests," according to Clinton. 16 She adds, "Open markets in Asia provide the United States with unprecedented opportunities for investment, trade, and access to cutting-edge technology. Our economic recovery at home will depend on 
13
14 Hunt,
Ideology and U.S. Foreign Policy,
38. 15
16
exports and the ability of American firms to tap into the vast and growing consumer base of Asia." 
17
Japan's imperial history of committed atrocities in Korea and China, for instance, are still a source of great Korean and Chinese animosity toward the Japanese. The need to acquire resources is a need that transcends ideology. Regional border disputes and territorial claims are about more than the addition of land. They are about claims to the resources in and around these disputed areas. The ongoing dispute between China and Japan over the Senkaku/Diaoyu islands is not about claims to a rock in the East China Sea, but rather to the rich natural gas deposits under the sea around it. According to Shelia Smith, a senior fellow at the Council of Foreign Relations, "Energy is clearly what's driving a lot of Chinese behavior."
18
State motivations in the Asia-Pacific remain the same today as those that impelled America's first intervention into the region. Fear, honor, and interest will certainly carry over into the future, as well.
Many of the differences between the past and the present arise from Asia's emergence as a significant actor in international politics and economics. Many argue that the Asian Century has begun. This emergence has caused American dominance in the region to wane at a time it seeks to maintain its regional influence. The strategic environment has also changed. During past American military intervention in the Asia-Pacific, third-world status primarily dominated the region. Western-style modernity did not exist, particularly in areas such as infrastructure and technology. There are many past examples of American political leaders and military service members considering Asian peoples inferior, deserving of either scorn or pity. 
19
20
Other differences complicate the strategic environment. Weapons of mass destruction are an emerging threat in the region. While North Korea's conventional capabilities remain a threat as they have since 1950, its WMD program presents new problems for any military force seeking to deter, defend against it, or occupy it after an internal collapse.
The US and its Asian allies now must concern themselves with rogue nations possessing nuclear weapons and their development of long-range missile technology. WMD proliferation is now a concern for multiple regional actors, especially with the progression of global terrorism.
Despite these very real and important differences, several similarities exist between the past and the present.
The differences and similarities between America's past experiences in the Asia-Pacific and those of today offer policymakers several valuable insights. To further America's security interests in the region, it should mitigate the probability of armed conflict. This requires an understanding of how fear, honor, and interest will influence the likelihood of armed conflict in the region. Concurrently, US policymakers must be aware of how North Korea's WMD program and China's global rise as an economic power create challenges to US interests.
There are three implications of the similarities between America's past experiences and today. First, because fear, honor, and interest affect all regional actors, there will continue to be the likelihood of armed conflict in the region. Second, conflicting honor and interest between China and Japan have a high probability of causing armed conflict in the long term, either unintentional or deliberate. China's entangling interest with other regional actors such as South Korea, Australia, and ASEAN would further complicate such a conflict. Finally, because fear, honor, and interest all exist in the DPRK-ROK relationship, a high-intensity conflict is most likely to occur on the Korean Peninsula relative to other locations on the Asian mainland. Given this likelihood and the potential severity of this conflict, this is the most important conflict to deter.
Two implications result from the differences in past and contemporary American experiences in the region. First, North Korea's possession of WMD and its ambitions to become a nuclear power with delivery capability make the prevention of a high-intensity war vital.
Second, China's rise as an economic power coupled with American dependence on Chinese trade, makes a healthy US-China relationship paramount in the region. These implications mean that the US should 1) strengthen allied partnerships in the region, 2) maintain military presence in the region as a deterrent, and 3) engage in diplomatic and collaborative efforts with China to reduce the chances of misunderstanding leading to conflict. American efforts to maintain and improve diplomatic relations with Asian-Pacific actors must be an imperative to promote regional stability.
Such relationships should emphasize shared cooperation and interests in an effort to reduce potential conflict and further American regional interests. Opportunities to do this through military cooperative efforts are available.
There is a need for the US to maintain a military presence in the region to maintain conventional deterrent strength. Robert Kagan suggests that most East Asian countries believe that a "reliable and predominant America has a stabilizing and pacific effect." 
21
22
The nature of security and warfare remain eternal and are reflected in the beliefs of regional actors. Technological advances and new tactics fail to alter the basic elements of conflict management and state motivation. Fear, honor, and interest will always drive state behavior just as they did in Ancient Greece. Fear, honor, and interest not only explain the security concerns of regional actors, but potential conflicts involving North and South Korea, China, Russia, and the United States. Despite these similarities, the characteristics of security are evolving and the security concerns of Asian-Pacific actors reflect this growing trend. Not only are cyber capabilities a concern, but also WMD. To further America's security interests in the region, the US should mitigate conflict through maintaining an active military presence in the region, while building regional partnerships and cooperating with the Chinese to the extent cooperation is feasible.
Meeting Army Capabilities Required in the Asia-Pacific Region And if for one moment you believe that because Iraq is over and Afghanistan is winding down that the future holds few challenges for you, then you are terribly mistaken. Because as long as there are threats to this great Nation, the Army upon which this Nation was founded, will be the cornerstone of its security, its freedom and its future. And you, as Army Officers, will shape that future, secure our freedoms, and protect us from harm.
Admiral 
To ensure it addresses its interests, the US must apply all elements of national power. In terms of military power, the US must take advantage of the Army and its dominance within the human domain.
Reexamining the capabilities the Army has given the nation in the Pacific during the 20 th century one recalls: 1) counterinsurgency, 2) civic action,
3) inculcation of democratic values, 4) sustained ground combat, 5) occupation, 6) foreign military assistance, 7) deterrence, and 8) assistance to regional stability. Today's security interests require blending these capabilities with new requirements.
Taking into account threats to regional stability in the Asia-Pacific, the 21 st century national requirements for America's army in the region should include four primary and four auxiliary missions:
1) Deterring War and Enhancing Regional Stability (Primary)
2) Preparing for War (Primary)
3) Foreign Military Assistance (Primary) Deterring a major war and enhancing regional stability (primary)
North Korea is the greatest short-term threat to regional stability and US interests in the region. Its rhetoric and actions belie those of a state desiring peaceful cohabitation. The Korean Peninsula is the most likely origin of a major war in the region. Deterring North Korean aggression and preventing war between North and South Korea is of paramount importance. The US Army must assist in maintaining deterrence on the Korean Peninsula. There is no greater deterrent and show of US commitment than boots on the ground.
The Army must remain ready to fight in the Pacific if deterrence fails. The most likely location for such failure is a war on the Korean Peninsula. In the event of a war, the Army is to "destroy the enemy's forces as a means to further an end."
1
To prepare for war the Army must train to fight, conduct joint and combined exercises, engage in war planning, and prepare logistically. 
Varieties in government, cultures, and grievances all influence terrorism in Asia. While significant characteristics distinguish terrorist threats faced by each Asian-Pacific country, similarities also exist.
3
Countries such as the Philippines and Thailand have histories grappling with local ethno-nationalist Islamic insurgencies rooted in colonial policies and fighting for separation or autonomy. 
4
5
6
As a byproduct of Foreign Military Assistance, military-to-military engagements provide opportunities to educate national armies in civilmilitary relations and assist the US State Department in people-to-people engagement. Given the influential role of armies in the region, the US Army is well-suited for this purpose.
The East Japan Earthquake in Japan in 2011. 
9
A and tracked vehicles, beginning in February 2014. 
10
11
The Army should also examine other ways it can contribute to deterring wars and promoting regional security interests. The situational environment is influenced by the emergence of cyber warfare. This is an area where the Army has the opportunity to contribute significantly to national security in an era where senior civilian leadership is reluctant to engage in conventional ground warfare. The Army should bolster the size and capabilities of its cyber forces, both Active and Reserve, in an effort to provide operational forces in cyberspace capability. This not only includes broadening training and education opportunities while shortening acquisition timelines, but also fielding cyber teams to commands within the Asia-Pacific theater and working with regional allies.
While fiscal restraints may make this requirement challenging, the Army must ensure that its combat capabilities are commensurate to counter the threats associated with the Asia-Pacific. The Army has already taken steps to prioritize the Asia-Pacific. One such step was the elevation of US Army Pacific from a three-star to four-star command.
Organizing regionally aligned forces are another step in this direction and allow tailored forces with regional expertise to train and develop relationships with Asian-Pacific armies. 
12
13
14
The threat of terrorist activity in Asia-Pacific nations requires the Army to be available to assist partner governments with their counterterrorism efforts. just as powerful. 
18
19
Information Support Group battalions to commit regionally specialized teams to Asian partners.
As the largest and most respected armed services in the world, the US armed forces are ideally suited to highlight a dynamic, professional defense establishment under civilian control, governed by rule of law, and in the service of a democratic system. 
20
21
This requires extensive knowledge and social awareness of the regional actors and strategic climate.
Responding to humanitarian and natural crises (auxiliary) 
18
In the event of a Korean contingency, ground forces entering North Korea will have to engage in CWMD elimination and include offensive operations such as characterize, control, detect, destroy, exploit isolate, 
The most likely scenario in which the Army would need to contribute to establishing military governance is in Korea following a North Korean regime collapse or post-conflict. According to Francis Fukuyama, such a scenario would require security forces, police, humanitarian relief, and technical assistance to restore electricity, water, banking and payment systems, and other areas of governance. 
27
28
American security interests in the Asia-Pacific deserve a response from each US national security asset. From its armed forces, the US should expect specific contributions from each service to address threats to US interests. There must not be a tendency to limit regional challenges America should require the Army to be responsible for seven missions that fit well within the human domain of operations. Primary missions should include deterring war and enhancing regional stability, preparing for war, and Foreign Military Assistance. To meet the requirement of deterring war and enhancing regional stability the Army 
28
29 Odierno,
Amos,
McRaven,
"Strategic Landpower,
5.
Auxiliary missions should include helping inculcate American values, responding to humanitarian and natural crises, securing and eliminating WMD, and establishing military governance. Inculcating American values is achieved through military-to-military engagement and the demonstration of a professional army working under civilian control.
To respond to humanitarian and natural crises the Army should develop a HA/DR additional skill identifier and track personnel with this special skill set to find disaster relief leadership and aid in HA/DR planning at the operational level. Securing and eliminating WMD requires the Army to stand up rapidly deployable units with CWMD expertise and consider establishing a specialized organization able to integrate WMD intelligence from several national and international assets. To establish military governance, the Army should ensure it is proficient in such capabilities as security forces, police, humanitarian relief, and technical assistance to restore electricity, water, banking and payment systems, and other areas of governance. military power."
2
For America, its overall national interests are security, prosperity, values, and international order. Acknowledging the Asian Century, the US has turned its attention to the region and proclaimed its interests.
Continuing its already-close relations with regional partners and fostering new alliances helps the US achieve access and influence within the Asia-Pacific.
China and North Korea represent the greatest threats to US interests in the region. China's continuing rise in economic, military, and political stature is America's greatest long-term threat. Of great concern is China's political assertiveness. Its rising economic and military power, combined with this political assertiveness are sources for increased tensions in the region. In addition, the US seeks greater transparency from China. North Korea, meanwhile, posses the greatest threat to regional stability and US interests in the short term. North Korea's threat derives from an unpredictable, unstable political regime, a nuclear capability combined with an active WMD program, and a long tradition of hostility between North and South Korea. As North Korea continues to seek status as a nuclear power, the US desires to keep the rogue state's ambitions under control while ensuring it adheres to international obligations.
Threats to American interests in the Asia-Pacific also offer opportunities. Opportunities to further US strategic goals are: 1) use the 
American troops left the peninsula after the government of the Republic of Korea (ROK) was formed on 15 August 1948. 56 Following the departure, North Korea embarked on a campaign of intimidation against the ROK. Repeated propaganda attacks and frequent border raids across the 38 th Parallel ensued. The US, seeking to see the newly formed Republic prosper, provided economic aid and technical assistance. Military aid to the ROK was limited to light weapons,
Cavite 7-13 October 1899 and 4 January-9 February 1900 Tarlac 5-20 November 1899 San Fabian 6-19 November 1899 Mindanao 4 July 1902-31 December 1904 and 22 October 1905 Jolo 1-24 May 1905 and 6-8 March 1906 and 11-15 June 1913 WWII-Asiatic-Pacific Theater Philippine Islands 7 December 1941 -10 May 1942 Burma, 1942 7 December 1941 -26 May 1942 Central Pacific 7 December 1941 -6 December 1943 East Indies 1 January -22 July 1942 India-Burma 2 April 1942 -28 January 1945 Air Offensive, Japan 17 April 1942 -2 September 1945 Source: Adapted from "The Army Flag and Its Streamers," US Army Center of Military History, http://history.army.mil.
Counteroffensive, Phase II 1 July 1966 -31 May 1967 Counteroffensive, Phase III 1 June 1967 -29 January 1968 Tet Counteroffensive 30 January 1968-1 April 1968 Counteroffensive, Phase IV 2 April 1968 -30 June 1968 Counteroffensive, Phase V 1 July 1968-1 November 1968 Counteroffensive, Phase VI 2 November 1968 -22 February 1969 Tet 69/Counteroffensive 23 February 1969 -8 June 1969 Summer-Fall 1969 9 June 1969 -31 October 1969 Winter-Spring 1970 1 November 1969 -30 April 1970 Sanctuary Counteroffensive 1 May 1970 -30 June 1970 Counteroffensive, Phase VII 1 July 1970 -30 June 1971 Consolidation I 1 July 1971 -30 November 1971 Consolidation II 1 December 1971 -29 March 1972 Cease-Fire 30 March 1972 -28 January 1973 Source: Adapted from "The Army Flag and Its Streamers," US Army Center of Military History, http://history.army.mil.
Source: Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense. Chapter 3 Contemporary Security Needs of the Asia-Pacific Region US economic and security interests are inextricably linked to developments in the arc extending from the Western Pacific and East Asia into the Indian Ocean region and South Asia, creating a mix of evolving challenges and opportunities.
14  
14  
19 Andrew Feickert, "US Special Operations Forces (SOF): Background and Issues for Congress (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 18 September 2013), 4. 20 Andrew Scobell, The US Army and the Asia-Pacific (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, April 2001), 32. 21 Scobell, The US Army and the Asia-Pacific, 32.
Air-Sea Battle: Service Collaboration to Address Anti-Access & Area Denial Challenges (Washington, DC: Air-Sea Battle Office, May 2013), 4.
Air-Sea Battle: Service Collaboration to Address Anti-Access & Area Denial Challenges, 1.
Muthiah Alagappa, Coercion and Governance: The Declining Political Role of the Military in Asia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001), 2.
Alagappa, Coercion and Governance, 2.   
Andrew Scobell, The US Army and the Asia-Pacific (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, April 2001), 32.
Slessor, Air Power and Armies,
[4]
[5]
Walter LaFeber, The New Empire: An Interpretation of AmericanExpansion, 1860-1898  (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1998), 382.   
Mark Moyer, A Question of Command: Counterinsurgency from the Civil War to Iraq (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009), 65.
Moyer, A Question of Command, 65.   
Office of the Historian, "The Philippine-American War, 1899-1902," US Department of State. http://history.state.gov/milestones/1899-1913/war.
Office of the Historian, "The Philippine-AmericanWar, 1899War,  -1902."  ."   
Moyer, A Question of Command, 71.   
Moyer, A Question of Command, 72.   
Moyer, A Question of Command, 72.   
Moyer, A Question of Command, 72.   
Allan R. Millett and Peter Maslowski, For the Common Defense: A Military History of the United States of America (New York: The Free Press, 1994), 307.
Moyer, A Question of Command¸73.
Moyer, A Question of Command, 73.   
Richard L. Millett, Searching for Stability: The US Development of Constabulary Forces in Latin America and the Philippines (Fort Leavenworth: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2010, 7.
Center of Military History, United States Army in World War II Reader's Guide, 41.
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 441.   
Richard W.Stewart, ed., American Military History, Volume II:  The United States Army in a GlobalEra, 1917
-2008
Stewart, ed., American Military History, Volume II, 167.   
Stewart, ed., American Military History, Volume II, 167.   
Stewart, ed., American Military History, Volume II, 167.   
Stewart, ed., American Military History, Volume II, 167.   
Donald L. Miller, D-Days in the Pacific (New York: Simon & Schuster Paperbacks, 2005), 48.
Miller, 48.   
Center of Military History, United States Army in World War II Reader's Guide, 47.
Center of Military History, United States Army in World War II Reader's Guide, 47.
Stewart, ed., American Military History, Volume II, 170.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 443.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 443.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 443.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 443.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 463.   
Miller, 91.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 444.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 465.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 465.   
Center of Military History, Korea-1950 (Washington, DC: United States Army, 1997), 1.
Office of the Historian, "The Korean War, 1950-1953" US Department of State, http://history.state.gov.
Office of the Historian, "The KoreanWar, 1950War,  -1953."  ."   
Center of Military History, "Korea, 1951-1953" (Washington, DC: United States Army,  1997), 284.   
"Eighth Army History," Eighth Army, http://8tharmy.korea.army.mil/history.asp.
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
"Eighth Army History."
Stewart, Deepening Involvement, 1945-1965 (Washington, DC: United States Army,  2012), 5.   
Stewart, Deepening Involvement,
5.
Stewart, Deepening Involvement,
5.
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense,[576][577] 
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 577.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 577.   
Mark Clodfelter,  The Limits of Air Power: The American Bombing of North Vietnam (Lincoln: University of NebraskaPress, 2006, 43.   
Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973), 463.
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 578.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 581.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 588.   
Millett and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, 588.   
Transforming U.S. Army Pacific, 6.
Transforming U.S. Army Pacific, 6.
Clodfelter, The Limits of Air Power,[219][220] 
Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 1976), 218.   
Yuen Foong Khong, Analogies at War:Korea, Munich, Dien Bien Phu, and the Vietnam  Decisions of 1965 (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1992), 133-135.   
Asian Defence Yearbook
2012, Asian Defence Journal (Kuala Lumpur: Percetakan Osacar Sdn Bhd, 2012), 53.
Asian Defence Yearbook 2012, 53.
Information Office of the State Council, The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces (Beijing: Ministry of Defense, April 2013), http://eng.mod.gov.cn/Database/WhitePapers/2012.htm.
Information Office of the State Council, The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces.
Information Office of the State Council, The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces.
Information Office of the State Council, The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces.
Information Office of the State Council, The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces.
East Asian Strategic Review 2012, 60.   
Defense of Japan 2013 (Tokyo: Ministry of Defense, 2013), 2.
Defense of Japan 2013, 2.
Fouse, Issues of Engagement: Asian Perspectives on Transnational Security Challenges, 92-93.
Fouse, Issues of Engagement: Asian Perspectives on Transnational Security Challenges, 93.
"S. Korea, U.S. to Hold 2 nd Talks for Wartime Control Transfer."
"S. Korea, U.S. to Hold 2 nd Talks for Wartime Control Transfer," Yonhap News, 19 January 2014.
"S. Korea, U.S. to Hold 2 nd Talks for Wartime Control Transfer."
Gina Harkins, "Australians Invest Millions to Upgrade Military Facilities for Marines," Marine Corps Times, 14 October 2013.
Central Intelligence Agency, "Regional and World Maps," https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/docs/refmaps.html.
Central Intelligence Agency, "Regional and World Maps," https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/docs/refmaps.html.
Hillary Clinton, "America's Pacific Century," Foreign Policy, 11 October  
2011, http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2011/10/11/americas_pacific_century.
Clinton, "America's Pacific Century."   
Tanguy Struye De Swielande, "The Reassertion of the United States in the Asia-Pacific Region," Parameters (Spring 2012), 78-79.
Rupert Wingfield-Hayes, "Why Japan's Shinzo Abe went to Yasukuni," BBC News, 26 December 2013.
Melvyn P. Leffler, "The American Conception of National Security and the Beginnings of the Cold War," in American Foreign Policy: The Dynamics of Choice in the 21 st Century, 2d ed. (New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2004), 253.
Struye De Swielande, "The Reassertion of the United States in the Asia-Pacific Region," 77.
Clinton, America's Pacific Century.   
Clinton, America's Pacific Century.   
Marianne Lavelle and Jeff Smith, "Why Are China and Japan Sparring Over Eight Tiny, Uninhabited Islands?," National Geographic, 26 October 2012, http://news.nationalgoegraphic.com.
Hunt, Ideology and U.S. Foreign Policy, 80.   
Tami Davis Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare: The Evolution of British and American Ideas about StrategicBombing, 1914-1945 (Princeton: Princeton University  Press, 2002), 275.   
Robert Kagan, The Return of History and the End of Dreams (New York: Vintage Books, 2008), 94.
Kagan, The Return of History, 94.   
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), 97.
TR Fehrenbach, This Kind of War (New York: The MacMillan Company, 1963), 427.   
Scott Helfstein, "The Landscape of Jihadism in Southeast Asia," in Radical Islamic Ideology in Southeast Asia (West Point: Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, 1 October 2009),
4
5
6
News Release, NR-009-14, "Cavalry Unit Deploys to Republic of Korea," 7 January 2014.
News Release, NR-009-14, "Cavalry Unit Deploys to Republic ofKorea."   
Cheryl Pellerin, "Hagel: US to Send 2 More Aegis Ships to Japan," US Department of Defense, 6 April 2014, http://defense.gov.
I would like to acknowledge several people without whose support and help I would never have completed this study. First, I want to thank my former supervisor, 
COL Bradley T. Gericke
Dr. Harold Winton
surround China's emergence as a regional power. The United States acknowledges that China's growth has the potential "to affect the US economy and our security in a variety of ways," and wishes China would provide greater clarity as to its strategic intentions to avoid regional friction. 
58
America's interests in the Asia-Pacific coincide with the emergence of Asia as a major player in international politics and the global economy. However, the region is not without threats to order and stability. Several flashpoints exist accompanied by the potential for conflict. China and North Korea pose the greatest threats to US interests in the region. Despite these threats, opportunities also exist to advance US interests.
The greatest threats to US interests include those that have the potential to destabilize the Asia-Pacific region. As General Martin E. Dempsey notes, "All of the trends, demographic trends, geopolitical trends and military trends are shifting toward the Pacific. So our strategic challenges in the future will largely emanate out of the Pacific region, but also the littorals of the Indian Ocean." 
60
58
59
60
China. China matters today and will continue to matter in the future. It is the greatest long-term threat to US interests in the region.
Along with China's growth comes apprehension from several state actors, as China's intentions in the region are unknown. At the forefront of the Asian Century, the anticipation of Asian cultural and economic domination in the 21 st century, China's actions and relations affect the entire region. Militarily, many view China with caution, while others see little reason for concern. The truth is probably somewhere in between.
While posing the biggest long-term threat, any threat to US security interests derives from its rising economic and military power, combined with political assertiveness. This section looks at these three areas. participation in campaigns including the Philippine Insurrection, World War II, the Korean War, Vietnam, and it continues to contribute today. In many instances, America's technological advantage failed to eliminate the threat as hard fought, bloody confrontations drove on for years. Unseen enemies frustrated US troops and leadership as US forces found themselves facing an enemy unwilling to conduct operations on American terms. However, despite these challenges, ground forces were a deciding factor in eventual military success during every conflict. In the end, the capabilities the Army provided to 20 th century American intervention in the Asia-Pacific included: 1) counterinsurgency, 2) civic action, 3) inculcation of democratic values, 4) sustained ground combat, 5) occupation, 6) foreign military assistance, 7) deterrence, and 8) assistance to regional stability.
Understanding the Army's role in the region requires first an understanding of the global, regional, and local contexts of previous US conflicts in the area. In addition, warfare as a human endeavor requires engagement at the human level. The destruction of an enemy's army, engaging in counterinsurgency operations, deterring and defending ground, and performing stability and support missions, all require forces on the ground. Operational and strategic success requires all elements of combat power working in sync to achieve clear political goals.
The security interests of Asia and the Pacific affect states beyond regional borders. Several regional actors are influenced by WMD proliferation, border disputes, cyber threats, and terrorism. The security interests of China, North Korea, Russia, Japan, South Korea, ASEAN, and Australia all vary depending on their histories, proximity to other key regional actors, and concepts of territory. China's increase in global stature and military modernization have resulted in alarm from several regional and global actors. Speaking on China's growth, US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel remarked, "With this power comes new and wider responsibilities as to how you use your power, how you employ that situations such as North Korean regime collapse of post-Korean conflict, the Army should ensure it is proficient in such capabilities as security forces, police, humanitarian relief, and technical assistance to restore electricity, water, banking and payment systems, and other areas of governance.
The history of US involvement in the region and the proclivities of the various Asia-Pacific states suggest ground forces will most likely play a significant role in regional affairs. However, new environmental challenges and complexities exist. The Army must correctly appreciate the current regional complexities and ensure it is able to meet the strategic objectives of the United States in Asia and the Pacific. To do so, it will have to bolster its cyberspace forces, dedicate its own counter A2/AD assets to the region, retain an element of its counterinsurgency capabilities and expertise, identify and manage personnel with HA/DR experience, and expand its CWMD capabilities. Harkening to its legacy in the Asia-Pacific and realizing how it can best contribute to America's 21 st century interests, the Army will ensure that it does not become the forgotten service as America surveys the vast Pacific.