# ID: 844ef3181cce4ceb8b2fb2b1b83c56db
# Title: Soviet Theater Nuclear Forces' Issues
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1979.0
# Fulltext:
most Soviet citizens, of p.
This study examines the Soviet approach to transition from conventional to theater nuclear war, in the context of Soviet political and military style. The analysis suggests that Soviet transition would be determined by considerations of military expediency in the contest of political objectives that would be far from satisfied by a return to the status quo ante.
In Part I of the study the usual assumption that the Soviets would preempt at transition is set in the context of Soviet political and military theory. The Soviet approach to theater war and nuclear transition is a reflection of the distinctive Soviet style of war and seminal enduring characteristics unique to Russian/Soviet history and society, and the Soviet political system. While a comprehensive set of factors is examined in the analysis, the Soviet approach to theater war and nuclear transition is informed fundamentally by two essential determinants:
--Soviet political objectives.
--Soviet views of the "revolution in military affairs," and the consequences of TNF use.
The recourse to arguments of Soviet military and political style is an attempt to reach conclusions likely to be valid even under the shifting economic and demographic conditions of the 
19 8
Rejection of the political status-quo would animate Soviet behavior in war.
It is not implied that the Soviet Union would provoke an undertaking as "adventurous" as war, indeed Soviet military behavior would probably be responsive to perceptions of a severe Western threat. Therefore, it is likely that the Soviet threshold for transition from a political to 'a military solution is quite high. However, once that threshold is crossed, the only acceptable objective would be substantial progress in overturning the political status quo. Once Soviet political leaders decide upon a military solution in Europe, Soviet behavior would not correspond to the quickest termination of hostilities, but the quickest termination compatible with political objectives. the necessity for Soviet intelligence to anticipate successfully NATO transition intentions.
--
the necessity for the Soviet chain-of-command to act more rapidly than NATO once its nuclear release decision is determined.
--
the inadequacy of Soviet doctrine to address the possibility of a NATO nuclear release at the outset of conflict.
--
the extremely effective preemptive transition required in light of the Soviet doctrine of massing firepower for conventional operations (i.e., massed Warsaw Pact forces would provide high value targets for surviving NATO TNF).
However, it is necessary also to consider a much wider array of the incentives and disincentives for Soviet nuclear transition. Part 2 of the study is a comprehensive approach to this issue and suggests ways in which NATO actions can affect the balance of incentives and disincentives facing the Soviet planner.
A degree of skepticism must accompany any attempt to identify the Soviet approach to TNF employment as a rigid single-variant doctrine. Two factors render somewhat tenuous any specific predetermination of Soviet intentions for TNF use: the inferential nature of available evidence, and the probability that the political circumstances pursuant to the outbreak of conflict would shape the incentives/disincentives for transition. There can be no certainty as to whether or not the Soviets anticipate being compelled to wage war in Europe, nor if they envisage its particular political context.
However, while acknowledging the methodological constraints, it is argued that the Soviet General staff has determined a set of "school solutions" to TNF use. Theater nuclear doctrine has been integrated into general combined arms concepts, and military solutions have been designated for anticipated military problems.
A detailed discussion of the multiple sources of evidence used to analyze Soviet theater doctrine illustrates the difficulty of predetermining Soviet intentions. Five indicators of Soviet theater nuclear doctrine are analyzed: military literature, the Soviet force posture, military exercises, strategic culture, and military rationality. The thrust of this analysis of methodology is to the effect that:
.. Soviet military literature, while of value, may--on occasion--be more misleading than useful because Western readers are far removed from contemporary Soviet debate and strategic culture, and may easily neglect the fine linguistic nuances, codewords, and allusions often used.
--
The Soviet theater force posture is characterized by such potential operational flexibility that its utility as reference for precise identification of any particular doctrinal orientation is limited.
--
The utility of Soviet military exercises is somewhat lilmited because the Soviets exercise a whole range of scenarios, and must recognize the significance of information revealed.
--An understanding of, and empathy for, Soviet strategic culture is perhaps the most valuable means of determining the Soviet "way of war" and approach to theater nuclear employment.
--Military common sense, although obviously scenario-dependent, is useful in light of the apolitical Soviet approach to military science.
An examination of Soviet strategic culture permits a prediction of 4the general type of war the Soviets would be likely to wage. The Soviet Union would prefer to avoid the risk of war with NATO. However, although slow to anger, if the Soviets were to decide upon war, subsequent Soviet 4 behavior would be determined by military expediency. They would seek to take and hold the initiative, and defeat the enemy decisively.
A "clash" of the Soviet and Western nuclear employment doctrines .4 could be disastrous for the latter. The Western concepts of preand earlywar deterrence bargaining probably are inappropriate because, once the Soviet Union crossed the nuclear threshold, it would be very unlikely to have any military objective in view short of victory. The sophisticated Western concept of intra-war bargaining would likely be lost upon an opponent whose behavior would be determined by milituty science and not political statecraft. During actual warfare, Soviet political leaders could acquire an immediate keen interest in Western intra-war deterrence concepts.
-However, the rigidity of Soviet pre-war planning, and the lack of initiative inspired by the Soviet political system, are factors considered to minimize the probability of such an event.
A detailed analysis of probable Soviet incentives or disincentives to cross the nuclear threshold is presented.
The problem of the transition from conventional to nuclear operations is among the iost complex confronted by the Soviet Army as it contemplates its most important operational task, war in Central Europe. It is our contention that the transition reflects a distinctive Soviet style in war, including the Soviet view of the character and purpose of warfare. We begin with the assumption that current Soviet transition doctrine is essentially pre-emptive, and attempt to place such a doctrine in its wider Soviet context, to suggest its origins and the considerations underlying it. Current
• Soviet doctrine has evolved from quite different positions adopted under Stalin and then Khrushchev under a variety of internal and external impulses.
In the next decade we can expect to see a new Soviet leadership and, quite possibly, such new Soviet conditions as a severe domestic labor shortage.
Thus to connect the Soviet view of the transition to deeper causes within the Soviet system is also to construct a basis for predictions of future * Soviet doctrine--and for estimates of the future shape of the Soviet ground forces.
Any discussion of this type encounters considerable problems of evi-*dence of Soviet views. The Soviet military literature, as represented by the series of Air Force translations and by Soviet internal press articles, reveals what appears to be a wide range of doctrinal positions, from the * unthinkability of nuclear war to details of strike planning and even to statements that nuclear war cannot be limited, that it will be a struggle .
to the death between Western and Soviet societies. Recent Western accounts commitment to professed political ideals. 
1
There are several possible ways out of this difficulty. One is to * assume that, despite their rhetoric, Soviet leaders, particularly those in the non-military bureaucracy, will react rationally, much as Western leaders will.
In particular it may be assumed that the Soviet civilian leadership will jealously and rather nervously control the release of nuclear weapons, and that such release will be extremely limited, whatever Soviet officers may imagine. 
2
3
On this model, the primary concern of the rulers of the Soviet Union 0 is the continuation of their own political power, which is linked with the continued expansion of that power. The regime rules, at heart, because it 12 :70 awes the population: continued military or civil reverses, if they do not arouse the patriotism of the Russian people, are the greatest danger to that awe. Perhaps the next greatest danger is contagion by outside ideas: one way to prevent that contagion is by absorbing (and neutralizing) contiguous
areas.
Yet a third model attempts to project Soviet behavior on the basis of Marxist-Leninist political theory, combined with the most fundamental historical experiences of the current Soviet leadership. This model also tries to take into account the "revolution in military affairs," the effect of nuclear weapons and space technology on the character of war, as seen by the Soviets. Important insights from this model include the Soviet concept of a perpetual war between "socialist" and capitalist societies as well as the vision of a kind of Soviet manifest destiny. History suggests that societies so animated have a view of war quite different from that current in the West. Even though most Soviet citizens seem indifferent to the political rhetoric in which they are immersed, that rhetoric provides a framework which probably influences Soviet behavior. Perhaps as importantly, Soviet official ideology provides a non-Western framework in which war outcomes and alternative strategies can be weighed. This non-Western set of values is probably a fundamental element in Soviet thinking; it goes far beyond a distinction between dictatorship and democracy.
This report is based on conclusions drawn from the third model of Soviet of war plans which read very well but failed in practice. However, in a world not (yet) at war, Soviet perceptions of the viability of their military machine are, perhaps, more important than its actual performance. Our understanding of Soviet thinking may well be extremely important in our effort to convince the Soviets of the futility of any European offensive.
(NATO capabilities to deter nuclear use and, if necessary, control escalation, are important roles for NATO TNF.) Of course the same insights will be valuable in our efforts to defeat that offensive, should it be launched; but that is quite another matter. The subtle defects in Soviet thinking and execution which may well defeat them in battle are unlikely to loom large in their prewar thinking, as in many cases they are so basic to Soviet society as to be ineradicable.
The Soviet doctrine and tactics cited are deduced from Soviet military sources. Their starting point is an implicit top-level political decision to fight which, in theory, permits the Soviet military to carry forward its 14 concept of a war. One analyst of Soviet behavior refers to a tendency, on the part of Russian and Soviet political leaders, in effect to throw up their hands in some crises and "tell the Army to clean up the mess," often without entirely thinking through the consequences. 
7
In particular, Western knowledge of Soviet tactics and theater doctrine is largely taken from observed Soviet practice; at the levels of classification available to this writer, it was not clear whether the Soviets have ever included their political leaders in war game exercises, or indeed to what extent Soviet political leaders are concerned with the details of Soviet military plans. However, at least the current generation of Soviet leaders is deeply involved in matters military and has had first-hand experience of leadership during World War II. Brezhnev, for example, spent part of World War II as political commissar of the Black Sea Fleet (where he formed a connection with Admiral Gorshkov). Later, he was responsible for leadership of the Soviet missile program during the postwar period.
It may also be worth remarking that the Politburo exercised very detailed control during the Czech crisis of 1968. One might expect a similar level of control in any future crisis the Soviets considered genuinely local 4! or delicate; the key question then would be the point at which they decided that their "canned" war plans had to be executed.
I'
The Soviets tend, at least in their writings, to go from grand principles, whether of history or of war, to specific applications; they are, for example, very proud of their "science of war." The origin of this tendency is somewhat unclear. Undoubtedly a Soviet officer would say that such formalism can be traced to the "scientific" (deductive) approach to the "social sciences introduced by Marx and Engel. However, this scholastic or formalistic approach can also be found in Czarist writings. For example, a comparison between Morskoi Sbornik and contemporary British and U.S. naval journals of the pre-1914 period reveals an almost complete absence of reference to practical issues on the part of the Russians. 
8
A Western cynic would of course observe that the Soviet state has never been troubled by contradictions between Party theory and reality; indeed, given the primacy of the Party they seem willing to accept great material sacrifices (e.g., in agriculture) rather than deviate from their principles.
Contradictions between principle and reality may show themselves in combat if we are wise enough to behave unpredictably; some observers of Soviet exercises suggest that in those exercises the forces representing NATO often operate in a particularly tame manner. 9 * The current paper attempts to develop a Soviet-style perception of the nuclear transition in Europe by synthesizing basic Soviet ideological principles, guided by what we know of the development of Soviet hardware Ia and practice. In some cases Soviet doctrine, especially when filtered through the exigencies of the Soviet productive system, may seem unrealistic to Westerners. However, this is not to say that the Soviets will do foolish things just because their logic tells them to, but rather that they have, over time, constructed formal principles with which they feel comfortable.
16
Of course there is a considerable degree of Russianism behind and among the political and military theory.
Because of their formalistic bent, the Soviets tend to emphasize classic military themes, and these are sometimes picked up in the Western literature almost as if they were Soviet inventions: examples of particular importance are the value of cover and deception, and, similarly, of surprise; the importance of war aims; the importance of concentration on the (military)
objective; the need to define war aims concretely; the preeminence of the offense; the preeminence of tactics of fire and maneuver, the area of maneuver immensely expanded due to the advent of weapons of mass destruction and long-range means of attack. These themes are not new, nor are they Soviet inventions. They are credited to the Soviets because study of the "principles of war" has never had an important place in the essentially pragmatic British and U.S. military literature. Moreover, they are absent from the Western analytic literature because the latter is, most often, not concerned with actual military tactics, but rather with questions such as the evaluation of alternative weapon systems. As such, it is by no means comparable with the content of Military Thought and similar journals.
The extension of this particular distinction to national modes of combat is misleading--at best. Indeed, it is very striking that the Soviets do not appear to possess an equivalent to the Western strategic literature. That is, they cover the two extremes of the military spectrum, detailed tactics and national doctrine, but not the means of connecting the two. In a sense the current paper, like other recent studies, is an attempt to identify this missing 10 Soviet doctrine.
One reason for this gap is ideological: if the Soviets maintain that their war plans are essentially defensive in character, then I it may be very difficult for them to admit to planning for the looting of the territory they seize.
One difference between Western and Soviet thinkers which is very important is that the latter tend to treat "weapons of mass destruction" as points along a continuum which includes conventional weapons and therefore to apply to them classical tactical considerations. Their great problem, then, is how to react to a Western doctrine which envisages massive discontinuities between nuclear and conventional use, and which does not provide for any preconsidered reaction to chemical warfare--which the Soviets class as one more "weapon of mass destruction."
The Western position is, if we may say it, rationally irrational: We espouse a combination of controlled escalation with the option of deliberately courting losing control in a particularly destructive manner. Soviet military theory does not appear to envisage this sort of Western reaction.
In particular, the Soviets appear to believe in a rather rational form of intrawar deterrence in which they hold the initiative. That is, they appear to expect to be able either to deter a Western nuclear strike or else to be able to preempt any Western decision to escalate.
What they do not appear to envisage is the sort of escalation bargaining common in the Western strategic literature.
The application of formal theories is filtered through a wide range of specifically Soviet (or Russian) military traditions and military realities, perhaps most notably the tradition of a mass-conscript army effective in only a very limited range of scenarios, and far more effective in a mass offensive than in anything else. Perhaps the origin of this tradition is the fact that the Soviet and Czarist states were both very highly centralized, with an abhorrence for any extended initiative at lower levels. In the Czarist army this political consideration was strongly reinforced by the very low educational level of a peasant army. Even now, the Soviet Army reportedly suffers from severe deficiencies in such basic skills as map-reading and driving. Labor shortages in the economy as a whole make it difficult for the Soviets to keep their conscripts in service for very long periods, or to achieve a substantial re-enlistment rate; consequently, training tends to be extremely specialized. 
1 1
12
Standard descriptions of Soviet tactics stress the preplanned character of the first-echelon operations, including even the menu of objectives for the first echelon reserve. Such preplanning reduces the need for detailed command and control arrangements and, therefore, the load on a highly centralized command structure. Indeed, one of the most striking characteristics of Soviet command and control practice is the absence of "horizontal" links between units at the same level; information must travel up to a higherlevel headquarters, and orders back down. 
13
It would seem to follow that carefully limited combat is not really an option open to the Soviet army; that it cannot hope for much success using plans outside its standardized repertoire. As long as it is basic Soviet doctrine that war in Europe cannot be limited, this This type of consideration should be of particular interest, given that the range of scenarios usually found most plausible in the West involve incidents from which wars proceed by miscalculation. If, in fact, the Soviets *perceive that they risk major embarrassment--which can have the most severe *internal political consequences--if they attempt to execute anything but their canned war plans, then the danger of. major (conventional) war arising I' 15 *out of some such scenario increases very greatly.
Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the Soviet political system * is its very high dEgree of centralization. The Soviets, like the Czarists before them, live under a system of absolutism quite alien to Westerners.
The ruler maintains his position by virtue of his power of life and death * over the masses, not (as in the West) by means of an implicit Fjcial contract in which his ability to provide essential services (above all else, physical 20 0 security) legitimizes his authority. This abstract political point carries over, in practice, to the extreme discouragement of initiative among the population, indeed to contempt for the masses.
In state organizations, it has always encouraged a bureaucracy ready to fawn on the rulers and at the same time to treat the ruled with disdain. An alternate expression would be that, from Czarist times, status in Russian society has attached almost exclusively to servants of the ruler--a point surely still true.
At one end of the spectrum of government, the peculiar position of the ruler in Soviet society permits no doctrine of automatic succession.
By extension, it is not permissible for the ruler's free choice of policies * to be hedged about, or indeed to be discussed publicly. Thus, for example, the Soviet military debates, from which we draw much of our vision of Soviet doctrine, are quite limited in their permissible range--as are other debates in Soviet society.
In particular, they cannot touch on the precise limits of the Politburo's control over military affairs. In theory the Politburo merely replaces the Czar--who always styled himself the "Autocrat of all the Russias" and who is said to have prided himself on the extent to which he was independent even of his advisors.
At the other end of the same spectrum, Czarist and Soviet views coin-cide: individuals always require detailed supervision; indeed the natural consequence of a lack of detailed control is chaos. Recent writers on the Soviet Union suggest that this attitude pervades the population as well as the bureaucracy. 
17
The best evidence of such behavior is the vast effort the Soviet state feels compelled to exert to arouse popular enthusiasm.
In the military, apathy probably translates to relatively low morale, as witness the endless discussions of morale-buildi.-g competitions and of "hero units" which overfulfill their performance norms--discussions largely absent from Western military publications.
Once again, this is a matter of leadership from above only.
Finally, the Soviet system tightly controls information, with the important consequence that the Soviet Union is, in effect, a rumor mill. This has important military consequences, in that some rumors can be quite destructive. Computers are also essential to such a development, in that the central commander must draw on more and more data if he is to make intelligent decisions about a complex battle.
Indeed, the Soviets sometimes consider "cybernetics" the basis of a * new "Revolution in Military Affairs" which permits them to implement ever more mathematical theories of warfare--which have been studied quite thoroughly in the West. 19  It is well to remark here on the General Staff system which produces (or is the product of) so formalistic an approach. The peculiarly academic Soviet system encourages General Staff officers to write crisply mathematical decision-making, and even perhaps to deceive themselves as to the extent to which such calculations would determine important deci-20 sions.
These developments are not entirely different from those in Western armies.
However, the Soviets place great emphasis on "collective," or highly coordinated, operations as a force multiplier, with much of the firepower (at least at first) delivered from considerable distances (e.g., by FROGs or SCUDs). Such long-range fire allows for greater flexibility in the selection of its point of aim, given an initial artillery and rocket disposition-and given detailed control of the battle by a high-echelon headquarters.
Long-range fire of this type is particularly useful in a breakthrough operation, in which multiple probing attacks are launched, and the successful
ones reinforced by long-range fire.
In effect the relatively long range designed into Soviet support rockets permits the Soviet army to achieve a high degree of local superiority in initial probing actions. 21 However, centralization carries with it considerable risks. The chain of command enforces delays in firing and thus may either retard operations or result in friendly casualties. Thus the concentration of very long-range firepower tends to favor preplanned ("canned") tactics, or, at best, tactics with very limited sets of options. Moreover, it is not clear that these weapons would be at all useful in the fluid phase following breakthrough (or following a relatively static battle)--which suggests part of the rationale for the SP guns and for the new Soviet equivalent of our A-10.
The two traditional components of Soviet (and, for that matter, Czarist) military power were massed manpower and artillery firepower. The former was a consequence of the sheer size of the most populous nation in Europe. an important factor in the wide proliferation of FROGs in Soviet front line forces. Historically, the Soviet Ground Forces have preferred organic artillery to direct air support.
Another factor in Soviet war-making is the character of the Soviet production machine, which is relatively inflexible, but which is well adapted to producing the massed armor and rockets of the Soviet Ground Forces. It appears somewhat less well adapted to sophisticated electronics; the rapid production of nuclear warheads may also present some problems. Traditionally, therefore, the Soviets have been quite willing to expend large numbers of tanks, troops, and unsophisticated aircraft, but they have taken pains to conserve larger and more sophisticated aircraft (and, for that matter, surface ships). Nuclear weapons may fall into an intermediate category of valuable assets, neither to be wasted nor left under-used in a large war. Soviet statements on the degree of materiel wastage to be expected in a nuclear war correspond well with the extent to which their production machine has enabled them to build up a stockpile of conventional weapons, particularly tanks.
These factors add up to reliance on mass, on weight, to a lesser degree on momentum. A factor perhapE less obvious is the relatively unsteerable character of a very massive army in motion. Before 1914 it was common to refer to the "Russian steamroller," one of whose salient characteristics was its unstoppability--by either Hun or Czar--once it had been set in motion.
In current Soviet military writing those traditional considerations have been translated into a strong belief in the primacy of the offensive, particularly when it is executed at the very favorable force ratios guaranteed by current 23 Soviet echelon tactics.
Soviet military doctrine shows a pervasive conservatism, a need to hedge against failure. This may be useful to NATO if we can exploit "uncertainty." Fundamentally the Soviets are expansionists: Soviet political doctrine envisages the ultimate triumph of "socialism," i.e., of the Soviet system, worldwide. In theory the impersonal forces of history are to accomplish this triumph; the capitalist world is to collapse under the weight of its own internal contradictions. 
25
the role of socialist military forces is, in general, to protect "progressive
forces" from violent counters by the capitalist world. Violence on the part of the progressives is, of course, no more than a helpful push towards their historically inevitable triumph and, if Soviet ideology is to be believed, is no more nor less than a reduction of net human suffering prior to the advent of the socialist paradise. It follows that to a Soviet thinker "deterrence" keeps the capitalists from attacking the socialist homeland as they might (or, really, should) otherwise want to do. If, however, the Soviet Union comes to take a more overtly activist position-due perhaps to a perception that the "correlation of forces" has tilted decisively in its favor--then the baslc thinking behind Soviet military doctrine may also shift decisively.
For example, a Soviet leadership truly convinced that the Western European democracies are ripe for the taking and unwilling to defend themselves may become interested in extremely limited military operations using only elite forces. This may have been in the forefront of the Soviet thinking prior to their invasion of Afghanistan. This type of concept is by no means excluded by even the present Soviet concept of the world.
In recent years Soviet writers have increasingly referred to a military * role in the Third World, although in practice the Soviet Union has preferred to deploy its hardware operated by such allies as Cubans. However, one of the major arguments for an oceanic role for the Soviet fleet advanced by 0 Admiral Gorshkov was the need to further Soviet "state interests" overseas.  There has also been speculation that the Soviets see in Europe (and, probably, Japan) the assets required for their postwar recovery, given U.S. preparation is generally greeted with horror.
Thus, for example, NATO could (in peactime) build lines of bunkers to permit nuclear close support of its troops as they fell back, but such a project would have the gravest political consequences and therefore seems 28 most improbable of execution.
What is truly remarkable about this view is that at the same time nuclear .eapons are accorded an aura of omnipotence: they can, somehow, substitute for investment in conventional armaments (even though they cannot do so).
In particular )any Westerners (mostly Americans) seem to assume that their use, on a carefully controlled scale, can (and will) bring about the prompt end to hostilities which NATO seeks.
Thus NATO both believes in the efficacy of tactical nuclear weapons and seeks to avoid their use early enough in a war to achieve tactical results; 2 9 reliance is, instead, placed on their psychological impact, in the belief that any use of nuclear oeapons autoiatically involves the spectre of world destruction.
In large part, this NATO doctrine harks back to a time of Western tactical and strategic nuclear superiority, when indeed the use of a few weapons was a signal that an overwhelming arsenal was about to be unleashed on an advancing Soviet army--which could not reply in kind, at least not effectively.
3 0
The Soviet view of the role of nuclear weapons in a European war has undergone considerable evolution since the introduction of these weapons in the early 1950s. Throughout the last quarter-century, the one constant has been the conviction that nuclear weapons were so destructive that their use might well prove decisive. Soviet official discussions of nuclear warfare of the late 1950s and early 1960s stressed the importance of preemptive strikes and the greatly increased potential for surprise. 
3 1
destroying NATO nuclear strike assets as rapidly as possible. Soviet planners assumed that, given NATO statements that tactical nuclear weapons would act as "equalizers' against the mass of Soviet conventional units, NATO would fight with nuclear weapons from the first (NATO credible deterrence).
There was another consideration. As n the West, the primary Soviet defensive measure against nuclear attack was to spread out their formations.
This in turn required a great dilution in offensive firepower per unit frontage. Given traditional Soviet measures of firepower density required for successful breakthroughs, Soviet formations of the 1950s and 19 6 0s could not achieve such successes using conventional weapons: nuclear strikes at the udtbreak of war were not only desirable but necessary. NATO nuclear weapons and systems remain the first target of a Soviet strike. For example, the stated primary mission of the Soviet paratroop force is the seizure of enemy "nuclear means." Such a priority suggests that in Soviet eyes, even though a major war may be won without recourse 4 to nuclear weapons, those weapons represent so important a threat that they must be neutralized at the outset. Thus the Soviets, unlike NATO, do not choose to rely on deterrence to prevent NATO nuclear use; 
3 4
It though not so much as did day fighter and light bomber production. 
4 1
It appears in retrospect that the decisions to cut conventional tactical weapon production were among the reasons the 1956-1960 Five Year Plan was cut short early in 1 9 r). Quite probahly one factor in the downfall of Khrushchev's nuclear-first concept was the perception that in an all-out exchange Soviet forces (and the Soviet Union) might well suffer severe damage which could be avoided were the war to gin with a conventional phase in which NATO nuclear assets (including strategic ones such as SSBNs) were destroyed. 
4
Rather, it begins with the assumption that sooner or later the war will turn nuclear, but adds the possibility that the conventional phase can be used to enhance the later nuclear one. There may not be a nuclear phase at all, but that will only be because enemy (NATO) nuclear assets have been so badly degraded in the conventional phase that they will no longer present a threat.
Thus, for example, Soviet conventional-phase tactics differ starkly from Western ones in that the Soviets emphasize the destruction of NATO nuclear assets over the destruction of NATO conventional forces: 
4 3
One of the great theoretical advantages of a preemptive approach to the nuclear transition is that it does not place the burden of nuclear initiation on the decision-maker: he feels he is me-ely accepting a role forced upon 4 him by his more trigger-happy enemy; he might as well fire, since that will oiil' be to hin advantage.
Although from an objective point of view preempcio' is much like a first strike, from a psychological point of view it is far easier. One operation is a gambler's move, and can be deterred by the prospect of failure.
In the other, there is no real choice: the weapons must be used even if it is clear that their use will be partly or largely futile. Matters will be only worse if they are not used.45
There are large risks inherent in the preemptive approach; Soviet intelligence may be unsuccessful or (as in 1941) the Soviet political leadership * may be unable to recognize the coming attack for what it is. In that case NATO may actually be able to strike first and so to spoil the Soviet offensive.
The only insurance against such an eventuality is very large military resources backed by great defensive depth. The Soviets, moreover, presumably read a Western strategic literature which suggests that no matter how hard 46 the initial NATO blow, it will not fall on the Soviet Union proper.
The SRF can deter that sort of escalation, at least at first, and Soviet passive and active defenses should (at worst) soften the blow very considerably. In this reading, Soviet hardening (e.g., of SRF missiles) is not so much to assure any sort of stability as to hedge against the failure of the preemptive mechanism. In so hedging, they are caught doctrinally between their suspicion that he who fires first (even if he is not Soviet!) wins the tactical nuclear battle, and their hope that they can minimize damage to the Soviet Union by a combination of a conventional opening phase and a preemptive nuclear strike. The development of naval missiles was considered so important that Beria's son was placed in charge of it. The Soviet nuclear program was run by the NKVD and the Tu-4 bomber and the MiG-15 were both evidently crash programs.
Apparently Soviet radar production, employing Western prototypes obtained under lend-lease, was also pressed forward very hard. One is left, however, 0 with the impression that Stalin had no clear picture of the new kind of warfare these weapons symbolized. Moreover, he seems to have prohibited extensive discussion of their implications. 
4 7
It follows that military forces are to be used in an economical manner:
there are many industrial and directly military targets which must be destroyed, and weapons, especially nuclear weapons, are not plentiful. The Soviets surely accept the possibility that their enemy may surrender before he absolutely must, but they cannot expect to rely on such a possibility.
Soviet experience in World War 11 is very relevant here: at least after the Battle of Kursk in 1943, the Germans knew that the Soviets would not accept any negotiated settlement. Although there was some attempt to negotiate with the Western allies, the Germans appear not to have considered any settlement with the Soviets--whom they, after all, regarded as barbarians. 
5
It is probably relevant to observe here that Soviet advocates of victory through strategic air power a la Douhet had a very weak bureaucratic base after 1945. 5 4
All of this is not to say that the Soviet Union is constantly poised to strike at Western Europe on some preplanned day. Rather, it is to say that the Soviets themselves have the idea that any war which breaks out may be either (i) the opening of a NATO attempt to extinguish its mortal adversary or (ii) a golden opportunity to assist the tortuous processes of history. 
5 5
It would seem to follow that, given an outbreak of hostilities in Europe, the Soviet reaction would be, not to seek the quickest end but rather to seek a quick favorable end.
It is often suggested that, in Soviet eyes, time is generally on the side of the enemy, which may explain their interest lose, while at the same time, it was necessary to cajole him out of the belief that he had been cornered. We might conceivably try for the latter
with the Soviets, but we seem woefully short on the former requisite.
What is most sobering about the 1914 analogy is the strong possibility that deterrence will prove entirely ineffective, that some (almost random) action *by a minor ally (in the Middle East?) will ignite the explosives.
1.12 Soviet Objectives and Nuclear Use It seems likely that the Soviets feel most secure with a land-force equivalent of the U.S. SlOP: one (or at most a few) basic detailed operational schemes for a sucessful European blitzkrieg. Such plans must of necessity include provision for possible nuclear use once a generalized release has been given; their character would tend to minimize latitude for ad hoc political-military decision-making in wartime. More objectives can be inferred from Soviet political doctrine, from the fact that on the deepest level the Soviet Union is committed to a change in the status quo.
In that light, military emergencies become opportunities rather than potential disasters. The role of military forces is to exploit such opportunities rather than to terminate an (accidental) outbreak of fighting. Clearly Soviet doctrine does not envisage the outbreak of a general European war at the slightest nudge. On the other hand, it does not consider the avoidance of war a positive good in and of itself. An offensive war which either disables a major opponent or else gains considerable resources for the Socialist camp may be evaluated as a very positivw step, even given considerable human and material costs to the Soviet side. Indeed, the primary deterrent to such an offensive is that it presents risks which (in theory) the "dead hand" of history does not. Given this image of the potential role of warfare in the development of the World Revolution, it would be surprising if the Soviets believed that NATO harbored no offensive concepts of its own. In that case the potential for fighting a truly limited war in Central Europe would seem rather dim.
In realistic military fashion the Soviets believe strongly that a preemptive attack is the best defense. This doctrine currently holds both for war initiation and for escalation within a war, always with the understanding that escalation is undertaken for purely military reasons rather than as a political ploy. One great advantage of a preemptive strategy is that it undercuts many of the problems of escalation so significant in Western doctrinal literature. Once the enemy has decided to escalate, there is no point in holding back, only in using resources as effectively as possible.
A nuclear strike plan takes so long to formulate that it is unlikely to be altered by late intelligence; the Soviets, therefore, can hope that if their chain of command operates quickly enough preemption will succeed and will catch NATO nuclear weapons on the ground. Even should preemption fail, the results will be no worse militarily than they would have been had the strike not been launched.
Note that because the Soviets believe that nuclear weapons can be deci-* sive, they regard nuclear weapons (as well as C 3 ) as the prime targets of their own nuclear offensive. It follows by mirror-imaging that they expect their own nuclear weapons to be primary NATO targets. Hence the preemptive Soviet strike must employ all or nearly all of the nuclear weapons in forward positions: weapons not fired will merely be wasted when the NATO strike destroys them. Hence there will be very strong pressures on Soviet commanders to expend their weapons promptly, quite soon after the approval of the preemptive strike. Thus the significance of PALs in Soviet hands is likely to be that they permit last-minute cancellation of the strike, rather than * that they guard against unauthorized use. For example, it is our belief that a European war would probably begin with a conventional phase because Soviet perceptions of the fire-break (if there is one) between tactical and strategic systems. It must, however, be emphasized that once the Soviets see as their ultimate aim the total defeat of their adversaries, they cannot be expected to exclude from their calculations any level of escalation, but rather must look at escalation control as a means of controlling the cost of that victory.
The Western states, on the other hand, are pledged to preserve the status quo. In the large, this means that their war goals are defensive and that they do not, at least openly, contemplate any march to the East in a war with the Soviets in Central Europe. The psychology of the status quo extends to the hope that the Soviets are fundamentally committed to a similar goal.
In order to reinforce such (presumptive) Soviet views, Western strategists will disavow as a (European) war aim any intention to dismember or neutralize the Soviet Union as a guarantee against future aggression. If the (NATO) war aim is defensive, it is also to limit damage to Western countries and also to limit any immediate loss of territory.
The result is a combination of the current "forward defense" doctrine and an unwillingness to contemplate large-scale use of highly destructive weapons throughout Western Europe. After all, if the war is not expected to resolve anything, then the chief consideration in its execution is to minimize its cost.
By extension, the Western powers seek to avoid war and therefore place great reliance on deterrent strategies; indeed, they conceive of war, and particularly of full-scale war, as the failure of deterrence. It follows that much of military strategy must be designed to threaten further escalation rather than to achieve specific military goals associated with some overall war-fighting goal: attacks become political statements quite as much as attacks per se.
In such an atmosphere the step from conventional to nuclear weapons no matter how small is an opportunity to define a firebreak and so either end a war or else limit its scope. This kind of strategy presumes Western escalation dominance, so that even low levels of esca-* lation give pause to the enemy, because they presage far worse to come.
One irony of Western strategy is that, precisely because the tactical use of nuclear weapons is considered an important element of escalation (and indeed a means of ending a war), a large fraction of NATO tactical air assets is devoted to the nuclear mission. Because these aircraft would probably be severely attrited were they to be used conventionally early in the war, they would probably be withheld--thereby helping to reduce NATO's chances for conventional success. Indeed, clearance to redeploy QRA aircraft for tactical (conventional) missions might well take too long for *• these same aircraft to have the necessary shock effect.
In addition, NATO is likely to suffer from the conflict between deep strike (e.g., airfield The rationale of the NATO posture is, in theory, that it deters through uncertainty. That would be effective if the Soviets thought of themselves as aggressors, i.e., if they balanced the gains to be had in the seizure of territory against possible costs. However, the Soviet point of view is that their attack is, in general, preemptive, that they will fight because not fighting will only make matters worse. 
6 3
Hence their effort at greatly increasing unit firepower, e.g., by the provision of self-propelled artillery on a large scale. Given the Soviet view that the main characteristic of nuclear weapons is their economy (destruc-
tive power per unit weight) it seems likely that they would consider nuclear shells for those SP guns the ideal means of assuring their survival after the transition. In the West, on the other hand, it is expected that tactical aircraft controlled by ground units will make a major contribution to effective small-I unit firepower, e.g., by the use of weapons guided by soldiers on the ground.
.* However, it seems probable that given Soviet difficulties in decentralization their ability to control tactical aircraft at a very low unit level Smay well be unsatisfactory.
However, the provision of SP artillery would not improve a small unit's chances against tactical aircraft, which are perhaps the primary Western * threat to moving Soviet formations. Rapidly-moving formations would find it difficult to maintain effective SAM coverage, and the Soviets must be at least somewhat skeptical of the extent to which their own FA interceptors can help. Moreover, the provision of extensive SAM and AA assets at very low unit levels is quite expensive, both in hardware and in (scarce) specialist personnel. However, reliance on assets not organic to the small indepen- The concept of preemption is a major element which permits the Soviets to construct a comfortable transition doctrine, but even it raises problems SSoviets nay be unable to answer.
) 7 I
This lack of ideals extends even to the highest levels. Accounts of debates within the Politburo suggest strongly that, among Soviet leaders, programs are primarily devices with which to beat down opposition leaders. For example, Khrushchev beat down Malenkov, who argued in favor of more consumer spending, then adopted essential y the same position himself.
Under such circumstances the significance of any but the most basic doctrinal claims is open to question.
Evidence might include the Soviet practice, in the 1950s, of keeping nuclear warheads at some distance from delivery systems, under direct KGB control.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev refers to Stalin's reluctance to permit Soviet officers to learn details of the new military technology, including nuclear weapons. Western adherents of this view of the Soviet system also note the concern with Party political control represented by the Commissar system.
Perhaps the most prominent exponent of this view is Richard Pipes; sec. e.g., his Russia Under The Old Regime (New York: Scribner's, 1974).
-4.
Les' Soviet subversive operations beyond Soviet borders be considered a novelty of their regime, it should be noted that the Czarist secret police (Okhrana) were extremely active outside Russia, trying both to destroy radical Russian movements and to control local government policy. Many 19th Century writers considered the Czarist state quite as expansive as is the current Soviet state.
These would include the Civil War, i.e., the attempt by the Capitalist world to drown the infant revolution, and the Great Patriotic War (World War ll)--which began with an ultimately unsuccessful German surprise 6attack.
Some writers, such as Norman Polmar, believe that Soviet willingness to build a major fleet originated with Soviet frustration over inability to break the Italian-German blockade of Republican Spain in the late 1930s.
It should be added that the current generation of Soviet political leaders actually held high ranks during World War II.
This image is particularly vivid in Soviet accounts of the origins of World War II. However, Soviet political doctrine as a whole stresses conflict. For example, the "dialectic" of dialectical materialism is the conflict out of which human progress is understood to arise. One can make a good case that for the next decades the Soviet Union will be torn between its revolutionary rhetoric and the need to defend the status quo it has achieved. Events in Iran form an example. All nations have a strong natural interest in the sanctity of embassies, yet for some time after the sei-ure of the U.S. Embassy, Soviet Persian-language radio stations applauded the seizure. They then rather suddenly recanted, presumably as great-power (non-ideological) logic overcame rhetorical inertia. The example is quite relevant to more severe crises: to what extent would the knee-jerk reactions of a highly centralized state apply? 68 I: The logic here might be that the very centralized Soviet leadership would be unable or unwilling to monitor and control such a situation for long, in view of tne many other issues requiring timely resolution.
It mu~t be admitted that this did not happen in Czechoslovakia in 1968. 8. Ore m;ght also sugqst that traditional Russian secretiveness forbade extensive referu"re3 in print to current hardware and even to current tactical issues.
.
T is kind of problem wai particularly pronounced under Stalin. In 1940 he dictated a forward defense of the Soviet Union; although this strate.iv oroved ineffective in a war game that year, it was continued-with disastrous conqequences. One might conclude that although in e, .o 1 prn'fes-iona! military questions are and will remain the province o Sovint military professionals, the Party's monopoly on doctrine Toy well intrude in awkward ways.
Stalin chose a forward defense on e,.sentially political grounds.
'-;r exampla, at a receot conference on Battlefield Interdiction, the ':tratg:c goal" of the Soviet Army in an invasion of Western Europe was descr'"ed j tye destruction of the NATO field forces.
Just what th~s onee ai-e.g., the seizure of Western Europe--was not debated, c-nO t K': 9 one .i t suppose that the character of operations would w it lei-st influenced by issues of Soviet requirements in Europe.
Covi,
. b-kavior in the invasion of Manchuria (1945), where heavy industry n1a ajor prze, may be a useful guide to the future. Some writers, 4uch as ,Michael ccGwir-, believe that the only serious Soviet war ;.pA , erv:iag,-an unlimited world oar in which North America is to je destroycd. but the industry of Western Europe preserved as a recovery set. Such i view is certainly consistent with the type of Soviet t :kiq dezcr ibed here.
F,: reas:ons : ot entirely clear to this writer, Soviet specialist training 'both civil and military) generally appears to require very length c<' rses; for :,amp e, it is said that the course for store clerks is 0X we, 's ior'g, mzU:, Yf it theoretical.
It is possible that this kind ,f p.da try tn . riflection of the very bureaucratic character of Soviet ,
Yd 'a, detailed supervision even at low levels is very t;. in , as , Bl -'s reactions to U.S.-style carrier air operations. -4, to_. u n ; I sudpyct that, in an emergency, the destruction of 0,1 of that -e-nO superstructure would have no great effect, but it se ms ur',ke1 , T" extnsive prn-iervice military training conn! 4.e taken as symp:. !tic of the specialist-training prohin. Oe i t rosti'q question rais.d by this situation is whether any Soviet attevpt nt croos-training ca': be successful, and consequently. .-hethe-Sovi, t uq ts can continue to function effectively after taking rcl ytively ligh: casualtie'-uniformly distributed amonq their personnel--,-would he the ase after nuclear attack.
S,-e. for example, C.N. Donnelly, "Tactical Problems Facing the Soviet . in -international Defense Review, Vol. Il, No. 9 (1978), pp. 40F-i612.- 0 13.
Cbservable consequences include the assignment of support assets such as FROGs to relatively low organizational units, presumably on the theory that fire-support calls to higher-echelon units will not be honored in a timely enough fashion. The advent of SP guns may well have a similar origin.
More recently, Soviet-backed forces in Afghanistan appear to have suffered badly in another off-scenario context. Should the current intervention fail to achieve a quick result, it is conceivable that the experience will make Soviet analysts uncomfortable about the possibility of insurgence in their rear in a protracted European war.
One favorite is an East German uprising which boils over the border to the West; NATO troops engage Soviet Army units chasing East German mutineers.
In this case the motive for a very strong Soviet response is fear of the collapse of the satellites. The West German engagement plays on the Soviet suspicion that it is Western interests which are attacking the Soviet empire.
This is why it is so easy for the Soviets to change their "Party line" 6 in an inconsistent manner: there is literally no requirement that the ruler be consistent. By extension, there is no requirement that the Soviet Union follow a consistent strategic policy. However, tactics are quite another matter. Thus there is no Soviet literature connecting war conduct to state policy, as there is in the West.
See, e.g., Hedrick Smith, The Russians (New York: Ballantine, 1977).
This was the thrust of several articles published in the Military Thought "Special Collection" about 1960.
See, e.g., V.V. 
This is not to denigrate the calculations involved in, for example, a nuclear strike.
Note, however, the recent tendency to assign support weapons in greater numbers at lower operational levels, to overcome time delays in call fire at the higher levels.
See, e.g., Harriet F. and William R. Scott, The Armed Forces of the U.S.S.R. (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1979), pp. 42-43.
Perhaps it is relevant to note here that Soviet echelon practice makes any early withdrawal or even any early severe (and unexpected) delay in advance quite embarrassing, to say the least. The momentum of the advance must be kept up quite far back if front-line units are to be replaced, as planned, on a one-for-one basis as they are destroyed. Spacing between units coming out of the Western Soviet Union would allow for some delays, but after a point bunching would occur--at best.
At that point the lack of individual initiative at low levels in the Soviet military might begin to have serious consequences.
Note, for example, the existefice of a separate organization "of the Rear,'' i.e., of logistics, producticn, and reserves. Soviet statements that means of war production are major military targets are consonant ith this attitude; it is tacitly assumed that wars can last long enough for wartime production to be a major factor.
Note, for example, Brezhnev's comment at the Vienna summit, at which the SALT II Treaty was signed, "that the Soviet Union is not to be blamed for the objective course of history."
The absence of Soviet interest in countervalue targeting is sometimes taken to support this contention. However, such targeting is entirely contrary to the basic military principles to which the Soviets tend to adhere. Khrushchev was probably the only serious Soviet advocate of Western-style MAD.
Contrast a recent comment by General Milstein, formerly head of the Soviet General Staff Academy, that "there can be no deterrence without a warfighting capability."
Similarly, note the violent West German political reaction against NATO programs to dig holes for the wartime emplacement of ADMs, atomic demolition munitions.
That is, studies of nuclear use almost invariably show that once the Soviet second-echelon units have come through the initial NATO defense line and dispersed, there are no longer attractive nuclear targets on the battlefield. After that the only targets are countervalue ones. This dilemma is a consequence of the absence of a NATO defense in depth quite as much as of any Soviet thinking on nuclear problems.
It is one of NATO's great misfortunes that its consultative machinery is so slow-moving that its doctrine often seems to match the materiel conditions of the previous decade. The current NATO "flexible response" concept (when married to the current NATO military posture) lost much of its value as the Soviets approached rough strategic parity in the early 1970s. This is quite apart from the issue of whether any form of deterrence would be effective against the Soviet Union.
These writers (e.g., in the "Special Collection") generally stress defense as well, but admit that for the defense to be effective the greater part of the enemy strike force must be caught on the ground--i.e., preempted.
This statement has been attributed to former defense minister Malinovskiy shortly before his death. However, according to a recent study by Joseph Douglass and Amoretta Hoeber, System Planning Corporation, Trends In Soviet Strategy For War In Europe (unpublished), recent defector information suggests that the shift began much earlier, in 1963.
33.
This argument has been advanced by Joseph Braddock of BOM.
Joseph Douglass has taken this idea a step further and suggested that the Soviets deliberately would fight the conventional battle in order to enhance the effectiveness of the later (inevitable?) nuclear strike. This seems to the current writer an excessive conclusion. However, the primacy of nuclear weapons in Soviet eyes would seem to make for inefficient Soviet strike planning with respect to the purely conventional phase.
"7.
It is important to distinguish between a Soviet leadership which might welcome any level of destruction short of that of 1941-5 and a Soviet leadership which can perceive so severe a level of damage as something less than the end of Soviet history.
In the latter case, the acceptance of damage is far better than a surrender which might literally mean the end of Soviet history.
Given traditional Russian concepts of the bass of authority, even a relatively incomplete surrender under foreign pressure might seem to Soviet leaders a form of political suicide.
, tend to think of missiles as both expensive and sophisticated, but * :h
German V-! (not V-2!) program offers a telling counterexample. TC.e suspension of Soviet tactical bomber production about 1960 may have been symptomatic of this view.
It must be admitted, however, t at at this time the Soviets themselves were advocating replacement of the large, level-bombing light bomber by fighter-bombers better able to counter the array of small mobile targets presented by a NATO army; the SU-7 appeared at about this time.
Its relatively small bomb capacity suggests a specification written primarily in terms of tactical nuclear delivery.
.
Even now, the Soviets refer to their long-range bombers as "rocket (i.e., missile)-armed."
Until the formation of the SRF in 1959, the missile bombers were considered the premier Soviet weapon.
However, note that the Soviet theater bomber program did not terminate with the success of Soviet MRBMs such as SS-4 and -5. Soviet exercise experience in war-outbreak scenarios calling for large nuclear strikes may also lave been involved.
Exap es might include the stated role of airborne forces and the stated missior, of the Soviet Navy: to strike first at the nuclear attack assets of the United States, the carriers and the ballistic missile submarines, while shielding Soviet strategic submarines.
Soviet concepts of the place of nuclear weapons in war cut across service boundaries.
Moreover, NATO has often said that it will use nuclear weapons to stop a Soviet conventional breakthrough.
There are somewhat upsetting parallels here to the character of the Japanese decision for war in 1941, a signal failure of deterrence. The Japanese went to war even though their Total War Institute predicted U.S. victory. They felt their choice was between living like slaves (i.e., submitting to U.S. ultimata) or dying like men. See, * e.g., the article on "Japan's Decision For War," in K.R. Greenfield, ed., Command Decisions (Washington, D.C.: Office of the Chief of Military History, 1959).
Soviet attempts to prevent the deployment of new deep-strike NATO systems (GLCM, Pershing II) suggest just how much the Soviets want to prevent * any shift in this perceived NATO strategy. Western reluctance to purchase these systems reflects in part a fear of just such Soviet reactions.
For example, not until the late 1950s did Military Thought print a series of tutorial articles (the "special collection") on this subject, • although it must be admitted that some such appeared as early as 1955.
This pattern suggests that the Soviets wished to continue using the Sturmovik task forces at the end of World War II, while devoting their aircraft industry to jet aircraft. There appears not to have been a jet Sturmovik prototype, although this may well have been a function of the state of Soviet jet aircraft development.
See, e.g., Lomov, ed., pp. 75-6.
However, it is only fair to suggest that Khrushchev's military revolution required, too, vast expenditures (on plant and on R&D) which had to come from some source within the Soviet economy: something had to pay for all of those ICBMs and MRBMs and, more, for their development. At the same time Khrushchev was expanding some consumer production. He had to take account of Stalin's partial personnel mobilization of the Soviet armed forces about the time of the Korean War.
Personnel had been cut sharply in 1946 (far more so, apparently, than production). Presumably, the strain of the sheer size of the Soviet Army, at a time of expanding personnel demands and a shrinking draft-age pool, was a serious problem. For example, Stalin's mobilization in itself must have stretched-out considerably the postwar reconstruction of the Soviet Union, particularly as that applied to such low-priority areas as consumer goods.
That is, the mere existence of weapons such as the SS-20 threatens NATO nations whose territory has not yet been invaded with severe damage, without at the same time requiring any drawdown of the strategic stockpile aimed at the United States.
In an era of nuclear parity, this threat might well prove quite sobering to the smaller members of NATO, particularly given some West European attitudes toward Germany.
At least this is the case in Soviet military writings. However, one has the uneasy suspicion that this characteristic may stem from the Soviet-style separation between the military and politics rather than from any deep doctrinal well. Before 1946, U.S. officers exhibited very similar ''purely-military'' attitudes.
Perhaps it is significant that the Soviet political system brooks no iconoclastic RANDs.
There 
For example, the Soviets would probably read a typical Western outof-satellite revolt scenario as Western-attempt-to-destroy-Socialist I Iblock-by-exploitation of (Western-induced) subversion. A particularly frightening possibility is that the Soviets might read a genuinely indigenous satellite revolt as a Western (ideological) assault. 56. By this is meant problems observed in Soviet Army movements, not political clumsiness (using a sledge hammer on an eggshell!).
57. See, for example, Miles Kahler, "Rumors of War: The 1914 Analogy," Foreign Affairs, Vol. It is important that this author's motives and reasoning not be misunderstood.
It is not claimed here that:
--Western strategic doctrine is foolish;
Soviet stratgy, as best we can discern, is superior to that of NATO:
--NATO/the U.S. should necessarily emulate Soviet style. 
1 0
1 1
The difference between NATO and the Soviets is usefully highlighted by the following quotat ion from General-Major S.N. Kozlov:
In wartime, military doctrine drops into the background somewhat.
since, in armed combat, we are guided primarily by military-political and military-strategic considerations, conclusions and generalizations which stem from the conditions of the specific situation. Consequen y, war, armed combat, is governed by strategy, not doctrine.'' For ''strategy,' in this context, one may read the science of war.
In the United States there is applied doctrinal thinking at the level of planning actual force employment.
By doctrinal thinking we mean the prin- A key to the judicious understanding of the Soviet approach to the conduct of war may be gleaned from consideration of a critically important axiom of Clausewitz: writing on the nature of war he asserted that "ilts • 16 grammar, indeed, may be its own, but not its logic.' By some curious * quirk of mal-appreciation, Western defense communities have succeeded in violating the sense in both halves of Clausewitz's axiom. The West has a strategic policy, which, in extremis in execution is not formulated so as to serve any political end, while it has also succeeded in neglecting 6 Clausewitz's strong suggestion that war may have its own 'grammar.' In short, while one should wage war only for very serious and precisely defined political purposes, there is a distinctive military logic to the actual dynamics of war.
There is very good reason to believe that the Soviets endors this idea (sensibly or not).
In short, to return to General-Major Kozlov, the conduct of war is the realm of strategy, not of doctrine.
This study, by and large, focuses upon some fairly narrow, even technical--in some important respects--aspects of Western secur;ty problems, particularly those pertaining to Soviet theater nuclear employment issues.
IHowever, some political perspective may be appropriate, lest the setting for the later detail .)e discounted unduly. As a section of this study explains in detail, the political character of the conflict scenario should  The Soviets, in their geopolitical and ideological perspective, know that they are engaged inalienably in a conflict between antagonistic social systems. Western malpractice, vis-a-vis Soviet interests, will be of policy concern to them, but 81 it will not engender righteous anger. The Soviets know that we are their enemies in an objective sense--and how else should one expect enemies to behave?
An important implication of the above, rather "soft" (though we believe, very important), line of thinking, is that there is a realpolitik-directed rationality to Soviet statecraft (at its best, assuming competent Soviet leadership), as a leitmotiv which often is lacking in the U.S. conduct of foreign policy. The Soviet Union does not take action in the world on points of abstract principle, or honor, in pique, or by way of revenge. Those, as the French would say, are pas serieux. In short, we believe that the Soviets tend to have a relatively high threshold for militarily expressed anger (war is a serious business and one does not wage it for less than serious reasons, or for less than decisive ends). However, once that threshold is reached, Soviet style suggests a determination to secure rapid, decisive results.
For example, in Soviet perspective, a NATO-Warsaw Pact war would not be a Schellingesque competition in risk-taking and pain-bearing. Instead, it would be a conflict the risks of which had been assessed fully in advance, which would be waged for the proximate end of securing an unambiguous military victory.
This introauctory analysis should not be thought of as reflecting any indifference towards technical or political detail (say, towards the Soviet combined arms posture directly relevant to theater war or political/administrative nuclear release procedures). But, it should be thought of as a protracted statement to the effect that the fine-tuning of Soviet military preparation and, potentially, execution is, and would be, orchestrated according to a distinctively Soviet style. As Bernard Brodie wrote:
Whether with respect to arms control or otherwise, good strategy presumes good anthropology and sociology. Some of the greatest military blunders of all tIiTy have resulted from juvenile evaluations in this department.
We observe that strategic cultural hubris, nominally at least, is sharply * on the decline in the U.S. defense community. However, fairly abstract recognition of rather gross asymmetries in weltanschauung, which is where we believe the United States is today, does not begin seriously to address the need for cross-cultural analysis. For example, in very recent years, there has been what probably should be identified as a major intellectual But, the Soviet understanding of escalation, of the idea that a war could pass through different phases, with distinctive rules of engagement for each phase, is very different from the rich mix of ideas that "escalation" suggests in the Western defense intellectual context. It should not be forgotten that the Soviets retain, vis-a-vis conflict at any and every ievel, a determination to win. 
22
"The initiative" carries no guarantee of success, but, ceteris paribus, it should mean that you dictate the time, place and conditions of combat.
(In a context quite removed from this particular study, Hudson Institute is considering the likely impact of the Soviet "science of war" upon the Soviet approach to escalation.) 23   We observe that in 1979. tht perspective of our likely major adversary, the Soviet Union, is acknowledged t( be an important factor in our strategic planning. For example, in his speech before the Council on Foreign Relations on April 5, 1979, the Secretary of Defense (Harold Brown) spoke as follows:
We need capabilities convincingly able to do, and sure to carry r out under any circumstances [what] the Soviets consider realistic, whatever damage the Soviets consider will deter them. Put differently, the perceptions of those whom we seek to deter can determine what is needed for deterrence in various circumstances. .
Such recognition is healthy and should license the U.S. national security bureaucracy to seek out the Soviet view of Soviet vulnerabilities. 2 5 However, in practice, the process of operationalizing that recognition in U.S. weapon acquisition policy and in NUWEP is very difficult for the system to manage.
(Perhaps there is value in knowing the right things to do, even if one cannot do them!)
2.2 "Going Nuclear"--When and Why?
The central problem for this study is the need to identify, in Soviet perspective, reasons why theater nuclear weapons would, or would not, be introduced in a war in Europe. We acknowledge that the evidence provided by Soviet/Warsaw Pact military posture, and by peacetime exercises, tends to be ambiguous (see the next section of this study). However, by way of fairly sharp contrast to Western planning speculation on this subject (i.e., when should NATO introduce nuclear-weapon use?), we believe that the Soviet General Staff has devised what, for want of a better description, may be termed a "school solution. '' 2 
6
The "base-case" for NATO concern has to be a premeditated Soviet determination to overwhelm NATO in a theater-wide campaign. 
In those cases, a "war-fighting" planning framework for the near-immediate employment of TNF would be close to ridiculous. However, with respect to the base-case, improbable or not, we find some deficiency in U.S. willingness to acknowledge apparent facts. The shortest of short lists of these apparent facts may highlight, by implication, some contemporary problems:
--
The Soviet threshold for the taking of military action in Europe is extremely high (there is no hair-trigger).
--
Ergo, up to a certain point (threshold), deterrence is a very easy quality to maintain. The Soviet motivation to attack is probably so low that the promise of military response need be neither particularly credible nor particularly damaging (in local perspective).
--But, should the Soviets define a situation as being of a life-or-death character (antagonistic social systems in head-on conflict), then deterrence might be very difficult (or simply impossible) to enforce. In practice, one could quite easily find oneself in a situation wherein scarcely * any U.S./NATO pre-war declaratory policy would suffice to dissuade Soviet initiatives.
--
An adequate NATO military posture, octrine, therefore, has to cope with a Soviet Union that is difficult to d er, and with a Soviet Union that is beyond deterrence. The nub of this problem may well be gaining acceptance within .. the NATO political leadership.
We are not suggesting that NATO should abandon its aspiration to encourage, or enforce, early intra-war deterrence for prompt war termination--only
that NATO needs to be ready to fight the war through to a military conclusion, if pre-and intra-war deterrence fail to function as hoped. In addition, and it would be difficult to exaggerate the importance of this point, NATO must o not so conduct itself, immediately pre-war and early intra-war--focusing upon assumed Keterrence needs--in such a way that it forfeits any reasonable chance of securing a satisfactory military outcome should the deterrence of war). A large number of Western aficionados of "things Soviet"' have noted, correctly, the Soviet disinclination publicly to entertain any idea of agreed, formal or tacit, "rules of engagement" for nuclear conflict.
For example, the Soviet reaction to "the (mis-named) 'Schlesinger Doctrine'" was totally hostile, with no known exceptions. Two reasons probably have driven this negative policy response. 
3
The U.S. defense community has come to accept that the question of theater-nuclear employment is a highly intellectualized, abstract, and--in addition--political matter. All of which is accurate vis-a-vis NATO, but may not be accurate, on the evidence available, for the U.S.S.R. Given that war is a two-way street, regardless of Western prejudices, one would surely expect that the apparent perspective of the adversary would be reflected in a serious way in NATO planning. This is not the case. NATO is postured, and is planning, as though the Warsaw Pact will not have attractive theaternuclear use options available. (For example, how well do the 108 A-10s in Europe fare if the Soviets, via SS-20 strikes, take out the four forward operating bases in West Germany, and the two generating bases in the U.K.
on day one or two of the war?) Unlike Western defense communities, the Soviet establishment appears to understand that war is a serious business and that a decision to wage war against NATO is, eventually, a decision to wage nuclear war.
For reason of their vulnerabilities, the Soviets almost certainly would prefer that a general war in Europe not go nuclear for several days, 
3 3
However, the political scenario is very important indeed. Why has the war cccurred? What were its immediate precipitating causes? If the sole subject for our attention were a premeditated theater-wide Pact attack, we would be willing to specify, on the basis of a fairly robust set of diverse Soviet sources, a close-to-single variant picture of "the Soviet way in theater war." Unfortunately, perhaps, the range of possible outbreak scenarios is too hroad to permit delineation of such a clear image of the character of the military style of the adversary. Nonetheless, the probable character of Soviet military performance is very unlikely to show as rich a variety of styles as, in Western perspective, the range of political-military scenarios might permit. As best we can tell, Soviet forces can be, and have been, "fine-tuned" for their crisis influencing effect (for example, Chrough perceptions of their readiness); also, the Soviets appear to understand clearly that perceptions of their relative military standing should have a 34 noticeable impact upon political behavior in crises.
But, totally lacking, in terms of Soviet evidence, is any willingness to make symbolic or "bargaining" use of the armed forces. A useful appreciation of Soviet military style may be obtained if one reads carefully Thomas Schelling's Arms and Influence and reverses many of his major arguments.
A statement by then Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger has come to offer undue aid and comfort to Western strategic analysts:
But, I might also emphasize Mr. Chairman, that doctrines control the minds of men only in periods of non-emergency. They do not necessarily control the minds of men during periods of emergency.
In the moment of truth, when the possibility of major devastation ocsrs, one is likely to discover sudden changes in doctrine.
Taken in context, a fair translation of James Schlesinger's thought, ""
as quoted here, is to the effect that however absurd we deem Soviet military "doctrine (in the Western sense of doctrine) to be, in the event the ethic of consequences will likely operate to suggest/compel more intelligent military employment direction. This theme is incredibly dangerous. It can be held to imply that the Soviets are likely to be more willing to behave in a cooperative manner than we have any evidence to believe might be the case.
Rather than think through the bilateral implications of Soviet nuclear employment options (in theater and in actual war) which do not fit a Western framework of intelligent war-waging, we are, implicitly, invited to discount the evidence available concerning a distinctive Soviet approach to such matters.
aSchlesinger's choice of words, with his reference to "doctrines," sug- gests a tenuous grasp of Soviet reality. Neither he, nor many other senior American policy makers of recent years, appear to have grasped an understando ing of the point that when political pre-crisis maneuvering evolves into actual military employment, one is very probably, in Soviet perspective, in the realm of the application of the tenets of the science of war. If this is true, clearly there should be major implications for incentives and disincentives to have resort to theater nuc!ear weapons. bove all else, perhaps, the employment of nuclear weapons may be viewed, in immediate Soviet wartime perspective, as a military rather than a political matter.
This does not deny Soviet recognition of the different quality of nuclear, as opposed to other weapons, nor does it imply any Soviet official indifference to the details of nuclear readiness and release procedures. But, it does imply a Soviet willingness to view nuclear weapons as a military, rather than political instrument.
The questions of when and why the Soviets might choose to "go nuclear"
have to be considered against the backdrop of political scenario diversity.
Furthermore, it is not obvious that any amount of study, at any level of 4classified access, would enable researchers to provide high-confidence answers.
It is possible to argue that the Soviets, much like NATO, do not have an authoritative theory for the guidance of theater-nuclear employment. This author does not believe this, but he admits to there being an evidence prob- Report--and this is not intended, in any sense, as a reflection upon its quality--does not lend itself to easy interpretation by those honestly searching after enlightenment on the subject of, for example, U.S. strategic nuclear doctrine.
In terms of declaratory policy at least (and the Soviets have to decide just how authoritative that Report is), the Report offers some comfort to almost every respectable school, and sub-school, of strategic theoretical opinion in the United States. The point of ti!is appa'er:t'igr ir sion is to emphasize the fact that very large and diverse military post,)es, particularly w~hen hedged about by a wide array of stateme-nts p-taining to employment policy, do not lend themselves to easy translation to (real) use doctrine.
It is possible, if riot persuasive (for reasons specified and explained below), to maintain that the Soviets do not adhere even to a rough facsimile of a single vision of a theater nuclear war in Europe.
Western defense analyst who claims to have 'discovered" the true character of Soviet theater-nuclear doctrine has to be retailing snake oil.
Confident Western claims to an understanding of likely Soviet military operational intentions vis-a-vis a war in Europe are not difficult to discover.
There are several schools of thought on the subject, all, roughly, with equal access to the evidence. The most important, and most obvious comment to make upon the evidence available is that it is all indirect. The Soviets have never waged a nuclear war in Europe, or anywhere else for that matter.
The experiences of Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 may tell us something concerning Soviet style in crisis management, but they may be only indifferent guides to likely Soviet style in actual warfare--particularly in warfare with a possible or even probable nuclear dimension. This is not, necessarily, to imply that the untried and inexperienced character both of the Soviet professional military cadre and of the Soviet mass army, does or would constitute a major brake upon Soviet military activism in a period of acute crisis, but it is to suggest that it is now a very lonq 
To be positive, we believe that a skeptical and careful reading of the Soviet military literature, married to a rigorous search for evidence from other sources, can offer insights into Soviet postural-deployment and operational intentions. For examples, the following observations are appropriate concerning that literature:
--At "the science of war" level, that is to say not involving questions of Soviet foreign policy objectives, the literature is scarcely less free in its permitted expression than is its counterpart in the West. Admittedly, the qualification registered above is very important. The Soviet military literature (very heavily) by and large, does not involve, even by implication, discussion of policy questions. So, what we can read in the specialized Soviet literature does appear to reflect genuine professional concerns.
--It does not seem to have any very noteworthy disinformational, or propagandistic, fu.,ctions. That kind of literature does, of course, abound--but it is of no interest to Western defense professionals.
In short, we do appear to have access to IO important educational literature i ended for the professional edification of the Soviet soldier.
What we make of it is another matter.
--There is a fairly strong case to be made for the view that we should believe roughly what we read. Soviet strategic doctrinal (in the Soviet sense) literature offers an uncompromising vision of greater relative milbary prowess resulting in greater relative political influence.
At "the science of war" level of attention, the Soviet military aims its concerns at morale, appropriate artillery support, the timing of infantry dismount from AFVs, etc. It is probably fairly safe to take most of this writing exactly at face value.
The kind of literature that should not be taken at face value are writings by Soviet "think-tank" defense intellectuals out of, for examples, the Institute for the Study of the USA and Canada, and the Institute for International Relations (IMEMO).
Vis-A-vis the West, the Institute for the USA and IMEMO are far too heavily impregnated with current-* policy propagandizing functions to be trusted to reflect anything other than the official perspective. These two institutes, above others, do undoubtedly contribute to serious Soviet in-house debate, but that is a contribution to which, as a general rule, we are not privy. These institutes are wholly-owned and directed instruments of the Soviet Government.
Whatever their domestic policy analysis-contributing function may be, and this author suspects that it is very modest (at least, it is probably of the "don't call us, we will call you" variety), there can be no doubt but that a major function they perform is to interdict Western policy debate, in terms (though not for motives) famfliar and eminently acceptable to "liberal" opinion here. An American audience can be impressed by the performance of an articulate and well-dressed Soviet think-tank "scholar" who employs Western strategic jargon in defense of policies of cooperation and restraint.
If the public and available literature of the Institute for the USA and of IMEMO truly reflected the desires 0 and actions of the Soviet Government, there would probably be no arms competition between the Super Powers. The Director of the Institute for the USA (Georgiy Arbatov) has told Western audiences, in very direct language and on frequent occasions, that the U.S.S.R. is not seeking strategic superiority, but our knowledge of (as opposed to opinion concerning) * Soviet strategic programs is not compatible with that statement. 
to the stability of Soviet political control over allied states and perhaps at home. 
4 3
The considerations specified above point to a major difficulty in any attempt to read intended operational strategy on the basis of posture. For * more than ten years, the Soviets have been improving everything, across the board. On the one hand this may be read as a major shift from the one-I variant nuclear obsession of the early 19 6 0s, towards a far more pragmatic, even opportunistic approach to conflict in the European theater. On the other hand, a dominant, and heavily nuclear-focused scenario, may still guide Soviet planning. The major improvements registered in the quantity and quality of non-nuclear arms are plausibly explainable in terms either of the contribution of such arms to fruitful exploitation of nuclear employment, or to a conservative hedging against the unexpected. Deep down, some Soviet defense professionals may suspect that their mentors in the Politburo * would be as reluctant to order nuclear release as NATO politicians would be.
More conventional power is always useful in a nuclear context, while it *#ould be truly essential in the event of nuclear pusillanimity.
Soviet military posture, as it bears upon NATO-Europe, tells us nothing in particular concerning Soviet operational intentions. This was not always the case, but it is the case today. The old axiom, "show me your programs, and I will tell you your policy," is not applicable. What is the basis for this judgment? The Soviets --have increased the ability of the motor-rifle and tank divisions to sustain non-nuclear combat.
--have improved dramatically the logistic support for combat divisions that could be called upon from Army and Front.
- Military posture, which--in theory at least--should be compatible with operational intentions, cannot be assessed solely in terms of quantity of manpower and quality of equipment. The quality of manpower and the likely responsiveness of the military organization to very demanding tasks are probably more important matters. Indeed, the balance of the admittedly ambivalent evidence available today suggests that the evolution of Soviet tactical doctrine is being influenced more by Soviet judgment of their capability for troop control, and their doubts over the ability of their soldiers to exercise the proper degree of initiative when confronted with unusually testing circumstances, than it is by any very serious doubts over the possible inadequacy of military equipment. The Soviets do nothing in a fine-tuned manner, that is to say with finesse or with the paying of great attention to the margins. Historically, this statement has been as true of military action as it has been of nearly everything else Russian or Soviet. The Soviets, holding the Third Rome, may be the inheritors of Byzantine cunning, intrigue and deviousness, but their fundamentally peasant culture has inherited few, if any, of the more subtle and sensitive skills of Byzantine statecraft. The long familiar image of the "Russian steamroller" is entirely accurate--and for reasons that are as deeply rooted today as ever they were. The Soviet armed forces should be thought of as a cudgel, not a scdlpel. When seeking to interpret Soviet military posture for the divining of some indication of how it might be employed in action, it is very tempting to be over-impressed with the surface of capability, and to ignore the fact that these are Soviet/Russian armed forces that one is examining. 
4 7
' 4 9
The details of Soviet military practice are, of course, very important, but, very often, the people best suited to discern the detail are not the people best suited to interpret that detail. Also, the detail, which we should attempt to understand as best we can, is less important than is the quality of our appreciation of "the Soviet way of war." For example, it is of inestimable importance to have a confident judgment as to whether the Soviet army would be wielded more like a sabre than a rapier. The precise detail of Soviet operations cannot be predicted in advance (barring intelligence information of a quality and timeliness that we have no business assuming would be available to us), but we should be able to predict the kind of war that the Soviets would attempt to wage. 
51
101 Strategic culture can be defined as the sum total of ideas, conditioned emotional responses, and patterns of habitual behavior that members of a national strategic community have acquired through instruction or initiat n and share with each other with regard to nuclear strategy", a
Non-rigorous though it sounds, the basis for the acquisition of a proper "feel" for Soviet strategic culture can only be a deep immersion in things Soviet (and Russian), and particularly things Soviet (Russian) military. 
53
In American culture, traditionally, war is an extraordinary event that is justifiable only for the most rousing of causes. A very large number of commentators have noticed the crusade-like character of "the American way of war. 
54
6 Soviet/Russian strategic culture is very close to the traditional Ameri-* can preference for the waging of war with near-unrestrained ferocity in " order to inflict total defeat on the enemy--though for different reasons.
The vulnerable geopolitics of the Soviet Union--its very long land frontiers, absence of natural barriers to invasion and, throughout history, the proximity 102 S. . . . of unfriendly neighbors--has produced a strategic culture which requires the country always to be semi-mobilized for war, which assumes the hostility of others, and which generally recognizes the possibility of national tragedy.
Russian history does not encourage its contemporary legatees to take anything other than a very prudential approach to their security problems. 5 5 In Russian and Soviet experience, some of it fairly recent, war tends to place the national territory immediately at risk. An insular Power very often is free to choose how intensive a war it will elect to wage, a continental
Power is less fortunately situated.
Following Clausewitz, the Soviets believe that war can have meaning only in political terms, but--again apres Clausewitz--they believe that war has laws of its own which must be obeyed if success is to be ensured.
Soviet military science is unambivalent in its enthusiasm for the military initiative (preferably beginning with the achievement of initial surprise)-the adversary is to be kept off balance: a cardinal principle of armored operations (strategy is more a matter of disruption, than of destruction, *. of the enemy). In Soviet perspective, a "stable" situation is one which they control. This (unilateral) control focus helps explain Soviet lack of enthusiasm for Western ideas of mutual deterrence. The Soviets are uncomfortable with the idea that the security of their assets reposes in restraint, even coerced restraint, exercised by others. In Soviet strategic culture, from strong preference, an enemy is physically restricted in the * damage that he might choose to inflict.
A summary profile of Soviet strategic culture has to include the following elements:
By definition, the outside, non-Soviet-controlled, world is hostile, actually or potentially. This perceptual, and now ideological fact may be traced to the national scars 103 inflicted by the Mongol Conquest, the adventures of the r.. Teutonic Knights, the ravages of Polish, Lithuanian, and VSwedish militarism, and later by the experiences of French and German invasions. All that matters for our purposes, are the facts of Soviet xenophobia and paranoia.
--International politics is judged, in Moscow, to be a story of continual struggle--more or less violent in instrumentalities as circumstances change. The idea of stable frontiers, or friendly non-(Soviet) controlled neighbors, is totall alien. As a German g~gpolitician once said, "[b]oundr are fighting places.
--
The U.S.S.R. will not feel "secure" until it has effect'v control of the entire globe. Some apologists in the Wes, for the Soviet military modernization drive of the late 1970s have argued that the momentum behind Soviet military programs reflects nothing more sinister than a deep Soviet sense of inferiority: they will never believe that they have "enough" to counterbalance the superior quality of Western military programs. Unfortunately, perhaps, this argument, if reflected in matching Western policies, is an invitation to disaster. We may believe that the Soviets are moved by a very deep-seated sense of inadequacy, and we may even empathize with that Soviet problem, but we cannot ignore threats posed by their military programs, which may be driven by their psychological problems. We lock up some mentally ill people, even though we unde tand that they are ill rather than consciously vicious.
The Soviet Union is a continental land-power, first and foremost. (It is difficult to decide whether we should be more impressed by the navy that Admiral Gorshkov has built, or by the fact that Admiral Gorshkov managed to have such a large and competent navy built at all--in a political context so fundamentally unsympathetic to sea power.) Western commentators are prone to observe that the differing geopolitics 5 8f the Super Powers compel differing strategic perspec-4 tives --which is scarcely a profound observation. However. if one proceeds much beyond the banal there are some profoundly important implications for NATO posture and doctrine. The United States has long acknowledged that security in Europe is a vital American interest, but that security pertains, in American perspective, to a (though admittedly a very major) theater of potential operations. In Soviet perspective, NATO-Europe is very substantially contiguous (with the Soviet Empire, if not the Soviet state) territory. Warfare in a contiguous "region" is far more serious business than it is if it is 3,000 miles away--and one should expect that that seriousness would be reflected in the character of operational intentions. For reasons of real-world geography, it is very difficult to outline a plausible analogy for the United States. At some considerable risk of oversignaling the point, consider a Soviet invasion of Canada or Mexico. NATO's still-authoritative dominant strategic concept of ''flexible response" (3 la MC-14/3 of 1967),' properly translated, amounts to the proposition that ''we will try this, then we will try that and, if really pressed, we will try more of that--while, if disaster really unfolds, we will try something that we find almost unthinkable--etc.'' In the context of the American bargaining theory of conflict, Schelling et al., MC-14/3 is entirely reasonable (if the various military balances accord NATO the required measure of freedom of action).
But, "flexible response" for NATO is not the kind of guiding strategic concept that you adopt if you believe that your essential assets are at immediate risk.
Indeed, ''flexible response" for NATO is distressingly reminiscent of the U.S. approach to the coercion of North Vietnam.
(Readers may care to recall that still-current NATO strategy was designed by the same team that guided U.S.
''strategy'' in Vietnam.)
To summarize, Soviet strategic culture is informed, accurately, by the proposition that the Soviet Union cannot afford to lose, or even not to win, a war in Europe.
Defeat in Europe would/should be a survivable catastrophe for the United States; it would not be survivable for the Soviet Union.
--
The details of Soviet military planning, including TNF employment, have to reflect the unique Soviet strategic culture. If our analysis is corrt t, it follows that the Soviets would * very loat' to pAace their system at risk via the initiat'or o, military operations against NATO, but that if they did so choose--presumably for reason of desperation over their ability to hold the Empire together--they would have to seek a military decision. One may wage an indecisive war an ocean away, but surely not, at least by choice, on one's frontiers.
Last, but not least, Soviet phenomena lend themselves to interpretation in the light of what appropriately may be termed miiitary common sense.
Soviet military preparations, as best we can judge, match the statements of Soviet political leaders and military commentators, to the effect that war has its own grammar. Soviet military science lays claim to an objective scientific basis.
In the event, the Soviets, at the highest levels, might find merit in Western-style theories of bargaining and escalation-for political effect. But the evidence available, as of today, suggests that the Soviets are prepared to fight a war in Europe the way a war in Europe should be fought according to the criteria of military prudence.
Just what is, and is not, prudent is of course scenario-dependent (the subject of the next section of this report).
If the Soviets decide to wage war (i.e., this is not a rather ad hoc escalation out of an unplanned crisis) in Europe, NATO should anticipate Soviet TNF and chemical weapon employment, as the Soviet military situation requires. The Soviets will not resort to nuclear use lightly, but neither will they hesitate to use nuclear weapons, or fail to use them in (intended) decisive quantity.
In short, TNF will be employed to solve particular military problems. 
59
6
Soviet military science is eloquent on the subject of the efficient application of force, but it tends not to be informative on the relationship between the conduct of war and the political character of the conflict. A firm connection is axiomatic in Soviet perspective, a fact which may go a good way towards explaining the absence of overt analysis. 
6
As noted earlier, Soviet military posture does not yield anything that even approximates clear evidence concerning a dominant political scenario. The Soviets have invested in potential freedom of foreign policy choice--they could wage large or small nuclear or conventional wars in the European theater. A matrix such as this in Figure 
1
We have no way of telling whether or not the Soviets expect to be com-*l pelled to wage a war in Europe, nor if they have some dominant vision of its political context. In their terms, their "objective" and "scientific" study of historical processes tells them that the final crisis of bourgeois society must occur sometime, and that desperate and heavily armed bourgeois elites arc likely to attempt some very dangerous adventures. Again in their terms, the Soviets cannot know whether war will come as a consequence of their being compelled to intervene against one or more capitalist societies in aid of fraternal forces; whether they will have to decide for war in No amount of research can tell us when and why the Soviets will choose to go to war. Soviet military planning, as evidenced in posture and exercises, prudently prepares for nearly everything that a reasonable man would deem to be not-implausible.
Scenario writers have difficulty inventing theater-wide wars in Europe * (initially) which the Soviets elect to start in a coldly premeditated, calculating fashion. However, that fact should not impress us very much. 
6 6
Of the three categories of conflict scenarios specified above, only in the case of the escalation from an unplanned crisis would the Soviets * be likely to be willing to pay a noticeable military price in the hope that the conflict would not enter a nuclear phase.
In other words, one l09 Im by constructing a chain of command vis-3-vis nuclear use which would have to impose a delay which might prove fatal. This is not to suggest that the Soviets are indifferent to the security of their nuclear weapons, nor that they have failed to consider some of the more obvious hazards that could attend premature delegation of nuclear firing authority. Traditionally, the Soviets have been extremely, perhaps even excessively, attentive to the issue of the security of their nuclear weapons.
To explain some of the more puzzling asymmetries, or apparent asymmetries, between the U.S./NATO and the Soviet approaches to nuclear release issues, one has to have resort to the near-fundamental differing approaches * to nuclear weapons of the two sides (this, yet again, is a matter of strategic culture and military style). War in Europe, in Soviet perspective (as it should be in NATO perspective also), would only be undertaken for the most serious of political reasons. Consistent with a very responsible attitude towards the minimization of possible damage to the essential assets of the Soviet state, the Soviets would seek victory. They would not wage a major, though limited (say perhaps, confined to West Germany territory only) campaign, let alone a theater-wide campaign for such reasons as: state honor; to make a political point; to weaken the adversary; or because Soviet military analysts predicted success. 
69
There is good reason to believe that the Soviets assume a theaterwide war in Europe inevitably would, eventually, be a nuclear war. By to go "both ways," i.e., plan for integrated warfare and then not use nuclear weapons, is a subject for another discussion.) This approach is close to incomprehensible to many Westerners, even to some who have defense planning 4 responsibilities.
In short, the Soviets appear to have sought "correct," scientific, solutions to the question, "when, and how, do we fight a nuclear war?" Nuclear weapons are not consigned essentially to a "political effect" Scategory--meaning that it is extraordinarily difficult to devise rigorous military requirements for their design and procurement.
(Much of the contemporary NATO debate, if not confusion, over theater nuclear modernization is the direct product of the absence of a NATO nuclear war-fighting doctrine.
If NATO does not know how many weapons, and of what kinds, it needs to 112 4l --. . ... fight the land, air and sea battle, its posture tends to be at the mercy of the domestic political vagaries of alliance members--which can be serious, and have to be taken seriously, but have little to do with the construction of a robust defense posture vis-a-vis the Warsaw Pact.) 
7 1
3
On the one hand, we may be sure that the Soviets would not recklessly E invite American (central-force) nuclear employment against the U.S.S.R.
at home. But on the other hand we may be fairly sure that the Soviets would not endanger the success of a campaign against NATO-Europe for fear of such (counter-) employment. is the subject of the companion study on Soviet transition issues, and so will not be developed in detail here.) 
7 4
Without specifying the political context for a conflict in some detail, and in the absence of knowledge of the military situation confronting both sides, one cannot, responsibly, offer even a rough facsimile of how the Soviets would view the balance of advantage and disadvantage vis-a-vis the initiation of nuclear employment. But, we can elucidate the structure of the issue and make some general judgments concerning the kind of decision that Soviet strategic culture and military style would be likely to favor.
All too often, confident-sounding assertions are made to the effect that thp Soviets would begin a war in Europe with a massive, theater-wide, nuclear lay-down, or that the Soviets expect to be very successful in their conventional assault and would be highly motivated to delay the active introduction of nuclear weapons for as long as possible. Assertions such as these, and their many variants, tend to rest upon consideration of only a very restricted set of factors that are assumed to dominate Soviet decision-making.
It is important to remember that there will nearly always be arguments pro and con nuclear use, and that our (and Soviet) total lack of " real historical (as opposed to exercise, war-game, and operations research) experience of conducting a nuclear land battle may cause both sides to exaggerate, or to underestimate, costs and benefits. Very rarely indeed in historical experience has a new weapon been employed "correctly" in the first campaign in which it was introduced. 
76
First, in summary form, what might be the incentives that would incline the Soviet Union to have resort to theater-nuclear employment?
--
To solve a military problem.
--
To deny NATO the benefits of the first strike initiative, and the advantages that could flow therefrom vis-a-vis the resolution or alleviation of its military problems.
--
To economize on time.
--
To economize on expenditure of military assets.
--
To avoid destruction by anticipated NATO TNF employment.
--
To respond, minimally, to NATO nuclear escalation.
--
To assume escalation dominance following NATO first use.
--
To implement rigid war plans.
--
Second, what might be the disincentives that could disincline the Soviet
--
To avoid licensing NATO use of TNF.
--
To minimize the prospect of a very punishing NATO preemptive TNF strike.
--
To avoid the uncertainties and unknowns of theater nuclear warfare.
--
To economize on the loss of lives and equipment.
To avoid possible escalation to homeland-to-homeland nuclear employment.
--
To avoid intra-Warsaw Pact alliance strain.
--
To permit optimum efficient use of non-nuclear forces.
--
To avoid terrain/structures damage that could impede the pace of advance.
--
To preserve Western Europe as a prize or recovery base.
These summary concerns, some of them apparently contradictory (we say apparently because it is entirely possible that under some conditions nuclear use could hasten the speed of an advance--by blowing away NATO ATGW defenses-while in others it could impose severe delays [for example, if large tracts of urban-industrial West Germany were transformed into radioactive rubble, or if large forest fires were created in the path of advancing Soviet armored columns]). As so often in defense analysis, a particular argument, if not localized as to time, circumstances and preferred doctrine, can be deployed on either side of an issue--apparently with equal legitimacy. First, let us examine the list of identified "incentives."
To Solve a Military Problem Unlike the U.S. civilian strategic theory community, the Soviets tend not to allow weapon considerations to drive strategy. Instead, strategy is driven by politics. Questions concerning the utility and control of nuclear weapons essentially drove the American limited war debate from 1956-63. 
77
8
In retaliation, the Soviets could wreak terrible damage upon NATO-Europe, but promptly applied nuclear firepower by NATO should be able to halt a Pact invasion before it had properly begun. 
8
The Soviets read our literature and monitor our debates and posture, and they know that NATO does not have an agreed alliance-wide polcy for the nuclear defense of Western Europe.  The longer into a war the NATO nuclear initiative is delayed, the less the damage that the Soviets should anticipate would be caused by such a strike (NATO would have lost many of its nuclear delivery assets, and its nuclear-relevant C 
3
We do not know for certain how the Soviets assess NATO's theater-nuclear posture and doctrine, but it is at least possible that they misread it quite seriously--if only for reasons of prudence. For example, the Soviets have to be acutely aware of the survivability problem of the NATO posture (both its weapons and its C 3 1), just as they appear to be tolerably well satisfied--as indeed they should be--with the continuing (im)balance in non-nuclear forces. Soviet satisfaction with that (im)balance may easily be deduced from their negotiating stance in MBFR. So, the Soviets see a NATO with a conventional defense that should not hold; a NATO whose authoritative strategic concept of flexible response requires the alliance to have *timely resort to theater-nuclear weapons in the hope of restoring deterrence;
and a distinctly non-survivable theater-nuclear posture. These apparent facts should lead a Soviet defense planner to one inescapable conclusion:
NATO intends to have very early resort to its theater-nuclear arsenal. * (A more sophisticated Soviet planner might believe that the conventional balance, if road-tested in action, could provide some major [and unpleasant] surprises; that flexible response offers more comment upon the peacetime intra-alliance political needs of NATO, than it does guidance to operational intentions; and finally, that a substantially non-survivable NATO posture reflects nothing more than the inability of the alliance to decide that *it should approach the problem of war in general, and theater-nuclear war in particular, very seriously. This last point could be very difficult for a Soviet professional soldier to grasp--no matter how familiar he was * with Western debate.)
This second incentive, "to deny NATO the benefits of the first strike," *is really a specialized case of the first incentive, "to solve a military * problem." There is every reason to believe that the Soviets are fearful of the damage to their offensive that could be wrought by a series of welltimed and well-aimed NATO nuclear strikes. For example, a very prompt * strike into Poland could cause major difficulties for those follow-on forces that were attempting to move rapidly from the U.S.S.R. into East/West Germany; The net benefits that NATO should expect to enjoy as a consequence of "going first" would, almost certainly, diminish very rapidly over time.
Given NATO's acute problem of the lack of first-rate, and properly positioned, * operational reserves (i.e., in the theater), a Soviet defense rationalist should anticipate that SACEUR would want to use nuclear weapons, not when he was truly desperately pressed, but when nis C31 was still functioning adequately, and when he had forces substantially unbloodied that could be employed to exploit the effects of the nuclear strikes. This hypothetical defense rationalist would very likely be wrong in his prognosis, because he would probably fail to appreciate the fact that some very important elements in NATO (and, in particular, the West German government) view nuclear weapons as being political rather than military instruments. None-*theless, NATO has the kind of posture, nuclear and non-nuclear, which would incline a Soviet defense planner to anticipate early, rather than late, nuclear use.
There appears to be a genuine ambivalence, or uncertainty, in Soviet military thinking over the issue of war duration. Sensibly, the Soviet I Union is preparing to fight both short and long wars. However, in the 121 I context of conflict in Europe, the Soviet interest in waging as short a campaign as possible is reasonably clear. The essence of strategy, as observed already, is not the destruction of the enemy; rather is it the '" disruption of his plans, the fissioning of his order of battle, and the general unraveling of his military situation. 
8 6
This might be the functional equivalent of an attack from a standing start-in terms of the sensitivity of Western intelligence indicators. 
8 8
The Soviet interest in a high-speed campaign probably includes a mixture of military and political considerations. On the military side, as observed immediately above, since the attacker, by definition, begins with the initiative, a very rapid rate of advance may outrun the defender's required recovery time and, in the geographical context of NATO-Europe, may deny the defender the depth needed in order to organize and effect a recovery. Other military considerations include the morale of one's own, and the enemy's, troops (the sense of being invincible, being part of an irresistible tide, and so forth), and the probable lowering of casualty rates that should be the result of exposing men and equipment to enemy fire for, say, twelve rather than thirty days.
Political considerations favoring speed include the loyalty/resolution of allied governments and armed forces; the extent of NATO territory held should an early armistice seem to be advisable; the demoralization of the less robust in NATO-European capitals; and the desirability of attempting to outrun the anticipated NATO nuclear release/use decision process. 
90
9 1
nuclear ammunition for the purpose (inter alia) of maintaining, or restoring a tolerable rate of advance.
As Hudson has explained elsewhere, 9 2 it is probable that the Soviets are nervous concerning the societal strains that a lengthy, and perhaps indecisive (in the sense that a clear military decision obviously was not obtained in short order) war might bring. Most, though by no means all, elements in Soviet society retained their adherence (loyalty might be too strong a term) to the Soviet state (though, more often than not, to the cause of Mother Russia) during the course of World War II, but that was in the context of the actual invasion of the homeland. If Soviet forces are hacked and mauled very badly, far from home in a cause whose merits are less than immediately obvious to the conscripted rank and file, then some of the more important strains in Soviet society could begin to make themselves felt in the quality of military performance, unrest in Eastern Europe, and perhaps even disturbances in the U.S.S.R. itself. These are *not predictions, but they are consistent with the adverse (for the Soviet Union) military situation postulated.
A principal source of state power in the Soviet Union is the military 7establishment. If the Soviets believed there was a fair chance that they would have to expend a very large fraction of that asset in order to grind through NATO defenses in Europe, their political threshold for taking overt I military action against NATO should be raised as a consequence. The speed of the Soviet offensive could be critical both for its prospect for success and for the cost in lives and equipment that would have to be borne. Soviet military science has determined that under nuclear conditions (following NATO should enjoy a deterrent credibility which really it does not deserve-but which is useful--while it is possible, indeed probable, that Soviet overestimation of NATO's TNF intentions and capabilities could trigger an inappropriate Soviet preemptive nuclear strike on a large scale.
A recurring problem in defense analysis is that each side tends to assume that the other will behave in a rational way according to its rule--.
Unlike the situation with respect to NATO, the Soviet theater-nuclear posture is not, primarily, a political instrument--intended to calm the fears K:. of exposed allies over questions of equivalency of risk, and to serve as a bridge, in enemy perceptions, to central-system employment. 
94
The importance that the Soviets attach to theater-nuclear forces is well indicated in the contemporary, comprehensive, modernization (and augmentation) program, in the decisive role which Soviet military literature continues to assign to nuclear-missile weapons; and in the targeting attention which they claim to pay to NATO's theater-nuclear assets. 9 5 Given *I these facts, it is to be expected that the Soviets would anticipate NATO devoting very considerable resources to the attrition of their theater-* nuclear posture, very early in the war. In a Soviet perspective which approaches the nuclear phase of the land battle very seriously, such * attempted attrition by NATO would amount to little more than common sense.
The Soviets would expect NATO to seek to draw down Soviet nuclear delivery vehicle holdings (FROG, Scud, and Scaleboard launchers, nuclear-capable SP artillery tubes, nuclear-capable strike aircraft, and perhaps even SS-20s and Tu-22Ms deployed in the European U.S.S.R.), and their C31 both forward to the enemy targets and backwards up the chain of command. Soviet defense planners probably would not credit reports which denied that NATO planned a dedicated assault on its nuclear assets--true though such reports t might be.
Almost certainly, the Soviets are unduly fearful of taking unacceptable damage to their theater-force posture (mirror-imaging their own theory of war) before that posture could intervene decisively in the battle.
This concern, f apfrently confirmed by a few events over the first few days of war, could trigger a Soviet nuclear initiative (which, objectively,
would not be preemptive--i.e., they need not be fearful of being surprised by a NATO nuclear strike), driven by the "use them or lose them" anxiety.
There is an asymmetry between NATO and the Warsaw Pact with respect to the real military value placed upon theater nuclear forces.
In case of actual conflict, this could mean that quite modest levels of attrition of Soviet This part of the discussion may appear to be bizarre to some readers, but its logic is not at all fanciful.
If the Soviets are progressing sufficiently well in a non-nuclear mode that NATO is driven to desperation use of theater-nuclear weapons, it is possible that the Soviets would choose not to change the character of their campaign (at least near the FEBA), h ut might elect to respond with a purely political-symbolic strike on a Sminimal scale (say, taking out one or two small cities in Belgium or Holland or West Germany 'depending on where the FEBA was at the decision time in question]). This would probably maximize intra-NATO divisions, would say that "if you want a nuclear war we are willing to oblige you," yet would demonstrate such self-evident restraint that it could easily attenuate resolve on the NATO side. Any follow-up nuclear blows by NATO against one or two cities in Eastern Europe could be either dismissed and ignored by Soviet policymakers, or could be matched in kind--in either event, the Soviets would be determined to maintain the momentum of their invasion of NATO-Europe.
This discussion is probably unduly "Western" in its strategic cultural origins. Certainly, in Soviet perspective, it has to be judged to be counter-stylistic. Nonetheless, there is a certain compelling quality about its logic, in the scenario posed, which this author finds disturbing. The moral of this particular part of our tale is that if NATO decides to "go nuclear," it had better "go nuclear" in a serious military way for the purpose of effecting major favorable military results. If NATO's TNF employment is light, tentative, and political-symbolic, NATO is, de facto, inviting the Soviets either to ignore it, or simply to match it, all the while pressing on as before for theater victory.
To Assume Escalation Dominance Following NATO First Use Several cases are subsumed under this 'incentive." One case would be a situation where the Soviets were doing so well in a non-nuclear theater campaign that they determined not to precipitate a militarily complicating nuclear exchange--hoping either that NATO would fail to take the nuclear initiative, or that such an initiative would be taken too late to affect the course of the fighting. A second case would be one wherein the Soviets themselves felt no incentive to initiate nuclear use, but where they were confident that they would have adequate intelligence concerning a NATO nuclear initiative, and hence could strike preemptively.
In this second case the E *Soviet monitoring of NATO signal traffic and weapon movement and preparation could be deficient and they would then find themselves on the wrong end of a surprise TNF attack.
This "incentive," to capitalize upon the license granted by a NATO theater-nuclear initiative, is the reverse, in its essential reasoning, of the argument offered in support of the previous "incentive" ("to respond, minimally, to NATO nuclear escalation"). The kind of nuclear employment 4I envisaged here is theater-wide, large-scale, though highly selective. 9 7
One can envisage a situation wherein NATO's nuclear initiative, either deliberately or inadvertently borne by the Soviet Union, functions as a green light to Soviet forces. The Soviet incentive to respond in a large way with theater-nuclear weapons comprises the following elements: the perceived * necessity to deny NATO the possibility of a militarily substantive nuclear second strike; the opportunity to hasten victory in the theater by striking all target sets that can be struck most efficiently and definitively with nuclear weapons; and, finally, the attraction of seizing the commanding heights on a theater-relevant escalation ladder.
This "incentive," let it be noted, should only function actively as a mover of policy if the central strategic balance, in Soviet estimation, Ais in a condition of rough parity or better (for them). One of the several * major attractions of a condition of (central) strategic superiority is that it (should) discipline enemy nerve in theater-conflict. 9 8 If the United States had a civil defense program as good as that of the Soviet Union, a modernized air defense system, and some area BMD, and had deployed a survivable MX ICBM force, Trident II SLBMs, the full B-1 complement plus ALCM assistance (which virtually could have been achieved for the mid-19 8 0s--in other words, had the U.S. defense community behaved differently in the mid-1970s vis-a-vis its extended deterrent duties), then the U.S.S.R. should not dare to attempt to outbid an initial NATO theater-nuclear employment move in the way specified here.
In the 19 8 0s the Soviet Union may feel free to exercise almost any TNF general strike plan against NATO-Europe that it finds politically and, above all, militarily expedient, because the likelihood of such execution triggering a noteworthy response from U.S. central strategic forces will likely be judged by Moscow to be minimal (though not non-existent).
To Implement Rigid War Plans It is possible, crude and unsophisticated though it may appear, that 4 the Soviets essentially, have a SlOP-spasm-type war plan for their Europeandedicated forces, and that theater nuclear weapons are scheduled to be employed in large quantities against military/logistic targets in the event of (a) a serious non-nuclear check to the pace of their advance, (b) the serious breath of a suspicion of NATO TNF employment, or (c) an actual NATO TNF attack of any size.
The rigidities of Soviet life and administration at home simply have to be reflected (and, we suspect, to an important degree) in the Soviet plan of campaign.
It is possible that the Soviets would begin a theater war with a massive nuclear lay-down. This author does not endorse the strong likelihood of such a possibility, although he will admit that the wish may, to an unhealthy degree, be father to the non-endorsement. If the Soviets were to begin a European campaign with a theater-wide nuclear lay-down (on troop/equipment casernes, C31 assets, airfields, ports, nuclear-weapon storage igloos, and so forth), there would be no theater campaign. NATO's ability to resist would be defunct on day one. The logic of this scenario is that the Soviets would have to be ready to deter and fight a central nuclear war from the outset. In fact, if the Soviets concluded that they could destroy NATO's ability to resist in the theater by means of the initial nuclear lay-down, they would probably reason that the theater itself, the immediate "prize," might be bypassed--in that NATO Europe may fall into their hands if they could wage and win the central war first. 
99
-In dealii.j with a Pact invasion of NATO-Europe in the 19 8 0s, we should perhaps recall 1914 rather than 1940. A Soviet facsimile of Helmuth von Moltke may falter in implementation, 0 0 but NATO should not overestimate its ability to alter Soviet actions on a real-time basis.
To Fragment NATO
The Soviets have to be as aware as is any Western defense analyst that NATO would likely be even less of one official mind in the event of war Agair, this is not a p!-ediction of Soviet behavior, but it is so obvious a tactic that NATO would be foolish to ignore the likelihood of its being suoested by the Soviet NUWEP community.
The rine incentives for Soviet nuclear employment discussed above need to b balanced by consideration of the nine disincentives discussed below.
Di t--regardless of any net assessment made by a reader who has pondered the -,erits of both sets of arguments--it is difficult to resist the tentative conclusion that a NATO which declines to think through the postural and doct nal (and societal-preparatory) requirements of theater-nuclear war, s a NATO which invites defeat. This is not to predict defeat: nothing is certain in war. But a non-serious approach to TNF issues (i.e., a non-'irvivable NATO nuclear posture, and the absence of an authoritative NATO ticory for the proper conduct of the nuclear land battle) tempts fate to 3 greater degree than this author would endorse.
Lot us now consider the disincentives for Soviet theater-nuclear use.
Given the generally anti-TNF thrust of orthodox Western defense and armscontrol thinking over the past twenty years, most of these a;guments should be more familiar than were some of those developed above in support of the putative "incentive'' contentions.
To Avoid Licensing NATO Use of TNF
The Soviets may suspect, if they attend with sufficient care and empathy to intra-NATO debates over theater-nuclear issues, that NATO would be politically incapable of initiating nuclear use.
In other words, the Soviets Ie might really be able to dictate the weapon character of the war. For all of their apparently genuine determination to preempt NATO nuclear employment, the Soviets can hardly monitor NATO's trials and tribulations over an issue such as enhanced radiation weapons and conclude other than that NATO addresses nuclear issues with extreme reluctance. The Soviets may believe, or perhaps suspect strongly, that NATO is very unlikely to employ nuclear weapons, * regardless of its military plight--provided legitimization is not provided by Soviet nuclear action.
This disincentive is of course highly conditional--it would be much stronger were NATO to modernize its theater-nuclear posture and marry it to far more survivable C31. Also, the operation of this disincentive would An obvious solution to the problem of denying NATO the ability to detect with high confidence TNF pre-launch signatures, is of course to build many of those signatures into the regular structure of the military situation.
In other words, if the Soviets decided to marry nuclear warheads to weapon launchers in a period of acute crisis--which is really what their theaternuclear employment policy requires to happen, on sound military grounds--the actual wartime process of ordering a nuclear strike should be less susceptible to NATO detection. Rightly or wrongly, but inevitably (given the Soviet perspective), the Soviets do appear to anticipate that NATO will pay heavy non-nuclear and nuclear targeting attention to their theaternuclear assets. Non-dispersal of nuclear warheads from storage sites far ahead of intended nuclear employment is the kind of policy inaction one would expect of NATO, but not of the Soviet Union. Whereas a U.S. President would likely be concerned, above all else, to ensure the security of the weapons, and to minimize the possibility of local military commanders taking the course of a war out of his hands; the Soviets would likely be concerned, above all else, to ensure that its theater-nuclear stockpile was not destroyed -" very early in a war (hence the case for dispersal out of storage sites).
Both concerns are eminently reasonable and, in principle at least, both may be satisfied to some degree by PAL technology.
If the Soviets fear a very punishing NATO TNF preemptive strike--and there is some evidence to suggest that that is so03--they may believe, with some reason, that they can influence NATO's assessment of its incentives to All too often, the prognoses by NATO analysts reflect local hopes, fears and reasoning, rather than a plausible portrait of probable Soviet behavior.
As a general rule, it is prudent to assume that an enemy's society, and political system, is more robust than the ambiguous evidence would suggest to be the case.
It is possible that nuclear strikes on a small scale against carefully selected target sets inside the U.S.S.R. would unlock domestic nationalethnic-political forces which would unravel that country (this probably merits categorization as "the Hackett Fallacy").  Soviet planners should worry about two aspects of the possible nuclear connection to the integrity of their alliance. 
combat unit will behave when it has been subjected to a radiation attack that leaves most of its members still functioning, but apprehensive as to the dosage to which they have been exposed, etc. 
119
would not prefer to cope solely with the problems posed by non-nuclear combat. Apart from this asserted preference, one has to admit that the Soviet Armed Forces appear to be so rigorously prepared for chemical and nuclear conflict that they would find it close to impossible to operate very efficiently in a non-nuclear environment. The U.S.S.R. would have to be ready, at very short notice, to anticipate a NATO decision to initiate nuclearweapon employment, and many Pact strike assets would need to be withheld from conventional operations in readiness for execution of nuclear operations.
With respect to this potential "disincentive," as so often in this report, there are critical missing elements in the evidence inventory.
For example, in this particular context, just how fearful are the Soviets *G concerning the military effect of early NATO nuclear strikes? Known Soviet devotion to the tactic of nuclear preemption may say more about Soviet obeisance to the "principle of war" generally termed "the initiative," than I it does about real Soviet anxieties over the disruptive effect of firing nuclear weapons second.
To Avoid Terrain/Structure Damage that Could Impede the Pace of Advance
The Soviets have to assume that a nuclear war in Europe would be a two (plus)-party affair. They may be tolerably confident of their ability so to plan and execute nuclear strikes that the pace of the armored advance 6 would be hastened as a consequence, rather than slowed.
In addition, the Soviets may believe that NATO would not choose to execute nuclear strikes against its own territory of such a kind that very serious barriers to a One may assert with some confidence that the Soviets would not inflict needless economic damage upon Western Europe, but--with no less certainty-one must assert that the Soviets should not be expected to risk compromising their prospects for swift military success, in the interest of preserving Western Europe as a prize or a recovery base.
The above discussion of nine "incentives" and nine "disincentives'
for Soviet initiation of theater-nuclear force employment might be deemed academic (pejorative use) by responsible officials. Such a reaction would be unfortunate and, we believe, inappropriate. If a simple and demonstrably correct answer were attainable vis-a-vis Soviet incentives/disincentives to initiate nuclear use, that answer would have been provided by the transnational NATO defense community many years ago.
Part I of this report, by Norman Friedman, is really a special, and overwhelmingly important, case of the subject matter of Part 2. In this report, Hudson has chosen not to rest its line of argument on a restrictingly narrow, though rigorously analyzed, evidential base.
In short, we do not believe that there is a simple "key" to Soviet nuclear-employment intentions.
We believe that it is very useful to study Soviet/Pact peacetime exercises, postural evolution, and military literature. However, we believe, very strongly, that Russian/Soviet history--and their likely interpretation of that history--and politico-strategic "culture," can tell us more about probable future Soviet military behavior than can any careful analysis * of Pact exercises or military doctrinal texts.
Much of what is identified as "the Soviet way" with respect to TNF employment would be misinterpreted were it to be attributed to a uniquely Soviet strategic culture. Quite resolutely, the Soviets continue to approach war in an operational perspective--"how should it be waged for maximum military efficiency?" There are many reasons why we believe that the Soviets should want to initiate a war in a non-nuclear manner, thereby, in principle, opening the door to transition problems. But, Soviet evidence is far from conclusive on the subject of the existence, and character, of transition issues. A conventional opening phase of a theater war is only one variant of war-waging possibilities. Many Western analysts may believe that the variant dominates Soviet planning, and they may well be correct, but there is no real authority underlying that belief. Although the evidence, such *as it is, is rich and ambiguous, which could promote the view that the Soviets are very pragmatic in their planning for theater war, we incline to the view that the Soviets probably do have a single dominant scenario I in mind vis-a-vis TNF employment.12 Soviet military science and, by Western standards, the heavily academic character of Soviet professional military higher education, 123 have a problemsolving proclivity which inclines towards the finding of a "school solution"
to anticipated military problems. In the Soviet context, the role of TNF
F.
in a war in the Central European TVD simply has to be categorized as a military problem of the utmost importance that begs for a scientifically "correct" analysis. The heavily mathematical formalism of Soviet military analysis does not preclude what could be termed a pragmatic approach. In other words, the Soviets might analyze "scientifically," long ahead of time, the proper role of TNF, or--no less persuasively--they might choose to subject possible TNF use decisions to (intra-war) real-time scientific analysis. The Soviet general staff, with its well-advertised enthusiasm for computerized algorithm application--comprising high-speed mathematical substitutes for qualitative human analysis--offers some disturbing analogies with the kriegspiele played by the Great General Staff of Imperial Germany: military planning is approached as a set of problems in applied mathemacics. 124 The potential for real-time rude awakening is awesome--on both sides. The Soviets may discover that "the fog of battle" starves their computers of vital information; while NATO may discover that, in practice as in peacetime exercise, the Soviets will apply decision rules on nuclear use on the basis of mathematical analysis of the net cost and advantage. NATO strategists cannot help but have extreme difficulty comprehending an adversary who appears to be willing to initiate nuclear employment on the basis of mathematical analysis. It may tran-pire, in practice, that the "scientific" scholasticism that is so notable a feature of Soviet military analysis would be an early victim of political reality. In short, in the event of war the Politburo might instruct its Soviet establishment to retire its favored algorithms for the duration, and to await clear qualitative political instruction on the detail of nuclear use. However, this speculation may reflect no more than Western-oriented wishful thinking on the part of the author.
By any reasonable person's interpretation of the rules of evidence, -Soviet intentions vis-a-vis theater-nuclear employment may be stated with some corfidence. We can claim that the Soviets intend:
1. To be the first to use nuclear weapons.
2. To anticipate NATO TNF employment in such a fashion that the concept of a "preemptive nuclear transition" does some violence to the integrity of the usual Western concept of preemption.
3. To use TNF as and when military circumstance suggests to be most appropriate.
4. To employ TNF in a decisive manner (i.e., they will not make "bargaining" strikes; seek to influence NATO-European political opinion; or play deliberately dangerous escalation games).
5. To strike with as much, and as little, nuclear fire as they need for strictly interpreted military purposes. (Soviet military science is very attentive to the application of what, traditimnlly, has been known as the principle of economy of force.)
The sine qua non of Soviet policy will be the achievement of unambiguous military victory in the theater. The Soviets will not imperil attainment of that superordinate objective by restraining TNF employment on the basis of applying algorithms that bear upon escalation-control (indeed, it is not at all certain that such algorithms exist in the Soviet culture).
For reasons of military prudence, NATO should plan as though the above were revealed truth. On balance, we think that the clear evidence, summarized above, should be taken at face value. But, we retain the nagging suspicion that, in the event of war, Soviet military science would be restrained in applicaticn by high-level political appreciation of the potential force of some of the "disincentives" identified and discussed above. NATO's TNF posture and doctrine are so heavily influenced by local considerations that relate scarcely at all to analysis of "the Soviet threat," that it is, perhaps, optimistic to have a Part IlII to this report which addresses "The Problems for NATO."
On the basis of the evidence to hand, there can be no doubt as to the character of a NATO combined arms posture and doctrine which would be optimal for the deterrence even of desperate 68. There is an unfortunate paradox in that anybody attentive to the history of the Twentieth Century should agree that pre-war defense communities tend to plan to wage "the wrong war"; but--undaunted, and probably necessarily--Western defense communities insist that they be persuaded of the probability/reasonable possibility of occurrence of particular scenarios as the required basis for long-term defense planning. In other words, U.S. defense planners behave as if the future were predictable in important respects, even though most of the evidence (i.e., history) denies that this is likely to be true. A good deal of unsound social scientific research has been officially funded in quest of the chimera of scientific predictability.
69. Of considerable educational value, through negative example--i.e., its reading usefully exposes the student of Soviet military affairs to important errors--is a recent novel by Douglas Terman: First Strike (New York: Scribner's, 1979). In this tour de force, the Soviets are deemed to have decided to go to war when they achieve an "89 percent probability of 'winning.''" "Winning" would be a condition wherein the U.S.S.R. controlled a largely undamaged U.S. economic system, while having suffered the loss of no more than 18 percent of its industry, 12 percent of its population, and could regain its extant level of GNP within 5 years. P. 33. Terman betrays no breath of understanding of why states choose to go to war, but--and it is a considerable but-his algorithms (misapplied) for war probably do apply very extensively to Soviet decision-processes at the military operational level. 78. The contemporary Soviet debate concerning "the revolution in military affairs," as best we can tell, is distinctly non-Western in character. For that debate readers need to study the "Special Collection" on the New Soviet Military Doctrine provided to the West by Colonel Oleg V. Penkovskiy.
The truth is that we do not, and cannot, know ahead of time just how the Soviets would resolve their principal nuclear-use dilemma: to go very early, thereby ensuring seizure of the initiative, but thereby licensing a NATO reply which could embarrass seriously the pace of an offensive that had barely begun to roll; or to go much later, thereby risking a surprise nuclear attack by NATO. There are excellent political, military, and psychological reasons why the Soviets should prefer to delay their initial nuclear strike (Douglass and Hoeber, Trends in Soviet Strategy for War in Europe, [unpublished]).
There is no evidence seen by this author which would suggest any Soviet interest in ''riding out'' a first NATO strike--or even any interest in accepting knowingly a substantial risk that such an attack might have to be ridden out.
For a strong argument in support of this view, see Marc E. Geneste, "The City Walls: A Credible Defense Doctrine for the West," Orbis, Vol. XIX, No. 2 (Summer 1975), pp. 477-90.
For an appropriate brief critique, See William R. Van Cleave and S.T. Cohen, Tactical Nuclear Weapons: An Examination of the Issues (New York: Crane, Russak, 1978), particularly pp. 54-63.
Echelon numbering varies among authorities. As employed here: the first echelon comprises those Pact forces in Eastern Europe committed immediately to the attack; the second echelon comprises those Pact forces in Eastern Europe withheld from the immediate attack, but committed very soon thereafter; while the third echelon comprises Soviet forces normally deployed in the Westernmost military districts (MDs) of the U.S.S.R. The leading alternative is to designate (most) Soviet forces deployed forward in Eastern Europe (and the better Pact-allied forces) as the first echelon; to designate the "category one" (of readiness) forces of the Baltic Belorussian, Moscow, Kiev, and Carpathian MDs as the second echelon; and to designate as the third echelon those Soviet units in the Western MDs that require substantial mobilization to be brought up to strength.
A leading Western authority on the Sovit:t army has written as follows: ''Furthermore, the cry comes through very clearly that, if nuclear weapons are used effectively by the enemy, then there is little chance that an offensive will succeed. This is because even if the defenders are similarly reduced by Soviet nuclear strikes, the problems of recovering control and continuing the offensive in a purposeful manner are almost insuperable." 
For a useful Western commentary, see Donnelly, "Tactical Problems Facing the Soviet Army," pp. 1408-10.
Friedman and Gray, Soviet Vulnerabilities and U.S. Strategic Employment Policy.
For a strong argument to the effect that "[ain in-depth, massive surprise nuclear strike, in conjunction with an immediate, high-speed air and ground exploitation, is still the dominant Soviet concept for war against NATO," see Joseph D. 99. This merits description as counter-intuitive. For more than twenty years, the U.S. defense community, for good apparent reasons, has been wedded to the idea that a central war erupts out of an escalation sequence that begins, and may continue for some time, in a local theater. 
Recent convincing, really definitive, evidence of Soviet recognition of the tunes they might be able to play upon the NATO keyboard, has been provided by the propaganda campaign launched to interdict NATO-European decision processes on enhanced-radiation weapons (the "neutron bomb") and new long-range theater-nuclear delivery systems. Given their ideological perspective, Soviet officials should be expected to be extremely sensitive to "the contradictions of capitalism"--* both within and between capitalist NATO countries.
See the brief speculation in Douglass, A Soviet Selective Targeting -* Strategy Toward Europe, pp. 28-9.
See fn. 87.
104. This author has seen no variant of this argument (concerning the potential danger of the readiness-upgrade process) in Soviet sources.
To the extent that stability may be enhanced through dialogue--or even just the exchange of monologues--this thought probably is worthy of communication to Moscow.
105. There is every reason to believe that the Soviet military establishment remains convinced that there are valid lessons to be learned from the events of 1941-45  abjures an all-nuclear opening phase. Indeed, it might be argued that the closer NATO comes to being able to go undetected from the conventional to the nuclear, the closer the Soviets will come to opening with a massive nuclear barrage which must not merely destroy the NATO nuclear arsenal but also much of NATO's population and industrial base, even if only through collateral damage.
Two pillars of Soviet policy are, therefore, a belief in the availability of unambiguous intelligence of NATO intentions, and the belief that the Soviets will be capable of extremely rapid decision-making on that basis. Against these must be set the ever-present "fog of war" and the 4 uncertainties inherent in any massive escalation. Moreover, the Soviets must be aware that they cannot with certainty destroy all NATO nuclear assets (e.g., submarines). They are likely to fire, then, not because of some calculation showing that firing is particularly profitable but more because of their belief that "if they do not use it, they lose it."
One extremely disturbing possibility is that, in the absence of reliable intelligence, the Soviets would resort to some type of operational analysis to predict, on the basis of NATC declaratory doctrine, when NATO will make its own nuclear strike, and then to preempt (in theory) on this 4 basis. Such an approach has the apparent attraction of avoiding the problems of intelligence collection, but on the other hand it negates the advantages of preemption. One important virtue of the operational analysis is that it can be used, in combination with somewhat ambiguous intelligence data, to convince Soviet politica" leaders of the need for nuclear release.
In political terms, the grea advantage of le preemptive approach to nuclear attack is that the leader signing the release does not feel that, by his own act, he is starting the nuclear exchange; he is only doing 
pOce essential point here is that physical measures which increase the survivabi ,ity of the NATO weapors (and therefore reduce the utility of the ;tafrdard Soviet attack) are unlikely to cause the Soviets to retarget. The reason is that the Soviets strike preemptively; they do not make a first re strilc based on some abstract calculation of its net effect on NATO. Rather, th. , strike in resporse to the expectation that NATO is about to strike, that weapons must he ised rather than lost, and tk-at they must limit damage hv neutral izing as many NATO nuclear weapons as possib'
Given this context, wide dispersal of the NATO storage sites (and partictilarly their removal from close proximity to such important NATO conventinna' asets as airfields) is a way of reducing collateral damage. Dispersal and hardening together may well reduce the number of Soviet warheads available for attack or) such non-nuclear targets as NATO command and control and gpopulation centers. Point defense of nuclear storage sites also increases tFe number of Soviet weapons which must be targeted on each, and so reduces the surplus available for other purposes.
In this context the existence of suich highly survivable NATO nuclear systems as those aboard submarines tends not so much to deter a Soviet strike as to reduce its military impact.
The basic Soviet preemptive doctrine assumes that it is always practical 'or the Soviets to detect NATO preparations for a nuclear strike. For -xample, the Soviets are well aware of the stereotyped NATO release mecha-',ism. and they pay close attention to the operational use of communications * intelligence.
In practice they plan both to intercept NATO nuclear communi- A move towards longer-range NATO nuclear weapons, such as GLCM or Pershing II, might also be helpful, in that such weapons would not have to be moved into position in order to interdict the battlefield. Moreover, since the physical security of rear-area weapons would not be affected by early events on the battlefield, it would not be possible for Soviet operations analysts to argue convincingly that they would have to be used to Soviet concept that in war the best target is the enemy's army, not something as nebulous as his ''will to resist.''
We are the Soviets' enemy, and our defeat is the Soviets' professed goal.
Our mil itary capabil ity is therefore his target; the best that we can do is to turn this orientation to our advantage in a war we may not he able to avoid by deterrence.
Given Soviet predilections, the NATO response must also take into account the character of the alliance and its members; merely to suggest mechanical counters (such as greater peacetime dispersal of NATO nuclear 4 weapons) may well be to avoid fundamental issues. Moreover, it seems unlikely that NATO will be able to eliminate some of its most severe vulnerabilities. NATO can, and should, adjust its force posture so as to decrease markedly the anticipated return from a Soviet preemptivP (transition) nuclear strike. However, NATO also should acknowledge that if Soviet military analysis is severely skewed by the "use them or lose them" concept, no NATO TNF postural adjustment is likely to affect the occurrence and timing of the nuclear strike.
Moreover, NATO is in desperate need of some postUral-dloctrinal offset for the fact that it will have literally tens of millions of its civilian refugees unprotected on the roads, and will have its urban-industrial areas 177 --------------------------------------------
*and connurbations on the line of Pact mac ch. For example, it is sometimes suggested that one vital function of Pact nuclear forces is so to threaten NATO states as to convince them to defect from the Alliance in a crisis.
-Soviet literature and behavior do not show the required flexibility and *imagination, but this potential NATO vulnerability nonetheless should be addressed.
Thus it is entirely possible that Soviet war-waging doctrine * would be insensitive to the possibilities that its initial application had created.
For its part, NATO often seems to show an insensitivity to the military realities imposed by one of the greatest connurbations in the world. * Too often, NATO campaign analyses seem to assume that "the war" would be waged on a continent-wide Luneberg Heath. In practice, however, the accepted NATO doctrine of defending its (heavily populated) ground requires a substantial willingness to accept great damage to that ground. West Germany and the Low Countries would, then, in principle, accept the logic of the fact that they constitute a potential battlefield. The West German Govern-0ment and people, in the (anticipated) event that NATO's main line of resistance, far forward, were broken, would have to be prepared to defend their cities. This in turn would probably mean the demise of industrial West * Germany. A rugged, in-depth, defense of that country would mean the prompt and lingering death of many of the tens of millions of civilian refugees who would be desperate to flee over the Rhine. Even if the Soviets did  
by, among other things, a Soviet transition from relative nuclear poverty to relative plenty, from extreme strategic inferiority (U.S. escalation dominance at the high end of the escalation ladder) to rough parity. In the large, the Soviets have gone from a posture of (perceived) inferiority, in which their Army in Eastern Europe was essentially a defensive formation against a perceived (if nonexistent) Western threat, to an offensive posture.
by, among other things, a Soviet transition from relative nuclear poverty to relative plenty, from extreme strategic inferiority (U.S. escalation dominance at the high end of the escalation ladder) to rough parity. In the large, the Soviets have gone from a posture of (perceived) inferiority, in which their Army in Eastern Europe was essentially a defensive formation against a perceived (if nonexistent) Western threat, to an offensive posture.
3
Even given Soviet assumptions, preemption in itself carries very stringent requirements for speed of attack coupled with a high standard of reconnaissance, to ensure the maximum level of destruction of the opposing NATO weapons. At present the great bulk of NATO tactical nuclear weapons are held on land and are, therefore, vulnerable to a Soviet first strike. However, such vulnerability need not continue to be the rule. Even the assignment of submarines and CONUS-based bombers to NATO (without, for example, changing the distribution of land-based weapons) would have a considerable effect on current Soviet expectations concerning the success of their nuclear offensive in Europe. As for urgency, if it is Soviet doctrine to direct nuclear fire first against NATO nuclear-capable units, surely it is the p. L 63 K Sp. e×prtat ior, trat NATO target ing world have a simi ar rat ionale. t I Ia,< t!at nrcr: tr. ' Vus, dec isio na-been mad e , th r 1 m st bt intn 5e .e ror th ,.,> t jvL I able we'apons, ,:s th(: (ar Sturrirj 'orresporidl st ,ir :d:a', . ' .... F~ raj 'nsed weapor, L vpn p'-b-ee . r :. y t tI e So . et nt!r: ear ;t r ik, iay 'w It ".. Cef I r>act c ,' -thst i . .. .. . ',! a:: , t0 n v : k" ' d ir nc t e xp r d :'are 'a a : t ii g as 'u or a car tt z .' ; -. a .tt',, i nd uqiprrort .hirh c,,l i.rts dir-,ct y wit l* rt':t f -epower for -f f ct i r a convent o;ra eptJiage xT , -or '-xt t m L si 'SQi -. 1 I ong reach of Soviet ar t 1I ry t , .means (I ce-p rr'se. t i also nite poc i le that the, Soviets s ue C a' , means of ac t ncvi ng . -'ar cIa: I 'f ec t i t hout nu lerr ,%capons. 1i, ',<aily ac they are qe',rraI ly cr-odi ted v.ith a considerabIe edge in CBW. (.aar r earand CPW weapons are classed as "weapons ci mass dust ruc ti on, .... -its perform nc Iear and CBW decontaminat on. .ria I -n o ,r -I ear-transition imposes part i cul a!-' severe Stre ses S-a.r ''t connar. a-n ront-oI system. It is necessary, f i st , t 'act f . -. at -r: t.a t NATO :I a , 1 , -t . " . The ','ar t i 'a -t -I -rd . -'I,, ...-i *-!.-fr "a--. , v. . r'-i " ovi,,t fnrr.s to ri' ,> ; ' _ " 3 . ' etrd At t -, same ti me mot, I(exp olIei ta o,) m must f 'ai'' r0 as to take an antage o t Ie I r t hcor rag : Lo lal strke: and scarecy mist be prtcerved in order to prevent NATO from mounting now appears t -,it. fr a time in the rid-1970s, Soviet doctrine envis-< : s,,t ot Soviet forces for improved survival on a nuclear battle-SI ;ct c., -oncentration would still bring results prior to the nuclear ctri.
Even given Soviet assumptions, preemption in itself carries very stringent requirements for speed of attack coupled with a high standard of reconnaissance, to ensure the maximum level of destruction of the opposing NATO weapons. At present the great bulk of NATO tactical nuclear weapons are held on land and are, therefore, vulnerable to a Soviet first strike. However, such vulnerability need not continue to be the rule. Even the assignment of submarines and CONUS-based bombers to NATO (without, for example, changing the distribution of land-based weapons) would have a considerable effect on current Soviet expectations concerning the success of their nuclear offensive in Europe. As for urgency, if it is Soviet doctrine to direct nuclear fire first against NATO nuclear-capable units, surely it is the p. L 63 K Sp. e×prtat ior, trat NATO target ing world have a simi ar rat ionale. t I Ia,< t!at nrcr: tr. ' Vus, dec isio na-been mad e , th r 1 m st bt intn 5e .e ror th ,.,> t jvL I able we'apons, ,:s th(: (ar Sturrirj 'orresporidl st ,ir :d:a', . ' .... F~ raj 'nsed weapor, L vpn p'-b-ee . r :. y t tI e So . et nt!r: ear ;t r ik, iay 'w It ".. Cef I r>act c ,' -thst i . .. .. . ',! a:: , t0 n v : k" ' d ir nc t e xp r d :'are 'a a : t ii g as 'u or a car tt z .' ; -. a .tt',, i nd uqiprrort .hirh c,,l i.rts dir-,ct y wit l* rt':t f -epower for -f f ct i r a convent o;ra eptJiage xT , -or '-xt t m L si 'SQi -. 1 I ong reach of Soviet ar t 1I ry t , .means (I ce-p rr'se. t i also nite poc i le that the, Soviets s ue C a' , means of ac t ncvi ng . -'ar cIa: I 'f ec t i t hout nu lerr ,%capons. 1i, ',<aily ac they are qe',rraI ly cr-odi ted v.ith a considerabIe edge in CBW. (.aar r earand CPW weapons are classed as "weapons ci mass dust ruc ti on, .... -its perform nc Iear and CBW decontaminat on. .ria I -n o ,r -I ear-transition imposes part i cul a!-' severe Stre ses S-a.r ''t connar. a-n ront-oI system. It is necessary, f i st , t 'act f . -. at -r: t.a t NATO :I a , 1 , -t . " . The ','ar t i 'a -t -I -rd . -'I,, ...-i *-!.-fr "a--. , v. . r'-i " ovi,,t fnrr.s to ri' ,> ; ' _ " 3 . ' etrd At t -, same ti me mot, I(exp olIei ta o,) m must f 'ai'' r0 as to take an antage o t Ie I r t hcor rag : Lo lal strke: and scarecy mist be prtcerved in order to prevent NATO from mounting now appears t -,it. fr a time in the rid-1970s, Soviet doctrine envis-< : s,,t ot Soviet forces for improved survival on a nuclear battle-SI ;ct c., -oncentration would still bring results prior to the nuclear ctri.
* 3 . Perhaps significantly, no new Soviet light bomber appeared between 1960 3nd the middle 1970s, when a new generation of deep-strike aircraft (FENCER) entered service. This suggests the absence of new production ' 72 SO programs initiated * 2.
59. The preemptive concept places a large burden on Soviet intelligence.
59. The preemptive concept places a large burden on Soviet intelligence.
4
Game
Game
•6. . .. ".• . .. . " Union locked into military dependence upon nuclear firepower (unlike the Soviet Union of today), should be expected to hesitate long over a decision to introduce nuclear use into a category of conflict such as this. * the Soviets in the merits of preemption (or execution in anticipation), one does not knowingly imperil the prospects of success for preemption 110
response :
response :
For understandable reasons, the governments of NATO-Europe have, to date, evinced no interest whatsoever in preparing some of their major urban centers as potential fortresses intended either to be defended house by house,
For understandable reasons, the governments of NATO-Europe have, to date, evinced no interest whatsoever in preparing some of their major urban centers as potential fortresses intended either to be defended house by house,
• --' . ... . . i : : .
• --' . ... . . i : : .
*
I
I
AT TN : JSAFE/DOX, Opnl Plns Jefen't N~irdr Ptjf-/ ATTN: USAFE/XPP. Programs AT T%: ['PR ATTN : USAFE /XPX , Plns A t i Trndtr Nij: Por' 183
• %, -. . "
jiPARTM ',
T OF DFFENSE COINTRACTORS Cont
Inc Systems Planning & Analysis
N. Sumner ATTN: B. Bennett Systems Rsch & Appli
A. Shaw
J. Mason
J. McGahan
R. Robinson Tetra Tech
Inc Scienr
R. Craver TRW Electronics & Defen
R. Burnett
R. Tidwell TRW
W. Jaye TRW
J. Allen
G. Parks TRW
S. Payne Vector Rsch
I. Weindtein ATTN: M. Sanchez ATTN: J. Douglas
CODE 
X337078469 Q84QAXYX91232 H2590D
Germany from NATO (and, therefore, really to destroy NATO), or to expel the United States from Europe and end theater-derived threats to the politicaleconomic integrity of their "holdings" in Eastern Europe, one should anticipate, on the Soviet side at least, a fairly low threshold for nuclear employment.
In terms of Soviet military science, war is war, with nuclear weapons comprising only the most destructive, though possibly decisive, element * in the essential combined arms team.
4This author suspects very strongly that the chain of command connecting ultimate political authority with a front commander, on the subject of nuclear readiness, nuclear release and firing orders, would operate far more expeditiously than is likely to be the case with NATO. As noted above, this is not because Soviet leaders would be in any way casual about nuclear use; rather is it because the Soviet political and military establishment appears to have accepted the nuclear weapon as an instrument of war, to be emploved responsibly for military purposes (in pursuit of overarching political goals), in ways which Western defense communities find unpalatable. 
79
To Deny NATO the Benefits of the First Strike Whatever doubts some Soviet defense planners may harbor concerning the controllability of a nuclear war, every shred of Soviet evidence known to this author indicates an overwhelming Soviet preference for striking 80 first with nuclear weapons, rather than second.
If NATO were committed wholeheartedly to the task of stopping a Pact invasion of Western Europe, a short list of NATO TNF strike options presents itself for attention.
war, it seems unlikely that, once the decision for war has been taken, the Politburo will shrink from those measures it has been told over and over again are likely to be decisive.
The Soviet world-view outlined in Part I of this report suggests strongly that a European war will begin in a context which, to the Soviets, suggests either the possibility of a catastrophic collapse of the West or else a Western offensive aimed at the destruction of the Soviet Union.
Lesser issues are unlikely to call forth the sacrifices entailed in a largescale European war.
In the Soviet literature, nuclear and other mass-destruction weapons are so often associated with decisive results that it seems unwise to imagine that very limited exchanges would be maintained.
However, at the same time it is possible to suggest that in reality the scenario might be far less clear than Soviet leaders suppose and, moreover, that brave words and thoughts may imply imprudent actions as the Soviets stand on the brink of a nuclear war, with ambiguous intelligence indications in hand. The stronger the NATO stance, the less likely the Soviets are to imagine that a push on their part will suffice to end the East-West struggle.
Other NATO measures can make intelligence indicators of a NATO nuclear strike far less unambiguous than would be the case in the near future. Paradoxically, given their theoretical concerns, the Soviets do not appear to entertain the real possibility of a successful NATO conventional military offensive, which they would have to blunt using nuclear weapons. Rather, they assume that they will be able to preempt in both the strategic and the tactical sense: in the strategic sense, they will detect a NATO offensive, and launch the spoiling attack which will carry them to victory. In the tactical sense, they expect to be able to detect preparations for a NATO nuclear strike. The latter policy is quite reasonable only because NATO most extensive, and densely populated, connurbation in the world! The case for forward, and preferably very far-forward (i.e., in Warsaw Pact Europe), defense scarcely needs to be made more explicit.
Since West Germany is adamantly opposed to the idea of risking its devastation by attempting to defend its cities, it appears to follow that NATO fights (and wins) on or before its border, or it fails in its primary mission--at best it permits the destruction of NATO-Europe without Soviet occupation. Steven Canby and Edward Luttwak have argued convincingly that NATO 'strategy," so called, amounts to little more than an intention to engage the enemy in a grinding, nose-to-nose, campaign of attrition I (a campaign which NATO is certain to lose, given the gross asymmetry in the im balance of forces on each side available for attrition). The logic of West Germany's well-publicized unwillingness to entertain high-intensity conventional, or nuclear, combat in its urban areas, means that NATO requires a much improved theory of genuinely forward defense.
Such a theory could envisage preemptive "spoiling," and then with luckexploitation, attacks eastwards; an immediate battlefield-nuclear defense of the frontier zone; or precipitate nuclear escalation to the Soviet homeland, according to some persuasive/coercive theory of intra-war deterrence (naturally, a condition of strategic "rough parity" would not suffice for this last option).
Hudson's recommendations in this Part 3 fall into two categories.
First, within the current structure of NATO defense-planning assumptions, small (though cumulatively significant) steps should be taken so as to reduce the vulnerability of NATO's theater-nuclear assets, and to increase the vulnerability of Soviet theater-nuclear assets. Second, we are persuaded that the explosive urbanization of post-war West Germany--a fact deeply imbedded in Bonn's steady resistance to nuclear war-fighting concepts--merits recognition in a NATO defense strategy which would not ask the impossible of NATO-Europeans.
It is far from obvious that the Soviets would be skillful in exploiting NATO-European anxieties concerning nuclear strikes, but they would not need to be. The militarily sensible transition strike, as analyzed in this report, probably would have all the political fragmenting effect that any designer of political-demonstration nuclear employment would desire.
NATO-European anticipation, let alone absorption, of a "scientifically" designed Soviet nuclear transition strike, probably would have a political fragmenting effect which its authors did not intend (which is not to say that such would not be a massive, and welcome, bonus). The authors of this report find themselves in a curious position. Their mandate, to examine Soviet conventional/TNF transition issues, and the probable/possible structure of Soviet considerations vis-a-vis initial TNF employment, leads them to the conclusion that NATO confronts a political enemy who is very likely, through application of a clear war-fighting doctrine, to effect even more political than military damage upon the Western Alliance.
K Thus, although it is possible to limit discussion to the most obviously military implications of Soviet policy, it seems extremely unwise to neglect to mention, albeit briefly, the potential political (and consequent military) catastrophe that applied Soviet TNF doctrine could effect upon NATO-Europe.
IIndeed, the resistance of Soviet doctrine to Western deterrent policy greatly increases its potential political impact. 