# ID: 8489f00e2e964b88b254145564fdc8c8
# Title: Army Air and Missile Defense: Preparing for the Future Requires a Joint Force Solution
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
According to the US National Security Strategy, the Joint Force spent the last decade in a "procurement holiday" negatively affecting the evolution of critical capabilities in every operating domain -air, ground, sea, space, and cyberspace. In contrast, US adversaries are enhancing existing offensive missile capabilities while developing new and unprecedented types of sea-and air-launch systems and hypersonic capabilities. As a result, US adversaries have created non-permissive, contested environments which challenge the normal model of US force projection and operational strategies by denying immediate air superiority. This monograph examines the need for a Joint Force solution to address future air and missile defense threats. After establishing a better understanding of the current problem for accessing operational areas, this monograph reviews the current US military approach to air and missile defense. Subsequently, an assessment of the anticipated operating environment provides the foundation for analysis against the effectiveness in future conflicts and whether there is a need to develop a new approach against emerging threats.
15.
According to the US National Security Strategy, the Joint Force spent the last decade in a "procurement holiday" negatively affecting the evolution of critical capabilities in every operating domain -air, ground, sea, space, and cyberspace.0 F
1
Air superiority forms the backbone to any US military strategy, force projection model, or campaign plan. US Joint Publication (JP) 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Defense, defines air superiority as "that degree of control of the air by one force that permits the conduct of its operations at a given time and place without prohibitive interference from air and missile threats."2 F 3 Since the Korean War, the United States has achieved and maintained air superiority in every major US conflict to include the Vietnam War, Operation Desert Storm, and Operation Iraqi Freedom. However, as stated in the summary of the 2018 US National Defense Strategy, "every domain is contested" and the underlying assumptions of owning the advantages in soldier quality, technology, and automatic air superiority are no more.3 F 4
According to Everett Dolman, the United States has had command of the air for so long that it has become an underlying assumption, almost factual, to any plan or theory of action.4 F 5 Yet, the emergence and proliferation of offensive missile threats and drones; as well as, a resurgence of potential air-to-air combat are challenging this assumption. Today, nearly thirty countries possess ballistic missiles and numerous countries are developing various ground-, sea-, and airlaunched cruise missile systems.5 F 6 Similarly, more than thirty countries have or are developing armed drones and more than ninety countries have unarmed drones.6 F 7
In addition, as the Joint Force shifts training and preparation activities from counterinsurgency operations to large-scale combat operations, a more traditional adversary with conventional force structures is becoming the focus. Future conflict is likely to involve adversaries with fixed and rotary wing threats which introduces elements unfamiliar in the current operational environments within Iraq and Afghanistan. In 2017 Brigadier General Randall
McIntire, then the US Army Air Defense Artillery School Commandant, wrote that attack helicopters are the greatest threat to ground forces due to standoff distances, electronic warfare capabilities, and a small radar signature.7 F 8 General McIntire's comments reinforce the US Department of Defense's concern about maneuver forces being ill-equipped to handle the range of aerial threats present in today's environment.
Each threat presents problems to the Joint Force in terms of gaining access to an area of operations and establishing air superiority for freedom of maneuver and freedom of action. A changing threat landscape with new methods of employment for offensive means, as well as longer distances of employment are disrupting the traditional model of service-based solutions.
As the operational environment continues to evolve and traditional and emergent aerial threats continue to challenge the assumption of air superiority, what is the impact on the US Army's current approach to air and missile defense as part of the Joint Force? The US Army will have to create new solutions as part of the Joint Force approach to address air and missile defense problems within the anticipated operational environment.
To test this hypothesis, this monograph examines the strategic environment and the effect from the proliferation of air and missile threats. After establishing a better understanding of the current problem for accessing operational areas, this monograph reviews the current approach to air and missile defense. Subsequently, an assessment of the anticipated operating environment provides the foundation for analyzing the current approach's effectiveness in future conflicts. The first section defines the current operational environment's problem, addressing the threats and how threats are challenging US air superiority in any given theater of operation. The second section analyzes the US Army's current approach to air and missile defense against the established threat and operational environment from the first section. The third section describes the anticipated operational environment and discusses if the current approach will suffice to mitigate threats in future conflicts. Finally, the last section analyzes if the Joint Force, specifically the US Army, requires a new approach to remain relevant against emerging threats or if the current approach is sufficient. Examples and case studies provide support in each section.
Section I: Challenges in the Current Operational Environment Current global trends indicate ballistic and cruise missiles are becoming more capable, due in part to the proliferation of advanced technologies, resulting in systems with global reach, increasing speed, and greater accuracy.
-Lieutenant General James H. Dickinson, April 2019 US adversaries have created non-permissive, contested environments which challenge the post-Cold War normal model of US force projection and operational strategies by denying immediate air superiority. Prior to the end of the Cold War, US Army Corps were stationed across a wide range of locations to include Europe and Japan. These forces were meant to serve as the contact, blunt, and surge forces before the arrival of reinforcements. Yet, today there are no Corps overseas and active duty end strength has fallen from nearly 800,000 to 420,000 soldiers since the collapse of the Soviet Union.8 F
9
Prior to 1991, any US concept of anti-access or area denial strategies were likely to only affect reinforcement operations as significant combat power and combat enablers were already in theater prior to a conflict starting.9 F 10 In spite of that, over the last eighteen years while the United States has reduced forces stationed overseas, adversaries have developed alternative methods to deny the United States access to regions and disrupt freedom of maneuver and action within contested spaces. Additionally, access to information and the transfer of advanced missile system capabilities continue to thwart US nonproliferation goals.1 0F 11 Further, the rise of long-range precision strike systems coupled with multi-tier air defense systems have enhanced the layered anti-access and area denial threats.
As previously noted, the United States has achieved and maintained air superiority in every major US conflict since the Korean War. Furthermore, recent US adversaries have been less than capable with regards to air and missile threats to US operations. During Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, US and allied forces were able to build combat power overseas in relatively uncontested areas.1 1F 
12
For each conflict, air superiority was achieved as a consequence of effective air power and air defense. Air power consists primarily of offensive operations using manned and unmanned aircraft to control or dominate the air domain. Manned aircraft include bombers, fighters, and helicopters; while unmanned aircraft are either high-flying, large, and fast or low, slow and small unmanned aerial systems.1 2F 
13
The United States uses overseas military bases and ally or partner nation locations, where no US installation is present, to set conditions for unopposed deployment operations. Overseas basing postures US military forces to support the execution of the US defense strategy. Benefits include quicker operational responsiveness from crisis response to large-scale combat operations, deterrence of adversaries and assurance to allies, and additional forces to participate in security cooperation activities. On the flip side, overseas basing also poses risks to include vulnerability to attack from state and non-state actors, political risk since overseas basing in peacetime conditions could appear as an occupation or US imperialism, and diplomatic risk as the selection of any given location over another messages a preference between US allies and partners.
Since the end of the Cold War, overseas garrisons for US forces have shrunk in terms of the number of locations, the size of remaining installations, and the number of personnel occupying each installation. This analysis does not include contingency bases and focuses on enduring bases. Contingency bases are generally meant for temporary use and last less than five years; whereas, enduring bases are those locations such as a main operating base, forward operating site, or cooperative security location which provide strategic access and use to support US security interests for the foreseeable future.1 3F 14 Examples of enduring locations include Ramstein Air Force Base in Germany, Camp Humphreys in South Korea, and Camp Butler in Japan. In 1991, there were approximately 1,600 US bases abroad compared to approximately 500 14 US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 4-04, Contingency Basing (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), GL-4.  bases in 2016.1 4F 15 Subsequently, active duty US military personnel in garrison bases overseas went from almost 600,000 to approximately 200,000 military personnel from 1991 to 2016.1 5F 
16
17
18
19
Recognizing the gap in air defense, at least in Germany, the United States activated the 10th AAMDC in 2011. Today, there is one Patriot battalion, one air defense brigade, two missile defense batteries, and one short-range air defense battalion stationed in Germany. While these units provide the first level of force protection to critical assets in the European theater from within, there are still too few resources to completely defeat an anti-access strategy within the region. While maintaining an expeditionary force can provide cost savings, the question remains at what cost will this ultimately impact the ability of US forces to support national defense strategies abroad and quell conflict prior to escalating to an all-out war? Meanwhile, other regional actors such as Russia and China continue to expand their spheres of influence, resulting in an increasing trend of decreasing support for US bases overseas.
Moreover, even where international support exists, domestic politics are unlikely to be supportive for additional force deployment whether for conflict response or pre-emptive posturing. In a study conducted last year, Pew Research Center found that sixty-two percent of US Americans say the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are not worth it.1 9F 20 Additionally, Charles Koch Institute recently updated results from a survey asking if the US military should be more or less involved globally, finding that forty-three percent believe the United States should be less involved while only twelve percent believe the United States should be more involved.2 0F 
21
20
21 Charles Koch Institute, "Seventeen Years On, Americans-Including Veterans-Want Out of Afghanistan," January 23, 2020, accessed February 14, 2020, https://www.charleskochinstitute.org/news/ afghanistan-17-anniversary-poll/.
The military defines anti-access as the action, activity, or capability designed to prevent an advancing enemy force from entering usually by way of long-range systems; complementary to anti-access, area denial is designed to limit an enemy force's freedom of action using shortrange systems.2 1F 
22
23
Advancements in technologies have resulted in ballistic and cruise missile systems with global reach, greater accuracy, and advanced countermeasures.2 3F 
24
JP 3-01 defines a ballistic missile as "any missile that does not rely upon aerodynamic surfaces to produce lift and follows a ballistic trajectory when thrust is terminated."2 4F 
25
23 US Department of Defense, Joint Operational Access Concept, Version 1 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), ii. 
24
Ballistic missiles continue to pose significant threats to US forces abroad, especially given the ability to carry nuclear warheads and advancements in decoy and jamming operations.
Regional actors such as Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea all possess ballistic missiles that continue to threaten US forces, allies, and partners. The concern is no longer regionally contained. Adversaries can strike long-range targets external to their borders with greater accuracy than historically demonstrated through previous conflict. As well, with global trends of increasing capability and affordability, many unknown state and non-state actors have acquired ballistic and cruise missile systems. Figure 
1
29
30
31
Since World War I, aircraft have been used in conflict to deny ground forces freedom of maneuver and freedom of action. Since the Korean War, the US Air Force has dominated command of the air, thus affording ground forces the ability to operate free from fear of an aerial attack via fixed or rotary wing aircraft.3 1F 32 Yet, the reemergence of great power competition is bringing the idea of a conventional air threat back to the forefront of military problems. Fixedwing and rotary wing aircraft provide offensive capabilities from extended ranges and a wide variety of platforms. Fixed-wing aircraft covers systems commonly classified as fighter, strike, ground-attack, bombers, and transport aircraft. Similarly, rotary wing aircraft covers systems that are classified as light, attack, transport, and reconnaissance. Most fixed-wing strike aircraft have a range of 2,000 to 3,000 kilometers and attack helicopters have a range of 500 to 900 kilometers; as well, both systems can carry a variety of armament to include bombs, rockets, and missiles.3 2F 
33
If we lose the war in the air, we lose the war and we lose it quickly.
-Field Marshal the Viscount Bernard Montgomery Air superiority in conflict remains one of the most critical factors to success and often determines the victor from the defeated. As airpower theorist retired US Air Force Colonel John A. Warden III once explained, "no country has won a war in the face of enemy air superiority."3 3F 
34
In spite of this, the United States remains dominant in air-to-air capabilities at this time; however, adversaries such as Russia and China have upgraded capabilities, actively demonstrating them for the world to see. In 2019, Russia and China conducted a joint air exercise of long-range aerial patrols in the Indo-Pacific region.3 5F 
36
37
38
39
Overseas bases have long served to present a posture for contingency response, deterrence of potential adversaries, assurance to allies and partner nations, and security cooperation efforts. Likewise, overseas forces provide strategic benefits to combatant commanders with forces able to respond quickly to a range of conflicts from crisis action to largescale combat operations. During the Cold War, overseas basing in Europe served to prevent initial setbacks or defeat by major threats until reinforcements could arrive to help achieve military objectives. Still, the United States transitioned to an expeditionary force capable of deploying anywhere in the world. Aerial threats have always been present in conflict; the shift to an expeditionary force has created opportunities for adversaries to expand their anti-access and area denial strategies. Furthermore, the proliferation of technologies associated with aerial threats continues to shrink the characteristic advantages of US weapon systems over developing adversaries. Accordingly, air superiority is no longer certain and without it, all military operations will be at increased risk. Consequently, the aerial challenges present in today's operational environment limit the United States' pursuit of strategic objectives and ability to uphold global security commitments.
As demonstrated in the previous section, air superiority throughout a campaign can never be wholly guaranteed. The spread of missiles, drones, aircraft and other aerial threats throughout the strategic environment paired against limited resources creates a continual disparity between measures and countermeasures. Nevertheless, military planners establish operational approaches to achieve desired results through the creation of combined arms effects to exploit the resultant advantage. As part of this, the current air and missile defense approach focuses on developing and fielding capabilities for protection of critical assets and maneuver forces abroad in coordination with allies and partners to strengthen deterrence architectures from regional missile threats.3 9F 40
Countering regional missile threats is predicated on a strategic environment where the United States can build combat power in uncontested space and requires cooperation with allies and partners. Additionally, air and missile defense is based on a multi-layered defense concept using a diverse arrangement of platforms to protect against a variety of aerial threats. That is, 
40
The US military uses a variety of ground-, air-, and sea-launched interceptors, aircraft, radars, satellites, and command, control, and communications equipment to defend against aerial threats. Currently, US forces protect critical assets by employing air defense systems, procedures, and tactics from the US Army, US Navy, US Marine Corps, and US Air Force. While each service provides some capability to the overall system, the US Army is the primary service responsible for protecting the maneuver force using ground-based interceptors and radar systems in static and mobile configurations.
The importance of both static and maneuver air defense was demonstrated during the Arab-Israeli Wars in 1967 and 1973.4 0F 
41
42
43
41
42
43
44
45
48
48
49
sensor, command and control elements, and the ground-based air defense platform. Essentially, each air defense platform and the associated equipment is a stand-alone package with minimal interoperability and integration across US Army systems. That being said, there is some integration built into the Patriot Information Coordination Central (ICC), a data processing and communications center that assists with engagement decisions. Through the ICC it is possible to incorporate THAAD and Avenger weapons systems under a single command and control center.
However, the technical expertise and institutional knowledge to achieve the required communications network architecture at the tactical level has been lost over the last two decades.
Additionally, the integration and subsequent engagement decisions are still accomplished through system specific radar feeds and platforms. That is, US Army air defense platforms lack horizontal integration to leverage current capabilities and increase lethality through technical solutions using any sensor, any shooter.
Undoubtedly, much of this problem is a result of defense contractors and manufacturers protecting intellectual property. According to a study by the Institute for Defense Analyses, intellectual property encompasses patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets.4 9F 
50
Competing government contractors use different technical language, algorithms, and programming which creates an interoperability issue both internal to an air defense platform and with other platforms. Therefore, to achieve complete protection from the array of aerial threats present in any given operational environment, all four major ground-based air defense assets and their associated equipment must be employed in the same area of operations. Yet, there are not enough systems for all four ground-based air defense asset types to be present in the same area of operations, with sufficient quantity to create a layered defense design, and ultimately provide complete protection from all aerial threats. Therefore, the US Navy and US Air Force both provide assets to help counter aerial threats and provide additional capability to protect forces.
The US Navy primarily supports theater air defense using the AEGIS weapons system from a littoral approach extending offensive naval air defenses overland. There are currently eighty-seven multi-mission cruisers and destroyers with the AEGIS combat system.5 0F 
51
52
53
51 "AEGIS WEAPON SYSTEM," United States Navy Fact File, last updated January 10, 2019, accessed February 14, 2020, https://www.navy.mil/navydata/fact_display.asp?cid=2100&tid=200&ct=2. 
52
53 David B. Larter, "The US Navy is fed up with ballistic missile defense patrols," Defense News, June 16, 2018, accessed February 14, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/naval/2018/06/16/the-us-navyis-fed-up-with-ballistic-missile-defense-patrols/.
54 "Multifunctional Information Distribution System (MIDS)," Products and Services, Collins Aerospace, accessed February 14, 2020, https://www.rockwellcollins.com/Products-and-Services/Defense/Communications/Tactical-Data-Links/Multifunctional-Information-Distribution-System.aspx.
The US Air Force contributes to air and missile defense through sense and warn, offensive counterair operations, preemptive strikes against adversarial missile systems on the ground, and close air support of maneuver units in action.5 4F 
55
56
58
While each service provides assets that can integrate into an air and missile defense plan for sense and warn operations, the assets are unable to communicate for inter-service intercept operations. Once again, service-specific systems and solutions lack vertical integration and are unable to communicate with sister-service platforms to leverage current capabilities and increase 55 US Department of Defense, Air Land Sea Application Center, Multi-Service Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (MTTP) Publication, SCAR (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 12, 28, accessed February 16, 2020, https://www.alsa.mil/mttps/scar/.
56 JP 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats, xii. 
57
58 "E-3 Sentry AWACS," U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet, last modified September 22, 2015, accessed February 16, 2020, https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104504/e-3-sentry-awacs/. lethality through technical solutions. As before, the lack of vertical integration is one consequence of defense contractors protecting intellectual property to remain competitive within the defense industry. Additionally, assets capable of providing air and missile defense from the US' Army, Navy, and Air Force are considered low-density, high-demand assets. That is to say there are too few US assets to provide complete air defense coverage for every overseas location of importance to the US military. For that reason, leveraging ally and partner assets become critical in the current approach to defending against aerial threats.
The 2017 National Security Strategy states that "[a]llies and partners are a great strength of the United States[,]" adding to our military and intelligence capabilities, and that "[n]one of our adversaries have comparable coalitions."5 8F 
59
60
61
59 Trump,
National Security Strategy,
37. 60
61 "Boosting NATO's presence in the east and southeast," North Atlantic Treaty Organization, last updated January 21, 2019, accessed January 23, 2020, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_136388.htm.
posturing US forces within the Russian anti-access system. In this sense, the United States can project power in non-hostile ways and use power as a means of influence. Eliot Cohen defines power as "the ability to get people to do things that they would not otherwise do."6 1F 
62
63
While the US Army focuses on ground-based air defense for both homeland defense and protection of maneuver forces in conflict, the US Navy and US Air Force also contribute to air and missile defense. However, each service has created service-based solutions to address air and missile defense. Even though sensor feeds and communications equipment allow for inter-Service sharing of an air picture, intercept platforms are unable to operate without the platform specific radar to track and transmit target data. The Joint Force has become stove-piped, lacking the integration and interoperability necessary across the force to achieve Joint Combined Arms as directed in the 2018 US National Military Strategy.6 6F
67
As such, US Army air defense planners must ensure a mix of assets are incorporated in defense design planning. Furthermore, the low-density of air defense assets requires planners to determine early where to deploy air defense assets using threat assessments and prioritization frameworks.
Generally speaking, from the US Army perspective, only Patriot and THAAD assets are prepositioned in an operational status globally under a pre-conflict environment. Once the environment shifts from pre-conflict to conflict, then all Joint Force assets in a theater are deployed to the area of operations. Ideally, assets will already be within the area covered by an adversary's anti-access strategy. One way to ensure assets are present whether US owned or not is through foreign military sales. Foreign military sales support the advancement of US national security interests abroad by helping to build ally and partner capacity and capability. For this reason, the United States must leverage ally and partner capabilities through equipment sales, training and exercises, and alliances. Even still, as previously mentioned, air defense assets are too few to be everywhere and are unlikely to provide the necessary level of air defense required initially. Hence, a description of the evolving operational environment and identification of future threats will help guide modernization efforts for the air and missile defense community.
The future operating environment is characterized by increasingly complex threats, sustained operational tempo, limited resources, and the ability of great power competitors to contest US forces in all domains.
Uncertainty in the future operational environment is a given in that the operational environment is an open system with emergent properties.6 7F 68 There is no way to accurately predict the future; however, planners and strategists alike can anticipate the future by understanding emerging trends and applying models to help interpret information. For example, the model from Peter Schwartz, a leading futurist, uses multisource-information gathering to identify driving 68 Robert Jervis, System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), 28.
forces and predetermined elements to create scenarios to perceive futures in the present.6 8F 69 While approaches such as the Schwartz model have strengths for forecasting, there is always the chance of being wrong. As German Army Colonel Jürgen Prandtner notes, analysts could be wrong when predicting the future which could have grave implications in creating a balanced force.6 9F 
70
71
Consequently, the Joint Force developed and published the Joint Operating Environment 2035 "to support and accelerate our future strategy and force planning activities across the Joint Force."7 1F 
72
(New York: Crown Business, 1996), 36, 105, 111-112. 70
72
A general trend analysis of the last one hundred years demonstrates how political, economic, informational and cultural systems have become more complex and interconnected.7 3F 
74
75
76
77
in foreign conflicts such as the Syrian civil war.7 8F 79 In 2015, Russia deployed fixed-wing and aviation assets to Syria in support of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's regime. As well, Russia continues to provide advisors and sell intelligence information, ammunition, and artillery to the Syrian regime's military.7 9F 
80
Moreover, it is anticipated that the broad network of alliances and partnerships the United States has developed will erode because of challengers such as Russia and China expanding influence around the world. Also, emerging economies able to compete with Western economies coupled with competition for scarce resources and energy reserves will create conditions for the formation of new alliances and the rebalancing of others. In turn, threatening the aptitude of the United States to leverage allies and partners to achieve US national security interests. There will likely also be a decrease in foreign military sales which will result in a decrease of interoperability and integration should conflict arise. Additionally, an increase in globally-present states will cause existing institutions and frameworks to fracture or evolve as fundamental differences contest previously accepted ways of governance.8 0F 
81
82
79
87
88
89
90
91
As stated in the Army Air and Missile Defense 2028, future operating environments will be "characterized by increasingly complex threats, sustained operational tempos, limited resources, and the ability of great power competitors to contest U.S. forces in all domains."9 1F 92 For the US air defense community, current and potential threats entail increased missile threats, the emergence of hypersonic weapons, and refinement of sophisticated anti-access and area denial capabilities. Forecasting through 2050 foresees new weapons taking advantage of advances in artificial intelligence and quantum computing, increasing the accuracy, lethality, and speed of delivery at ranges beyond the current capability of a US response.9 2F 
93
From 2013 to 2014 the Missile Defense Agency conducted a series of integrated flight tests to demonstrate the integrated missile defense operational effectiveness against various aerial threats.9 4F
95
96
2
97
98
105
To date, most US military services have created service-based solutions to implement strategies towards the end goal of Joint Combined Arms as directed in the 2018 US National Military Strategy.1 05F
106
In doing so, services will support the Joint All Domain Command and Control concept which supports multi-domain operations. Undoubtedly, the future operating environment will require weapon and sensor systems to be flexible, interoperable, networked, open, secure, and survivable across the Joint Force to reduce decision time and exploit windows of opportunity. Until the IBCS is in full production, however, the US Army will require a layered approach using air defense assets in theater to provide protection from air and missile threats. This means protecting US forces and critical assets abroad with only air defense systems approved for that area of operations by the Secretary of Defense.1 06F
107
108
There are basically two ways to fight the US military: asymmetrically and stupid.
-Lieutenant General H. R. McMaster, February 2017   Challenges in the current operational environment involve non-permissive, contested environments where the adversary creates anti-access or area denial strategies using a variety of air and missile threats. As has been since the Korean War, the United States can no longer assume that air superiority can and will be achieved or maintained throughout a conflict. The proliferation of advanced technologies, offensive missile threats, drones, and resurgence of air-to-air combat all threaten US military dominance across every operating domain -air, ground, sea, space, and cyberspace. Additionally, threats are no longer regionally contained and adversaries can strike long-range targets with greater accuracy than previously demonstrated. Namely, the shift from an overseas garrison operating model to an expeditionary model has created opportunities for adversaries to expand their anti-access and area denial strategies.
To meet the challenges of the current operational environment, military planners seek to establish operational approaches to achieve the desired results through joint combined arms effects. The current approach to defending against aerial threats incorporates service-specific air defense systems, procedures, and tactics to protect critical assets. While each Service provides some capability to overall air and missile defense, the US Army is primarily responsible for maneuver force protection. For US Army air defense planners, this requires a mix of assets built into the defense design to ensure critical assets are protected. Assets include THAAD, Patriot, Avenger, MANPADS, and C-RAM. Each system provides protection from specific threats such as fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft, ballistic and cruise missiles, and UAS to include drones.
As well, most systems lack vertical and horizontal integration to expand on current capabilities to increase effectiveness through a system of systems approach. Furthermore, the low-density of current US Army air defense assets requires planners to pre-position assets based on threat assessments. Therefore, anticipating the future and understanding the evolving operational environment is critical to forecasting for a balanced force.
The future operating environment will be complex, characterized by changes in world order via shifting alliances, proliferation of advanced weapon technologies and long-range precision strike capabilities, competition across all domains coupled with rivalries for scarce resources. An increase in globally-present states will cause friction and possible fracture of fundamental institutions to the global security environment such as NATO and the UN. Russia and China will continue to expand their spheres of influence, develop hypersonic weapons, and refine sophisticated anti-access and area denial capabilities. Consistent with leading authorities, must continue to look for ways to integrate weapon and sensor systems while ensuring interoperability, security, and survivability are maintained in an operational environment where the United States does not dominate the cyber and space domains. Additionally, while the modernization strategy is specifically focused on US Army modernization, the efforts to improve force protection must include modernizing all Joint Force assets capable of aerial threat intercept operations. The Joint Force must continue to search for problem-based solutions where all services contribute to convergence, mitigating weaknesses, and enhancing strengths. In essence, the US Army and Marine Corps' multi-domain operations concept can provide guidance to the Joint Force for what to work towards. The future requires innovation and cooperation among the services to regain and maintain dominance over an adversary in all operating domains.
82
US President Donald J. Trump, National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House,
2017), 27, accessed September 3, 2018, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf. 2 Steven Biddle and Ivan Oelrich, "Future Warfare in the Western Pacific: Chinese Antiaccess/Area Denial, U.S. AirSea Battle, and Command of the Commons in East Asia," International Security 41, no. 1 (July 2016): 7. 3 US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-01, Countering Air and Missile Threats (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), I-4. 4 Secretary of Defense James N. Mattis, Summary of the National Defense Strategy of the United States of America 2018 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 3, accessed September 3, 2018, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
Vincent H. Demma, Department of the Army Historical Summary, Fiscal Year 1989, ed. Susan  Carroll (Washington, DC: Army Center of Military History, 1989),
109, accessed January 5, 2020, https://history.army.mil/books/DAHSUM/1989/Index.htm. 10 Timothy M. Bonds et al., What Role Can Land-Based, Multi-Domain Anti-Access/Area Denial Forces Play in Deterring or Defending Aggression? (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 1, accessed September 22, 2019, www.rand.org/t/RR1820. 11 US Department of Defense, Missile Defense Agency, 2019 Missile Defense Review (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), VIII.
Bonds et al., Land-based, Multi-Domain, x.    
US Joint Staff, JP 3-01 (2018), I-2.
US Joint Staff, JP 3-01 (2018), 
Michael J. Predny, "The US Army and the Emergence of Unmanned Threats" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2016), 1, accessed October
28, 2019, https://apps.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1022201.28  Thomas G. Mahnken, The Cruise Missile Challenge (Washington, DC: Center for Budgetary Assessments, 2005), 5.
US Department of Defense, Conduct of the Persian Gulf War: Final Report to Congress (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1992), 189, 211.
Dennis M. Gormley, "Missile Defence Myopia: Lessons from the Iraq War," Survival 45, no. 4 (Winter, 2003): 62, accessed January 14, 2020, ProQuest Ebrary.
Michael R. Gordon, "A Poor Man's Air Force," New York Times, June 19, 2013, accessed January 4, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/19/international/middleeast/a-poor-mans-airforce.html.
  32 Dolman, Pure Strategy,
38.
Richard Atta et al., Department of Defense Access to Intellectual Property for Weapons Systems Sustainment (Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses, 2017), iii, accessed March 1, 2020, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/1038450.pdf.
"Major Arms Sales," Defense Security Cooperation Agency, accessed February 16, 2020, https://www.dsca.mil/major-arms-sales.
US Department of Defense, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff, Description of the National Military Strategy 2018 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 2, accessed September 3, 2018, https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Publications/UNCLASS_2018_National_Military_Strategy_De scription.pdf.
US Department of Defense, Missile Defense Agency, Integrated Flight Tests at U.S. Army Kwajalein Atoll/Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site (USAKA/RTS) Environmental Assessment (Redstone Arsenal, AL, 2012), 1.
Adam Stone, "How the DoD is synchronizing missile defense systems," C4ISRNet, June 16, 2018, accessed January 25, 2020, https://www.c4isrnet.com/c2-comms/2018/06/26/how-the-dod-issynchronizing-missile-defense-systems/.
97 Dan Goure, "Is IBCS Another 'Too Big to Succeed' Army Program?" Real Clear Defense, December 6, 2018, accessed October 27, 2019, https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2018/12/06/ is_ibcs_another_too_big_to_succeed_army_program_114004.
html.98  "IBCS Functions and Features," Northrop Grumman, October 9, 2019, accessed January 25, 2020, https://www.northropgrumman.com/wp-content/uploads/L-0770-Integrated-Air-and-Missile-Defense-Battle-Command-System-Infographic.pdf.
Jen Judson, "After complex test, is the US Army's major missile defense command system ready for prime time?" Defense News, December 12, 2019, accessed March 7, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/land/2019/12/12/after-complex-test-is-the-armys-major-missile-defensecommand-system-ready-for-primetime/.
100 Sydney J. Freedberg, Jr., "Crunch Time For Army Missile Defense Network," Breaking Defense, April 10, 2017, accessed January 25, 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2017/04/crunch-time-forarmy-missile-defense-network-ibcs/.
US Joint Staff, JOE 2035 (2016), 20.    
Office of the Director of National Intelligence, The National Intelligence Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 4, accessed March 7, 2020, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/National_Intelligence_Strategy_2019.pdf.
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff, National Military Strategy 2018, 2.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), II-5.
Jonathan W. Bott, "What's After Joint? Multi-Domain Operations as the Next Evolution in Warfare" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2017), 34, accessed September 12, 2019, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/1038879.pdf.
Umer Khan, "The Syrian Conflict -A Training Ground, a Test Bed and a Showroom," (Paper, University of Buckingham, 2020), 1, accessed March 18, 2020, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ 338416993_The_Syrian_Conflict_-A_Training_Ground_a_Test_Bed_and_a_Showroom.
General Mark A.Milley and Ryan D. McCarthy, memorandum, October 3, 2017, "Modernization Priorities for the United States Army," 2, accessed September 5, 2019, https://admin.govexec.com/media/untitled.pdf.
I would like to thank the following people for their encouragement, support, and assistance with this paper: 
Dr Gorman
Mary Jocelyn
SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 8. PERFORMING ORG REPORT NUMBER 9
MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Advanced Military Studies Program 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
Colleen M. Shepherd
The global environment is complex and characterized by a variety of actors, all with varying political and economic will, and military power. However, the future operating environment anticipates trends in technology, shifting demographics, changing strategic relationships, resource competition, etc. that "will likely lead to greater parity among a range of international actors thus allowing potential adversaries to more effectively challenge U.S. global
Russia will continue to be the United States' pacing threat with improvements to precision targeting, air defense systems, and their air force. What is more, Syria provides Russia an opportunity to test and refine newly developed weapons and gain operational combat experience.1 08F 
109
Therefore, this monograph proposes that the US Army's current approach to air defense integration as part of the Joint Force will not work in the anticipated operational environment.
The US Army's current approach relies on independent service-based platforms and solutions that require unique systems for employment. As well, the vertical rather than horizontal communication capabilities prevent intercept data sharing between systems within the US Army and across the Joint Force. For this reason, in 2017 General Mark Milley, then the US Army Chief of Staff, established a modernization strategy to create "air and missile defense capabilities that ensure our future combat formations are protected" from aerial threats.1 09F 
110