# ID: 8526181a60e0441aa18e282273e52dd2
# Title: Formation of US security assistance policy, 1947-1959
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
Security assistance has played a vital role in the formation of foreign policy objectives throughout United States history. It is generally accepted that a formal security assistance program was initiated in the U.S. following the conclusion of World War II with the signing of the Greek
Overview There is no question that security assistance is crucial in the implementation of foreign policy objectives in the United States. It has been an important aspect of these decisions from its inception in 1947 
(Schlesinger, 1985:xi)
(Semmel, 1982:268-269)
The years 1947 to 1959 marked a unique period in U.S. security assistance policy. Following World War II, the United States found itself confronted with the Soviet threat of expansion. In order to counter this threat the United States embarked on an aggressive security assistance program that would become a cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy. President Truman stated in his inaugural address in 1949:
In the conduct of foreign relations, the United States, like every other state, is concerned primarily with the achievement of those objectives of national interest which it conceives to be of paramount significance. If the management of our external affairs is to enjoy rationality, it must have goals that harmonize with, and supplement, the internal policies and programs of the Government, whether they may be the promotion of commerce and trade, the acquisition of territory or power, or the maintenance of peace and security. 
(Quoted in Defense Institute, 1995:1)
It also includes economic support to allied and friendly nations for the purpose of strengthening their economies. Finally, security assistance has been used to maintain regional stability abroad in support of vital U.S. interests 
(Grimmett, 1985:2)
Much understanding of the security assistance program during the years 1947 to 1959 can be gained from investigation of key legislative acts and doctrines established during this time period. The Greek-Turkish Aid Bill in 1947 is generally accepted to have been the first significant piece of security assistance legislation enacted in the United States. The bill called for both economic and military assistance to be provided specifically to the countries of Greece and Turkey for the purpose of preventing Soviet domination and control.
The Mutual Defense Act of 1949 was the next significant piece of security assistance legislation enacted in the United States. It was significant because it created the Military Assistance Program within the United States which would be the first step in this country of providing substantial military assistance to countries all over the globe in support of foreign policy objectives. Perhaps the next major piece of security assistance legislation was the Mutual Security Act of 1951 which combined military assistance and economic assistance into one legislative vehicle, signaling the perception that both military and economic assistance work together to form security assistance policy. While the Mutual Security Act of 1951 created the Military Assistance Program in the United States, the Mutual Security Act of 1954 created Foreign Military Sales Credit program, perhaps indicating a transition from military assistance to foreign gold outflow. It is a program which provides military equipment and weapons and training to those allied and friendly nations which share our view as to the threat of international communism. It is a program which funds purchases from American industry for shipment overseas to the military forces of those countries which have the will and the manpower but not the means to defend themselves... It is an arm of the United States foreign policy. It is an extension of United States defense posture and at the bargain basement rates. It is predominantly in our own self-interest. 
(Hovey, 1965:v-vi)
(Brandt, 1989:1)
Therefore the research objective of this thesis is to study the major historical events that occurred between 1947-1959, that impacted the United States security assistance program. In order to accomplish this, the following events will be analyzed: Although the Marshall Plan played a significant role in our nation's history, its role in the shaping of security assistance is somewhat limited. Therefore only a brief description of it will be presented without an extensive analysis of the subject matter.
Research Questions 1. How did the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill impact security assistance? 
The evaluation of this thesis will be limited to the major events impacting security assistance that occurred in our history between 1947-1959. Analysis will begin with the signing of the Greek-Turkish Aid bill and conclude with the President's Committee to study U.S. Military Assistance of 1959. It should be noted that only limited discussion will be provided concerning the Marshall Plan as its impact on security assistance is somewhat limited. The Marshall Plan provided economic assistance to Europe, which does constitute one aspect of security assistance, however, it did not reflect the military assistance aspect to security assistance.
The years 1947-1959 marked an important point in our history concerning security assistance. During this period much debate existed dealing with the role the United States would play in world politics and how best to accomplish this role. As mentioned in the previous chapter, security assistance as we know it today had its beginnings with the Truman Doctrine in 1947. During this time period an important shift took place in the way in which the United States carried out its security assistance policy. This shift was evidenced by an increasingly expanded role security assistance would play on foreign policy in the United States. Since this thesis is a historical analysis of security assistance during the years 1947-1959, examination of several of the key legislative acts and doctrines of the time period were deemed as the most appropriate way to conduct the research. To accomplish this goal, a historical literature search was used that would include analysis of the books, congressional documents, and other official documents that would be relevant to the time period.
A methods matrix was used to facilitate a logical approach that would be utilized in this thesis. This type of matrix organizes the data collection process necessary to answer the question of what do I need to know? It then ties this process into a statement concerning the validity and reliability of the method utilized 
(Maxwell, 1996:81-85
1
An archival research method was deemed as the most appropriate method to conduct the study. An archival method is appropriate when the focus of the data collection process will be on gathering material previously written on the subject. This would include government sources, newspapers, books, and magazine articles 
(Dane, 1990:169)
(Dane, 1990:169)
Dane describes two forms of archival research, content analysis and existing data analysis. Content analysis, which will be used throughout the thesis involves using the content of messages to draw conclusions about its meaning. Dane points out that through this method of analysis, one should be able to draw the same conclusions as others when presented with the same material for study. Content analysis involves answering one of five basic questions: who, what, to whom, how, and with what effect 
(Dane, 1990:169-174)
For the purposes of this thesis the question I will attempt to answer is: with what effect? This seems the most appropriate question to answer as the thesis is concerned with the effect different pieces of legislation and doctrines under analysis had on security assistance policy in the United States.
Research involves an organized approach which will provide information that can be used to answer the stated research questions 
(Cooper and Emory, 1995:16)
(Cooper and Emory, 1995:240)
(Cooper and Emory, 1995:241)
During the data collection process, I attempted to evaluate the contents and debate surrounding the key legislative acts and doctrines stated in chapter one. My thinking was that by gaining an understanding of the contents and debate surrounding the legislation, significant issues would begin to surface which would prove useful in the analysis of each act and its impact on security assistance.
Whenever evaluating secondary data caution must be used concerning how much confidence can be assigned to the accuracy of the data 
(Cooper and Emory, 1995:259)
(Stewart, 1984:14)
Silverman states, "Having a cumulative view of data drawn from different contexts allows us, as in trigonometry, to triangulate the true state of affairs by examining where the different data intersect" 
(Silverman, 1993:152)
Greek-Turkish Aid Bill. Following World War II, the United States went through a significant change in foreign policy. This change involved the United States assuming a more active role in world affairs than it had ever done before 
(Kaplan, 1980, iii)
Assistance, 1985:183)
After World War II ended, President Truman found himself with the difficult task of dealing with an aggressive Soviet Union that was becoming increasingly threatening to U.S. objectives. This was evidenced by the Soviets exerting pressure on both Greece and Turkey to gain further influence in the region. This action would eventually result in the president's request to Congress for $400 million that would be provided to Greece and Turkey for both military and economic aid 
(Defense Institute, 1995:12)
Concern of Soviet domination of the entire Middle East was focused not only on Greece and Turkey, but on Iran as well. An agreement had been reached in 1942 between the British, Russian, and Iranian governments which allowed troops to be stationed in Iran until March 2, 1946. It was agreed by all countries involved that by this date all foreign troops would be out of Iran.
However, not only did the Russian government not remove the troops by March 2nd, intelligence showed that the Russians were actually increasing troops in the country 
(Truman, 1956:93)
President Truman saw three strategic implications from the continued Russian military presence in Iran. First, there was the issue of Turkish security.
Russia had repeatedly asked Turkey to make allowances for the defense of the Dardanelles along with territorial concessions over the last few months. The ability for Turkey to resist these pressures would only be compounded by Russian troop presence on another border should Iran fall prey to complete Soviet influence. If this were to happen, the Russians would have the ability to outflank the Turks if they so desired. Secondly, the President was concerned with the security of the oil reserves in Iran. He felt that Soviet control of this region would seriously affect the balance of world power. Finally, what bothered the President the most was the way in which the Soviet Union was handling an agreement that was made with the Iranian government. The President felt that all nations no matter how large or small are due a certain amount of respect in terms of binding agreements or commitments from the other countries they enter into the agreements with. He felt that if any region in the world was to accomplish stability, a certain level of cooperation must exist between the countries in that region. The President felt that the Soviet Union was not acting in good faith by maintaining troops in Iran and was displaying a disregard for the United Nations in its attempt to bring a resolution to the conflict. Finally on March 24, 1946, after much political maneuvering, Russia announced that it would immediately remove all troops from Iran. However the threat of Soviet influence over Greece and Turkey remained at the forefront of strategic administration issues 
(Truman, 1956:93-95)
In February 1947, the British government provided the United States the justification necessary to become actively involved in providing the two countries with aid. Notes were provided to the United States from the British government which outlined several alarming trends. First, the notes stated that Greece was currently involved in a guerrilla war, in which the guerrillas were being supported by the communist governments of Yugoslavia, Albania, and Bulgaria. Secondly, the notes detailed the fact that Britain was in the midst of an economic crisis and would be unable to provide any further assistance to the governments of Greece and Turkey as it had done in the past. Finally, the notes discussed the Soviet Union's attempts to gain influence over the defense of the Dardanelles, by pressuring the Turkish government (U.S. House of Representatives, Vol. 
VI, 1976:307)
It should be noted that other factors influenced the decision to provide aid to Greece and Turkey besides the notes. The United States had been involved with Greek politics actively since the end of World War II. In 1946, the United States had supervised the national elections in Greece, as well as provided a loan from the Export-Import Bank. Many of these actions were the result of a growing administration sentiment to resist Russian expansion of influence throughout this region (U.S. House of 
Representatives, Vol. VI, 1976:307-308)
The circumstances in both Greece and Turkey were unique in many ways and justify further consideration. The situation in Turkey was primarily a military issue, while the situation in Greece was more focused around political, economic, and humanitarian issues. Regardless of the fact the Truman administration treated the problems in both countries under a single legislative umbrella, they clearly "present different aspects of the problem and should be considered separately" 
(Reitzel, 1947:680
Russia's interest in Turkey had gone on for years as they fett the country was an important strategic objective for the Russian Navy having an exit point into the Mediterranean Sea. When Russia began pressuring Turkey for greater control over the Dardanelles the United States felt a response was necessary.
On November 2, 1945, the United States provided the Turkish government with a note outlining three key principles that the administration hoped that any further agreement between the Russian and Turkish government would contain concerning control over the Dardanelles. The first was that all merchant vessels of all nations would have access to the Straits at any time. Secondly, all Black Sea power warships would have access to the Straits at all times. Finally, the administration hoped that access to the Straits would be denied to warships of non-Black Sea powers except with permission of all the nations or special permission from the United Nations. In July 1946, the Russian government sent Turkey a proposal which essentially called for joint Russian-Turkish control over the Dardanelles. The United States viewed this as an attempt by the Russians to take control of Turkey. In the administration's view, they felt that once the Russian military had entered Turkey for purpose of defending the Straits, it would be only a matter of time until they used the troops in country to control all Turkish affairs. Turkey sought the United States' advice concerning the Russian proposal, and after much discussion rejected it and made it clear to the Russians that any attempt to gain control of the region by violence would be met with stiff military resistance. The problem with this was that the Turkish Army was very inadequately equipped and would need funds in order increase military capability to hold the Russians at bay in their quest for influence in this region 
(Truman, 1956:96-97)
The situation in Greece had a somewhat different origin. Following the war the country's political situation had broken down into two main factions. The first was a communist controlled group and the other was the political faction that remained under control by the king. The country's economic situation quickly deteriorated further during the fighting between the two political groups.
Everyday life in Greece became a struggle for the people as factories were closed, jobs were lost and people feared for their lives. The desperate situation in the country played right into the hands of the communist groups 
(Truman, 1956:98)
(Truman, 1956:98)
The concern for the situation in Greece was enhanced when on March 30, 1947, the United Kingdom informed the United States that due to its own economic situation it would have to cease all support to the country. At the time, the administration believed that the only thing preventing a complete communist takeover of Greece was the British presence there. With this deterrent removed they believed it would only be a matter of time until the country was under communist control. This would be an important strategic implication for the United States because it would increase communist power in the Mediterranean.
Also the administration felt that once Greece had fallen under communist control, the pressure on Turkey would increase dramatically 
(Truman, 1956:99-100)
(Truman, 1956:99)
Reports from MacVeagh, Porter and Ethridge in Athens are unanimous in their alarm over the probability that Greece will be unable to maintain her independence. Determining factors are the probability of an imminent economic and financial collapse and the fact that Greek communists and the Soviet dominated governments of Albania, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria are making every effort to prevent any improvement in Greek internal affairs....The Greek foreign exchange position is so critical that no one can see at the present time how absolutely essential imports can be financed during the next few months....Unless urgent and immediate support is given to Greece, it seems probable that the Greek Government will be overthrown and a totalitarian regime of the extreme left will come to power....The capitulation of Greece to Soviet domination through lack of adequate support from the U.S. and Great Britain might eventually result in the loss of the whole Near and Middle East and northern Africa. 
(Department of State, Vol. V, 1971:29-30)
VI, 1976:308-309)
In a speech to Congress made on March 12, 1947, President Truman asked for $400,000,000 in aid to be provided to Greece and Turkey. The President went on to say: I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjection by armed minorities or by outside pressures. I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way. I believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financial aid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes. 
(Truman, 1947:504-505)
(Truman, 1956:108)
(Hovey, 1966:5)
The Greek-Turkish Aid Bill as mentioned earlier was to be the beginning of an extensive security assistance program within the United States. The current administration felt this type of program was crucial to stop Soviet expansionism as well as protect vital U.S. interests. The legislation had another significant impact on our nation's developing security assistance program. The bill required that the aid would be administered in the receiving countries of Greece and Turkey with the oversight of U.S. military advisors. By 1949, over 500 U.S. service personnel served in this capacity in Greece and over 400 in 
Turkey (Defense Institute, 1995:12)
(Hovey, 1965:294)
Most of the military assistance provided by the Greek-Turkish aid bill would come in the form of existing U.S. military stockpiles. The equipment was provided in the form of grants to the recipient countries and was never expected to be repaid as a loan would. The United States had significant excess equipment following the war and this seemed to be a practical solution to our involvement in military aid at this point 
(Defense Institute, 1995:13)
Mutual Defense Act of 1949. Following the passage of the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill, the Truman administration felt that attention needed to be focused on the economic situation in Europe. Specifically, it was the administration's belief that a program of strong economic support to Europe was essential for our country's security interests. 
(Grimmett, 1985:4-5)
In a speech delivered at Harvard on June 5,1947, Secretary of State Marshall presented the details of what would become known as the Marshall Plan. During his speech the Secretary had the following to say about the purpose of the plan: "The goal of the United States should be the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist" 
(Bickerton, 1978:374)
It should be noted however, the importance the administration placed on complete involvement by all the European countries taking part in the program for its success. During the same speech Secretary Marshall made this point in the following way:
It is already evident that, before the United States Government can proceed much further in its efforts to alleviate the situation and help start the European world on its way to recovery, there must be some agreement among the countries of Europe as to the requirements of the situation and the part those countries themselves will take in order to give proper effect to whatever action might be undertaken by this Government. It would be neither fitting nor efficacious for this Government to undertake to draw up unilaterally a program designed to place Europe on its feet economically. This is the business of the Europeans. (Department of 
State, 1950
State, :1269) )
(McCormick, 1985:42)
Representatives, Vol. Ill, 1976:9)
While the Marshall Plan was intended to assist Europe with economic recovery for internal stability, it was clear that this form of assistance alone would not be the complete answer. Europe still had the very real threat of the Russian military to contend with and the United States needed to consider what role to play in this matter. Senator Vandenberg introduced a resolution into the Senate during 1948, which would allow the United States to participate in "Progressive development of regional and other collective arrangements for individual and collective self-defense" (Department of 
State, 1950:197)
(Grimmett, 1985:5-6)
NATO was established on April 4, 1949, when twelve nations, including the United States formally signed the North Atlantic Treaty. This marked a turning point in U.S. policy 
(Grimmett, 1985:6)
(Kaplan, 1980:1)
(Grimmett, 1985:6)
While the Marshall Plan was intended to assist Europe with economic recovery, NATO was to provide for collective defense of the region. The military assistance program would serve to provide the capabilities needed to make NATO effective militarily. On July 23, 1949, President Truman signed the NATO treaty and forwarded his proposal for a program of military assistance to Congress. The President stressed to Congress that this funding was only to ensure an initial wave of defense in the event of a Russian attack. The majority of the aid was to consist of surplus equipment that were already part of the U.S. military stockpile. Another form of the aid was to come in the form of cash grants, which would be used for the recipient countries to increase their own capabilities to produce weapons. This aid was not to be tied into the European Recovery Program aid in any way. It was believed that the grant aid would be limited in nature as eventually the countries would develop their own capabilities to produce weapons (U.S. House of Representatives, Vol.V, 1976:8-9).
Testimony surrounding the bill at the time seemed to reflect a change in attitude concerning national strategic military strategy. The focus now seemed to be on the deterrence of Soviet aggression where in the past it had been on preparedness. The United States felt that with the introduction of NATO, coupled with economic aid from the Marshall Plan our own national security interests would be protected (U.S. House of Representatives, Vol. V, 1976:9-10).  
, 1950:1357-1358)
Truman to spend an additional $500,000,000 on the North Atlantic Treaty countries to carry out the purposes of the act. This additional funding was granted to the president in the form of contract authority and allowed the President to distribute the funding by entering into contracts that would support the overall purposes of the act. Section 301 of the Act authorized the President to provide military assistance to Iran, Korea, and the Philippines in an amount not to exceed $27,640,000. This represented a geographic expansion of the security assistance program from its origins with the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill to include the countries of Iran, Korea, and the Philippines. Representative Judd's arguments concerning the situation in China received attention in the Act as well.
The President was authorized to spend $75,000,000 in China in order to support the spirit of the policies and principles of the Act (Department of 
State, 1950
State, :1357
State, -1359))
State, Vol.I, 1976:398)
The Mutual Defense Act of 1949 was important in the history of security assistance for several reasons. First, it was the first piece of legislation that provided the authority to give significant military assistance to our NATO allies, as well as other areas of the world we felt strategically affected the United States, such as Iran, Korea, and the Philippines. Secondly it established the foundation of our military assistance program for years to come 
(Grimmett, 1985, 7)
Mutual Security Act of 1951. The primary purpose of the Mutual Security Act of 1951 was: maintenance of the security and promotion of the foreign policy of the United States through the provision of military, technical, and economic assistance to friendly countries. The intent in providing such assistance was to strengthen the mutual security and individual and collective defenses of the free world, to enable friendly nations to develop their resources in the interest of their security and the national interest of the United States, and to facilitate the effective participation of these nations in the collective security system. 
(Grimmett, 1985:10)
Assistance, 1985:183)
Several significant world events played a role in the creation of this act.
Perhaps most importantly, there was the Korean War. On June 24,1950, the North Koreans invaded South Korea and with the invasion caught the United
States by surprise 
(Weigley, 1973:383)
(Hovey, 1965:9)
Throughout the conflict the United States was relied on by United Nations forces to provide the majority of logistical support. The funding for this support did not fall under the text of foreign aid but instead was classified as our own country's military spending. This situation arose out of the complexities associated with classifying and coordinating the different costing and logistic systems, given all of the different countries involved in the effort 
(Hovey, 1965:9)
The Korean War concerned senior U.S. leaders in that it provided a direct military challenge in Asia, conflicting with our own country's interests. The administration felt that if South Korea fell into communist hands the security of other U.S. allies in the region such as Japan, Taiwan, and the Philippines would also be threatened. The United Sates felt that a strong stance in Korea would be necessary in order to counter a Soviet feeling of confidence regarding future expansionist activities 
(Grimmett, 1985:8)
(Grimmett, 1985:8)
In  
(Grimmett, 1985:9)
(Grimmett, 1985:10)
These treaties had several implications for the United States. To begin with it meant that we would assume a role of responsibility for our partners in the agreements that previously may not have existed. It also meant that the United
States would have access to military bases in these countries which would allow our country to further project power across the globe. Finally, the treaties marked a beginning of better cooperation between the United States and the other countries concerning both political and military matters 
(Grimmett, 1985:9)
At the conclusion of the Korean War the military production capabilities that had been produced as a result of the war were redirected toward producing equipment that would be essential to support our force levels in Europe. The responsibilities of equipping and training the Korean forces had shifted from our own defense budget to the military assistance program 
(Hovey, 1965:10)
During 1951, the focus of the aid program in the United States was shifting from economic to military goals. For this reason, it was felt that a greater emphasis should be placed on the overall coordination of the program in order to meet its intended objectives. To accomplish this goal, the President assigned all comprehensive responsibilities for the foreign aid program to the Secretary of  The assistance would be provided to all areas of the globe to shape world politics wherever U.S. interests may lie. The act also reflected an important administrative issue. For the first time since the war, our security assistance legislation was combined under a single act. Although the funding for military and economic assistance were clearly defined in the legislation, this still reflected an attitude that these types of aid, although different in intent, both helped to define our foreign policy. Korea including dams on the Yalu River. These bombings were portrayed as targeting primarily the civilian population; the United States had projected a willingness to go to any length to bring an end to the war 
(Nathan, 1976:196-199)
In March 1953, Stalin died which would have significant impact on the worldwide communist movement and may have led to positive movement towards peace talks. Stalin was in many ways the ultimate symbol for communism around the world and his death led to significant transition within communist leadership. The Chinese government now had an opportunity to end the war without much direction from Moscow and they took the opportunity 
(Nathan, 1976:199)
A truce was signed July 27,1953 that would ultimately bring an end to the Korean War. With the truce, the United States had promised South Korea that a
Mutual Security treaty would be formed in which South Korea would receive significant military aid as well as economic assistance 
(Nathan, 1976:200)
Following the Korean War the Eisenhower administration turned to a military strategy of deterrence in governing its policy to contain communism. The United States viewed the implied threat of an atomic attack on North Korea from our government as key in bringing about a resolution to the Korean War and felt that the military superiority that our country enjoyed at the time would be useful if applied to our nation's military strategy. As a result of the Korean War effort, the United States had moved significantly in front of the Soviet Union in terms of a nuclear arsenal. The Soviet Union also did not enjoy the same capability to project their atomic assets that the United States did at this time. The United States enjoyed a significant advantage in the number of secure forward bases and also maintained an advantage in the delivery methods it could employ for its nuclear arsenal 
(Weigley, 1973:399-400)
Eisenhower approved policy formulated by the National Security Council that called for the United States military establishment to build the concept of nuclear capabilities into both tactical and strategic plans when their use would lead to desired military outcomes. Responsibilities for the containment of Soviet expansion had shifted in our country from conventional military forces to a concept of massive retaliation. The shift to a strategy of massive retaliation from that of maintaining sizable conventional forces for the purpose of prevention of Soviet expansion would significantly ease the fiscal burden on the United States defense budget 
(Nathan, 1976:205)
It can be argued that the establishment of a concept of massive retaliation in no way erodes the need for a strong security assistance program as the United States would still need forward bases for the purpose of carrying out this strategy to any corner of the globe 
(Jordan, 1958:253)
(Brandt, 1989:185-187)
11
(Hovey, 1965:137)
(Hildreth, 1985:74)
Assistance, 1985:183)
(Grimmett, 1985:37-38)
12
(DeNovo, 1978:292)
Resolution.
The language of the resolution was perceived as vague in certain respects. First, the area of the Middle East was not clearly defined. Secondly, the language of the resolution did not define what would constitute international communist influence. Secretary of State, John Dulles, summed up the vagueness of the language of the resolution as "an attitude, a state of mind, a point of view" 
(DeNovo, 1978:292)
The world situation of the time helped shape the Eisenhower Doctrine. In 1949, following the Arab-Israeli War, the United States, Great Britain, and France signed the Tripartite Declaration. The intent of this agreement was to prevent an aggressive build up of weapons in the Middle East 
(DeNovo, 1978:293)
(Eisenhower, 1965:22)
After 1951, the states felt that the Western powers were trying to draw them into a cold war conflict in which they had no interest. For the time being, this type of defense arrangement would have to be postponed 
(DeNovo, 1978:293-294)
The country of Egypt played a key role in the political situation in the Middle East during this time period. The country became a dictatorship in 1952, led by Gamal Nasser. Nasser's influence in the region was critical to the stability of the Middle East. His political influence over the peoples of the other Arab states was significant and led to a growing feeling in this region that a united Arab state would be beneficial. Egypt was also vital to the stability of the region for another reason. The Suez Canal was within its borders and with it came influence over the majority of the worlds oil supply. During the year of 1955 alone, the canal was transited by more than double the amount of cargo that was shipped through the Panama Canal. This key waterway brought in approximately $100 million in revenues every year, thirty percent of which was a net profit 
(Eisenhower, 1965:22)
During East for its own purposes 
(DeNovo, 1978:294)
13
(Eisenhower, 1965:24-25)
Egypt in 1956
(DeNovo, 1978:294)
(Crabb, 1982:153)
Congressional approval came, however, with its share of criticism. It took the Congress two entire months from the time the President introduced the bill to approve it. In the House the debate focused on the administration's belief that communist hostilities was a significant threat in the Middle East. Many of the members believed that Secretary Dulles had not established this fact and had reservations based on it. The Senate was even more divided on the bill. Some in the Senate felt that the idea of Soviet aggression in the Middle East was exaggerated and that most of the conflict in the region was a result of country by country differences. They felt that this issue only tied in slightly with the issue of communism. Critics of the bill also stated that they felt the aid provided by the legislation would do little to resolve a pressing problem in this area of the world: quality of life for the people. They felt that the circumstances that individuals had to live in were one of the primary reasons for the political instability of the region.
The legislation would only provide a modest improvement in this area, if any improvement at all 
(DeNovo, 1978:295-296)
The international reaction to the Eisenhower Doctrine was both immediate and mixed. The strongest support came from both Lebanon and the Baghdad Pact. Both Syria and Egypt reacted negatively to it. The general feeling in the Arab world was resentment. A feeling of resentment for a Western attitude that the United States was going to come in and fix all the problems in the Middle East. Eventually the United States would sign agreements with nine countries in the Middle East for assistance. These nations included Iran, Turkey, Pakistan, Iraq, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Libya, Saudi Arabia, and Ethiopia. The agreements would amount to $119 million in aid of which over half would come in the form of economic assistance 
(DeNovo, 1978:296-297)
Following the creation of the Eisenhower Doctrine there were several world crises that the doctrine could have been applied to that would provide analysis of its effectiveness. One of these cases concerned Jordan. During  
(Crabb, 1982:177)
(DSAA, 1990:109)
The second situation in which the Eisenhower Doctrine was applied occurred in connection with Syria. During the middle of 1957, the Syrian government charged that the United States Central Intelligence Agency was interfering in their political structure. This led to the expulsion of several U.S.
diplomats from the country. At the same time the Soviet influence in the country seemed to be on the rise. Syria was turning to the Soviet Union at an increasing rate for both economic and military assistance. This led President Eisenhower to become concerned with the possibility that the country would soon fall under communist control. The situation presented a complex set of circumstances for the administration. For the Eisenhower Doctrine to be invoked a country must come under international communist attack. It was apparent that this was not the case up to this point. Also, the United States had criticized the governments of France, Britain, and Israel concerning the invasion of Egypt within the year and stood to appear hypocritical if the Doctrine were implemented. Another requirement that appeared to be missing for the implementation of the Doctrine was the fact the Syria had never requested United States assistance in the matter. President Eisenhower attempted to deal with this potential criticism by stating that the country had been subjected to invasion by international communism and that the countries that surrounded Syria had requested the assistance from the United States. As it turned out the President never had to invoke the Doctrine in the Syria case 
(Crabb, 1982:177-180)
In forces arrived in Lebanon, the situation became stable. On October 25, 1958, the first of the American troops in the country began to leave 
(Crabb, 1982:181-186)
The situation in Lebanon was very unique indeed. It in many ways did not test the Eisenhower Doctrine. The country was never infringed upon by international communism in any way. In fact President Eisenhower and the administration downplayed the role that the Eisenhower Doctrine played in the situation when attempting to justify the need for U.S. military involvement in the area. In fact when the President announced the fact that the Marines were landing in Lebanon, he stated that their mission would be to protect the lives of the Americans that were in the country and to safeguard the country's freedom 
(DeNovo, 1978:299-300)
military commitment to the stability of the Middle East. In certain aspects the security assistance program had extended beyond pure military and economic aid to include the threat of military force. When the United States withdrew its forces from Lebanon, it also in some respects withdrew from the Eisenhower Doctrine as a guide for foreign policy in this area of the world 
(Crabb, 1982:186)
In many ways the Eisenhower doctrine was a logical extension to the foreign policy established under the Truman administration. What started as a containment policy towards communism in Greece and Turkey and then in Europe had simply now been applied to the Middle East. Secretary Dulles eventually would state that he felt that eventually the United States would be able to form a worldwide doctrine of containment against communist aggression and the Eisenhower Doctrine was simply the next logical step in that sequence 
(Crabb, 1982:165-166
Question 1. How did the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill impact security assistance?
The Greek-Turkish Aid Bill provided much debate concerning the role the United States should play in foreign affairs. Perhaps this was due to the fact that it was the first major piece of legislation since the end of World War II that significantly focused on foreign policy. It was, in fact, a major commitment of the United States of both funding and involvement in international affairs that had not been undertaken in our country up to this time.
The majority of the supporters of the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill cited the fact that it would prevent Soviet expansion as the primary reason for the necessity of the legislation (U.S. House of Representatives, Vol. 
VI, 1976:309)
Senator Vandenberg delivered a speech to the Senate on 
April 8, 1947
Vandenberg repeatedly made the argument that the only way to avoid war was to actively seek to prevent it 
(Vandenberg, 1947:51-53)
In his speech, Vandenberg realized that the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill as well as the Truman Doctrine would not in and of itself bring about the end of Soviet expansionist policy. He portrayed the United States role in future foreign affairs as a reactionary one in which each situation or crisis would have to be judged separately. The Senator also pointed out that assistance alone would not solve the Greek-Turkish dilemma. In his speech he proposed that the United States would have to work hard to resolve the adversarial relationship that it had developed with the Soviet Union since the end of World War II in order for progress to be made in Greece and Turkey. Also, he felt that the United States needed to share common grounds with the United Nations when it came to overall plans and objectives. Senator Vandenberg stressed that the United Nations had already recommended aid to Greece as well as support for aid from the United States as it alone recognized that it could not effectively deal with the turmoil in these two countries 
(Vandenberg, 1947:51, 55-56)
Senator Pepper, in his speech to congress also made several other arguments against the adoption of the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill. He expressed a concern over the fact that it would further divide the world into an east and west political division, which would be counterproductive to world economic recovery after World War II. The senator pointed out that many people around the world felt the legislation was merely an attempt by the United States to gain economic influence in expanding markets around the world. This argument basically focused on the fact that the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill was not directed at ensuring democracy around the world, but was in fact an attempt to gain influence by America's largest corporations in markets previously not entered. Senator
Pepper expressed concern over the amount of military assistance that would be offered in the bill, although made no argument concerning any amount of economic assistance that would be provided to Turkey and especially Greece.
However, Pepper felt that economic assistance could best be managed and distributed through the United Nations. Another key argument in Senator Pepper's speech to the Senate was that the aid provided in the bill should come in the form of loans and not grant aid. The Senator felt that the American taxpayer should not be automatically given the responsibility for paying other countries' debts. He felt that Greece and Turkey should both be given the opportunity to pay for their own economic recovery through a loan financed by the World Bank 
(Pepper, 1947:70-74)
The Greek-Turkish Aid Bill also fueled debate concerning the practicality of it to deal with the economic situation in Greece. Greece's economy was in a shambles after World War II and many critics of the bill felt that too much emphasis was being placed on the military aid aspects of the legislation. It was argued that communist influence in Greece was centered on the economic situation of the country at that time and no amount of military spending would alleviate this problem. The solution to this communist influence in Greece, it was argued, centered on the ability of the Greek economy to recover to a point in which its peoples would not be so easily recruited into the communist guerrilla movement. This, it was stated, could only be accomplished through economic aid to the government of Greece 
(McNeill, 1948:3-4)
The Greek-Turkish Aid Bill was an important milestone in the United
States security assistance program. It was at the very least a first step in developing a massive commitment to prevent the spread of communism across the globe. This first step involved what seemed to be a very specific purpose:
providing assistance to the countries of Greece and Turkey for the purpose of preventing communist expansion into these countries. This clear relationship that existed in security assistance legislation would not last long as the program's focus would expand to every comer of the earth in the years to come.
Whether or not the administration at the time understood the implications of this first commitment of military and economic aid is not clear from analysis of the literature connected with it. It is clear, however, that the Truman administration felt that it was within the best interests of the United States to play an active role in the containment of Russian and communist influence worldwide.
This objective was viewed as a top priority for the overall welfare of the United
States.
The fact that the United States had significant surplus stockpiles of military equipment and supplies following World War II made the transition from a policy of isolationism to that of active communist engagement an easier process. It, in fact made sense for our country to provide military equipment to further our policy objectives globally if it would be in the form of excess materials and supplies. This was viewed as a small price to pay to promote peace and stability across the globe. He felt that it would be foolish to withhold the funding in the short term as the NATO alliance was already working hard to achieve the objective of collective security. He also stated that military plans were very dynamic in nature. The general suggested that there would never be a day in which policy makers in the United States would be satisfied with a complete plan for the defense of Europe, because these plans would be constantly changing.  Both the Greek-Turkish Aid Bill and the Mutual Defense Act of 1949 received overall public support. This came from the fact that most Americans were leery of Soviet intention following World War II. In fact the majority of Americans felt that the Soviet Union had every intention of dominating the world at every opportunity provided to them. The Truman administration did a good job of balancing the public's perception of a necessity for containment of the Soviet Union with the public's desire for fiscal constraint 
(Crabb, 1982:127-129)
As The Mutual Security Act of 1951 also served to further enhance the regional breakdown of funding for security assistance from the United States. in America. This resulted in jobs for Americans as well as money flowing back into our economy 
(Dulles, 1958:430-431)
States had been intended to serve our own nation's economic objectives at some point. This would seem rather far fetched at its inception based on the specific nature of the program in terms of what countries receive aid and the tremendous economic aid that encompassed the security assistance program.
Perhaps as the security assistance program developed in the United States, however, the economic benefits from a well defined program was a necessity to its very existence.
Secretary Dulles also responded to the view that our security assistance program was only giveaway in nature by pointing out that without it several nations would have fallen under Soviet domination, which in turn would have provided momentum for the communist movement. He felt that providing funding for a healthy security assistance program was a small price to pay when compared with the military expenditures that would be required to sustain a military force in the event of war 
(Dulles, 1958:431)
(Hildreth, 1985:46)
Despite the President's support for the security assistance program in the United States he also felt an objective analysis of the program could be beneficial to the overall effectiveness of accomplishing its intended objectives.
Therefore, in late 1958, President Eisenhower established the Draper Committee to provide, "a completely independent, objective, and non-partisan analysis of the military assistance aspects of our Mutual Security Program" 
(Eisenhower, 1958:VII)
(Eisenhower, 1958:VII)
The committee reported that the military assistance program had went through a significant evolution between 1947 and 1959. It had started as a program that transferred primarily excess equipment and supplies to nations for the purpose of communist containment. The committee went on to say that the current world political environment was much more complex and the weapons that were required by countries for their own defense were equally complex. The committee found that most nations were not able to produce the weapons needed for their defense internally, thus justifying military assistance from the United States 
(United States Congress, 1959:2)
The committee found that the military assistance program was in need of significant improvement in the way in which it was administered. The committee felt that the program was not as responsive as it should be to the needs of the countries receiving assistance and the national interests of the United States.
They felt that this could be resolved through greater flexibility and timeliness that could be built into the administration process. The Draper committee felt that a method of continuous analysis should be built into the executive department functions to determine which countries should receive aid. They recognized a danger that existed in the Mutual Security Program for certain programs to continue to be funded even though the need no longer existed (United States Congress, 1959:2). In its report, the committee provided two main recommendations:
1. The strengthening of the position of the State Department on the policy level of military assistance planning and an increased assurance Union to the foreign interests of the United States. This conflict fueled the attitude within the administration that an aggressive security assistance policy was the best approach to hinder communist expansion abroad.
Military Assistance played a less significant role in terms of the budget towards the end of the 1950s than it had at the beginning. This is illustrated in Table 
15
(Hovey, 1965:76)
(Jordan, 1958:237)
The purpose of this questionnaire is to determine the potential for current and future applications of AFIT thesis research. 
(Source:
(Source:
(Source:
(Source:
American Republics. The President was authorized to provide this money to nations in the Western Hemisphere that were participating in missions vital to the defense of this region and in accordance with our country's defense plans
American Republics. The President was authorized to provide this money to nations in the Western Hemisphere that were participating in missions vital to the defense of this region and in accordance with our country's defense plans
when they seemed determined to negotiate a settlement to the war. President pieces of legislation. One of the primary things that it accomplished was to authority to control the foreign assistance programs of the United States. This authority was in turn passed down from the President to the Secretary of Defense concerning military assistance and the Secretary of State concerning economic assistance
Section 106 of the law addressed the sale of military equipment and services. It stated, "The President may, in order to carry out the purpose of this chapter, sell or enter into contracts (without requirement for charge to any appropriation or contract authorization) for the procurement for sale of equipment, materials, or services to any nation or international organization" (United States
Section 106 of the law addressed the sale of military equipment and services. It stated, "The President may, in order to carry out the purpose of this chapter, sell or enter into contracts (without requirement for charge to any appropriation or contract authorization) for the procurement for sale of equipment, materials, or services to any nation or international organization" (United States
It appears once again that substantial increases in military assistance were provided to the countries of Iran, Turkey, Pakistan, and Iraq following the signing of the Baghdad Pact in 1955.
I owe thanks to several individuals that assisted in the writing of this thesis. First, I would like to thank my thesis advisor, 
Dr. Craig Brandt
Maj. Cindy Fossum
I would especially like to thank my wonderful wife, Patricia, for her support throughout the entire AFIT adventure. I always tell her that as soon as I am finished with this job, or thesis, or program, things will get better, and we will have more time together. I have finally come to the conclusion that I am a liar.
Acknowledgments
Committee to Study U.S. Military Assistance of 1959 IV. -
Turkish Aid Bill
United States" (Defense InstituteMilitary assistance. General Robert Wood
United States Army
Peace Corps
Eisenhower and his staff felt that the Indochina War was another attempt by the Soviet Union to spread communism throughout the world. Eventually France accepted a Soviet invitation to attend a conference with representatives from the Soviet Union, United States, Britain, France, and China concerning the conflict in Vietnam. President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles immediately saw the possibility of a negotiated withdrawal of France from Indochina as having serious implications to the security of the Asia and the Pacific. They felt that once Indochina fell into communist hands, other countries in the this vital region of the world would be at great risk to succumb to the pressures of communism as well.
The President, however felt that any commitment of US troops to Indochina could not be justified given the fact that the Korean War had just ended and the potential reaction of the American population. Ultimately an armistice was signed which was not endorsed by the United States which called for the country of Vietnam to be divided temporarily at the 17 th parallel 
(Nathan, 1976:208-212)
Secretary Dulles summed up the situation in Vietnam best by saying, "The important thing is not to mourn the past but to seize the future opportunity to prevent the loss in Northern Vietnam from leading to the extension of Communism throughout Southeast Asia and the Southwest Pacific" 
(Nathan, 1976:213)
Although the Mutual Security Act of 1954 had been preceded by several significant world events discussed previously, it played a slightly less significant role in terms of security assistance than some of the previous mutual security after the Anglo-French invasion that the United States would side with Egypt if it came down to it and honor the Tripartite Declaration which stated that the United States would support any country that is subjected to aggression in the Middle East. The President was caught off guard by the invasion and was equally perplexed by the secret nature that France, Britain and Israel had plotted the invasion of Egypt without consultation of the United States 
(Ambrose, 1984:356-358)
(DeNovo, 1978:294)
(Hildreth, 1985:48)
These criticisms would eventually lead Eisenhower to appoint a committee in 1958 to study the Mutual Security Program in the United States from its inception through the present day. The President was primarily concerned with obtaining an objective and independent look at the program along with recommendations that would ensure its continued positive role in shaping the world political arena in order to protect the interests of free people everywhere 
(Hildreth, 1985:45)
The study, which would eventually become known as the Draper Reports, was conducted beginning in November of 1958 and lasted for approximately nine months. The Draper Reports consisted of four reports to the President.
The first addressed the need to enhance spending on the Military Assistance Program as well as the necessity to update the equipment of the NATO forces.
The second report focused on the administration of the security assistance program in the United States. During the Korean War significant problems were revealed in mismanagement of the program concerning lost and stolen supplies as well as the inappropriateness of certain weapons that the United States was furnishing some third world nations:. It was felt that these nations could not handle the significant technology gap that existed between the United States military systems and their own country's military capabilities. The third report dealt with the concerns over military aid being included in the Department of Defense budget along with recommendations concerning the adoption of multiyear authorizations to the funding process. The last report issued by the Draper committee involved the necessity of public relations for the success of our nation's mutual security program. The report outlined the need for the American public to be educated in the reasons for our mutual security program and its interest in our own national security and called for continued military aid to countries under communist pressure 
(Hildreth, 1985:46-48)
Further analysis of the Draper report will be presented in chapter four as it in many ways provides a insightful glance at the United States security assistance policy from its inception until 1959. It is felt that by gaining an understanding of the contents and recommendations of the report useful analysis of the substance of the other major Security Assistance Acts that were presented previously will be more clearly recognizable.
Perhaps one of the greatest criticisms of the bill was that it would somehow undermine the authority of the United Nations to effectively deal with the world political environment. This argument focused on the fact that the United States would act alone to intervene in world situations without the interests of the United Nations always in mind (U.S. House of Representatives, Vol. 
VI, 1976:310)
(Pepper, 1947:74)
VI, 1976:310-311)
for NATO. The concern was that if the United States simply provided European assistance without formalized plans and strategies developed for the defense of Europe, it would simply be a waste of American taxpayer money. The argument was that the only way to truly prevent communist expansion was to resist it with a well thought out collective security arrangement. Some concern was also raised in Congressional debate that unless the United States required a well integrated plan for the defense of western Europe from the nations involved up front and tied appropriations in the bill to the approval of such a plan, it would be more difficult to obtain in the future (U.S. House of Representatives, Vol. V, 1976:9,33). The concern over a unified plan for the defense of the North Atlantic region was carried over into the final wording of the Act which states, "$400,000,000 shall become available when the President of the United States approves recommendations for an integrated defense of the North Atlantic area which may be made by the Council and the Defense Committee to be established under the North Atlantic Treaty" (Department of 
State, 1950
State, :1357
State, -1358))
General Omar Bradley, Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army, addressed the concern raised about the absence of a formalized plan for the defense of the North Atlantic by stating that he felt that time was essential to the proper management of the situation. The general stated that the funding that would be provided in the Mutual Defense Act of 1949 was only the first step necessary in providing Europe with the force structure necessary to counter the Soviet threat.
The act was divided into the regional areas of Europe, Near East and Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and the American Republics. The act gave the President some flexibility to provide funding to nations not identified in the wording of the law if he so made the determination that it would be in the best interests of the United States 
(United States Congress, 1952:373-377)
Based on this analysis it is concluded that the Mutual Defense Act The committee expanded on the two principal recommendations presented to provide specific recommendations that would satisfy the objectives. They are as follows:
Military assistance should be planned and programmed on a long term basis, covering a period of three and ultimately five years.
There should be a continuous authorization for the military assistance appropriation, in order to provide a sound legislative framework for multi-year planning and programming.
The military assistance appropriation should be placed in the Department of Defense budget, in order to center responsibility for administering the program more positively in the Defense Department.
Military assistance plans should be formulated within order of magnitude dollar guidelines to ensure feasibility and should be approved by the Secretaries of States and Defense before implementation.
The Department of State and the Ambassadors should participate at an earlier stage in the development of military assistance plans.
Military assistance planning and programming should be further decentralized to the United States Unified Commands overseas and to the Military Assistance Advisory Groups.
Provision should be made for more adequate consultation with recipient countries during military assistance planning.
The Department of Defense should have clearer operational responsibility for planning, programming and execution of military assistance.
The Executive Branch should assure that funds for the procurement of military assistance material are made available to the military departments more promptly after appropriation; the military departments, in turn, should accelerate procurement and supply actions to expedite actual deliveries overseas of military end items.
There should be established within the Defense Department a Director of Military Assistance.
There should be established within the Defense Department an independent evaluation staff.
Highly qualified and experienced personnel should be assigned to the program. 
(United States Congress, 1959:3-4)
Based on these conclusions the committee felt that both economic and military assistance funding levels needed to be maintained at their present levels at the very least 
(President's Committee, Vol. I, 1959:7-15)