# ID: 8526181a60e0441aa18e282273e52dd2
# Title: Formation of US security assistance policy, 1947-1959
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
On November 2, 1945, the United States provided the Turkish government with a note outlining three key principles that the administration hoped that any further agreement between the Russian and Turkish government would contain concerning control over the Dardanelles.
The first was that all merchant vessels of all nations would have access to the Straits at any time.
Secondly, all Black Sea power warships would have access to the Straits at all times.
Finally, the administration hoped that access to the Straits would be denied to warships of non-Black Sea powers except with permission of all the nations or special permission from the United Nations.
In July 1946, the Russian government sent Turkey a proposal which essentially called for joint Russian-Turkish control over the Dardanelles.
The United States viewed this as an attempt by the Russians to take control of Turkey.
In the administration's view, they felt that once the Russian military had entered Turkey for purpose of defending the Straits, it would be only a matter of time until they used the troops in country to control all Turkish affairs.
Turkey sought the United States' advice concerning the Russian proposal, and after much discussion rejected it and made it clear to the Russians that any attempt to gain control of the region by violence would be met with stiff military resistance.
The problem with this was that the Turkish Army was very inadequately equipped and would need funds in order increase military capability to hold the Russians at bay in their quest for influence in this region