# ID: 85fee1dda8c445978ebecd5172fd73b6
# Title: Current developments and prospects for the future: French security policy in a changing world
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1991.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis provides an analysis of the effects of recent historical events on the future of French security policy. The end of the Cold War division of Europe, the rebirth of Germany, the growing pressures for major defense cuts, the calls for France to review its nuclear doctrine, abandon its independent policies and rejoin NATO's integrated military structure, and finally, the lessons of the recent Gulf War, are issues that threaten to divide France in a way that has not occurred in several decades
The fundamental question for the decade of the 1990s is how to, or perhaps whether to, preserve the legacy of national independence and grandeur handed down by former Pre.sident Charles de Gaulle. The thesis concludes that the Gaullist myth of grandeur and independence can no longer be sustained.
French security must now be achieved by strengthening ties with NATO, and building a stronger West European defense posture centered around close Franco-German relations.
In the year 1989, France celebrated the bicentennial of its revolution. i991 marks the 33nd birthday of the drafting of the constitution of the Fifth Republic. By French standards this is a remarkable record since the average life of the count'y's 15 constitutions or charters since the year 1791 has been 13 years and four months. Ironically, the French have spent the last several years celebrating their history and the man most associated with the last 50 years of it, Charles de Gaulle, precisely at the time when a new mood of uncertainty and debate over the future of the French political identity appears to be at its height.
The end of the Cold War division of Europe, the rebir.h of Germany, the growing pressures for major defense cuts, the increasing calls for France to review its nuclear doctrine, and the urging by allies for France to abandon its independent policies and rejoin NATO's integrated military structure, are issues that threaten to divide France in a way that has not occurred in several decades.
Many Frenchmen now believe the choice is one of resignation at being one nation among many in a German-led Europe, or continuing to pursue Gaullist-type foreign and defense policies which are becoming increasing difficult, if not soon impossible, politically and financially, to sustain.
The fundamental question for the decade of the 1990s is how to, or perhaps even whether to, preserve the legacy of national independence and grandeur handed down by De Gaulle that is so clearly associated with the Fifth Republic's sezurity policy. In one U.S. defense analyst's view:
France's autonomous defense posture a'kd, since 1966, special status as a non-integrated member of NATO were predicated upon the continuing existence of favorable international circumstances, an expanding domestic consensus on security policy, and a robust economy and defense industrial base. Each of those assumptions is being challenged, to various degrees, by an international situation in flux, eroding public support for defense spending, and adverse budgetary trends. 1
The strong and widespread support that France has typically enjoyed for its foreign and defense policies can no longer be assumed.
Indeed, the domestic challenge to those policies appears to be increasing dramatically and as a result, the portent of a significant reorientation of policy is becoming clear.
As President Francois Mitterrand enters his eleventh year in power, it has become obvious that France faces unexpected and unwanted changes abroad. Rather than relying on power to protect its place in the international arena, France must, as during the immediate postwar period, rely on the talents, skills and diplomatic prowess of its leader. With four years left until his final term in office expires, Mitterrand appears eager to make his mark in history as the man who eroded the Gaullist legacy of independence and French nationalism and established a new European identity for his country, principally in the vanguard of the European community. 
2
The decisive French turn toward Europe has been reinforced by the 1989 democratic revolution in Eastern Europe, which is widely perceived as enhancing German power even more, and which has evidently destroyed any lingering French pretensions at politically dominating Europe. Indeed, the French could watch Chancellor Kohl's steadfast pursuit of a greater Germany with only a clear sense of helplessness and lack of direction.
Compounding the blow to common French assertions of France being a world class power, French budgetary difficulties are making at least some controversial defense cuts inevitable and there are even discussions in French defense circles that elements of the prestigious nuclear force de frappe may be allowed to become obsolete. Even the French are being forced to acknowledge that the political usefulness of nuclear weapons and hence the essence of France's claim to great power status, is diminishing along with East-West tensions.
Perhaps as a result of the pace of Ele profound changes in Europe, Mitterrand's reactions have seemed hesitant and uncertain.
This has led some critics to portray him as a cynic, quick to abandon policies and principles. 
3
With German reunification, France has been required to relinquish its special responsibilities in Germany as one of the four victorious powers of the Second World War. Chancellor Kohl took the lead, establishing firm control over the unification process, informing, rather than consulting the Allies of events that were occurring.
Ignoring his critics' advice, Mitterrand has refused to issue declarations to the Germans. Instead, he has attempted to convince the Germans of the virtues of European unity.
Mitterrand's next task will be to convince his own nation. One Pulitzer journalist has repeatedly described De Gaulle as "a political psychiatrist, ministering to a nation that was to suffer traumas of defeat, betrayal and loss." 
4
4 Jim Hoagland, "France: Le Jour De Gloire Est Passe," The Washington Post, 22 July 1990, C4. 4 nation suffering from reduced national influence, independence and military power. The Gaullist vision of France as a nation destined to glory as a result of its leading role in world affairs is rapidly fading as Europe, indeed the world, centers its attention on Germany and the democratization of Eastern Europe.
Unfortunately, precisely at the time when strong leadership and direction are most needed, Mitterrand has been unable to provide a clear vision of where and how France will fit into the new order. The central problem appears to lie in an uncertainty of the French government in knowing exactly what it wants. President De Gaulle accurately prophesied in 1965 the conditions that would have to exist for German reunification to occur; however, he could not have predicted the benign role France would play were this to happen:
Assuredly, the success of so vast and difficult an enterprise (German unification) implies many conditions. Russia must evolve in such a way as no longer to conceive its future in totalitarian constra 'int imposed at home and abroad, but in progress accomplished in common by men and free peoples. Its satellites must play their role in a renewed Europe. It must be recognized, above all, by Germany, that the settlement of which would be the object would necessarily include its frontiers and armaments in agreement with all its neighbors, East and West. *
The six states that, let us hope, are in the process of establishing the West European economic community must succeed in * organizing themselves in the political and defense domain in order to make possible a new equilibrium of our continent. Europe, the mother of modern civilization, must be established from the Atlantic to the Urals in concord and cooperation to develop its immense resources and to play, together with its daughter, America, the appropriate role in the progress of two billion people who badly need it. What a role Germany could play in this worldwide ambition of the rejuvenated Old ContinentI
5
The French were not prepared for the magnitude of the changes that German reunification and the end of the postwar division of Europe would have on international security arrangements. Because European security in the postwar period has depended on the partition of Germany and Europe, developments since 1989 have had profound effects on all European nations' seLurity policies, but particularly that of France. French security policy has critically depended on the super structures of the Cold War -Germany laden with U.S. troops and nuclear and conventional weapons and the U.S. nuclear guarantee to Europe.
However, U.S. troops and weapons have begun to leave Germany, with large-scale withdrawals imminent. The future role and structure of NATO are clearly uncertain and, as a corollary, so are the ties between the U.S. and Europe. The future of the Soviet Union is perhaps the least predicable dimension of the new European political landscape; East and West have solemnly agreed that the Cold War is over, but Moscow's huge military might remains largely intact, to pose at least a polential danger.
Finally, the war in the Persian Gulf has allowed many questions concerning Germany's new role in the international arena, and particularly the European arena, to surface. After widespread fears surfaced shortly after reunification over possible rising German militarism, Germany's "benign" response to the Gulf War prompted fears concerning Germany's commitment to NATO, the European Community (EC) and other European and Western institutions. The French are becoming increasingly concerned over what appears to be a German preference for denuclearization and neutrality -an occurrence which would level a certain blow to the premise of French security policy.
This thesis examines each of these areas with a view toward defining how recent events have shaken the foundations of French security policy, demanding the revision of its fundamental tenets.
The areas examined include the following:
1) A review of French security policy since the Second World
War and the pervasive impact of De Gaulle's legacy;
2) The effects of Gorbachev's "new thinking" and the relative decline of Soviet power on French security policy;
3) The impact of German reunification and the end of the poqtwar division of Europe on French economic and security policies; and
4) The implications of French cooperation with its Western Allies in the recent Gulf War.
Finally, this thesis concludes with an estimation of the direction
French security policy appears to be headed -a continuation of the current course, which is becoming increasingly unsustainable, or an acknowledgement 0iat France's security is dependent upon greater cooperation with NATO and her European allies.
In 1815, after the defeat of Napoleon, France was still considered a Great Power. The label did not change even long after the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71, although for the first time in her history, she has become greatly dependent on her allies for security. France gained her main objective in World War I, the reacquisition of Alsace-Lorraine, but for the price of 1.4 million dead or over 10 per cent of the male population.
6
French status as a Great Power remained intact.
When the French surrendered to the German military invasion in 1940, it was widely agreed that France would never again be a Great Power. This was a conclusion vehemently opposed by the Resistance and General Charles de Gaulle's Free French Movement.
De Gaulle's 18 June 1940 broadcast from London, announcing the founding of the Free French Resistance and declaring that Francc had lost a battle, but not the war, is an event characterized by great festivity in Paris each year. The following is an apt interpretation of the significance of this event to the French nation:
This broadcast was the beginning of de Gaulle's long career as a political psychiatrist, ministering to a nation that was to suffer traumas of defeat, betrayal and loss. From June 18, 1940 until his death in 1969, de Gaulle fashioned a political identity for the French that they donned and wore like a winter greatcoat against the harsh winds of history.
7
France's populat self-perception as a Great Power is owed largely to De Gaulle's convincing arguments. He insisted that France had not lost the Second World War but had won it as much as had the Russians, British and Americans. Hence, he insisted France was to be accorded all the perquisites due the other Great Powers, most notably, an occupation zone in Germany and Berlin. It followed that
France would share in the responsibility for the ultimate disposition of the German question, and would take a seat on the United Nations Security Council. To underscore France's proper rank, De Gaulle accelerated the country's nuclear weapons program and embarked on a much more autonomous role for France in both the European arena and NATO. De Gaulle acknowledged in 1961: "France proposes to recover the exercise of its full sovereignty -it is intolerable for a great state that its destiny be left to the decisions and actions of another state." 
8
14
independent from the forward battle that would be fought by the NATO allies.
France's withdrawal from the NATO integrated military structure was the natural corollary to such premises.  In order to preserve the government's liberty of action and to safeguard French interests in the Alliance, the cooperation policy will continue to repose on the three following principles:
-cooperation only involves conventional forces, and therefore excludes all nuclear force employment planning;
-no automatic commitment of French forces, which excludes in particular France receiving any peacetime responsibility for ground, sea or air zones and participating in what is called the 'forward battle'; -in the case of a commitment at NATO's side, French forces will remain grouped under national command and in directions or zones covering national territory. French strategists stress the value of the concept of "proportional deterrence," a concept whose meaning appears to be kept deliberately vague and imprecise in order to enable a surprise reaction. 
22
The French deterrence concept is founded on the need for a strictly "sufficient" nuclear arsenal. Deterrence for the French means not winning wars but preventing them. Mitterrand described it as, "keeping forces in a state of 'sufficiency' -in terms of quantity, quality, performance -so as to be capable of inflicting damage on the aggressor that would be at least equivalent to what he would stand to gain."2 2 4
The nuclear employment scenario would begin with the release of "pre-strategic" forces (previously termed "tactical weapons"), which are not intended to function as an extension of conventional weapons. They are delivered in a single strike and have enormous significance because they are considered the final "warning shot" before the strategic nuclear offensive begins. The balance between the nuclear and conventional forces is vital: conventional, pre-strategic nuclear and strategic nuclear forces all support and guarantee the security of one another. 28 Alan Riding, "France Concedes Its Faults In War," The New York Times, 8 May 1991, A7; Andrew Borowiec, "France Shocked Into Revamping Its Armed Forces," Washiinzgtonimu, 30 April 1991, 8.   29 Yost, "The French Way of War," 9. -. e events of 1989 proved to be a turning point in history of a magnitude that could not have been anticipated. In 1979, one author correctly predicted the upset of long-standing French assumptions that events in Europe have caused: "Only the reunification of Germany, whether neutralized or not, could in the short term shake the (current) feeling of continental security (that the French enjoy)."' 33 Not (only do the French have to contend with the reunification of Germany, but they must also come to terms with the collapse of Communist authority in Eastern Europe, the prospective withdrawal of Soviet forces from the region, and the imminent largescale reductions in the U.S. military and nuclear presence in Europe.
Faced in addition, are unprecedented pressures to reduce defense spending, to participate more fully in arms control initiatives, to review their nuclear doctrine and strategic force employment, and of its total defense budget to the Force de Frappe, while cutting spending on many conventional arms systems. 
45
There are also strong indications, as reflected in recent public-opinion polls, that the traditional domestic consensus on military spending priorities and defense issues is beginning to break up. Indeed, the debate has centered on such political issues as France's status as one of Western Europe's strongest military powers and its complex relationship with Germany. 
4 6
Indicative of this debate, France is said to be moving toward abandoning upgrades to one of the three branches of its nuclear strike force. The leg of the triad that would be neglected is viewed arms control with suspicion; a matter solely construed by the superpowers as a means of preserving their own status and power in view of the emergence of other independent nuclear powers. This suspicion has persisted to the present and can be seen in the French argument that, while there may be a conventional European balance, there is not a nuclear one -a statement obviously inspired by the French desire to avoid limitations and controls over their own nuclear deterrent. 5 1
The French recall four essential elements that must be met before their participation in arms control negotiations will occur:
1) asymmetric reductions of the superpower strategic arsenals that will result in a quantitative balance or parity; 2) stability which will guarantee that this new configuration of forces renders it impossible to launch surprise attacks or major offensives; 3) sufficiency in terms of the impossibility of one state to possess more than a specific percentage of the armed forces in Europe; and 4) transparency which will be secured by an information, and verification system, confidence-building measures and other initiatives. 
52
Prior to 1978, France's "empty chair" policy concerning arms control was clearly inhibiting its opportunity to shape East-  More often than not, the new ideas being articulated are doctrinally and ideologically revolutionary and could potentially lead to the greatest changes ever undertaken in Soviet military policy. Indeed, glasnost, perestroika and this "new political thinking" on security served as the catalyst necessary to upset the balance of power inherent in the post-war international order.
When President Gorbachev repudiated the expansionist Brezhnev Doctrine and elevated the issues of disarmament and detente to a high position on the international agenda, no European country paid more attention than France. As the only other country on the European continent to possess and control its own nuclear weapons, France stands to lose much in terms of its perceived rank and independence if arms control negotiations strip it of any significant numbers of its nuclear armament. In fact, more so than any other country 1.n the world, France has based her defense on the possession of a national nuclear armament, and therefore V as come to view arms control as more of a threat than a hope.
It is not surprising then that France remains the least pro-Gorbachev country in Europe. Although not immune to Gorbachcv's appeal, the French seem to have continued trust and a feeling of security in the old Cold War order. Yet as a result of French skepticism of the permanence or long-term impact of Gorbachev's "new political thinking", France could stand to be cut off from any emerging detente or have little say in defining the structure of a new European security order.
The problem for France is how to reconcile its historical suspicion of arms control and disarmament with the desire to not disassociate or isolate itself from any newly emerging partnerships and lose any leverage it may have with allies, and, above all, compromise its own diplomatic or strategic independence. In the French view, if the Soviet Union breaks up, Russia will remain the single largest military power in Europe, a power that necessarily must be somehow balanced. How to balance this great, and possibly still unfriendly, military power and, equally important, how to prevent a Russian-German entente, is clearly a problem that is high on the French security agenda.
In the past one hundred years, two great forces have largely influenced French policy toward Russia, and then, the Soviet Union:
the ideology of its regime; and its position as a candidate for continental hegemony. Even in the nineteenth century, before the communist revolution, the ideological element was present. One
French observer, the Marqvis de Custine, described Russia as a mysterious, closed, alien, and despotic society and a threat to the peace of Europe; as Custine put it, "the slave on his knees dreams of world empire." 6 1 Additionally, given the geographical situation,
France is neither directly dominated nor directly threatened by the Soviet Union (there are no common borders, no conflicts of territory, nor are there any conflicts of minorities), but at least in modern history there has existed a diplomatic interest in not alienating Russia.
Between 1870 and 1945, French foreign policy vis-a-vis Russia was tied intimately to the German "problem." The three formal alliances between France and Russia (1893, 1935 and 1945)  Europe" as a superpower tactic to maintain control over the continent. This led to an even greater quest for independence and a push for De Gaulle's idea of "Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals".
In the mid-1960's, De Gaulle turned to the oldest strategy in the French repertoire. Approaching the Soviet Union, De Gaulle offered himself as a partner in detente against the American "hegemon" and his West German "continental sword". Therefore, it would be logical to assume that the Soviet government would most likely view the French as a belligerent in any East-West conflict.
C. GLASNOST, PERESTROIKA AND "NEW POLITICAL THINKING"
The catalyst for Mikhail Gorbachev's thorough restructuring, "perestroika", of all aspects of Soviet lifesocial, political, moral and economic, was the Soviet Union's deepening economic crisis and the gradual but severe erosion of the ideological and moral values of its citizens. Attempts to modify socialism in the Soviet Union are not without precedent, although the magnitude of Gorbachev's reforms are certainly new. Between World War Two and Gorbachev's appointment as President in March 1985, the Soviet Union saw four main phases of reform. 
68
68 For a synopsis of these phases see Perestroika -And now for the hard part," The.,1goirnist, 28 April 1990, 9.
The purpose of perestroika is accelerated socio-economic development -to achieve the highest world levels of social productivity in the shortest possible time. Gorbachev calls perestroika an "urgent necessity" which arose as a result of processes of development in the Soviet socialist society. 
69
71
72
-War prevention as the fundamental component of Soviet military doctrine; -No war, nuclear as well as convetitional, can be considered a rational continuation of politics;
-Political means of enhancing security are more effective than military-technical means; -Security is indivisible: one nation's security cannot be enhanced by increasing other nations' insecurity;
-'reasonable sufficiency' should be the basis for the future development of combat capabilities vice military superiority;
-Soviet military strategy should be based on 'defensive defense' (non-provocative), vice offensive capabilities and operations. 
7 6
would limit its nuclear potential to levels of reasonable sufficiency. 
7 7
The French also define their deterrence doctrine in terms of reasonable sufficiency. They define reasonable sufficiency as the capacity of French strategic forces to inflict on the Soviets damage of such intensity so as to offset the advantage that the Soviets might gain by controlling France. 
78
Army General Dmitriy Yazov, USSR Min.,cer of Defense, discussed reasonable sufficiency in an article entitled "Warsaw Treaty Military Doctrine." His definition is generally shared by the majority of Soviet officials:
When we speak about maintaining the armed forces, our military potential within the limits of reasonable sufficiency, we mean that at the present stage the essence of sufficiency for the strategic nuclear forces of the Soviet Union is determined by the need to prevent an unpunished nuclear attack in any, even the most unfavourable situation. As far as conventional weapons are concerned, sufficiency envisages an amount and quality of armed forces and armaments which would be enough to reliably ensure collective defence of the socialist community. The limits of sufficiency are determined not by us but by the actions of the United States and NATO. The Warsaw Treaty member states do not strive for military superiority and do not claim greater security than other countries but they will never agree to lesser security and will never tolerate military Gorbachev introduced the concept of reasonable sufficiency as the basis of a purely defensive military doctrine. Although the Soviets have always maintained that their military doctrine was defensive, they acknowledged, however, that they would resort to offensive military force if the socialist world was ever threatened.
However, the new concept of defensive defense is a significant departure from this idea. According to one Western interpreter, "Defensive defense connotes a force posture and military strategy sufficient to repel a conventional attack, but incapable of conducting a surprise attack with massive offensive operations against the territory of the other side." 
80
98
Opinion polls suggest that no one doubts that the former GDR, following a transition to a market economy. will be just as able to 98 "A relationship in ttie balance," ne Eonoist, 6 Octeoe 1990, 53.
bring about an economic miracle as the Federal Republic of Germany was after the 1948 currency reform. 9 9
French apprehension centers on the idea that the new Germany will simply be too big and powerful to make a reliable partner in West European integration. This apprehension is manifest in Paradoxically, while government, intellectual and newspaper circles in Paris publicly supported and privately fretted over the idea of a unified Germany, opinion polls indicated that two of three 102 Mauriac as cited in "West German Survey," ITh.. 
cngmist, 28 October 1989, 4.
French citizens favored it.104 Distrust for Germany lingers among those who remember the war. Among those who are fearful, the young are much more confident than the middle-aged, and the main concern that is cited consistently is Germany's economic challenge.1 0 5
1.
The French Economy: From the 1980s to the Present For most of the 1980's, the French economy was declining: the economy was stalled and many of its well known companies were on the verge of collapse. But in the last few years of the decade, an economic bloom gave rise to new confidence everywhere. The French began to see themselves as a major economic power and some were beginning to cite France as, once again, the center of Europe.1 0 6 French investment was back on track, growing even faster than that of its European rivals. French industry became competitive again, exports rose substantially, consumer spending saw a boom, and forecasters notched up growth predictions to three percent. 
10 7
105 "They like it," 50. 106 Frank J. Comes, "France's bid to be President of Europe Inc.," Business Week, 25 April 1988, 76.   107 ibid. and it is projected to grow by 2.8 percent in 1991.108 For the first time in nearly 11 years, inflation in France could fall below that of Germany -to 2.9 percent. 10 9 France has become what most nations aspire to be -a low inflation, strong currency economy.
France has also been busily drafting ambitious new plans for a new Europe. French politicians argue that if the European Community becomes united economically by 1992, as planned by the Community's agenda, Paris would be the natural center and France the leading nation in this new economic order. Paramount to this idea of Pa'is becoming the European center is its necessarily simultaneous designation as the seat of Continental Europe's financial center. To this end, French officials have opened the door to futures and options trading and ended the monopoly trading rights of small French brokers. 1 1 0 This new French business ethic was intended to provide confidence building measures which would, in turn perhaps, enable France to gain ground against the growing German economy.
Notwithstanding the fact that France's economic might is smaller than, Germany's, some statistics on French production are relatively impressive. A country of 58 million people, France is the world's fourth largest exporter, fourth biggest capitalist economy, 108 "Paris Haven," The Su Times, 15 April 1990, D5; David Smith, "A tale of two economies," Ihk Sunday Time, 8 July 1990, 3/5; "World's Economic Growth Remains Sluggish," The Christian Science Mo.liMo, 7 September 1990, 8. 109 "Paris Haven," D5. 110 Comes, "France's bid," 80. and has the world's third largest nuclear arsenal. 1 1 I It is also the world's second largest producer of nuclear energy. Outwardly, at least, the French appear more sure of themselves than the people of any other European nation.
Yet, perhaps the French realize, more than any other nation, that much of being important depends on acting as if you are:
De Gaulle used this prestige principle to help France recover its selfconfidence after defeat in the second world war and the upheaval of decolonization in Indochina and Algeria.11 2 However bright this French economic picture appears, whether justified or not, it has not stifled fears about a large, economically powerful, German state in the center of Europe.
Reunification had two aspects: the forging of normal and ever tighter links between two societies and the merging of two states. 1 13 According to several well-publicized polls, the French welcome the prospect of a better way of life for the East Germans and are enthusiastic about its imminence. Yet the prospect of growing German power encites fears reminiscent of a Germany during World War Two.
What seemingly lies ahead for Germany is a potential economic giant capable of rising to be the dominating economic If we want to transcend these traditional rival J, then only one great thought, one great constructive enX,-,or, can take the place of all this. That could be a great mission for the European Communityif it is something that can prove to be stronger than everyone's desire to be master of his own village.1 2 3 Mitterrand's initiative is aimed at achieving De Gaulle's well-known objective of a Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals. However, if this initiative is successful, it will be a much more tightly knit Europe than the loose grouping of nations that De Gaulle had envisioned in the 1960s.
Mitterrand's view of unified Germany anchored tightly in the EC is a view shared by many Frenchmen as well as other Europeans. Klaus Harpprecht, a well known author and former speech writer for Willy Brandt, West German chancellor in the early 1970s, clarified this view:
The great problem of a united Germany in the past was that its weight overwhelmed the rest of Europe. Our neighbors wouldn't be quite so upset if the European Community had developed enough authority to counter-balance this fear today. The Warsaw Pact doesn't exist anymore, NATO is weakening as a force capable of providing this kind of order, and the only thing left is the European Community. The most urgent task before us is to accelerate steps toward European unity. 12 4 Helmut Schmidt, former West German chancellor, theorized that, "It was a major mistake not to create the European Germany was willing to be a real part of the European system." 
12 5
How the united Germans will use their economic power is, of course, the main question. It is unknown whether the EC will be able to survive in its present form or whether it will be strong enough to weather this storm and eventually evolve into a wider grouping that would amicably comprise Eastern as well as Western nations. Whether or not the EC is able to accomplish this consolidation of Eastern and Western nations, one major concern is whether it will become dominated by German economic and monetary power -what some term as a potential Fourth German Economic Reich. 
127
The would eventually govern a single currency which would supercede a!1 others including the Deutsche Mark. Then, in a surprising turn of events that once again raised questions of Germany's commitment to economic integration and monetary union, the German central bank increased interest rates in February 1991, in a move to make the country more attractive to international investors. German officials justified the move as necessary to counteract the inflationary potential of Chancellor Kohl's plans to finance the reconstruction of eastern Germany through intense public-sector borrowing, however, many foreign officials and economists overlooked the explanation and simply claimed that the Bundesbank was sending a message that national concerns continue to far outweigh any international considerations. 136 "There are those who think of others and there are those who think of themselves," claimed Pierre B&r6govoy, the French finance minister. 13 7 Another economist claimed that "the increase was a reminder that when these things (monetary union and economic integration) come about, it will be on Germany's terms and that for now, the Bundesbank can dictate policy to Europe." 
138
Since the French view tightening European links, particularly in the EC, as the means to rein in the increased economic and political power of the unified Germany, they are the most skeptical of Germany's current position in the European arena and the perceived low priority Germany has placed on European unity. For France, a
strong European identity bound tightly to European institutions is the only condition under which Germany should assume its new identity.
A former American Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, made the well known statement concerning post-World War Two Britain that it had lost an empire and not yet found a role. 
1 3 9
France. France certainly lost its empire some time ago and appears to have been struggling to make its place in the international system ever since.
137 ibid.
138 ibid.
Outwardly at least, the French appear more sure of themselves and their rank in the world than most other countries.
Yet talking of rank can be a sign that one is not sure of it. One example of this is the way the French judge themselves almost obsessively against German manufactured exports.:
For many years, Germany, although the stronger of the two powers economically, was content to play the subordinate role;
when the views of German leaders differed from those of France, they were often willing to defer to their partners, or at least refrain from carrying their opposition to extremes. France is adjusting very slowly to the fact that it is a middle-sized power. In realizing that their national market is too small to stand alone and that this "smallness" became amplified by the recently united German economic powerhouse, the French are once again learning to depend on their allies. In France, the "1992" prospect for creating a true common market in Europe has a special meaning that it lacks elsewhere in 'rope.
If Jean Monnet's postulate that political integration follows necessarily from economic integration is accepted, some exciting prospects lie ahead for Europe. Perhaps General de Gaulle's
Europe of a 'Concert of Powers' hinged on economic integration may yet lie somewhere in the near futureperhaps 1992. Faced with certain U.S. military and nuclear force reductions in Europe, a united Germany whose future role in NATO and the EC the French view as unpredictable, the formal conclusion to the Cold War, and the uncertain political and economic future of the Soviet Union and the East European nations, the long-standing foundations of French security policy have been unprecedently shaken. Thus, the uncertainty of events and a growing realization of its own limitations in discerning its future role in the newly evolving international order, are conditioning France's approach in the current political aiena.
French policy-makers believe that despite movements in the USSR toward democratization and economic liberalization, Russia's great military power must still be offset by Western military power.
A largely unpredictable Soviet future has led President Mitterrand to warn that "nothing can guarantee that a new Soviet power -which might not be communist -wouldn't still be military and totalitarian, and that would be a great danger."'1 4 3 However, the French also recognize the need to prevent the Soviet Union from feeling isolated in a rapidly evolving anti-communist world.
These same desires for democratization and economic liberalization are advanced for the East European countries, who are increasingly subscribing to membership in the EC as a means to obtain this democratization and economic liberalization. However, the French have led discussions in the EC aimed at protecting it from dilution of its political goals that current enlargement would bring.
Of great importance to the French is the goal of keeping Germany firmly tied to Western institutions, specifically NATO, the EC, and the WEU. Indeed, France deems the future of these institutions as determined by German choices. 1 4 4 Naturally France would prefer to keep or obtain the leadership role or a shared leadership role in each of these institutions.
Finally, and above all, France would like to maintain the status quo with respect to its perceived special status including its independence, autonomy of decision and freedom of action. In order to accomplish this goal, it is viewed as essential to maintain the U.S.
commitment to Europe, and NATO is seen as the organization most likely to ensure this commitment.
ALTERNATIVES FOR A NEW SECURITY ORDER
In 1952, in the midst of the Cold War, Stalin suggested to the Germans that reunification could possibly be offered in return for neutrality. Bonn flatly rejected the offer as it did again 40 years later when President Gorbachev suggested this as the price for unity.
Although neutrality appeared initially attractive to some Frenchmen, it was later determined potentially the most destabilizing of all options.
Although Germany is currently tied to NATO, the French fear that continued or unchanged participation in NATO cannot be guaranteed. The French perceive that German leaders may soon insist that full sovereignty and the "normalization" of Germany's status dictate the removal of most, if not all, foreign military troops and nuclear weapons including those based on aircraft. Germany has renounced this.1 4 7 This in turn is a short step from the development of a nationalistic military policy or the attempt to organize a "Mitteleuropa" security zone under German hegemony.
If Germany begins to loosen ties with NATO and pursue a more independent political path, there is also concern that a German- France initially championed such ideas as evidchacc ,i
Soviet "new thinking." Mittenand had long held similar ideals oi "European Confederation," although the specifics of which have never been identified. However, the enthusiasm of some Germans. notably Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher who began speculating ":')Ut "transcending the alliances" in this "all European peace "'rdc,." ,. would produce "collective security,"'151 provoked concern among the French who began to see this movement as another Soviet attempt to break up NATO and de-couple the U.S. from Europe.
The French acknowledge the value of the CSCE in giving the East European countries and the Soviet Union an organization to assist in tho transition to democratic societies. However, the French consensus has been that fur the immediate future, the CSCE is woefully inadequate to assume primary responsibility for a stable European peaceits cumbersome size and unanimity rule yield too many uncertainties to serve as a basis for real 41ability.
Recently, in an attempt to strengthen the CSCE by institutionalizing it, it was agreed that the CSCE should accomplish European nations that the organization replace the NATO alliance and the nearly defunct Warsaw Pact as Europe's main military security structure.15 3
The French share the position that although it has been agreed to grant the CSCE increased authority and powers, it will still be too weak to guarantee a meaningful American political and military presence on the continent besides having few institutional safeguards that could play an effective role in prospective crises.
Hence, the CSCE remains inadequate to provide a sufficient basis to radically alter the Western alliance system.
In the current flux in international relations, many French officials are championing the idea that the European Community should transform itself from a purely economic and trading organization into a political and ',ater a security entity with a common defense policy. Indeed, France has been one of the major proponents t1eli.d the campaign for an EC political role. Yet a pi,4hcal or security role for the EC is incoiisistent with the French necessity to maintain natiotial decision-making autonomy. Indicative of this inconsistency, President k ,terrand, who views the EC as a means of "hinding in" Europe's cc. )omic, military and political links, stops short of promoting the EC a-, a security organization which would -usurp more than a 'little of h nati.ni's sovereignty.
The renewed emphasis on continuing political cohesion in the EC occurred when the prospect of German reunification became a reality. In order for the EC to assume the responsibilities of a collective security organization, a political union would have to occur whereby the members contribute to a common European stance towards security matters on the continent and abroad. While the ultimate institutional structure of this European political ur"on is uncertain, it would by necessity include most of the traditional responsibilities of a nation-state, with responsibility for external security and stability being among the most important. 
15 4
Supporters of European unity were critical of the EC's disregard of the crisis after the Iraqi President ignored the 12 nations' eleventh hour attempt to avert war by final diplomatic measures. After Hussein's refusal to comply with the 15 January UN deadline to withdraw his troops from Kuwait, Britain, France and Germany pursued independent, and often divergent, policies in the region. These independent moves by EC members led the current EC president, Jacques Poos, Luxembourg's foreign minister to state that the war has demonstrated "the political insignificance of Europe," and 154 Christopher Bertram, "The German Question,"' Eugn. [AWj,, Spring 1990, 55.  the Belgian foreign minister to concede that "Europe is an economic giant, a political dwarf and a military worm." 
155
When the Iraqi President spurned French peace proposals as well,
Mitterrand too placed the French troops under the command of U.S.
forces.
The German response to thc crisis, however, was the most surprising. Political analysts are now claiming that Bonn, in displaying a clear determination to sit out the Gulf War with the least possible involvement, has raised strong doubts about whether it can muster the political resolve to play the major role in European security that ts position as Europe's prime economic power would seem to dictate. 15 7 One Dutch analyst claimed: "Only months ago Europe was worried that a newly reunified Germany would dominate the continent -now the European fear is that Germany is not reliable in a crisis." 158 Perhaps the most stinging criticism, though, came from the Turkish president, Turgut Ozal, who was angered by Germany's hesistation over whether to join NATO in militarily defending Turkey against a potential Iraqi attack. "I think," he said, "Germany has become so rich that it has completely lost its fighting spirit." 159 Some have explained the divergent responses across Europe as simply distinct and varied public opinion tied closely to historical phenomenon: British and French citizens expect international roles for their countries, whereas German and also Spanish citizens reflect strong veins of anti-interventionist sentiment.160 A recent poll in Germany suggests many Germans are opposed to an international role for their country, while the country they most admired as a model for Germany was rich and neutral Switzerland. 1 6 1
In spite of such polls and recent German passivity to the crisis in the Gulf, German policy makers insist that Germany will remain bound to European institutions. Indicative of this was the recent launching of a new plan for a common security policy by the foreign ministers of France and Germany. The plan calls for a "progressive development of an organic relationship" between the EC and the WEU which would lead, by 1996, to a decision on their integration.1 6 2 Until 1996, the WEU would be tasked with deciding Currently, the debate is ongoing as to whether the EC should concentrate its efforts on assuming this political and security role or concentrate on an all-European trade and monetary arrangement. If it chose to sponsor a larger economic framework, it could incorporate not only the remaining advanced industrial countries of Western Europe, but also the newly forming democratic countries of Eastern Europe currently attempting to adopt markettype economies. In this case, the EC's charter would be limited to facilitating internal economic interaction and protecting the economic interests of all its members. If the EC chose to evolve into a security organization, its membership would necessarily be restricted to the current level for some period of time.
The French desire is that the EC maintain the momentum of political cohesion and concentrate its energies to complete its union. Any enlargement that could slow down the process or Jilutc.
the political will must be postponed until the EC has definitely agreed on its future structure. Another area the French refuse to support which in turn could have the effect of undermining Alliance continuity is the idea of multi-national corps for NATO. The Alliance's July 1990 decision to reshape the army corps along multi-national lines made up of national units was viewed by most allies as making a continued foreign military presence more palatable to host nations, and particularly, to the German public. However, the French saw the initiative as operationally problematic and politically undesirable.
They believe such a structure would deepen integration under U.S.
authority, postponing a necessary and long overdue adjustment of EuropeaniAmericari leadership responsibilities.17 5
Howei r, the French have also not been particularly
supportive of the idea of a specifically West European defense force. 17 6 This new scheme of a European army under EC auspices could again have the effect oi usurping French autonomy of decision.
Overall, rather than supporting vehicles which would be of utility in advancing their own political goals, the French instead are continuing to spout the Gaullist rhetoric of the ultimate French duty to uphold its rank.
The ultimate vision for French security policy is a stronger, more autonomous West European defense posture centered around close Franco-German relations and a diminished European The French have also been annoyed with the Germans over a series of incidents: Kohl's sudden announcement of his 10-177 Among numerous sources on this subject see: "A relationship in the balane." Jk.omiL 6 point plan for German unity without prior consultation with his allies; his hesitation over the Polish frontier; his push for German economic unity without concern for the EC's monetary union; and his direct dealings with Gorbachev during their July 1990 summit. 
178
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990 and the events that occurred since then have destroyed France's claim to have a special relationship with the Arab world in general, and Iraq in particular. France's daily tactical oscillations over the course of the crisis, including the final hours which preceded the allied air attack on Iraq, provided telling signs of a nation deeply mired in a strategic quandary. The fluidity of the situation in the Gulf since 2 August, indeed the fluidity of the emerging international system as a whole, have raised the necessity of tightening links between France and the United States. However, although an identity of interests between the two states seems to be emerging both in the Gulf and beyond, France's "Atlantic option" is not a choice that will be readily accepted in a society still mesmerized by the Gaullist ideals of nationalism and independence.  205 Riding, "France Puts Force Under U.S.," A10.
will spell out the objectives that we consider just, and no one will give us orders." 20 6
The French claim their interests are founded on an acute awareness that Europe's, and particularly their own, historical, in this period of uncertainty, France must maintain its own defense capability. Those who adhere to this line argue further that there now exists the possibility that NATO could abandon its concept of nuclear deterrence for conventional defense. This would be in total conflict with the fundamental premise of French defense policy:
deterrence based on the threat of nuclear retaliation.
The recent Gulf war has only reinforced the idea that conventional defense is more applicable today than nuclear deterrence. France's participation in the war and its desire to work closely with the United States has led to a remarkable improvement in relations between the two nations. This warming of relations has apparently even survived in the wake of the war with France signaling its desire to forego any "different" policy to which it had previously alluded, and to instead maintain an approach to the Middle East conflict similar to that of the U.S.
Yet this French warming to American policy choices cannot be said to have resolved French ambivalence: France's Gulf policy was resolved in favor of the Allies as a matter of practicality rather than any assured long-term ideological commitment to U.S. policy goals.
Ironically, where under strict Gaullist traditions, French policy choices were previously fairly predictable; now they appear to be totally unpredictable.
Although changes in policy are undoubtedly occurring, French security choices remain as beforeelusive.
In the final analysis, French security policy remains at a crossroads: the choice is one of pursuing the present course of stressing France's special status based on her traditional nuclear deterrence policy, or firmly acknowledging that the road to enhanced security is through greater cooperation with her NATO and other European allies. What is apparent to date is that although the French purport to espouse the second choice of deeper cooperation through extended bilateral and multilateral cooperation efforts, their actions continue to encourage the now unsatisfactory status quo arrangement. France remains unwilling to return to the NATO integrated military command and French defense policies continue to be largely national and independent.
The French are in agreement with the Allied consensus that a pan-European structure, such as the CSCE, is largely inadequate to assume the security functions currently performed by NATO. They also believe that argument holds true for the WEU, the EC, or any other existing bilateral or multilateral security arrangement because unlike NATO, they cannot guarantee the U.S. commitment to Europe.
Given that the French acknowledge the value, indeed the necessity, of NATO for their national security, the over-riding question becomes why do French officials continue to undermine, or at least refuse to participate in, efforts to maintain NATO's legitimacy?
The only apparent answer to this question is that it is easier for the French to maintain the comfortable and successful status quo, which allows them to claim autonomy of decision and a special status in the world, than to make the painful adjustment inherent in recognition of the current international circumstances.
Yet by failing to recognize the need to abandon the Gaullist rhetoric of independence and a privileged world rank, France may miss the opportunity to play a leading role in constructing a new European security order. Failing to adapt to changing international circumstances and recognize the increasing unsustainability of French independent national security policies, may lead to France's isolation and her subsequent adoption of more nationalistic policies. Some authorities have asserted that a similar reaction could occur if certain supranational elements of the EC's political union, or even perceived German domination of the current EC structure, seem to threaten
France's national identity and decision-making autonomy. Further bilateral and multilateral cooperation efforts in the nuclear, logistic and reinforcement areas would free money for the strengthening of conventional military forces -something which the recent Gulf war has proven is becoming increasingly necessary. A related issue is a need for re-examination of France's nuclear doctrine and a revised policy which would rely less on a nuclear response to threats and more on a conventional one.
As a leading European nation, France could play a major role in reshaping Europe in accordance with its own national security objectives. Do Gaulle's ideals fostered a strong impression of French independence and rank, and enabled France to restore its pride and prestige after World War Two. However, the Gaullis.t myth of French grandeur and independence as a great world power can no longer be sustained. The advantage of increased security through a strengthening of ties with NATO, Western and even non-Western
After De
After De
position. A central objective of De Gaulle's "Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals" was to distance France from NATO, meanwhile reducing the American presence in Europe and inducing Russia to relax its rule and reduce its own presence in Eastern Europe; thereby opening the way for a reassertion of national autonomies and European influence, particularly French influence. 6 4 Ironically, history has now taken a new twist: other countries, most notably Germany and the United States have assumed this Gaullist path of detente and bilateral relations with the Soviet Union. Now it is France that is warily reminding its allies of the still-present Soviet threat, the corresponding necessity of maintaining a military balance, and of the danger of decoupling the United States from Europe. B. FRENCH SECURITY POLICY PRIOR TO GORBACHEV'S "NEW "Proportional deterrence" protects France against Soviet aggression through the use of tactical nuclear warning shots at France's frontiers that will convince the Soviets of France's willingness to execute its counter-city threats. 6 5 Should the Soviets in return choose to strike France's air bases and IRBM's, then France would, almost certainly, strike Soviet cities with its surviving SLBM's and bombers. In effe-ct, France's threat of nuclear retaliation alone can deter the Soviet Union from attacking France because the damage France could cause from targeting Soviet cities exceeds what the Soviets would stand to gain in conquering or destroying France. 65 Yost, "The French Way of War," 16. 66 Yost, "France's Deterrent Posture, Part I, 15.
position. A central objective of De Gaulle's "Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals" was to distance France from NATO, meanwhile reducing the American presence in Europe and inducing Russia to relax its rule and reduce its own presence in Eastern Europe; thereby opening the way for a reassertion of national autonomies and European influence, particularly French influence. 6 4 Ironically, history has now taken a new twist: other countries, most notably Germany and the United States have assumed this Gaullist path of detente and bilateral relations with the Soviet Union. Now it is France that is warily reminding its allies of the still-present Soviet threat, the corresponding necessity of maintaining a military balance, and of the danger of decoupling the United States from Europe. B. FRENCH SECURITY POLICY PRIOR TO GORBACHEV'S "NEW "Proportional deterrence" protects France against Soviet aggression through the use of tactical nuclear warning shots at France's frontiers that will convince the Soviets of France's willingness to execute its counter-city threats. 6 5 Should the Soviets in return choose to strike France's air bases and IRBM's, then France would, almost certainly, strike Soviet cities with its surviving SLBM's and bombers. In effe-ct, France's threat of nuclear retaliation alone can deter the Soviet Union from attacking France because the damage France could cause from targeting Soviet cities exceeds what the Soviets would stand to gain in conquering or destroying France. 65 Yost, "The French Way of War," 16. 66 Yost, "France's Deterrent Posture, Part I, 15.
92 "A Neighbor's View," Jime, 2 April 1990, 31.
92 "A Neighbor's View," Jime, 2 April 1990, 31.
128 Dick Leonard, "Pocket Guide to the European Community," The EconomistPubligatio&, with a Foreward by Roy Jcnkins, 1989, 3-4. said 133 David S. Yost, "Franco-German Defense Cooperation," final draft -NoveriVr 1988, 39. and nurturing a new friendship with the Soviet Union has distracted
181 William Drozdiak, "France Denounces Iraq's Offer," The Washinmon Post 24 August 1990, A31. President in 1981.182 Although some have severely criticized the WashjngtaongPsg, 16 September 1990, A38. 185 Lewis, "Mitterrand's Posturing," A19. 93 avoid raising the specter of a 194 "Still in step, mostly," The Economist, 27 October 1990, 53.
181 William Drozdiak, "France Denounces Iraq's Offer," The Washinmon Post 24 August 1990, A31. President in 1981.182 Although some have severely criticized the WashjngtaongPsg, 16 September 1990, A38. 185 Lewis, "Mitterrand's Posturing," A19. 93 avoid raising the specter of a 194 "Still in step, mostly," The Economist, 27 October 1990, 53.
Diego A. Ruiz Palmer, "France." Draft paper for presentation at the conference on Force Mobilization. the Revolutions of 1989, and the Future of European Security, National Defense University, Washington, D.C., 19-21 June 1990, 1-2.
William Drozdiak, "Miuerrand, Kohl  Stepping Up Pace Without Britain," The Washington Post,
November 1990, A14.
Steven Philip Kramer, "France Fares the New Europe.` Cunt His1, November 1990, 365.
David S. Yost. "The French Way of War," Essay presented at the Conference of the International StudiesAssociation, Philadelphia, 18-21 March 1981, 5.   
Jim Hoagland, "Revive la Francel" The Washington Post National Wee?/Jv.Editiol, 30 July-5 August  1990, 24.    
De Gaulle as cited in Yost, "The French Way of War," 8,
Diego A. Ruiz Palmer, "Between the Rhine and the Elbe: France and the Conventional Defense of Central Europe," CurrentNews, No. 1695, 2 March 1988, 474.    
Jean.Baptiste Duroselle, "General de Gaulle's Europe and Jean Monnet's Europe," in TN International Actors: The U.N. and the E.E.C., eds. Carol Ann Cosgrove and Kenneth J. Twitchett(London: Macmillan, 1970), 191.   
Lemnitzer as cited in Yost, "France and Conventional Defense in Central Europe," 59.
David S. Yost, "French Defense Budgeting: Executive Dominance and Resource Constraints," b,Fall 1979, 579.    
Giscard d'Estaing as cited in Yost, "French Defense Budgeting," 584.. 2 2 For a review of various definitions of this concept see Yost, "France's Deterrent Posture." 15.
Speech of M. Roland Dumas, Ministre DEtat, French Minister of Foreign Affairs, before the Senate, 27 June 1990, as cited in Sneeches and Statements, Sp.St/LON/92/90.
Michael Mandelbaum (New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1988), 29.
2 Pierre Hassner, "The View from Paris," in Eroding Emjire -Western Relations with Eastern Eurone, ed., Lincoln Gordon (Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1987), 145. 63 Roger Morgan, West Euronean Politics since 1945: The Shaping of the European Community (London: B.T. Batsford Ltd, 1972), 161. 64 Hassner, "France and the Soviet Union," 33.
Stephen M. Meyer, "The Sources and Prospects of Gorbachev's New Political Thinking on Security," InternationaL Security, Fall 1988, 129."74 William E,Odom, "Soviet Military Doctrine," ForeignAffair, Winter 1988/89, 129.   
Nov 1989, K-2.
"Yazov writes on Pact Military Doctrine," FBIS-JPRS-UMA-88-005, Warsaw Pact, 10 March 1988, 25.
Meyer, "The Sources and Prospects," 150.
David S. Yost, "Evolving French Attitudes on NATO and European Security," paper presented at the Naval Postgraduate School,Monterey, CA., 18 July 1990, 4.   
Palmer, "France," 4.   
Nelan, "Anything to Fear?" 32.    
De Gaulle as cited in "They like it and they fear it," Ibe.Ecno ist,27 January 1990, 50.   
"Deeper, still and deeper,"  .LQEcnmist,  16 December 1989, 51.    
Jetter, "French fears," 2.   
Community and the New Euroean Agenda (London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1989), 24-25.
Karen Elliott House and E.S. Browning, "Mitterrand Sees Europe at the Crossroads," wall Stree Ju.iml, 22 November 1999, A6.
"West German Survey," 12.
William Drozdiak, "French, Germans Reach  Fork in Path of European History," Tebing1on B29, 22 September 1990, A17; Ian Murray, "Germans look for fuller role by France on unity," Tbeimes 18 September 1990, 14.
Ferdinand Protzman, "Germany Siands Alone on Rates," TUe New York Times, 11 February 1991, C2.
"The French way," 33.
Leonard, "Pocket Guide," 8.   
David S. Yost, "Evolving French Attitudes," 1.
David S. Yost, "France in the New Europe," Foreign Affajj,Winter 1990Winter  /1991, 109.   , 109.    
ibid., 115.
Richard Perle, "The Right Kind of Missile Ban for Europe," The Wall Street Journal, I May 1990, A20.
George de 1-wia, "Eumpe se wks U)bo twJer security wi viio ;A,-.vfAnn center," ChicagnTibb i q, 3 October 199). 9.
Craig R. Whitney, "Gull Fighting Shatters Europeans' Fragile Unity," The Ngw York Times," 25 January 1991, A7.
"A light is dimmed," T.heEmmist, 19 January 1991, 48.15 7 "Gulf War:. European unity fails its first test," Jane's DefenceWeekly, 9 February 1991, 117.   158 ibid.   
Howard LaFranchi, "Europeans Fall Short of Common Foreign Policy," The Christian Science Monitor, 28 January 1991, 3.
ibid.
"Of bridges, pillars and canals," e, 9 February 1991, 52.
2 Ian Gambles, "Prospects for West European Security Co-operation," Adelphi Papggis.24-, Autumn   1989, 26.   
John Newhouse. "The Diplomatic Round," Thf New Yorkr. 27 August 1990, 87.   
Preparing the oath for a European army," JAW's Defencl Weekly, 5 January 1991, 15; David Marsh, "Boim conccrn ever Paris defence stance." FjaLTjmels.1 Ociober 1990, 40.   
October 1990. 54: and Yost. "France and the New Europe." 112. For the French puIl-out from Germany see. JAC Lcwis. "France to begin force pull-ct," Jane's Defence Weekly. I Scepimbcr 199U. 301; JAC Lewis, "France moves on German pull-ou," Jane's Defence Weekly, 24 November 1990. l011.
"A relationship," The EconomisL. 54; Yost, "France and the New Europe," 112.
6  Drozdiak, "France Sends Independent," A26. 187 ibid.
Drozdiak, "France Denounces," A29. Also see William Drozdiak, "Use of Force Authorized By France," The Washington Post 20 August 1990, A15.
Stuart Wavell, "Breaking up is hard to do as Paris enc"l 20 year love affair with Baghdad," The Sunday Times, 26 August 1990, 1/10a.
Howard LaFranchi, "Iraq Woos France With Hostage Release," Christian Science Monitor, 13 October 1990. 3.
Howard LaFranchi and Francine S. Kiefer, "Antiwar Sentiment Gains Ground in France and Germany," Christian Science Monitor, 18 January 1991, 6.
Jim Hoagland, "Germany: Timidity in a Time of Crisis," Washington Post National Weekly Edition,   4-10 February 1991, 28.    
Alan Riding, "French Defense Chief Quif , Opposing Allied War Goals," The New York Times, 30    January 1991, A7.
Alan Riding, "French Seem  Willing to Work With U.S. in the Middle East," The New York Times, 14 March 1991, A7: Andrew Rosenthal, "Bush and Mitterrand Urnted On Peace, Divided on Process," Ih~c New York Times, 15March 1991, A7; "Rapprochement," I71Lcnomis , 16 March 1991, 20.   
Hassner, "The View from Paris," 191.   
For a discussion of these possibilities see, Yost, "France and the New Europe," 123.125.
proposal for European unity would be a complement to NATO -NATO must still be maintained to ensure the U.S. commitment to Europe.
The recent proposal presented by the French and German governments and strongly endorsed by the Italians which would push the EC into political union called for: merging the EC with the Western European Union or WEU; strengthening the European Council of Ministers; and taking all foreign policy and defense decisions by majority vote. 16 6 Although majority voting on all foreign and defense issues would give France the right of veto, the French would still be required to surrender some national sovereignty. Even though this would be inconsistent with the Frenci demand for national decision-making autonomy, France reportedly was ready to do this.1 6 7 However, the French scheme would not merge the WEU with the EC immediately -only in the long term would it be gradually fused with the EC's political cooperation procedures. 
16 8
Equally important, the French also realize that their future lies in redefining and improving relations with the U.S., which as the current crisis plainly revealed, remains the undisputed leader of the world.
institutions, must come at the cost of a less independent role 