# ID: 86436e59c76540c39922f6fb147b0445
# Title: Multi-Domain Operations: The Army's Future Operating Concept for Great Power Competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Enduring and emerging powers are reshaping the geopolitical landscape by heavily investing in military modernization programs to achieve domain overmatch, physical stand-off, and superiority in military power. The Department of Defense published the Defense Innovation Initiative in 2014 to identify and invest in innovative ways to sustain and advance America's military dominance for the twenty-first century. Through the initiative, the Department of Defense developed a third "offset" strategy to contend in great power competition and win during armed conflict. The US Army developed a new future operating concept called Multi-Domain Operations in order to support the new defense strategy, drive modernization, and prepare for the future fight. Multi-Domain Operations theory proposes three interrelated tenets that solve the problem of contested domains and Anti-Access/Aerial Denial threats presented by Chinese and Russian operations in conflict. Those tenets are calibrated force posture, multi-domain formations, and convergence. This monograph examines the efficacy of the three Multi-Domain tenets through the lens of a historical case study -Solomon Island Campaign during World War II. The case study will help drive discussion, analysis, and further refinement of the operating concept with military professionals.
sacrifices of living geographically separated while I attended SAMS. My wife, Sara, has and will always be my main source of happiness and strength. Your untiring dedication and devotion to raising an incredible family, mostly on your own, while managing a career in education, is inspiring and extraordinary. I could never do what I love to do without your absolute support.
I would also like to recognize COL Ryan Connelly who provided this unique opportunity to attend SAMS, which has been one of the most professionally rewarding educational experiences of my life. I would not have ever attended SAMS without your intervention in my professional development as an officer, planner, and leader. I hung on every word spoken during our long conversations in person or over the phone. Thank you for believing in me and investing in my future. I will forever be grateful for your leadership and insightful perspective on warfighting.
I want to express thanks to Dr. Davis for your mentorship, guidance, and constructive critique in helping me navigate through the research process and writing this body of work.
Without your oversight and professional advice, I would have never been able to cross the finish line.
Finally, I would like to show my gratitude to COL Yannick Michaud for one of the best years of my life in exploring and experimenting with history, theory, and doctrine. You brilliantly orchestrated and delivered a world-class education and curriculum that exponentially expanded my curiosity of life and our military profession. Your thought-provoking lectures, ideas, and opinions were instrumental in guiding me from the cave to the light. I will eternally be grateful for the time and articulate care you selflessly spent on our personal and professional     
While we cannot predict the future, we can be certain that our Nation will continue to call on America's Army. Going forward, we will be an Army in transition. An Army that will apply the lessons learned in recent combat as we prepare for evolving threats.
-General Raymond T. Odierno, ADP 1 The Army, 2012
Is World War III cresting the horizon as international relations and competition between great powers lay in the balance of the global commons? As enmity between great powers such as the United States, China, and Russia begin to grow through competition for economic resources, geographic sovereignty, and military superiority all in the name of national interests; the US military faces complex and ill-defined challenges if pitted against a foreign conventional military with matched capability and strength. The fictional book, Ghost Fleet by P.W. Singer and August
Cole conjures a terrifying and plausible future where the United States finds itself in a global war against a peer superpower. China, assisted by Russia, gain dominance in the western Pacific by leveraging a massive cyber-attack via malware in Chinese-made microchips that infects the Defense Intelligence Agency, subsequently rendering all US military command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence networks obsolete allowing for a bloody attack on Pearl Harbor and occupation of the Hawaiian Islands. In the twenty-first century version of the Cold War, US veterans organize into an insurgency called the North Shore Mujahedeen, teenage computer hackers battle in digital playgrounds, Silicon Valley billionaires mobilize for cyberwarfare in space to neutralize Chinese satellite warfare, and old warships from the navy reserve fleet forms a "Ghost Fleet" to fight the Chinese at sea. 
1
2
Admiral James Stavridis, United States Navy (Retired) Supreme Allied Commander of NATO said "Ghost Fleet is a startling blueprint for the wars of the future."
3
The US Army faces new challenges as transformation begins across the US military to confront emerging global threats in an era of great power competition. Seventeen years of protracted conflict on two different fronts in Iraq and Afghanistan eroded the US comparative military advantage in great power competition and conflict. 
4
7
The research question this study explores is whether the tenets of MDO (convergence, force posture, and multi-domain formations) are critical components for achieving strategic objectives in future armed conflict against a near peer adversary. Examination of the MDO concept through the lens of a historical case study will benefit assessment of the applicability of MDO to the future operating security environment. The study investigates three hypotheses to support the thesis in order to conclude that MDO tenets are applicable to defeating a near peer adversary in future armed conflict. To do so, this study uses the Solomon Islands Campaign from August 1942 to January 1943 to examine how the US military conducted MDO concepts, albeit less domains than the US Army anticipates fighting in. The first hypothesis is the Allies' force posture within the Pacific Theater set conditions to prevent the Japanese from maintaining the initiative to achieve a fait accompli campaign. The second hypothesis considers the composition, capabilities, and resiliency of multi-domain formations that enhances semi-independent maneuver. The third hypothesis examines the Allies ability to conduct convergence by integrating capabilities to create windows of advantage while exercising mission command to maximize disciplined initiative. An historical analysis of the Solomon Island Campaign provides evidence that the Allies operationalized force posture to prevent the Japanese from achieving a fait accompli campaign in the Pacific theater of operations, employed resilient multi-domain formations to allow semi-independent maneuver, and achieved convergence to created windows of advantage for Allied forces that ultimately lead to the defeat of the Japanese Empire.
The research presented in this monograph includes six sections to evaluate the efficacy of MDO tenets in the future operating security environment. The first section introduces the problem, research question, and thesis of the monograph. The second section consists of a literature review of both contemporary publications on MDO theory and historical literature on the Solomon Islands Campaign. The third section outlines the methodology in assessing the significance of MDO through the lens of the Solomon Islands case study. The fourth section explains the central idea of MDO and the problem MDO attempts to solve in conducting operations against a matched adversary. The fourth section also provides an understanding of the operational and strategic factors that drove the conception of the MDO concept and the requirement to create a future operating concept. The fourth section also defines the three tenets of MDO and other terminology critical to understanding the central idea of MDO in the context of armed conflict while providing a comparison to a previous AOC -AirLand Battle. The fifth section consists of the analysis of the Solomon Islands case study, assessment of the hypotheses, and answers to the research questions. The final section is a review of the findings, applicability to the future fight, recommendations for additional research, and final conclusions.
The whole purpose of the Third Offset Strategy is to identify the technologies, identify the operational and organizational constructs, the new operational concepts to fight our future adversaries.
-Deputy Secretary of Defense Robert J. Work, Speech at the Army War College
The purpose of this literature review is to provide a description of existing literature, identify any potential gaps in the current literature, and provide recommendations for further research and discoveries in MDO theory. The literature review consisted of two categories: contemporary literature on MDO theory and historical literature of the Solomon Island Campaign.
Multi-domain operations is a concept for future operations that provides a "system of fundamental beliefs" in the nature of war to describe how military practitioners should apply  collaboration between services. Other than a co-authored white paper between the Army and Marines published in January 2017, there is little multi-domain literature that illustrates collaboration between services, other than existing Joint doctrine. A future concept that emphasizes convergence across all domains should champion cooperation and partnership to ensure unity of effort. The cyber and space domain are relative new to the Department of Defense (DoD) resulting in a lack of literature. A literature shortfall is research dedicated to understanding the space and cyber domains that develop a greater understanding how military professionals can integrate these capabilities in the land domain. Like any new concept, as more experimentation, discussion, and analysis becomes available the concept will evolve and a greater body of literature will encapsulate the concept more in depth.
The second category of research focused on the historical content of the Solomon Island Campaign in which there is a plethora of publications. Historians have written hundreds of books on the Pacific theater. The official histories undertaken by the US military services remain valuable starting points. Authors such as Wesley Craven and James Cate for the Air Force, Samuel E. Morison from the Navy, and John Miller, Jr. for the Army provide volumes of detailed accounts of the operations during the Pacific Operations of World War II due to direct access to primary sources immediately following the end of the war. Each services official history presents bias towards their own service, but underlying themes in tactics, strategy, and logistics prevail.
The gap in the official history is the inter-service relationships at the command level most likely to protect the professional character of the officers involved. The official histories acknowledges differences in proposed strategies from each service, but do not share details on specific interpersonal relationships and how their bias impacted operations. Each official history does illustrate the structure of command and generally concludes that cooperation among services was a key to strategic success, although a more extensive account of how the generals faced competing interests and overcame service parochialism would be helpful for future commanders in a highly domain federated environment. Another research gap is how US forces interacted with multinational Allies and partners. Most historical narratives focus on the operations of the US forces and gloss over the contributions, participation, and results of the multinational partners.
There is a vast amount of publications in the general histories of the Pacific War during War World II that discusses the Solomon Island Campaign usually as a section or chapter of the overall history of the war. However, several authors have dedicated their entire work specifically to the Solomon Island Campaign like John Prados, Richard Frank, Joseph Wheelan, and William Bartsch. Richard Franks' book titled Guadalcanal: The Definitive Account of the Landmark Battle is an excellent source in quantitatively comparing the composition, disposition, and strength of each side before, during, and after the campaign.
11
12
13
14
The military student does not seek to learn from history the minutiae of method and technique. In every age these are decisively influenced by the characteristics of weapons currently available and by means at hand for maneuvering, supplying, and controlling combat forces. But research does bring to light those fundamental principles and their combinations and applications, which in the past, have been productive of success. These principles have no limitation of time. Consequently, the army extends its analytical interest to the dust buried accounts of wars long past as well as to those still reeking with the scent of battle.
-General Douglas MacArthur, Joint Military Operations Historical Collection
The methodology applied to support the central argument is a historical case study of a multinational and joint operation during World War II in the Solomon Islands Campaign through the lens of MDO theory. The goal of this study is to provide a general assessment of how the tenets of MDO provide a solution to contested domains in relation to a historical case. The aim is to determine if the proposed tenets have historical relevance that leads to strategic success in the operational environment. The purpose of the research is to identify qualitative data that contributed to the success of the historical operations resembling MDO. The monograph then compares the findings of the research to the beliefs of MDO theory in order to test the hypotheses. Lawrence Freedom postulates in The Future of War that great powers must "stay alert and prepare properly for the upcoming tests," but the whole character of war will not change dramatically making historical case studies useful in testing the theory of future operating concepts. 
15
16
17
18
As General Milley stated in the foreword of the MDO concept, emergent technologies are driving a fundamental change in the character of war and have the potential to revolutionize military affairs much like the integration of machine guns, tanks, and aviation in an era of combined arms conflict. 
19
20
The development of the MDO concept stems from a conglomeration of previous operating concepts, the evolving operating security environment with great power competition, and the strategic vision of the US Army's civilian leadership on how to win militarily in future warfare. First, it is important to understand the meaning of an operational concept and the developmental process. Developing a practical future military operating concept is a daunting task, in that, the operational concept developer predicates the application of the concept based on future context. Consequently, predicting the future to a strong level of certainty is nearly impossible. A failed military concept will result in dire consequences of catastrophic proportions like losing a war or massive loss of life and resources. The essence of a concept is the description of a method. An operational concept is the method or scheme for employing specific military capabilities at the operational level of war in the achievement of a stated objective or aim. A future concept envisions how the practitioner will apply military power in some future context. 
21
22
The operational framework of MDO derives from previous and current operational concepts. Colonel (Retired) Richard Sinnreich described MDO as, "Old wine in a new bottle." 
23
24
1
vulnerabilities of others to establish superiority in some combination of domains that will provide the freedom of action required by the mission." 
25
26
Townsend changed the name from Multi-Domain Battle to Multi-Domain Operations. General Townsend along with feedback from the DoD and US State Department agreed that the word "battle" possessed tactical connotations applied only in armed conflict; as opposed to the word, "operations" which is strategic in nature taking into account both competition and conflict.
Additionally, operations better describes military activities in conjunction with interagency and non-governmental organizations. 
27
32
MDO is a response to evolving threats in great power competition in the strategic security environment. The National Security Strategy (NSS) of 2017 provides an authoritarian assessment of the current geopolitical landscape. President Donald Trump's 2017 NSS marks a shift in US foreign policy from President Obama's approach to international relations. President Trump's NSS builds on the theoretical framework of realism, in which, rational state actors seek national power to pursue their vital interests and continued existence. 
33
34
35
37
Russia interferes with domestic political affairs in countries all over the world with destabilizing cyber capabilities and subversive tactics. 
38
36
37
38
39
40
42
1
43
First, they identified that the strength of US military operations lies within gaining theater access and establishing a foothold in the area of operations via aerial or seaport of debarkation.
Territorial access provides an operational advantage to project combat and extend operational reach to establish conditions for overwhelming logistics, firepower, and command and control support. The second lesson is fracturing the operational framework and interdependency between the air and land domain. China and Russia will attempt to isolate the air domain from the land domain to defeat air and land forces sequentially. Lastly, China and Russia recognize the US advantage lies within the ability to maneuver forces through all the elements of combat power to include mission command. Therefore, China and Russia will use overwhelming firepower to fix maneuver forces. 
44
45
47
48
49
50
Understanding the meaning of convergence in the military context is essential in gaining insight into how the concept offers a solution to the problems Russia and China present.
Convergence is a polysemous word that represents multiple meanings and broad applications found in many fields of study to include science, technology, mathematics, computing, biology, art, music, and literature. Webster's dictionary defines convergence, as moving toward a union or uniformity and the merging of distinct technologies, industries, or devices into a unified whole. 
51
53
2
54
59
60
The third tenant of MDO is resilient multi-domain formations that possess the capacity, capability, and endurance necessary to operate across multiple domains in contested spaces against a near-peer adversary. The absence of access and domain superiority in an expanded and noncontiguous battles space will cause friendly forces to face contact from varying directions and domains. MDO formations must demonstrate the ability to avoid detection and survive contact with the enemy when virtually isolated while maneuvering without continuous supply lines or secured flanks. 
61
62 US Army, The US Army Concept for Multi-Domain Combined Arms Operations, 21-22.  creative and critical thinkers who can solve ill-defined problems operating with more autonomy at the tactical level in disaggregated operations. With an increase in enemy firepower and lethality, MDO formations will operate more dispersed demanding emphasis on mission command versus command and control found in highly synchronized and phased unified land operations concept. 
63
64
The successes of the South Pacific Force were not the achievements of separate services or individuals but the result of whole-hearted subordination of self-interests by all in order that one successful 'fighting team' could be created.
-Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr., Guadalcanal: The First Offensive
To understand how the application of the tenets of MDO led to the Allies successfully achieving their strategic objective, it is important to understand the historical context in the Pacific Theater from 1942-1943. On December 8, 1941, the United States Congress declared war on the Japanese Empire after the surprise attack at Pearl Harbor. As President Franklin D. Roosevelt characterized the attack, "a date that will live in infamy," would generate one of the greatest generations in US history. The Pearl Harbor attack galvanized the will of the American people to initiate the first offensive campaign against the Japanese Empire in the Pacific Theater.
The complexity of conducting warfare in the vast Pacific area, the overmatched military power of the Japanese Empire, and the pending large-scale offensive in the European theater presented a wicked problem for the United States. In the face of overwhelming circumstances, the Allied operations in the Pacific Theater would become a spectacular orchestration of joint operations that ultimately led to the fall of the Japanese Empire.  Churchill's decision to defeat Germany first and then mass in the Pacific to defeat the Japanese nation. 
75
71
72 James Holmes, "Three Strategic Takeaways from the Guadalcanal Campaign," The National Interest, accessed October 18, 2018, https://nationalinterest.org/feature/3-strategic-takeaways-theguadalcanal-campaign-22987. 
73
74
75
Through the lens of military theory, the Allies and Japanese diverge on maritime strategy.
The Allies applied theories aligned with Julian Corbett's maritime strategy. For instance, Corbett felt that protecting lines of communication was much more difficult to enforce at sea than on land which aligns with Operation Cartwheel's overall "island hopping" strategy of securing basing and conducting a series of battles to gain a tactical advantage. 
76
77
The third hypothesis examines the Allies ability to conduct convergence by integrating capabilities to create windows of advantage to enable the JF to conduct cross-domain synergy and semi-independent maneuver while exercising mission command to maximize disciplined initiative. The examples of convergence outlined in MDO theory that contributed most to the strategic success of the Solomon Island Campaign are reconnaissance posture, intelligence sharing, and territorial access. 
78
The emergent electromagnetic technology of the radar proved to be a critical capability that created advantages across the domains for the Allied forces in the Pacific theater. The technological developments of the radar resulted in a plethora of capabilities for the Allies which included an early warning of enemy movements, facilitated navigation, guided gunners to orient weapon systems, made night fighting practical in the air and on the sea, and fighter interdiction. 
79
80
79
80 Frank,
Guadalcanal,
603.
81
Radar technology provides several lessons related to MDO theory. First, the radar on the Catalina demonstrates how the US military modified old or existing technology with new technology to created windows of advantage when faced with fiscal constraints and limitations. The radar is a critical component in the modern A2AD system, in which advancements in the range, accuracy, and size have improved significantly since WWII.
In modern warfare, emergent and enhancing technologies in radar, Theater High Altitude Area Defense, inter-continental ballistic missiles, long-range precision fires, artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and nanotechnologies increase the overall complexity and uncertainty for military practitioners generating a reluctance to change. A deeper understanding by commanders and staffs of these emerging capabilities will be crucial in identifying vulnerabilities in enemy systems, as well as, exploiting the friendly capability to gain advantages.
Lieutenant General Eric J. Wesley mentioned during a senior leader MDO panel that technology matures at an accelerating rate and the US Army ability to find innovative ways to adapt tactics and operations to these technologies should be our strength in cognitively defeating the enemy. 
82
83
84
The ground forces would enable air operations by securing the airfields from Japanese assault.
The integration of capabilities among air, sea, and land domains created a cross-domain synergy effect allowing the establishment of basing which lead to semi-independent maneuver which continually caught the Japanese by surprise and unable to mass significant combat power and win a decisive victory. The greater maneuverability of the carrier task groups gave US naval strategists extraordinary freedom to plan wide-ranging operations extending overall operational reach, while conversely throwing Japanese leaders continually off balance or surprised. Time and again, Japanese planners had to cancel attacks because an Allied assault fell from an unexpected direction. 
86
This section tests the second hypothesis, which considers the composition, capabilities, and resiliency of multi-domain formations that enhances semi-independent maneuver. The First and Fifth Marines demonstrated endurance and resiliency after conducting an amphibious assault at Guadalcanal to capture Henderson Airfield in August 1942. After one of the US Navy's worst defeats at the Battle of Savo Island, the US Marines watched Vice Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher move his carrier task force and all their supplies out to sea to protect the ships from further Japanese air attacks. The abandoned Marines secured the airfield without adequate supplies and no naval gun support. The Marines endured harsh conditions on Guadalcanal through relentless air attacks and naval bombardment in extreme heat, mangrove swamps, torrential rains, and swarms of malarial Anopheles mosquitoes. 
87
87
the Marines continued to defend the perimeter of Henderson Airfield and conducted daily patrols and offensive counter-attacks to push Japanese artillery position out of range of the airfield. 
88
90
The third hypothesis this study seeks to test is the Allies' calibrated force posture within the Pacific Theater set conditions to prevent the Japanese from maintaining the initiative to achieve a fait accompli campaign. 
92
95
Allied strategic success during World War II in the Pacific Theater stemmed from applying the concept of basing, which Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Planning claims is an "indispensable" part of operational art. 
96
97
98
100
101
102
103
The history of failure in war can almost be summed up in two words. Too late. Too late in comprehending the deadly purpose of a potential enemy. Too late in realizing the mortal danger. Too late in preparedness. Too late in uniting all possible forces for resistance. Too late in standing with one's friends. Victors in war results from no mysterious alchemy or wizardry but depends entirely upon the concentration of superior force at all critical points of combat.
-General Douglas MacArthur, Statement on aid to Great Britain in response to a request from William Allen White, Chairman of the Committee to defend America by aiding the Allies
The current AOC does not adequately address the emerging problems of the future operating environment in 2028 and does not include the space and cyber domains. The infusion of technological developments, the introduction of the cyber and space domains, and the emerging threats of an era of great power competition will change the character of warfare, but the nature of war will remain the same. Thus, the US Army requires a new future operating concept that creates a physical, virtual, cognitive framework to fight and win in future conflict. MDO is the The lethality of modern weapons will highly restrict joint maneuver in great power conflict. The A2AD umbrella will become the new "no man's land" of World War I. Hypersonic weapons, rail guns, high-velocity projectiles, precision-guided missiles, and intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance capabilities will limit joint maneuver in the A2AD umbrella. Just as the small-bore rifle, machine gun, and quick-firing artillery caused the bloody stalemate in World War I.
106
107
108
Finally, a war against a great power opponent will be a whole nation approach. The United States has never achieved simultaneous victories against two opponents when fighting on two different fronts. The only exception is World War II in the Pacific and Europe. Historians attribute the success of the US military on two fronts to the ability to out produce and out think the Japanese and the Germans. The huge industrial capacity of the United States turned commerce into a war machine providing the Allies numerical superiority in all facets of force structure across all the services. Talented engineers developed innovative technologies that improved existing weaponry, aircraft, and naval fleets with overmatch capability to gain advantages. 
109
Zbigniew Brzezinski, one of America's leading twentieth-century strategic thinkers, said, "the most dangerous scenario," he warned, would be "a grand coalition of China and Russia…united not by ideology but by complementary grievances." 110 To be successful in great power competition and conflict, the nation must be ready to take a whole-of-government approach to war and warfare similar to the success of fighting on two fronts during World War II. 
109
110 Graham Allison, "China and Russia: A Strategic Alliance in the Making," The National Interest, December 14, 2018, accessed March 31, 2019, https://nationalinterest.org/feature/china-andrussia-strategic-alliance-making-38727.
In a world of perpetual and increasing uncertainty and complexity, a military force cannot prepare for all possible contingency scenarios. The linchpin to success in future warfare will be "speed." The great power competitor that acts as a learning and adaptive organization that can rapidly transition in being faster in posturing for the fight, producing overmatch capacity, rapidly converging capabilities, adapting to technology and tactics, maneuvering before being detected, and firing further with precision against an opponent will cumulatively gain the superiority in all domains. The great power competitor that can seize superiority in the domains will be more likely to win the war.
30
"Ghost Fleet -A Novel of the Next World War," New America, accessed October
24, 2018, https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/vol-60no-1/ghost-fleet.html.
P.W.Singer and August Cole, Ghost Fleet (New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt  Publishing Company, 2015), 124.
"Ghost Fleet Book Reviews," 2015 Ghost Fleet Book, accessed January 16, 2019, https://www.ghostfleetbook.com/reviews/.
Martin Dempsey, National Military Strategy (Washington, DC: Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2015), i, accessed November 25, 2018, http://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents /Publications/2015_National_Military_Strategy.pdf.
John F. Schmitt, "Practical Guide for Developing and Writing Military Concepts," Defense Adaptive Red Team Working Paper #02-4 (December 2002): 22.
Richard B. Frank, Guadalcanal:  The Definitive Account of the Land Battle (New York: Penguin Books, 1990), 610.
John Prados, Islands of Destiny: The Solomons Campaign and the Eclipse of the Rising Sun (New York, NY: Penguin Group, 2013), 6.
Joseph Wheelan, Midnight in the Pacific: Guadalcanal, The World War II Battle that Turned the Tide of War (Boston, MA: Da Capo Press, 2017), 5.
Eugene L. Rasor, The Solomon Islands Campaign, Guadalcanal to Rabaul: Historiography and Annotated Bibliography (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1997), 1.
Lawrence Freedman, The Future of War (New York: Hachette Book Group, 2017), 7.
Claudia P. Pena-Guzman, "Preparing for the Future, Looking to the Past: History, Theory, and Doctrine in the US Army," (Masters monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, US Army Command and General Staff College, 2013), 3-4.
Nan Tian, Aude Fleurant, Alexandra Kuimova, Pieter d. Wezeman, and Siemon T. Wezeman, "Trends in World Military Expenditure, 2017," Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, May 2018, accessed March 16, 2019, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2018-04/sipri_fs_1805_milex_2017.pdf
 18  Freedman, The Future of War, 123.
US Army, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations
2028, foreword.20  John Lewis Gaddis, The Landscape of History: How Historians Map the Past (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 11.21  Schmitt, "Practical Guide for Developing and Writing Military Concepts," 3.
Richard H. Sinnreich, "Multi-Domain Battle: Old Wine in a New Bottle?," The Law Constitution, accessed October 31, 2018, https://www.swoknews.com/misc-columns/multi-domain-battleold-wine-new-bottle.
  24  Kelly McCoy, "The Road to Multi-Domain Battle: An Origin Story," Modern War Institute, accessed October 30, 2018, https://mwi.usma.edu/road-multi-domain-battle-origin-story/.
Donald Trump, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC:  The White House, 2017), 1, accessed November 25, 2018, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
Roger McDermott, "Gerasimov Appeals for Military Science to Forge New Forms of Combat," The Jamestown Foundation, March 12, 2019, accessed March 18, 2019. https://jamestown.org/program/ gerasimov-appeals-for-military-science-to-forge-new-forms-of-combat/.
Stephen Biddle and Ivan Oelrich, "Future Warfare in the Western Pacific: Chinese Antiaccess/Area Denial, US AirSea Battle, and Command of the Commons in East Asia," International Security 41, no. 1 (July 2016): 7-14.
James Mattis, National Defense Strategy (Washington, DC: The White House, 2017), 6-7, accessed November 25, 2018, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
Ibid., 7.   
Merriam-Webster, "Convergence," On-line Dictionary, accessed January 7, 2019, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/convergence.
Jonathan Parshall and Anthony Tully, Shattered Sword: The Untold Story of the Battle of Midway (Dulles, VA: Potomoc Books, 2005), xxi.
Julian Corbett, "Some Principles of Maritime Strategy," in Roots of Strategy: Book Four, ed. David Jablonsky (Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1999), Part II.
Alfred T. Mahan, "The Influence of Sea Power Upon History," in Roots of Strategy: Book Four, ed. David Jablonsky (Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1999), Part II.
Examples of windows of advantage are found in US Army, Multi-Domain Battle, 25.
David G. Chandler, "Napoleon, Operational Art, and the Jena Campaign," in Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art, ed. Michael D. Krause and R. Cody Phillips (Washington, DC: US Army Center of Military History, 2005), 27.
Adams, If Mahan Ran the Great Pacific War, 14.   
S.C. M. Paine, "The Japanese Way of War," in Strategy in Asia: The Past, Present, and Future of Regional Security, ed. Thomas G. Mahnken and Dan Blumenthal, (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press), 134.
US Army, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, 24.
Colin S. Gray, Another Bloody Century: Future Warfare (London: Weidenfeld & Nicholoson, 2005), 391.
Schmitt, "Practical Guide for Developing and Writing Military Concepts," 12.   
Robert H. Scales, "Tactical Art in Future Wars," War on the Rocks, March 14, 2019 accessed March 28, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/03/tactical-art-in-future-wars/.
Quote from General Stephen J. Townsend, TRADOC Commander, during MDO Panel at Defense Visual Information Distribution Service, "Association of The United States Army 2018 Contemporary Military Forum #8: Multi-Domain Operations," accessed November 16, 2018, https://www.dvidshub.net/video/ 631836/ausa-2018-cmf-8-multi-domain-operationsv.
John M. Nimmons, "Escaping No Man's Land: Combined Arms Adaption in the Meuse-Argonne," in Bringing Order to Chaos: Historical Case Studies of Combined Arms Maneuver in Large-Scale Combat, ed. Peter J. Schifferle (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Army University Press, 2018), 75.
I wish to acknowledge my beloved family (
Sara, Talon, Addison, Payton, and Skylar
The Army's Future Operating Concept for Great Power Competition 5a. CONTRACT 
NUM BER 5b. GRANT NUM BER 5c. PROGRAM ELEM ENT NUM BER 6. AUTHOR
S) LTC Alex R. Garn
Michigan Army National Guard 5d
PROJECT NUM BER 5e . TASK NUM BER 5f. WORK UNIT NUM BER 7
PERFORM ING ORGANIZATION NAM E(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) U.S. Army Command and General Staff College
66027-2301 8. PERFORM ING ORG REPORT NUM BER 9
ONITORING AGENCY NAM E(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) ADVANCED MILITARY STUDIES PROGRAM 10. SPONSOR/M ONITOR'S ACRONYM (S) 11. SPONSOR/M ONITOR'S REPORT NUM BER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEM ENT Approved for Public Release
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The Japanese offensive defeated the European colonial powers in the region and seized critical strategic energy and mineral resources in the East Indies required for the continuing growth of the Japanese Pacific Empire. 
67
68
69
Additionally, the Japanese built airstrips along their southern approach to maximize the fighter-plane range. 
70
67