# ID: 86af5406ffc84727a596bc96863adebf
# Title: Leveraging NATO: A Strategic Partner Now and in the Future
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2004.0
# Fulltext:
The United States' strategic partnership with NATO is just as important today as it was throughout the Cold War. The United States is the most powerful nation in the world, but as was the case during the Cold War, it cannot fight the Global War on Terrorism alone. The United States must leverage NATO's capabilities and support to succeed in the winning the Global War on Terrorism. Maintaining a strong transatlantic relationship with NATO is a vital interest of the United States. The combined efforts of NATO and the United States resulted in the defeat of Communism and given the opportunity, will defeat terrorism. Despite political disagreements in going to war with Iraq, it appears the ground work is being laid for allowing NATO a greater role in OPERATIONS ENDURING and IRAQI FREEDOM. The United States leadership must use all its political influence and diplomatic savvy to obtain NATO's commitment and political support in fighting the GWOT. In both the near term and more importantly, the long term, NATO provides the United States with a political and military ally that can assist the United States in defusing known and unknown security challenges.
The beginning of the Cold War arrived with the ending of World War II in Europe. Over the next forty years the United States would build and maintain an alliance with European countries in an effort to suppress the spread of communism. The tragic events of 11 September 2001 marked the beginning of the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT). NATO's strategic role in winning the Cold War is history. Its role in fighting the GWOT is just beginning. NATO is an alliance that has withstood the test of time and by its mere existence prevented war from breaking out in Europe. The United States' strategic partnership with NATO is just as important today as it was during the Cold War. The United States remains the most powerful nation in the world, but as was the case during the Cold War, it cannot fight the GWOT alone. The United States must leverage NATO's capabilities and political support to succeed in the winning the GWOT. NATO'S support to on-going operations in Afghanistan and Iraq are historic and shows that NATO is transforming itself to respond to threats beyond its geographical boarders.
Terrorism, like communism, is a threat to all nations. The United States and NATO must again confront those that seek to disrupt peace in Europe and around the world.
I will begin by reviewing the origins of NATO in order to understand its strategic role in winning the Cold War. I will then discuss NATO's on-going commitment to fighting the GWOT.
Finally, I will discuss why the United States needs NATO and NATO needs the United States in order to effectively prosecute the GWOT with special emphasis on OPERATION IRAQI and ENDURING FREEDOM.
Following the end of World War II, President Harry S. Truman was faced with the daunting task of determining what role Germany should have in Europe and how to proceed with reconstruction of the war torn continent. The leader of the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin, wanted a voice in determining the answers to these questions. No longer could the United States take an isolationist approach to international affairs, as they did prior to entering WWII; they now had to take an active leadership role in directing European foreign affairs and in particular, deal with the Soviet Union. The United States was the standard-bearer of democracy, individual liberty and capitalism, while the Soviet Union was the world's first and greatest socialist state, committed to building communism at home and expanding its influence and control abroad. 
1
From 1945 to 1947, both superpowers attempted to work out their differences in post-war conferences designed to determine the way ahead for Europe and the defeated Axis powers.
One of the most significant was the Potsdam Conference in July 1945. For the first time, leaders of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union formally met to discuss the German Question. Despite differing views on how to proceed with Germany, agreements were reached. Specifically, the allies determined German boundaries and agreed to administer Germany as a whole. Administration of Germany would be the responsibility of the senior military commander controlling the American, French, British and Soviet occupation zones. 
2
Mistrust of Soviet intentions in Europe actually began to take shape in February 1946, when George Kennan, while serving in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, cabled his influential "Long Telegram" to Washington calling attention to the Soviets' expansionist aims in Europe and the need for a Western policy of firm but patient resistance. 
4
7
Although the Soviets approved of the insurgency, they did not provide substantial monetary or material support. In February 1947, Britain informed the United States that it could no longer afford to provide assistance to Greece and would withdraw its forces. 8 President Truman realized the abandonment of Greece was very dangerous and could send the wrong signal to the Soviets. If Greece fell to communism, then Turkey was in peril and potentially communism could spread to Europe, the Middle East and Asia. 
9
10
One final diplomatic attempt to resolve issues surrounding Germany occurred in April 1947 at the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers. In attendance were the foreign ministers from Britain, France, the United States and the Soviet Union. In discussions with Stalin, Secretary of State George Marshall concluded that Stalin intended to let matters drift until Europe disintegrated, and to advance Soviet interests in the resulting chaos. 11 Speaking on radio after his return to the United States, Marshall said: "The patient is sinking while the doctors deliberate, so I believe that action cannot await compromise through exhaustion". 
12
13
Although the Soviets were also in an economic crisis, they rejected the United States' offer of financial aid and prevented communist countries under their control from accepting financial aid. The Soviets denounced the Marshall Plan, calling it an attempt to enslave Europe.
To counter the Marshall Plan, the Soviets established the Communist Information Bureau (Cominform). Cominform's purpose was to promote unity and co-operation between member parties by exchange of information, and in practice to ensure uniformity under Stalin's control. 
14
In February, the Soviets moved forces to the Czechoslovakia border and replaced the democratically elected government with a pro-Soviet communist party regime. This was alarming to Western Europe and the United States because Czechoslovakia was the only democratic state in Eastern Europe. In June, in a response to the introduction of a new Germany currency for Western Germany and Berlin, and the establishment of a West German state, the Soviets cut off electricity and blocked all routes into West Berlin. 
15
When Czechoslovakia fell to communism, Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg responded by signing the Treaty of Brussels. This treaty bound all participants to come to the help of any one of them if attacked in Europe. 
16
Getting the United States to formally commit to the defense of Europe was not easy.
Negotiations between Western European officials and the Truman administration occurred between March 1948 and April 1949. Preserving Congress' constitutional right to declare war was the most significant issue that prevented Congress from ratifying the treaty. The wording in Article 5 preserved Congress' right to declare war and stated that an armed attack against one would be an attack against all and that in such an event member states would respond as necessary to include the use of armed force.
On 4 April 1949 the United States, Canada, Iceland, Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and the United Kingdom signed the North Atlantic Treaty. The significance of the North Atlantic Treaty cannot be overstated. It committed the United States to the defense and stability of Europe without complete American predominance. 17 European countries knew that without the US military support, security in Europe was fragile. With the United States, they now had an alliance that could stand up to the Soviets' political and military instruments of power. This, and the economic stimulus provided by the Marshall plan, gave Europeans hope and confidence that they could recover from the war. Europe was on its way to recover but other events would soon intervene to shatter world peace.
The Korean War broke out in June 1950 when North Korea attacked across the 38 th parallel. North Korea's leader, Kim Il-Sung, briefed Stalin on his plan and sought his approval.
Stalin gave his approval, partly because he believed the Americans would not come to the aid of South Korea. Almost simultaneously, the United States sponsored a United Nations resolution calling for a cease-fire and withdrawal of North Korean forces behind the 38 th parallel, and began air-dropping supplies to the South Koreans. Truman ordered military forces to Korea as part of a United Nations operation and fought for three years.
The Korean War greatly influenced actions in Europe. Many believed the Korean War was the forerunner of a Soviet advance on Western Europe and the armed forces in Europe were not capable of defeating a Soviet attack. 
18
19
20
24
The events of 9/11 greatly influenced President Bush's foreign policy by generating what some intellectuals labeled as the "Bush Doctrine". In outline, the doctrine asserts that: (1) The United States will combat terror wherever it exists using all means at its disposal, including force; (2) bilateral relationships around the world will be increasingly defined in terms of those countries that support the war of terrorism and those that do not; (3) "rogue" nations and/or terrorist organizations cannot be permitted to acquire and/or threaten the United States with weapons of mass destruction. 
25
26
Following the events of 9/11 many governments and Americans expected the United States to quickly strike back at those responsible for the attacks. This was not the case.
President Bush and his National Security Counsel understood that building international support for the GWOT was strategically more important than quickly unleashing a symbolic missile attack. The military response to an attack carried out against our homeland, with devastating results, required the combined effects of the United States and coalition armed forces. Building a coalition is a very difficult process. There are many political factors influencing whether or not a nation elects to join a coalition. Most nations are sympathetic to the victim of a terrorist attack and acknowledge that terrorism is a threat to world peace. However, few are willing to provide resources if they don't perceive it to be a vital interest.
For several reasons the United States was very successful in building a coalition in the first Gulf War. First, there was a clearly defined enemy who used military power to occupy a sovereign nation. The world witnessed the Iraqi Army's invasion of Kuwait and listened to Saddam Hussein's claim that Kuwait was now part of Iraq. Second, Middle Eastern Arabic nations believed they were at risk if nothing was done to expel Iraqi forces. Clearly, doing something was in their vital interest. The potential for Saddam Hussein to invade Saudi Arabia and gain control of its oil reserves was very high and would adversely impact the global economy and shift the balance of power in the Middle East to Iraq. Lastly, sufficient time and energy were devoted to developing and implementing a diplomatic solution. The use of military force was the last resort. For these reasons the coalition was quickly assembled, included Arab and non-Arab states, and remained intact until the war was over and coalition forces withdrew from Iraq and Kuwait.
In contrast, the GWOT does not have a unambiguous enemy like Saddam Hussein and his military. Terrorist organizations are by their nature ghostly structures that do not engage in the national and international diplomatic process. The US believed al-Qaeda was responsible for the attacks on 11 September 2001, however, our intelligence apparatus could not initially produce irrefutable evidence to convince the world. In the case of Iraq, the evidence presented to the UN appears to have been somewhat over stated and caused some countries to oppose military action against Iraq. This was certainly true in the case of Germany and France. As expected, the United States viewed the GWOT as a vital interest. Unless a nation is the subject of a terrorist act, it will not necessarily subscribe to define combating terrorism as a vital interest and thus won't commit scarce resources to reduce the global terrorist threat. Additionally, many nations perceive the United States as a nation that acts unilaterally and fails to give diplomacy a chance to work. In the words of President Bush, "you're either with us or against us." I don't believe the United States subscribes to a unilaterist approach when dealing with the world's problems, but other nations do. These are a just a few challenges the Bush administration faced in building an international coalition to fight global terrorism.
Afghanistan is a country whose history is replete with internal civil war and occupation of foreign armies. The Soviet Union learned first hand that invading Afghanistan is possible, but sustaining a military presence is extremely costly. The Islamic inspired Mujahadian, with US support, forced the Soviet Union to leave Afghanistan. With the Soviet Union's departure, the Taliban gained control of the country and implemented an extreme Islamic fundamentalist regime that harbored al-Qaeda terrorists in exchange for substantial bankrolling by bin Laden. 
27
28
Afghanistan became the first country to test President Bush's doctrine of attacking states providing sanctuary and support to terrorist organizations.
Building the coalition for OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM was the first major step in fighting the GWOT. Much of the work of building an international coalition was given to the Secretary of State, Colin Powell, although President Bush made personal calls to the leaders of France, Germany, Canada and China. 
29
30
31
32
At the outset, most of the world's governments publicly decried the 9/11 attacks and declared their support for the United States. That was not, however, tantamount to offering facilities and military support, nor did they fully understand what support the United States required . 
33
34
35
36
37
38
Perhaps the most significant contribution in OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM took place when NATO assumed command, from British forces, of the United Nations mandated, International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). ISAF is a 5,700-member security force responsible for assisting the Afghan Transitional Authority (ATA) in maintaining security in and around Kabul for ATA and UN personnel. 
39
With success in Afghanistan, the Bush administration shifted focus on Saddam Hussein and Iraq. Despite being defeated militarily in the first Gulf War, Saddam Hussein remained in power. For years, Iraq failed to comply with United Nations resolutions ordering the destruction of weapons of mass destruction and allowing weapons inspectors inside Iraq with complete access to all facilities. The United Nations' inability to get Iraq to comply with its resolutions, coupled with the events of 9/11, made Iraq a strategic threat to the United States and the world.
In a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on 12 September 2002, President Bush condemned Iraq for its failure to adhere to existing resolutions and called on the United Nations Security Council to pass a new resolution if Iraq failed to comply. The resolution called on Saddam's regime to declare and disarm itself of all weapons of mass destruction or face undefined "serious consequences" if the Iraqi regime did not comply. 
40
41
Unilaterally going to war with Iraq was an option, but strategically, not a very viable one.
Iraq allowed United Nations weapons inspectors to return and on 7 December 2002, and submitted a written declaration of its weapons programs to the United Nations. The declaration stated that Iraq had no weapons of mass destruction, but in the words of Hans Blix, Chief U.N.
inspector, it lacked supporting evidence. 
42
France and Russia's support the United Nations Security Council would not pass a resolution authorizing military action against Iraq. In one last diplomatic maneuver, Colin Powell presented the United Nations with new allegations, including intercepted conversations and satellite photography, of Iraq's secret weapons programs and cover-ups. Despite this new evidence, France, Germany and Russia remained opposed to military action in Iraq.
The building of a coalition for military action in Iraq was very difficult because many nations were not convinced the United States had provided irrefutable evidence of an Iraqi WMD program. Moreover, they generally disagreed with the implications of our preemption strategy. Unlike Afghanistan, Germany, France and Russia opposed military action against Iraq and remain opposed to on-going stability and support operations. Perhaps the most significant impact on OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM was Turkey's refusal to allow ground forces to transit its territory. This was a strategic set-back for United States forces and caused a major change in the campaign plan. There are factors that determined why these nations failed to join the coalition. Some disagreed with our strategy, others feared their country would become a target of terrorist and others simply refused to act if the action did not have the endorsement of the United Nations. Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld stated " a state makes its decisions based upon national interests. If certain of our friends tell us no, the U.S. will not be sad for it." 
43
44
Overall, forty-six nations supported OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM. Although countries like Britain, Australia, Spain and Poland provided military forces, the US provided the vast majority of forces. Other NATO and non-NATO nations contributed, and though their contributions are insignificant in terms of military impact, they are significant in terms of diplomatic impact and demonstrated support for the United States. Poland represents NATO and therefore its success or failure in many ways represents NATO's failure or success.
The United States military is without question the most professional and powerful military in the world. Our success on the battlefields in Afghanistan and Iraq demonstrates to the world our ability to execute military operations. The real question is, can we sustain our battlefield success as we transition from combat operations to stability and support operations? The answer is yes, with a caveat that in doing so we will overburden our military forces, in particular our ground forces. I would also argue that overburdening our ground forces could potentially have negative second and third order effects. If another international crisis occurred, our ground forces would have great difficulty in responding with sufficient combat power and certainly would not be able to sustain combat operations for an extended amount of time.
Depending on the nature of the crisis, it is also possible that we would have to greatly reduce our footprint in Iraq. Reducing our footprint would most likely result in significantly increased attacks against coalition forces and Iraqi governmental institutions. If this scenario were to occur, all the gains we've made over the last year would be in jeopardy.
During fiscal year 2003, twenty-four of the Army's thirty-three active duty combat brigades were deployed overseas. This equates to almost 50 percent (232,759) of the active duty force.
Additionally, approximately 136,000 National Guard and U.S. Army reservists are mobilized and performing missions in support of the Global War on Terrorism. 
46
Rotation of units into and out of Iraq and Afghanistan will most assuredly continue for the next three or four years or longer. The Army leadership and Congress are starting to call for an increase in the force structure in order to have sufficient forces to meet mission requirements.
President Bush has repeatedly stated that the United States will not abandon the citizens of Iraq and Afghanistan and will remain until the mission is complete. The strategic objective of a unified, stable, and secure Iraq that does not threaten its neighbors, will take time to achieve as will peace and stability in Afghanistan. The question is: Where can the United States look to get assistance in executing phase IV operations in Iraq and Afghanistan? The most likely source is from NATO.
LEVERAGING NATO NATO's support to operations in Afghanistan and Iraq has helped lessen the strain on United States forces. NATO recognizes participation in the Global War On Terrorism and maintaining security in Europe, requires it to operate outside its traditional geographic boundaries and to transform its C2 and force structure. NATO has transformed its headquarters into a single strategic command (Allied Command Operations) and one that is purely functional (Allied Command Transformation). To become more deployable, NATO is building a response force (21,000 personnel) capable of carrying out integrated air, maritime and ground force operations with as little as five days notice and the ability to sustain itself for a month. 
47
48
49
Ibid., 32.   
Kenneth M. Pollack, "Next Stop Baghdad?", Foreign Affairs, March/April 2002. Vol. 81, Iss. 2; pg 32. [database on-line]; available from ProQuest; accessed 29 December 2003.
Thom Shanker, "U.S. to Use Mix of Regular, National Guard and Reserve Troops in Iraq." New York Times, 24 Jul 2003, p A.10. [database on-line]; available from ProQuest; accessed 1 December 2003.
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or